THE

EUGENICS REVIEW ©

ENVIRONMENT AS A FACTOR IN
EVOLUTION.!

By Major L. Darwin.

THE part which environment has played in the causation of
evolution is likely to give rise to much controversy in the
immediate future, and Dr. Tredgold’s interesting article on “The
Problem of Degeneracy ” in the July, 1917, number of the Quarterly
Review is but a forerunner of much that is likely to follow on
this subject. Many of the opponents of the belief in the
inheritance of acquired characters have been living under the
impression that this is a chapter in the history of scientific
progress which has been finally closed, and the re-opening of
these questions must be to them a painful surprise. How far
the pendulum will swing back away from the belief in the
perfect continuity of the germ plasm no wise man will now
predict; but such arguments as those of Dr. Tredgold, who
is, however, dealing with a somewhat different aspect of environmental effects, are certainly worthy of most respectful consideration.

What is often called degeneracy may be due, as Dr. Tredgold
points out, either to defects in nature or in nurture, and he suggests
that “the most convenient word to denote somatic modification
arising from a defective environment would be ‘ decadency’ ” (p. 53).
As to “degeneracy ” proper, he defines it as “a retrograde condition
of the individual resulting from a pathological variation of the
germ-cell,” a definition which may perhaps be criticised as antici
* This article was written in 1917 and has only been kept back on account of War
conditions— Professor Adami’s book on ‘‘ Medical Contributions to Evolution” has now
been published.
64 EUGENICS REVIEW. _

pating the explanation of the facts about to be offered. No doubt
we are dealing with the effects of germ-variations, and for such
variations three explanations have been suggested. In the first
place degeneracy has been attributed to germinal defects which
have been in existence since the dawn of life in the most remote
ancestor of man, an explanation rightly rejected, as we think. Then
again it has been suggested that degeneracy arises spontaneously
or is not caused by any external agent, and this explanation is
rejected as merely amounting to a confession of ignorance. Whether
this suggestion, which is at all events conceivable, should be
rejected because it cannot be called an explanation is, however,
doubtful. “The third view is that retrogressive germ variations
have neither existed ab initio, nor are spontaneous in origin, but
are produced by the operation of natural processes and in obedience
to natural laws” (p. 36); an explanation which does not preclude
the possibility of the trouble having arisen in some more or less
remote ancestor of the degenerate. Dr. Tredgold seems, however,
to suggest that changes in human environment might quickly
lessen the degeneracy believed thus to be caused, thus tacitly ruling
out the probability of the origin of such troubles often having been
very remote.

A good deal of evidence is now available in support of the
view that defective environment may injure the germ-cells of several
succeeding generations, evidence which is becoming more and
more difficult to refute. But if alcoholism, tuberculosis and
venereal disease are the three most important final causes of
degeneracy, as Dr. Tredgold suggests, why have they not already
inflicted a vital injury on our race? The explanation here given
is that the vulnerability of the germ plasm varies greatly in different
individuals, the unaffected germ plasm always’ being available to
maintain the race in its purity. No doubt if the germ cells were
all either uninjured by these harmful agencies or else given such a
deadly blow as to lead to eventual extermination, no racial harm
could thus arise. But it is admitted that the result will sometimes
be “a dilution of the morbid process ” together with “a more widespread dissemination throughout the community” (p. 40), of the
evil effects of these environmental factors. We assume, though
it is not clearly stated, that it is held that the combined result
ENVIRONMENT AS A FACTOR IN EVOLUTION. 65

of the selective elimination of defective stock and of the constant
re-introduction of hereditary defects through these environmental
agencies is to establish a position of temporary equilibrium. But
the believer in heredity can hardly deny that the constant preservation of the less vulnerable stock must tend to create a relative
immunity to disease and alcoholic poisoning, as Dr. Archdall Reid
has suggested. It is to be noted, however, that even if it be
admitted that facts show that a certain invulnerability to certain
diseases has already been created by selection, we thus only
get confirmation of the view that the vulnerability varies in
different individuals, and not of the belief that these diseases
are amongst the final causes of degeneracy.

We cannot but regret that space prevented Dr. Tredgold from
fully discussing his reasons for selecting the above-mentioned three
agencies as being the cause of racial degeneracy. No doubt they
are all definite external agents producing immediate evil results, and
no doubt also, as is here pointed out, they are all found to be
recorded in increasing frequency-in degenerate pedigrees as the
generations succeed each other. But does this latter fact form a
legitimate argument in favour of the belief in their evil racial
effects? If we select an individual so degenerate as to be incapable
of becoming an ancestor, he must generally be inferior to his
immediate ancestors, because they at all events proved themselves
capable of playing that part. Similarly if degeneracy is the actual
cause of an individual being unlikely to become a parent, his
ancestors are likely to be superior to himself, whatever may be the
ultimate origin of his defects. For example, degeneracy has been
explained as being due to the fortuitous combination of several
Mendelian factors, and if it should be true that the more pronounced forms of degeneracy are due to the union of a greater
number of harmful factors than in the case of the less pronounced
forms, then the pedigrees ending in pronounced degenerates would
always give a picture of progressive deterioration, even though
there had really been no change whatever from first to last in these
Mendelian factors. Progressive deterioration, in fact, gives but a
slender basis for the belief that these diseases and other evil agents
recorded in progressive degenerate pedigrees are the causes of the
deterioration there depicted.
66 EUGENICS REVIEW. |

Dealing with the question of causation, Dr. Tredgold tells us
that some members of degenerate stocks “ may be epileptic, others
suffer from insanity or marked moral failing, whilst others may be
feeble minded or even idiots.” From this he concludes that “ since
the environment of such persons differs in no material particular
from that of the mentally healthy section of the community
amongst whom they live, it is clear that the failing is of the germ
cell and is inherited.” But if we substitute “consumptive” for
“epileptic” and “venereal disease or a tendency to drink” for
‘insanity or marked moral failing,” do we not thus get an equally
valid argument in favour of these evils being also in a great measure
due to heritable tendencies? And if they are due to heritable
tendencies, why may not these tendencies have been derived
from the remote ancestors of the degenerates? It must be
remembered, moreover, that it is only the direct ancestors of a
degenerate who can have transmitted to him the evil effects of a
racial poison, and that the frequent appearance of harmful diseases
or habits amongst co-lateral relatives tells against rather than in
favour of this environmental explanation. As to the probability
of venereal diseases: acting as racial poisons, I have elsewhere
dealt with the difficulties connected with the subject.—[Augenics
Review, July, 1917.| The whole question seems at present to be
wrapped in considerable obscurity, and it is to be hoped that
Dr. Tredgold will discuss these and other relevant difficulties
on some future occasion at greater length. In the meantime, and
in view of this obscurity, the immediate evils resulting from these
harmful agencies should be relied on as forming an all-sufficient
basis for the campaign against them.

Another symptom of this change of opinion in regard to
environment as a factor in evolution is to be found in the Croonian
lectures delivered last year by Prof. Adami. The abbreviated
account given in Nature, on August 16th, 1917, is all.that I have
seen, and this is insufficient to enable a fair judgment to be made
on all the points therein raised. We are fold of the wonderful
way in which both microbes and certain parts of the human body
become directly adapted to new conditions, and continue for
long to act as if under the domination of acquired habits. If
we live in France we become ‘“‘directly adapted’’ to our
ENVIRONMENT AS A FACTOR IN EVOLUTION. | 67

environment by acquiring the habit of speaking French; and
if these microbes could think, it is probable that their change
of habit would cause them no greater surprise than that which
we feel in thus fitting ourselves to our surroundings. Our
mjstake seems to be in regarding habit as being necessarily
connected with some mental process. The point in this paper
that is, however, of the greatest interest to the Eugenist is that
there is said to be ‘‘ abundant evidence ’’ to show that in the
case of bacteria these habits are passed on to the next generation,
or in other words that these acquired characters are inherited.
We shall wait with interest to see how Prof. Adami has
succeeded in his experiments in eliminating the element of selection,
the stumbling block which has been so often the cause of failure
and false conclusions,

In certain passages in this interesting paper Prof. Adami has
been very severe on Mendelians, and I cannot but feel that many
of those who are quite willing thus to be labelled do not deserve
his censures. Though he tells us that protein molecules may be
“represented as a ring or chain of linked peptone molecules, each
having its ring of glycocoll nuclei with swinging side-chains,” he
would, I am sure, be the first to admit that it is “inconceivable ”
that “swinging side-chains” can actually exist in the interior of a
molecule. Nochemical reaction is really thoroughly understood, and
all that should be attempted in these graphic representations of
molecules is to group together into classes certain unexplained facts.
But when Mendelians “ conjure up separate individual particles or
structures, each the bearer of an individual property,” may not
their words be interpreted in the same spirit, their “structures”
being no more open to criticism than Prof. Adami’s “sidechains”? Anyhow it is thus that I myself would prefer to regard
the statement of the Mendelian creed alluded to by Prof. Adami,
namely that “the parental properties remain segregated in the
germ Cells,” a statement which we are told is open to attack. Here,
however, it is the fact thus attempted to be delineated which, I
understand, Prof. Adami wishes to refute, he regarding such complete
segregation as being physically impossible.

The experiments of Stockard on guinea pigs were quoted
by Prof. Adami in support of his views, and no doubt they do
68 EUGENICS REVIEW.

strongly support the belief that present environmental changes
may affect future generations, But the effects of the fumes of
alcohol on these animals bore no resemblance to the defects
thus caused in their normally reared descendants, and these
“inherited ” defects did not obey the laws of Mendelian inheritance.
Kammerer’s experiments, quoted by Prof. MacBride in the January,
1917, number of this Aevzew, would have been more to the point.
Those who believe in the inheritance of acquired characters,
however, base their faith to no great extent on the experimental
work, which they hold at present to be mainly important as
refuting the confident statements often made that the hereditary
transmission of modifications due to environment is a physical
impossibility. The broad fact of evolution, or the gradual
descent of one form of life from another, is now irrefutably
established, and for the slow process by which these changes
have been brought about there must be some explanation.
Now the inheritance of acquired characters seems best to account
for certain phenomena in nature, such as the almost complete
disappearance of certain useless but not harmful bodily
structures, and it is the advantages which would be gained by
adopting this explanation in these cases which has induced a
considerable number of naturalists to reconsider the possibility
of accepting the Lamarckian hypothesis, if it may be so
described, as a partial explanation of the facts of evolution. To
adopt this view, though it would link together cause and effect,
would not, however, afford any explanation of the process by
which the effect was produced. If the inheritance of environmental modifications is to be firmly established as an accepted
creed, some explanation must be forthcoming; and in this connection Dr. Cunningham’s views, mentioned in Prof. MacBride’s article, concerning the part played by hormones in the
evolutionary process, are of considerable interest, even though
they should thus far be regarded as mere tentative suggestions.
In order to consider to what extent the difficulties encountered
are thus in reality overcome, take the case, for example, of the
adjustment of the thickness of the fur of animals to the climate
during the approach of a glacial period. Ifwe start from a position
of equilibrium, we first have to assume such a mutation as would
ENVIRONMENT AS A FACTOR IN EVOLUTION. 69

result in the organ which secretes the hormone necessary to
stimulate the growth of hair, acquiring the property of secreting
it to a degree dependent on the temperature. -Then according
to this theory, besides performing its normal function in regard
to the stimulation of the growth of hair in the individual
primarily affected by the increasing cold, the hormone must
become stored up in his germ cells and thus also cause a relative
increase in the growth of hair in his offspring whatever might be
the temperature to which they were exposed. - Here is a
suggested explanation to be discussed rather as if it were the
best explanatory diagram of the facts available, than as being an
actual picture of those facts. If it fails to co-ordinate those
facts satisfactorily, we may conclude that there is something
wrong either in our facts or in our theory.

Two assumptions may be made with regard to this stored-up
hormone between which the truth must lie. We have assumed
that this secretion will affect the growth of the offspring of the
individual primarily affected by the environment, and now
let it also be assumed that it will be completely used up
or exhausted by its use in this second generation. This being
our first hypothesis, we see that in these circumstances the
maximum effect of any drop in temperature would be
obtained in a single generation ; and in order to account
for any considerable increase of fur as the temperature feli, we
must either assume that the secretion of the hormone, and consequently the thickness of the fur, varied greatly with the temperature
in the individual primarily affected—a supposition contradicted
by facts—or we must assume a number of successive mutations
adjusting the secretion of the hormone to the lowering temperature, in which case the merits of this method of accounting for
evolution almost entirely disappear.

As to the other extreme hypothesis, let us assume that the
hormone not only is stored up in the germ-cell, but that it there
also acquires the property of reproducing itself in perpetuity. But
if fresh doses of the hormone are thus successively added to the
germ-cell as the generations succeed each other, does it not follow
that there must be a continuous increase in the thickness of the
hair? If so harmful results must ensue sooner or later, and the
7O EUGENICS REVIEW.

more this acquired character was capable of being inherited, the
sooner would the species suffer from an overweight of fur. It
is true that in this Reveew Mr. R. A. Fisher has giver reasons
for believing that sexual selection does act in a similarly harmful
manner, the plumage of Birds of Paradise being the result of a
process once beneficial being continued for too long a period.
Correlation between the amount of secretion of a hormone and
the environment of the individual secreting it, may no doubt also
as it were, set up a momentum, harmful in its ultimate consequences, natural selection coming into play as a brake only when
material harm had already been done. As the length of the fur of
the individuals on whom the selection would be operative would
depend on the effects of environmental conditions at various times
on a large number of their ancestors, the method by which adaptation to existing conditions would be brought about is not readily
apparent. A simple reversal of the process would merely ultimately
result in the fur being too thin instead of too thick. Moreover
though there are signs of misfits of this type taking place in
nature, we have no reason to believe that it is a disaster of frequent
occurrence. Thus if a study of this suggested method by which
environment may act on future generations gives a true explanation
of the facts, it follows that it has not been a frequently occurring
method of evolutionary progress, and it would moreover make
it seem probable that acquired ‘characters influence subsequent
generations but very slowly. The belief that environment only
produces heritable effects extremely slowly is also confirmed by a
study of the evolutionary process in Nature, and in view of these
theoretical conclusions, it seems that it would be wise for the
Eugenist to rely on breeding from the best stock as still being
his guiding rule in his efforts to promote progress in the inborn
qualities of the race. All enquiries are to be welcomed, but no
enquiry thus far made has in any way tended to shake our faith in
regard to our main lines of advance.
