T. J. SAMUEL, M.A.

Department of Political Economy, University of Toronto

Social Factors Affecting Fertility
in India’

SUMMARY

FERTILITY BEING the crucial demographic
variable in India, the factors affecting fertility
need careful examination. The social factors
believed to have a bearing on fertility are the
social institutions of marriage and joint family,
attitudes such as the status accorded to women,
the motivation for having children, the habits
of sexual behaviour, and social characteristics
such as education, urbanization, occupational
distribution and the religious, regional and
linguistic composition of the population. The
effect of the changes likely to be experienced by
these factors on fertility during the period
1961-1981 is discussed here.

Among the demographic variables affecting
the growth of population in India, the birth
rate is of obvious importance owing to the
potential possibility it holds for lowering the
rate of population growth. Therefore, the major
burden of a student of Indian demography is
to understand and evaluate the role of this
crucial demographic variable which is determined by biological, psychological, economic
and social factors. The social factors likely to
be of importance in the determination of
fertility in India during the period 1961-1981
are examined in this paper.

These factors may be considered under three
heads:

I. Social Institutions: Marriage, joint family.

II. Social Attitudes: The status accorded to
women, the motivation for having children, and
the habits of sexual behaviour.

* I am indebted to Professor S. G. Triantis of the
University of Toronto for his most vaJuable comments
on this paper.

III. Social Characteristics: Urbanization,
education, occupational distribution and the
religious, regional and linguistic composition of
the population.

I. SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS

Among the social institutions pertinent to
our purpose are marriage and the extended or
joint family system.

Marriage
Since practically all births in India at present
occur within the institution of marriage, it is
assumed that there is little chance of illegitimate
births causing any change in total fertility
during the short run (1961-81) under consideration.

A discussion of the institution of marriage
and its capacity to influence fertility rates may
be considered under three subheads:

1. The Prevalence of Marriage. Since marriage
is considered to be a duty of a quasi-religious
nature by the two dominant religious groups,
Hindus and Muslims, marriage is universal in
India. In other words, practically, every Indian
has, sooner or later, to marry. In the Hindu
scriptures (Manusamhita and Mahabharata) it is
seen that the word putra, son, is derived from
the word put, hell, the connection between them
being that the birth of a son saves the father
from going to hell.!5 Thus marriage is almost a
religious duty. Regarding the Muslims, Mohammed is recorded as saying, “‘marry and generate’,
and “marry a woman who is richly
fruitful”’.22 The minority religious groups copied
the practice of “marriage for all” from the two
major religious communities.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, March 1965, 57, 1.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The ubiquity of marriage in India is borne
out by statistical evidence as well. In 1931, 98 per
cent of the females had been married by the age
of thirty.3 The percentage of the total population
of women who remained single in the age group
thirty-five to forty-four was only 0-1 per cent
in 1951.4 The following table compares the
percentage of never-married females aged
fifteen and over in India with those of some of
the developed countries of the world.

TABLE 1

Percentage of never-married females aged fifteen and over
in selected countries for the years specified

Country Percentage
India, 1951 6:4
Canada, 1951 25°7
France, 1954 23-2
Japan, 1950 25-7
U.K., 1951 25:5
U.S.A., 1950 18-5
W. Germany, 1950 27:1

(Source: United Nations, Demographic Year Book, 1958,
pp. 155, 161, 172, 173, 182, 190.)

Since marriage, as an institution, is deeply
entrenched in the Indian culture, it is unlikely
that there would be such drastic changes in a
short time as to increase considerably the
percentage of never-married females aged fifteen
and over before the country attains a fairly high
degree of economic and social development.
Therefore, a decline in fertility from a change in
the social institution of marriage, as once
happened in Ireland, is ruled out.

2. Age at Marriage. Marriage is not only
universal in India but it takes place at an early
age. The Hindu scriptures urged the parents ta
give away their daughter in marriage “‘while she
goes still naked’? and warned not to keep the
maiden in their home after she has attained
puberty because “the father or guardian [of the
maiden] incurs the sin of destroying an embryo
at each appearance of menses as long as the girl
is unmarried after puberty’’.!5 Society expected
the girl to be married early because the correct
ideal of chastity required that “the maiden
should not feel love for a man other than
the one to whom she might eventually get
married’’.17 Since virginity was a badge of
respectability, ‘“‘marriage would be desired

6

before any scope for suspicion regarding the
virginity of a girl presented itself”.15 The
Muslim invasions of India after A.D. 1000 are
also believed to have promoted pre-puberty
marriages since the Muslim invaders were not
keen on taking with them married women as
part of the loot. Because of all these reasons,
age at marriage became very low.

Efforts have been made, in modern times, to.
raise the age at marriage by legislation. The
reform movement, started towards the close
of the nineteenth century, for the abolition of
childhood marriages resulted in legislative action
against child marriages in several states of India.
In 1929 after prolonged discussion, controversy
and protest, the Child Marriage Restraint Act
was passed. The Act prohibited “child”? marriages, the term “‘child’’ being defined as a male
under eighteen or a female under fourteen years
of age. This piece of statute has, for a long time,
been honoured more in the breach than the
observance, though lately the age at marriage
has been going up.

The question to be examined here is, what
would be the impact on fertility of a rising age
at marriage? However, before we enter into a
discussion of this aspect, it is necessary to
pause a moment to examine the meaning of the
word “marriage” as used in India. In certain
parts of India the performance of the ceremony
of marriage, especially pre-puberty marriages,
is not invariably followed by cohabitation of the
couple and consummation of the marriage.
The term “‘marriage’”’ here means nothing more
than a betrothal difficult to discard later and is
not immediately followed by the ceremony of
gauna after which the couple enter into effective
conjugal relations. In order to avoid confusion,
a distinction is drawn between the ceremony
of marriage, hereafter referred to as marriage
and the ceremony of gauna hereafter referred to
as effective marriage. A rise in the age at
marriage does not mean a rise in the age at
effective marriage and when the age at marriage
goes up, marriage and effective marriage come
closer to each other and even coincide. In places
where there is no separate ceremony of gauna,
marriage and effective marriage coincide.

Though, prima facie, it might appear that every
increase in the age at effective marriage would
SOCIAL FACTORS AFFECTING FERTILITY IN

cause a reduction in fertility, the relationship
between fertility and age at marriage has not
been found to be so simple and direct. The
concept of “adolescent sterility”—as enunciated
by Clellan S. Ford,!4 and supported by evidence
from samples studied from populations as
culturally dissimilar as those of Africa on the
one hand and Scotland and the Western United
States on the other 18—claims that marital
unions in the very early reproductive period of
women, to be more specific, before the age of
sixteen, are relatively sterile as compared with
marital unions in a later reproductive period.
This theory casts doubt on a negative correlation
between age at effective marriage and fertility
when age at marriage is very low.

It may be asked: What accounts for this
rather paradoxical phenomenon of a lower
fertility for women married at lower ages of
marriage ?

A plausible answer seems to be that for girls
entering effective marriage at low ages, fecundity
and fertility are lower for reasons of health or
of lower frequency of coitus. At low ages of
effective marriage the fecundity of girls is
prematurely and permanently impaired by early
cohabitation and pregnancy. This could be so,
particularly in an underdeveloped country
which has a low average consumption of food
per capita and which lacks even the essential
medical facilities for maternity and after-care
of the mother.

Secondly, the young couple, especially in a
traditional joint family (as will be explained
later) do not have sufficient opportunities for
frequent coitus during the early years of effective
marriage because of certain traditional norms
of behaviour. This would reduce the chances
of conception.

Some empirical investigations conducted in
India during the period 1950-60 throw some
light on the phenomenon of “adolescent
sterility’. Supporting data are available from
rural and urban samples in Uttar Pradesh, two
samples in Maharashtra and one sample from
Kerala. An all-India sample has also produced
evidence. Four of them may be briefly examined
here.

A sample of 2,314 couples were included in
the Central India Study from Maharashtra.11

INDIA

Among the married women who have completed
their reproductive period (age forty-five or
more) it was found that women married at
under thirteen years of age gave birth to 6-5
children while 6:9 children were born to those
who married between the ages of thirteen and
seventeen. !1

In the urban areas of Lucknow and Kanpur
of Uttar Pradesh, for women with thirty-one
years of married life, 7-8 children were born to
those married before the age of thirteen as
compared to 8-4 children for those married
between sixteen and eighteen.25 A rural sample
from the same state showed that for women
with the same duration of marriage, gross
fertility was 6-3 for those married below the
age of twelve as compared to 7:8 for those
married between sixteen and seventeen.23

Finally, there is the evidence from the fourth
round of the National Sample Survey * regarding the fertility performance of India’s rural
marriage cohorts married at ages below and
above fifteen. Only rural marriage cohorts are
considered since more than 80 per cent of
India’s population live in rural areas. The
table below presents the average number of
children born to these couples at different
stages of marriage.

The data overleaf do not support the contention that completed gross fertility is lower for
those married at a lower age, as suggested by the
theory of “adolescent sterility”. Nevertheless,
this does not contradict the probability of a
general increase in fertility due to increasing age
at marriage because:

(1) The period under consideration is only
twenty years (1961-81).

(2) For durations of marriage (in years) 2, 7, 12
and 22, the fertility of those married over age
fifteen is higher than for those married before
fifteen.

* The National Sample Survey (NSS) was started in
1950-51 by the Ministry of Finance of the Government of
India, in co-operation with the Indian Statistical Institute,
to collect socio-economic data. With the whole of India
under its geographical coverage, the NSS conducts a continuing series of surveys in the form of two or more
“rounds” a year—each round covering about 1,000 villages
and 500 sample blocks in towns and cities. In 1956, it had
a whole time staff of 600. Information is collected by the
interview method.

7
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(3) The differential fertility between those
married for the “maximum period after twentytwo years” is much less than the differential
fertility for the shorter durations of marriage
in the opposite direction.

The studies cited show that with increasing
age at marriage, the interval between marriage
and first delivery decreases. Gross fertility is
positively correlated with an increase in age at
marriage till a certain age at marriage or a
certain duration of marriage is reached. After

TABLE 2

Total number of children born per couple to rural couples
at years after marriage stages 2, 7, 12, 22 and the
maximum after 22: all India rural couples, NSS 4th
round, 1952

Increase in number
of children born
to those married

Number of children
born to couple
Years after with wife’s marriage

marriage (years) above 15
Below 15 15-above

2 0-04 0-22 | +0-18

7 0-80 1-66 +0-86

12 1-99 3-00 +1:01

22 4:49 4:96 +0-47

Maximum

after 22 6:01 5-69 —0-32
(Source: Gupta Ajit Das, Som Ranjan Kumar,

Majumdar Murari and Mitra Samarendra Nath. 1955.
Couple Fertility, The National Sample Theory, No. 7,
in Sankhya: Ind. J. Statist., 16, 273.)

this level has been reached, fertility falls for all
higher ages and durations of marriage. The
point of maximum fertility was reached in
Central India for the women married between
ages thirteen and seventeen and in Uttar
Pradesh between sixteen and eighteen.

In the short period under discussion, the age
at marriage is not likely to go up above the
crucial age after which fertility is expected to
register a fall. It may be assumed that, in
circumstances favourable to an increase in the
age at marriage, by 1981 the age at marriage of
females, for the whole of India, would remain
near that reported for urban cohorts in the
period 1946-51, that is, around sixteen years.

An age at effective marriage around sixteen,
according to the studies we have reviewed, is not
favourable for a reduction in the levels of
fertility. On the other hand, fertility is likely

8

to rise during this period when age at effective
marriage is reaching the crucial age of around
sixteen.

3. Length of Marriage. The influence of
marriage on fertility also depends upon the
length of married life, or to be more specific, the
period during which the couple remain in fertile
union which, given the age at marriage, is
determined by the dissolution of marriage
caused by the death of one of the spouses or
by their separation and the prevalence of
remarriage. Since divorces are not of much
importance in India the effect of divorces on
fertility is left out of the discussion.

However, the age at widowhood is a factor
that has a great influence on the level of fertility.
The age at widowhood in India, during the last
few decades has been going up consistently and
its rise has been more spectacular during the
decade 1951-61 because of the greater success in
the reduction of mortality during that decade.
The crude mortality rate fell from 36-3 in
1921-31 to 30-9 in 1941-51 and to 24 in
1951-61.10 This decline in mortality and the
consequent increase in age at widowhood of
women is estimated to have produced the effect
of increasing fertility by 15 per cent during the
last two decades.6 The crude mortality rate in
1971 is expected to be around 16 and in 1981
around 15.8 Such a fall in mortality would
prolong the length of married life in India and
further increase the fertility rate.

However, age specific fertility of women
reaches its maximum between the ages of
twenty and thirty and afterwards it shows a
tendency to decline with increasing age. Therefore, it is not to be expected that a further
reduction of mortality which would have the
result of increasing the average life span,
would have the same magnitude of effect on
fertility as it had in the earlier stages of the
reproductive period. Nevertheless, it is quite
clear that fertility in India would increase
because of the lengthening of the span of life
of men and women who continue to remain in
fertile union.

In determining the length of married life the
- prevalence or absence of the practice of widow
re-marriage must be taken into account. The
percentage of widows to all females decreased
SOCIAL FACTORS AFFECTING FERTILITY IN

from 16-1 in 1931 to 12-8 in 1951 4 most probably due to a decrease in the incidence of
widowhood. And there is no way of finding
out the rate of re-marriage for the widowed
women of India as widow re-marriage is, as it
always was, to a large extent taboo in India,
particularly among the upper social classes.

The social ban on widow re-marriage is likely
to get weaker, though very slowly, with increasing education and urbanization, and therefore the rate of their re-marriage would show
an increase in future. This, however, is likely to
be of very little demographic significance in the
next two decades.

Joint Family

Another social institution, believed to be of
significance in the determination of fertility in
India is the joint family system once widely
prevalent there, though breaking up into
nuclear families in recent years. It has been held
by some sociologists that the joint family
system promotes higher fertility rates by (1)
arranging marriages early and by (2) providing
for the married couple and the children born
into the family since the young couple do not
have to restrict reproduction for prudential
reasons. The validity of the first assumption
seems doubtful in the light of the foregoing
discussion on the effect of age at marriage on
fertility. The second assumption is also questionable because it is more plausible that children
are born in Indian families, irrespective of the
-type of the family, as a matter of chance and not
of choice. Since the assumptions behind the
argument seem questionable, its soundness is
open to serious doubt.

In fact, there are several norms of behaviour
that reduce the frequency of intimate marital
relationship in an extended family. Firstly, the
freedom of the young couple even to talk to
each other, much less to have sexual intercourse
at their will, is to a large extent restricted by
the traditional pattern of behaviour expected
and enforced by the older members of the joint
family. In particular, the young wife is always
under the vigilant eyes of the mother-in-law
and ‘“‘too free” a behaviour with her husband
is bound to bring prompt and open rebuke.

INDIA

Secondly, when total available sleeping space
in the house is limited the young couple are
not even likely to have a room for themselves.
This reduces the frequency of sexual unions.
The unwarned, frequent, and prolonged visits
of relations would, sometimes, necessitate the
sleeping of all the women in one room and all
the men in another.

Thirdly, in some joint families there is a
nuptial room and the couples have to take
turns in reserving it. Since too frequent reservations, particularly by the younger couples,
would be frowned upon by the head of the
family, the frequency of sexual intercourse
would be reduced. (The newly-married couple
described by Taya Zinkin 27 had access to the
room five nights a month.) Such practices lower
fertility of couples in joint families.

If prudential reasons influence fertility, they
are probably nullified by the conditions described above. Therefore, it may be inferred that
joint family life does not bring about increased
fertility.

Nor is the argument corroborated by empirical
evidence. None of the studies in India that
probed into the question of family structure and
its relation to fertility have revealed a higher
fertility for joint families as compared to nuclear
families. The results of some of the studies are
cited below:

Fertility levels and differentials between joint
and nuclear families in two Bengali villages
were studied by J. S. Aird in 1957. He came to
the conclusion that “Bengali joint families do
not appear to lead to higher than average
fertility”’.!

In the Central India Study, Edwin Driver
compared couples living in a nuclear family with
those living in a joint family, according to
wife’s present age, and found that there was no
difference in the fertility behaviour between
these two groups. He observed: “. . . family
structure has little bearing on the fertility of
couples”. 11

In Kerala in South India, an urban study
reported that among the couples living in joint
families 11-3 per cent had no parturition before
the period of the survey as compared to 7-6
per cent in nuclear families. !6 However, the value
of this data is limited because no information

9
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

is available on the age of the couples in
either group. It is probable that the couples in
joint families belong to a lower age group than
those in the nuclear families.

Also, the gross fertility was found to be
higher for nuclear families in Kerala. While the
fourth or higher order births amounted to 48
per cent of total births reported (1958) from all
joint families, it was 58 per cent for nuclear
families. Again, without the age composition
of the couples no definite conclusions can be
arrived at.

Though empirical investigations are few in
number, on the basis of the theoretical reasoning
coupled with what little empirical evidence is
available, it may be concluded that the supposedly higher fertility of joint families is
difficult to establish. This conclusion is relevant
and important to our discussion in the sense that
it removes the belief that a change from the
institution of joint families to nuclear families
would automatically lower birth rates in India.

Il. SOCIAL ATTITUDES

Among the social attitudes of the people of
India, the status accorded to women, the
motivation for having children and the habits
of sexual behaviour, have an important influence
on fertility.

The Status of Women

Among the social attitudes that have a bearing
on fertility, directly or indirectly, is the status
accorded to women in the society. Though it is
believed, on good evidence, that the women of
India in the very early days (Vedic period—
towards the close of the B.c. era) and in places
where the matriarchial system of kinship
existed, had a relatively high status, Indian
society in later years had not bestowed on its
women a status comparable to that enjoyed
by the women in developed countries. The
women were assigned a submissive and secondary role in society and it was considered that
women do not deserve independence. “‘At every
stage in her life’, it was believed, ‘‘she should
be under the domination of someone, her father,
her husband or son’’.!5 Their honourable field

10

of activity, as in most traditional societies, was
held to be the kitchen and the best that life
could offer women was marriage and motherhood. The general emphasis on dharma, duty,
and the belief in Karma, fate, in Indian culture
generated in her a spirit of resignation and she
found contentment in faithfully fulfilling the
duties assigned to her—the duties of looking
after her husband and bearing and rearing
children for him.

The restriction of women to the role of
producer of children has, in other countries,
been found to be comparable with an increase
in fertility. And India was no exception. When
women in developed countries started taking
up productive employment outside their homes,
their career very often conflicted with their role
as wives and mothers. At the same time, outside
employment of women undermined the allpervasive, dominating role of the husband and
enabled her to rise in economic and social
status as a member of the family and of society.

On the opportunities for Indian women to
enter a career, the Indian constitution disapproves discrimination, among other things,
in employment on the basis of sex. In practice
too, little discrimination against women is
noticeable in employment and the number of
women who accept employment outside their
homes is increasing. However, the fertilitydepressing effect of this factor has been circumscribed by the small percentage of women
taking up a career, the abundance in the supply
of domestic labour, the social security laws and
the lack of opportunities for social activities.

Firstly, though the number of women who
enter a career would increase in future their
number as a percentage of total women in the
reproductive age group would continue to be
small in the period 1961-81 under consideration.
Their influence on the reduction of fertility
would therefore be limited.

Secondly, it is usually assumed that the duties
of a wife and mother and those of a career
inevitably clash and, therefore, the mothers will
be motivated to postpone and limit the birth
of children. But the abundant supply of cheap
domestic labour leaves the mother to pursue
her career without any difficulty.

Thirdly, the social security laws introduced
SOCIAL FACTORS AFFECTING FERTILITY IN

in India to make the country a welfare state
offer no incentives to employed women to
lower their fertility. On the other hand, the
existing social security laws, copied from some
of the developed countries, provide inducements to the employed women to raise a large
family.

For instance, Maternity Benefits Acts guaranteeing certain facilities to women employees
of the Central and State governments, as well
as of industrial and other organizations, have
been passed in all the states. The rules provide
for women two months leave with pay and in
addition they are eligible for a maximum of
thirty days further leave with pay if they are
ill due to ailments arising out of pregnancy.
Perhaps with some exaggeration a doctor
reported from a plantation that “‘because of
these facilities, many of these women labourers
are actually anxious to become pregnant
almost every one and a half years with clock-like
regularity’.19 The problem was also raised at
the Ninth Meeting of the Family Planning
Board of the Government of India in 1960 and
it has been suggested that “‘the present practice
of giving maternity leave needed revision”’. 12

Fourthly, a principal motive for women to
limit their families in developed countries has
been the desire to participate with men in social
activities outside the home. The evidence culled
from young housewives in the U.K. makes it
clear that “. . . a desire not only to have a
share in life’s social pleasures, but to participate
in activities outside their homes, has been an
influential factor in the limitation of families’’.13
This motivation is very weak among the women
of India, however educated and well-placed
they are financially and otherwise, because the
women have few opportunities of participating
in activities outside their homes, except perhaps
in the major cities of India.

The status and role of Indian women are
undergoing changes, though only gradually.
The legal imposition of monogamy and the
legalization of divorce have made Indian women
more independent and less submissive. According to the Hindu Succession Act of 1956, the
Hindu woman has a claim to as equal a
share of her father’s property as any male
child.

INDIA

However, despite all the legislative measures
for improving the status of women in India, for
the vast majority of them these legislative
statutes are virtually a dead letter. It has been
correctly observed that “various legislative
measures ... permit contractural marriage,
prevent bigamy, child marriage and forced
widowhood, foster education and entry into
gainful occupations, and furnish opportunities
to women of a certain class? (italics mine).
Therefore, it cannot be assumed that the
changes observed in the status of Indian women
in recent years are widespread enough to cause
any significant change in fertility. Though more
changes are bound to come in the next few
decades, it is problematical how far and how
fast such changes would contribute towards a
reduction of fertility.

Desire for Children

Among the social attitudes affecting fertility in
India the desire for children is of no less
importance than any other relevant social
attitude. Among the motives for having children
there are the ones like to “‘make the home
happier”, which is common to human beings
everywhere, in developed or in underdeveloped
countries. But in India this is not the only or
even the principal reason for wanting children.
The following motives have been found equally
or more important.

1. The Desire for a Son. The religious motive
of the Hindus for having a son has already been
mentioned. In a country where the death rate,
until recently, has been very high, the prompt
arrival of a son after marriage is eagerly
welcomed, so as to ensure the future of the
parents in the other world and to perpetuate
their name in this one. Moreover, since there
has for so long been a high infant mortality
rate, this longing would not be satisfied by the
birth of a single son. Though the mortality
situation has improved this motivation is likely
to remain strong for some time. Also, even those
who want to have planned families would continue to have more babies if they had only girls
in the beginning.

Very often such attitudes spread to other
religious communities who live in the midst of

11
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the larger Hindu community with whom they
have close cultural contacts.

Statistical evidence for the existence of this
incentive is available from the Mysore Population Study which found that 84 per cent of rural
wives and 93 per cent of rural husbands had,
primarily, this motive in mind. In urban areas
71 per cent of the women and 73 per cent of the
men considered this as one of the motives for
having children. 26

2. The Concern for Care in Old Age. The wish
to be cared for in old age by one’s children is a
very powerful one among average Indians. This
is particularly so in a society in which the
average parents can hardly save anything for
a retired life because of the low level of their
incomes and the absence of institutions that
help saving. Nor has this motive been affected
by the welfare activities of the State because,
except in the case of civil servants, no old age
pensions or allowances worth mentioning have
been started in India. The Mysore Study shows
that 82-86 per cent of the rural couples and
68 per cent of the urban couples considered
this an important reason for having a large
family.26

3. The Need to Follow the Community Pattern.
Public approval or disapproval is one of the
means of social control in a traditional society
in which the average individual or family finds
it difficult to go against the pattern of social
behaviour set and dictated by the society. Such
individuals or families are goaded back to the
set pattern of behaviour by community criticism,
or the fear of it.

In a modern type of society, on the other hand,
these social controls do not apply and, therefore,
such motives are necessarily weak. In the
urbanized sector of Indian society, which is
relatively modernized as well, this form of social
control is becoming ineffective, thereby weakening the motive under discussion.

Though it is difficult to predict to what
degree the motives suggested would be
weakened, it would be safe to assume that, in
general, they would lose their present importance. Any modification of these motives for
having children would largely depend on the
impact of urbanization, economic progress and
education.

12

Habits of Sexual Behaviour

The habits of sexual behaviour ceteris paribus,
would have a direct effect on fertility. Apart
from the practices noted in the joint family
incidentally restricting the frequency of sexual
unions, there are a few more reasons why the
frequency of coitus among the Hindus is lower
in general.

In the traditional Indian culture, there are
certain customs that reduce the average frequency of sexual unions. They are founded on
religious or health grounds and have been
mentioned in religious books, “scientific” books
on sex, or in books on medicine. The Dharma
Sastras of Manu (600 B.c.), a religious book,
and the Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana (4th century
A.D.) a “‘scientific’”” book on sex, lay down the
time when a husband should meet his wife
physically. A Short History of Aryan Medical
Science describes as follows the time when
sexual intercourse should be avoided:

Sexual intercourse is prohibited for the first four
days after the appearance of the menstrual flow, as
well as on the 8th, 14th and 15th days of both the
fortnights—light and dark; on the anniversary
days of dead parents, nights previous to the anniversary, on vyatipta [the seventeenth of the astrological yogas], varidhrata [the twenty-seventh of the
astrological yogas], sanskranti [the passage of the
sun or planetary bodies from one sign of the zodiac
to the other], in the daytime, at sunset, at midnight
and during an eclipse.24

The above injunctions lower the frequency of
coitus. This has been borne out by investigations.
Religious reasons were cited in Ramanagaram,
a rural area in Mysore and in Lodi Colony, an
urban area in New Delhi, by the married
couples who reported avoidance of coitus during
specific periods; ranging from 1-79 days in
Lodi Colony and 2-120 days in Ramanagaram,
the median being nineteen days in the former
and twenty-four in the latter. 2

For reasons of health, abstinence for six months
or more during lactation was reported for 80 per
cent of the cases interviewed in Ramanagaram,
while in Lodi Colony the period of abstinence
seldom exceeded three months.

Avoidance of coitus because of religious or
health reasons has been less common in urban
areas, as seen in Lodi Colony, as compared
SOCIAL FACTORS AFFECTING FERTILITY IN

with rural areas represented by Ramanagaram.
Increasing urbanization or the spread of urban
values to rural areas would also, in all likelihood,
increase the frequency of coitus for the reasons
quoted above and would, thereby, serve to
increase fertility.

III]. SOCIAL CHARACTERISTICS

The degree of urbanization, the rate of
literacy, the occupational pattern and the
religious, regional and linguistic composition
of the population affects fertility rates.

Urbanization has not, so far, had the effect
of lowering fertility in India. Evidence on
differential fertility, according to residence, was
collected in the 1951 census for TravancoreCochin and Madhya Pradesh which demonstrated that in the former State and in areas
excluding Eastern Madhya Pradhesh in the
latter, the number of children ever born to
women of forty-five and over, still married,
was 6:6 in rural and 6-4 in urban areas—a
difference which is not very significant. Eastern
Madhya Pradesh shows a fertility of 6-3 for
urban women, in the same age group and in the
same period, as against 6-1 for rural women.°
A study by the Gokhale Institute in Poona in
the early fifties showed no difference in fertility
between urban and rural areas.? The Mysore
Population Study of the United Nations
reported that the average number of children
born to women with unbroken marriages until
they were forty-five years of age was 5-9 for
Bangalore city and 5-8 for rural areas.? The
Central India Study in the late fifties does not
reveal any notable difference in the fertility
between urban and rural population.1!1

Information collected by the Indian Statistical
Institute on a nation-wide scale during the
second and fourth “rounds” of the National
Sample Surveys showed a higher fertility for
urban couples within twelve years of marriage
as compared to rural couples of the same
marriage duration.9

Regarding differential fertility according to
literacy, Kingsley Davis 19 observed a negative
correlation between general literacy and fertility
which has been supported by later investigations.
However, he found that a higher literacy of

INDIA

females was not accompanied by a lower
fertility. This conclusion is refuted by evidence
gathered from several surveys in the fifties.
In Central India, fertility of wives was found to
decline with education. Mean fertility of
illiterate wives was 4-7, with primary education
4:3 and with high school education or above
3-2.11 In the Mysore Study, according to
Chandrasekharan, as quoted by Coale and
Hoover, the size of completed family for
unbroken marriages with age of wife not less
than forty-five was six or more for illiterate
women as well as for women with primary
and middle school education, five for women
with high school education and two for college
educated.

The above studies show that fertility
differences are of importance only when the
fertility of the illiterate couple and the fertility
of couple with high school education or more
are compared. In the short run, therefore, no
significant fall in fertility can be expected because
of increasing literacy.

Finally, differential fertility according to
occupation may be examined. The data supplied
by Kingsley Davis based on the 1931 census are
of doubtful dependability since he assigns a
particular occupation to each caste. Nor does
his analysis suggest any definite conclusions
on this aspect. Though traders and those in
professions belonging to the tertiary sector of
the economy report a lower child/woman ratio,
than that for agriculturists—usually assigned to
the primary sector of the economy—the child/
woman ratio for servants and scavengers is
found to be high. They are also in the tertiary
sector and their combined total in the sample
exceeds the combined total of the traders and
those in other professions.

The Mysore Study failed to lend support to
any suggestion of the appearance of differential
fertility on the basis of occupation. Married
women in the same age group belonging to
agricultural and non-agricultural occupations
showed little difference in fertility.26 The
Central India Study suggested a slightly lower
fertility for the traders, clerks and professional
classes as compared to agriculturists and
artisans. !1

According to the studies reviewed, differential

13
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

fertility on the basis of occupation is also largely
non-existent in India as a whole. Therefore, no
reduction in fertility, in the short run could be
achieved by any social movement up to the
secondary and tertiary sectors of the economy.

Social characteristics such as the religious,
regional and linguistic composition of the
population, with political undertones, would
perpetuate conditions facilitating a high level
of fertility. It would hardly be correct to say
that religious, regional or linguistic feelings

TABLE 3

Probable effect of social factors on fertility in India during
the period 1961-1981

Change in
fertility

Social factors

I. Social institutions
(a) Marriage
1. Prevalence of marriage 0
2. Age at marriage +?
3. Length of marriage +
(b) Joint family 0

II. Social attitudes

(a) Status of women 0or —
(6) The motivation for children 0 or —
(c) Habits of sexual behaviour

III. Social characteristics
(a) Urbanization Oor +
(b) Literacy _
(c) Occupational distribution Oor +

(d) Religious, regional or linguistic factors 0or +

0 = no change. — =negative change.
+ = positive change. ? =doubtful.

have initiated a competition to outdo rival
groups in fertility performance. However, these
rivalries must have, subconsciously at least,
discouraged many of the leaders of these groups
from becoming social examples to be emulated
in fertility reduction. Even if birth control
techniques are known, the political significance
of a larger percentage of one’s own group
against other groups—religious, regional or
linguistic—would be too obvious to be overlooked in deciding the size of one’s family.
Newspaper reports like, “Fall in Growth of
Hindu Population’’,* reminding the Hindus
that their percentage has gone down, however
slightly, might foster the formation of an

* The Mail, Madras, April 8, 1963.
14

attitude that would prove resistant to reduction
in fertility. How far these forces, that are
largely imperceptible but nevertheless potentially
powerful, would remain effective during the
next few years is hard to predict. It is improbable,
though not impossible, that changes of a significant nature are likely to appear in the fertility
pattern of India’s population because of
religious, regional or linguistic forces at
work.

Table 3 presents in summarized form the
expected results of social factors on fertility in
India in the next two decades.

From the social factors we have examined,
it is quite evident that they are of cardinal
importance in the determination of fertility
and they are not likely to change in the desired
direction during 1961-81, to reduce fertility in
India. Most probably, these social factors
would not only perpetuate the existing high
fertility, but would also tend to increase it in
the short run.

REFERENCES

1. Aird, J. S. 1958. Fertility differential in two Bengali
villages. Dissertation Abstr., 18, 1528.
. Blacker, C. P. 1955. The rhythm method: two
Indian experiments, Eugen. Rev., 47, 93.
. Census of India, 1931. 1933. Part I—Report, Delhi.
. Census of India, 1951. 1953. Vol. 1, India. Part I-A.
elhi.
. Census of India, 1951. 1953. Maternity data. Delhi.
. Chandrasekharan, C. 1962. Indian fertility in a
changing economic and social setting. Family
Planning News, 3, 236.
7. Chandrasekharan, C. 1954. Fertility trends in India.
yceeiines of the World Population Conference, 1,

8. Coale, Ansley J., and Hoover, Edgar M. 1958.
Population Growth and Economic Development in
Low-Income Countries. Princeton U. Press.

9. Das, Gupta Ajit et al. 1955. Couple fertility. Sankhya:
The Indian Journal of Statistics, 16, Parts 3 and 4.

10. Davis, Kingsley. 1951. Population of India and
Pakistan. Princeton U. Press.

11. Driver, Edwin. 1963. Differential Fertility in Central
India. Princeton U. Press.

12. Family Planning News. 1960. Ninth meeting of the
family planning board, 1, 11.

13. Florence, Lella Secor. 1946. Britain and her birth
rate. Econ. J., 56, 287.

14. Ford, Clellan S. 1945. A Comparative Study of Human

__ Reproduction. New Haven, Yale U. Press.

15. Kapadia, K. M. 1958. Marriage and Family in India.
Oxford U. Press.
16. Kerala, The Demographic Research Centre. 1961.
Attitude to Family Planning. Pt. 1, Govt. of Kerala.
17. Kejkat, S. V. 1909. History of Caste in India. Araoti,
ndia.

Nan & WwW N
18.
19.

21.
22.

SOCIAL FACTORS AFFECTING FERTILITY IN INDIA

Lorimer, Frank. 1954. Culture and Human Fertility. 23. Saxena, G. B. 1962. Age at marriage and fertility—
A sample study in the rural Madhya Pradesh.

Paris, O.

Mahadevan, R. 1962. Social security and family Artha Vijnana, 4, 53.

planning. J. Ind. med. Assn., 38, 439. 24. Sinh Jee, Sir Bharat. 1896. A Short History of Aryan
. Mukerji, D. P. 1951. The status of Indian women. Medical Science. London, Macmillan.

Internat. soc. Sci. Bull., 3, 798. 25. Sinha, J. N. 1951. Fertility and age at marriage.

Planning Commission. 1961. Third Five Year Plan. Document No. 16. International Statistical Institute,

New Delhi. New Delhi.

Population Council. 1958. Population: An Inter- 26. United Nations. 1961. The Mysore Population Study.

national Dilemma. New York. 27. Zinkin, Taya. 1958. India Changes. Oxford U. Press.

15
