The Danger of Degeneracy.

By Proressor HERMAN LuNDBORG, M.D.

I,

The development of civilisation at the present time in Europe
affords anything but an attractive picture. The reasons for this are
many. Some of the most important will be dealt with in this paper.

Materialism in ‘‘a machine made world,’’ begins to make itself
felt in a very disquieting manner. There can be hardly any doubt that
both ignorance and egoism have driven us into a blind alley from which
we must find a way to return, to strike out new paths which will lead
upwards towards real improvement, and not downwards towards the
ruin and destruction of the race.

Our greatly increased knowledge, respecting formerly unknown
powers of nature, has opened the way to possibilities in obtaining
material advantages and greater riches from the land, the mountains,
the forests and the air. Improved means of communication, industry
and commerce have hastened this process. The temptation has been
great to enter into the enjoyment as soon as possible of the good things
of this world in the form of money, property, shares and securities of all
kinds. The outward conditions of life (environment) had been considerably improved before the great war came. A life full of ferment
and excitement has arisen, but ideals of enormous value have gone
under. The race, the efficiency of the race, las deteriorated. Degeneration spreads quickly around, takes fast hold and expresses itself in the
worship of mammon, love of pleasure, degradation, vice and crime.

But it is not selfish motives alone which have been leading the
people, ideal motives have also been present. It cannot be denied that
in many departments real progress has been made, but in spite of this,
the ignorance and fanaticism of the masses has not seldom upset us into
the ditch instead of helping us forward. Very extensive movements
among the people of a social, political and religious nature have taken
place, working for their improvement and making powerful contributions towards it, which undoubtedly have had good results in some
cases, but often the reverse, because the starting point has been a false
one. On this account expectation has not always been fulfilled.
Theories which philosophers, pedagogues, sociologists and politicians
have striven to work into the thought-world of the more or less uncritical masses of the people have proved themselves upon a nearer
examination to be wrong. Such erroneous opinions have been leading
development into by-paths and begin to show disastrous consequences
for the race and people. Among the obvious false opinions of this
kind may be mentioned the belief in the omnipotence of environment
and the inner similarity of all mankind. Further the certainty that

*This article has been received from Professor Lundborg, the distinguished
Director of the Swedish State-Institute for Race-Biological Investigation, an
account of which appeared in Vol. XIII, No. 3 of the Eugenics Review.
532 EUGENICS REVIEW.

acquired qualities are inherited; all of these are questions which
modern investigation refuses to accept without further knowledge.

We ought not to forget either that different strata of society are of
different race-biological value, as a rule it is greatest in the sound
middle-class and lowest in the bottom stratum. The cultivated leading layer, which forms the upper class, is on account of its low birthrate
of decidedly less race value than the middle class, although the contributions of the former towards culture are considerably greater.

The very best environment has no power in itself to raise a bad or
unfit race of people, as for example, gipsies or negroes, and it is in the
same way impossible to raise in civilised societies the deepest sunken
bottom layer, i.e., habitual criminals, vagabonds, imbeciles (individuals deficient in gifts). These often suffer from defects, the result of
hereditary conditions, upon which improvement in the environment
has no or very little influence.

The consequences of such a process of layer-building, by which the
best equipped individuals (or bio-types to call them by their scientific
name) disappear and are replaced by lower ones, who have not the
corresponding power to take a leading social position, is evidently not
only a deterioration of the race from a biological point of view, but in
this manner a retrograde movement is also brought about in the ability
to receive culture.

The false humanity, which inspires so many people at the present
time, doubtless hastens this process, so unfavourable for development,
which we call contra-selection (selection in the wrong direction).
Good-hearted men and women often help forward without any distinction persons who are both physically and mentally feebly equipped,
who afterwards propagate themselves and pass on their inferior qualities in inheritance to new generations , which in turn become a burden on
society. In this way they add to the load of coming posterity.

q The law-maker who does not look deeper into the thing than this is
doomed to failure. We have already in all civilised countries laws
enough that bear witness to gross biological ignorance. I should like
in connection with this to quote the following utterance of Professor
Hultkrantz in Uppsala: ‘‘We can never get away from the eternal
elementary laws of life, and therefore it holds good that we must take
care before everything that our own written laws do not come into conflict with these, but are instead the best possible application of them
that we can make. It is on the quality of the human material that a
nation’s future development depends. We must constantly keep the
eugenic point of view before our eyes, if we wish our struggle to be not
only of use for the moment, but also a blessing and not a curse to the
coming generation. The individual disappears, but the race lives on,
any violation of its interest ought to be looked upon as a sacrilege.’’
May we also strive after a deeper knowledge of the laws of nature and
afterwards apply the experience regarding human life thus won not
only to ourselves, but also—and not least—to our posterity .

* * * *

We are taught by Mendelism that the germ-plasm in living
creatures is composed of a great number of hereditary factors,
“‘genes’’ (probably there are thousands or more in a human being).
THE DANGER OF DEGENERACY. 583

Parents belonging to the same family or race, have in their germ-plasm
many identical genes. This does not prevent every individual from also
having within himself a number of genes unlike those of other individuals. The sum of these altogether forms the distinguishing mark of the
individual in question. ‘The combination of the genes in man and wife
are therefore always more or less dissimilar. For every child that is
conceived the genes are combined in a different way (if one excepts
twins* produced from the same ovum, who are equipped alike genotypically). In this way and influenced to some extent by the environment, different constitutions arise (individuals, personalities). The
genes are to be taken as the building material itself. The frame work,
the structure are given in and by conception. An individual belonging
to a specified definite race receives in inheritance many characteristics both external and internal which distinguish the race in question
and differentiate it from other races. Thus for example, every person
knows that parents of Nordic race do not have children resembling
negroes or Japanese, nor is the reverse the case. Selection (in combination with environment) has during the course of thousands of years
effected this. Strong potent force lies without doubt in biological
inheritance, which is much more powerful than the accidental influence
of environment which affects the private individual during a more or
less extended period of time. In and by the process of mating the
future possibilities of development in the coming individual are to a
large extent decided according to established laws. It is therefore of
decided consequence for the child as to how the germ-plasms, which it
receives from both father and mother, are constituted.

If these are of good quality a talented and biologically well-born
person is the result; if again thev are bad, a stupid or degenerate individual is produced. No human power can make any alteration in
this fact, for we cannot—no teacher or doctor is capable of doing it—
re-create the materia] and the force that are bound up in the hereditary
substance. With the best will in the world we cannot therefore produce new traits. It is not possible from imbeciles, who have received
their weak intelligence in inheritance (and they are many) to make
human beings of full value no matter how good a bringing-up and
education we may give them. All the gold in the world is not capable
of doing anything in such cases. Just as little can we of an easily
led and weak-willed human being, who has inherited these qualities,
make an energetic resolute person. In other words we cannot alter
the laws of nature, 1.e., in this case heredity; we cannot even sway
these powers of nature, we could just as easily annihilate the law of
gravitation. |

But in the meanwhile it must not be thought that environment,
education and good conditions of society are worthless. That is far
from being the case. That would be to go from one extreme to the
other. We must not forget that bad conditions in the environment,
and an unsatisfactory up-bringing may ruin even those with good

*Most twins—all of a different sex and even a greut many of the same sex—
are not produced from the same ovum, but are produced from two different ovas
Twins produced from two different ova are not more alike than ordinary brother.
and sisters, but twins produced from one ovum are similar in the highest degree.
534 EUGENICS REVIEW.

instincts, or at least fai] to bring out the best that is in them. If they
happen to be placed in such difficult and degrading circumstances that
they die early or have no opportunity of building a family their good
‘*hereditary mass’’ is lost in and with themselves and this must be
considered as a national loss. Good conditions in the environment can
also help naturally to straighten out in some degree that which is
crooked. But the environment does not create anything new, it can
only modify, in a good or bad direction, the disposition which we have
inherited.

People having the same descent both on the father’s and mother’s
side are as a rule developed harmoniously; the genes that form the
foundation of their bodily organ and organic system in such cases suit
one another as a rule very well. Marriages between people of tne same
family and tribe are therefore advantageous. It is only in degenerate
families that such marriages give bad results. Race-mixtures between every nearly-related efficient nation are also good.

Extreme inter-marriage as well as its opposite extreme, too much
blood-mixture, have on the contrary unfavourable effects in the long
run, although of quite different kinds. In the first case the number
of the homozygotes is increased, in the second case the number of the
heterozygotes, that is to say; in every day language, intermarriage
breeds a too great monotony, while unchecked race-mixture causes too
great variation and often pure disharmony.

A people who always inter-marry show therefore very evident
outward and inner similarity. Little by little the feeling of solidarity
increases, but at the same time it degenerates into strong caste feeling,
chauvinism, and self-worship. Reactionary modes of thought spread
themselves around. Such nations are marked by their archaism and
senility. Many examples both from former times as well as at the
present could be brought forward to show this, e.g., the caste system
of the Hindus and the rigid formality of the old Jews. The conservatism and unexampled caste spirit of the true gipsies comes certainly from
the same cause. In the same way we find that the inhabitants of
isolated islands, Tasmania for example, and as far as that goes the
whole of Australasia, give, before the penetration of Europeans, a
picture of people lagging far behind, not only from a biological point of
view, but also as regards their culture.

Individuals and nations that arise from a great mixture of race are
as arule very disharmonic. The different traits do not suit each other
particularly well. A ‘‘mixtum compositum’’ is formed of a not very
attractive nature. Only in certain exceptional cases can a genial
(but at the same time bizarre) personality appear. The variations in
such a nation increase over and over again. The result is not only a
lack of correlation (agreement) between the different organs and organic
systems in one and the same individual but also an altogether too great
dissimilarity between the different individuals among themselves,
which causes a lack of the feeling of solidarity. We find quite analogous conditions within the world of animals.

In such cases—whether in regard to human beings or animals or
even plants—the constitution so to speak suffers shipwreck. The
power of resistance towards sickness and other dangerous factors is
THE DANGER OF DEGENERACY. 585

diminished, which is shown by increased mortality. The sexual
tendencies are increased; immorality, love of pleasure, vice even and
crime arise and stamp their character upon society. Dis-union,
quarrelling, uproar and revolution result sooner or later. Civilisation
sinks downwards. We find such conditions in the greater part of
Central and South America where a regular chaos of blood is to be
found on account of the fact that during many succeeding generations
a race mixture between Indians, negroes and whites (Indo-Europeans)
has been taking place. The circumstances in Eastern Europe and in
many parts of the Balkans (Europe’s unruly corner) also furnish us with
another example of the same kind. In a less degree and not quite so
plainly one can observe the same phenomenon taking place in big
cities, in industrial centres, in gold mining camps, etc., where people
oi different races collect and cross-breed. Such places are seats of real
race-corruption. The country-side with its purer bred population
shows us as a rule a far brighter picture.

It must be evident to everyone that a true national stock ts u
country’s greatest riches. How different things would appear everywhere in all the civilised countries if this principle was not only believed
in but was also lived up to.

_ One can compare nations and races to a tree, whose
branches represent the different national families. Some grow
luxuriantly while others become dried up and are blown down. The
weakest races die out. Stronger nations take their place and so it goes
on in endless repetition. Without any doubt the forms of life in the
world develop gradually during the course of thousands of years. The
same thing happens with regard to the human race. The better
organised nations do not remain in a savage State, but little by little
introduce better conditions of society, a fixed judicial law, a less
despotic constitution, in a word, a higher culture. Such things are not
brought about as people in general believe by the more highly civilised
nations imposing by hook or by crook their civilisation, their religion,
the constitution of their state, etc., upon the nations of lower status.
In this way one can possibly bring about an outward veneer, which
however cracks as soon as it is put tothe test. Culture is the expression
of a nation’s innermost being, and it cannot be altered or changed as
easily as one changes a coat. Feebly equipped nations have a low
civilisation, vigorous nations again have a higher one. We cannot
make any essential alterations in this matter. We may strive as much
as we are able but still in the long run we shall not succeed (even with
the best environment we can imagine) in keeping alive a dying race,
as for example, the Tasmanians or Australian negroes. We might just
as well attempt to make anyone immortal. So the forms of life
change, and in connection with these the forms of civilisation. Degeneration and extinction are taking place ncessantly on the one side,
and on the other development and uplifting. Taken as the whole one
may say that progress triumphs. The stronger nations spread both
themselves and their culture. The wish to proclaim the ‘‘status
quo’’ principle between nations is an absurdity which struggles against
immovable biological laws, which govern both us and all life to be
found in the world. We might just as well command the earth to
586 EUGENICS REVIEW.

stand still or all life to cease. The inherent powers of nature assert
their rights independently of the more or less short-sighted assertions
we are pleased to set down upon paper and declare valid.

No nation continues unchangeably the same during the course of
time, it develops and improves, or it deteriorates and degenerates.
Many factors are working towards this. One among the most important, which at the present time owing to mass-emigration, trade, commerce, war, etc., makes itself felt very strongly, is the unchecked
mixture of blood between different peoples, which has been previously
mentioned. This cannot take place without disaster in the long run.

Development in a certain direction in Europe has taken place at 2
rapid rate during the last hundred years.

Means of communication, trade, commerce and other forms of
occupation bear witness in an unmistakable manner to this. The
population of Europe has more than doubled itself during the 19th
century, the mortality has diminished, thanks to considerable improvement in the environment, the average length of life has also
increased, etc. To many this appears to offer bright hopes, but
there is undoubtedly a reverse side which is correspondingly dark,
so dark that people here and elsewhere are beginning to be very mistrustful of the future of European nations. The conflagration which
has raged throughout the world, and is not yet really quenched, has
certainly opened the eyes of many to the fact that in spite of all the improvement in environment it is not altogether as it should be with
our modern civilisation. It is not possible to ignore the fact that the
people have been made proletarians—in a biological sense—during a
few generations to a very alarming degree.

In a government motion in this year’s Swedish parliament the
Minister for Education (B. Bergqvist), in giving the motive for His
Majesty’s proposal to found a Race-biological Institute, illustrates
just this point among others :—

**It is doubtless quite clear to everyone, who is awake to certain
circumstances and phenomena of the time in which we live, that we.
cannot help feeling anxious about the future of civilised nations. At
the centre of the many powerful forces which are at work to improve and
ennoble the human race, many regrettable and dangerous conditions
show themselves which threaten to undermine and annihilate the work
of these forces. The struggle between these contrary currents is not a
new one, but we in our time ought to feel more strongly the danger of
letting the destructive elements do their work, without making any
attempt to counteract them. The significance of the self-denying
aspect of culture is seen more clearly when it is placed side by side with
the advance of civilisation. At the same time that the welfare of the.
people, taken on the whole, is improved, the mortality decreased,
the average length of life increased, etc., they are threatened by a
deterioration of race. The vigour of the race is destroyed, which is too
dear a price to pay for the advantages gained by the high standard to
which our material and mental culture has attained.

For some time, however, endeavours have been made to counteract
the above-mentioned destroying forces. But up to the present time
they have been chiefly directed towards the more easily accessible tasks.
THE DANGER OF DEGENERACY. 587

which lie nearest to hand, in improving the outward conditions of
human life, the social environment, or in directing attention to the
symptoms which the faults of these conditions have made apparent in
the world. With every appreciation of what has been done and is
being done in this way, one has had one’s eyes opened to the fact that
no real decisive victory can be won, by these means only, against the
evil one is fighting. One does not rely any longer on the effect of
improved conditions of environment. The fact of the importance
of heredity in the continuation and improvement of the race is at
last coming into prominence and getting recognition.”’

Many people—I am sorry to say—begin by regarding their own
individual life as being the only thing that matters, instead of regarding it as an inheritance held in trust, for the guarding of which they are
responsible in the eyes of their posterity as well as of their forefathers.
This arises from an individualistic view of life, having its foundation
in a certain over-estimation of their own value and an exaggerated
claim to the right of enjoyment.

The ‘‘policy of the empty cradle’’ is gradually making headway.
This system of having no children or only one or two in a family is
steadily becoming commoner, and, from the stand-point of race, must
be deprecated when it is realised that it has been adopted by the more
valuable race-elements.

The future of the family and the race must be safe-guarded. Not
80 very long ago, when the resources of food and nourishment were very
scanty on account of the war in Europe, every country was obliged to
introduce rationing of the means of life, in some form or another to
avoid a catastrophe in the form of actual starvation. One can ask
one self: when will the wounded and bleeding nations, in our quarter
of the globe, be forced to economise in a better way than heretofore with
the race-material that they own and to take care that the necessary
recruiting of good blood is effected? At the present time in the greater
part of Europe there is a dreadful waste in these respects, which make
a sad impression on all those who have learnt to see clearly the wrong
we are doing to those who will succeed us. The nations, who no longer
understand the value of healthy and strong children but prefer to live
an egoistic life without them, are not worthy of sustaining the fight of
competition; they must go under and make room for other nations
who are conscious in a higher degree of their duty and of the demands
made by nature.

Until more recent times the Swedish nation has lived in poverty,
‘but there has been no lack of children in Swedish homes. The majority
of these have been obliged to make their own way, and yet we have been
able up to the present to vindicate our equality with other European
nations, both physically and intellectually. Will this continue?
Hardly, not at least if we continue to follow the dangerous pathway we
have now entered upon. The luxurious mode of life and the sinking
birthrate in the well-to-do classes betokens nothing good. Added to
this we have a spreading industrialism which helps forward the work of
corrosion.

A nation, which does not increase in numbers, must degenerate.
Within my knowledge no historical example is to be found of a people,
5388 EUGENICS REVIEW.

showing a larger percentage of deaths than births yearly, which has
been able to recover. It is going to meet its doom.

If our own mothers and grandmothers had practised the system of
having only one or two children to the extent that it is now practised
in France and in a great many Swedish homes, the larger number of
the bearers of civilisation in this country would never have seen the
light of day. They would have been smothered already in their
mothers’ wombs. One sees this best if one goes through any large
genealogical work. Still it is not strange, that such a doctrine, which
actually makes a virtue of comfort and egoism is embraced by many
with enthusiasm in these days.

Not to be misunderstood I must here explain that I do not of course
consider an indiscriminate ‘‘rabbit-like production’’ within the sphere
of humanity to be in any way desirable. But I dare to assert most
decidedly that healthy efficient parents in fairly good circumstances.
commit a crime against nature and against their own race, when they
are content with only one or two children, while the most feebly
equipped lower strata among the people continue to increase in large
numbers.

The State authorities have certainly a heavy responsibility in the
circumstances just mentioned in that they do not sufficiently support
the most worthy element in the nation in their wish to build homes and
keep up their families. Our individualistic epoch shows much greater
consideration for the ‘‘rights’’ of the private person, and takes little
thought of the position of families and of the race taken as a whole.
At the present time one might almost say that a war of extermination
is being carried on against families and children, and in this the
authorities often set a bad example. The wage question, the shortage
of dwelling-houses, the hard times and other things help to undermine
the existence of families. Can one under such circumstances expect
that the race in the long run will be able to keep up its vitality or power
of competition? We must wake up and learn to understand the perils
of such a system.

From what has been said, it is evident that the position of civilisation and the development of society, in Europe and our own country,
are very far from satisfactory at the present time.

One is forced to ask wherein does safety lie? For surely the
human race taken as a whole can hardly be doomed to destruction.

The answer to the question is this:—-We must to a much higher
degree than in the past preserve the genotype, i.e., we must work
more for the tribe and race than is done now. The private individual
must learn to accept this and be willing to make real sacrifices for the
sake of posterity, as our forefathers have in the past. The individualism of the present day is certainly not inclined towards this but an
altogether new epoch is approaching which may prove to be a turning
point in racial history.

It is absolutely necessary to penetrate as far as possible into the
laws which the science of heredity has made the subject of its studies.
We must gradually learn to order our lives according to these laws.
As the matter stands we have too much evidence of what happens when.
a nation neglects them. In the meanwhile it is not right to hold the
THE DANGER OF DEGENERACY. 589

belief that these laws are exclusively stern avengers. Rightly understood and practised they form an almost inexhaustible source of
inspiration and advancement.

Thus it becomes the work of investigation to lead the way here, as
in other fields of labour. Hand in hand with this work a rational
system of enlightenment ought to be carried on.

The modern science of heredity and the still younger biological ,
branches, race-biology and eugenics work diligently to investigate the
natural laws which govern nations and races. Our knowledge increases incessantly. One is concerned in saving all that can be saved,
so as to be able to build up a stronger and better race. With the
statesmen, politicians and scientists leading the van every good citizen
in every country ought, according to his powers, to help in this work.

Great race-biological institutes, well-equipped for the work of
investigation must be established in all the civilised countries. The
instinct of self-preservation will quite certainly compel this sooner or

later.

The Swedish parliament has quite lately granted the means of
establishing such an institute. In England and America such institutes are already to be found. In these countries the means to support
them have been subscribed by private persons who are patrons of science.
In the meanwhile no other civilised country has advanced so far that a
race-biological institute has been endowed by public money. Here
Sweden has the honour of leading the way.

One has a perfect right to entertain the firm conviction that a
people, who learn in time to understand the importance of heredity and
race, and who are willing at the same time to submit obediently to the
natural laws that govern humanity, must advance triumphantly in the
world not with the ravages caused by war, hunger and sickness in its
track, but leading the way to a higher civilisation, a wider and deeper
morality and a happier human race.
