EUGENICS AND POVERTY
By RICHARD M. TITMUSS and FRANCOIS LAFITTE

to attain an ethical end. The end is a

higher level of mental and physical
health, an increase in the biological efficiency
of human beings; the means are such
measures as tend to improve the inborn
qualities of future generations, to raise the
proportion of those who are “ well born.”’
Eugenists seek a higher level of health—i.e.
of ‘“‘ wholeness ’’—as an end in itself, because
the human personality is an end in itself,
and because they wish to see human beings
in the mass become more completely human.
They wish to bring about ai: increased inborn
capacity for “ wholeness,” and also a fuller
realization of that capacity by creating
conditions in which inborn qualities can
attain full expression. The Nazis, on the
other hand, are interested in human health
and biological efficiency only to the extent
that they further the immoral purposes of a
tyranny whose highest aim is total warfare.
Eugenics is only one contribution to the
production of human beings who are mentally
and physically ‘‘ whole,” capable of living
full harmonious lives and creating a healthy
social order. The adult human being is the
product of an endlessly complex system of
interactions between “ nature”’ and “ nurture.”’ Inborn qualities by themselves do not
suffice to produce “ whole ’’ human beings.
The “well born” individual requires a
healthy environment (nutrition, activity,
economic and social opportunities, psychological and moral atmosphere) if he is to
grow to that full mental and physical
stature of a “‘ whole ” adult which is potentially his. Few eugenists would hold that the
unmistakable increase in the average height
and weight of British school children over
the past generation is evidence of genetic
improvement. It zs evidence of improved
environment, which may or may not: have
masked an actual deterioration in hereditary
endowment. We do not know. So entangled
are the factors of ‘‘ nature ’’ and “ nurture,”
of which each human being is the end
: UGENICS is the use of scientific means

product, so scanty still is our knowledge of
human genetics, that no eugenist can afford
to neglect the study of environmental
factors—especially of economic and social
conditions. As long as there remain vast
inequalities of financial and social opportunity it will not be possible to determine
which socially important differences* between human beings can safely be attributed
to genetic endowment rather than to
environmental circumstances. The Eugenic
Charter must therefore of necessity comprise

the twin aims of providing the healthiest

mental and physical endowment for future
generations, and of insisting on the healthiest
environment for all so to ensure that potential
health can be turned into actual health. In
reviewing Seebohm Rowntree’s new social
survey of York,f concentration on the forces
of “‘ nurture ’’ does not therefore imply that
we are ignoring the importance of transmissible biological factors. —

It is the study of Rowntree’s work which
has impelled us to re-state our conception of
eugenics as a preliminary to taking stock of
Britain’s position after forty years. If the
world is to be rescued from its present
misery, our conception of society after the
war and our ideas of the form which reconstruction should assume must take account
of deficiencies in our pre-war society, and,
what is of equal importance, the pace at
which social change takes place. Poverty and
Progress has much to tell us of the effects of
pre-war environmental conditions on the
mass of the population and it gains in value
from the fact that it repeats a survey made
in 1899{ and thus renders possible some
measurement of forty years of change.

* Subnormal mental ability, epilepsy, invalidism,
poor physique are socially important. Rare hereditary
diseases are not very important. Jewish or Negro
“blood ’’ is important only to Nazis and other race
fanatics.

¢ Rowntree, B. Seebohm. Poverty and Progress. A
Second Social Survey of York. Longmans, Green & Co.
1941. I5S.

t Rowntree, B. Seebohm. Poverty, A study in Town
Life. rgor.

106
EUGENICS AND POVERTY

The city of York is Rowntree’s laboratory.
It is fairly representative of English urban
life. The changes that have taken place in
York between the two surveys correspond
fairly well to the changes that have occurred
during the same period in town life in
general ; and England is a highly urbanized
country. The growth in the population of
York by 18 per cent (from 75,800 in 1899 to
89,700 in 1936) has been somewhat less than
that for the country as a whole (27 per cent)
but in other respects the correspondence is
very close. Thus the birth rate in York has
been halved in thirty-seven years from 30 to
I5 per 1,000 population, whilst the rate for
the whole of the country fell from 29 to 15.
Similarly, the proportion of children in the
population fell by 30 per cent in York as
against a national decline of 32 per cent ;
and, just as the average age of the population
of England and Wales has been rising, so it
has in York. Accompanying this continuous
fall in fertility and progressive ageing of the
population there has occurred a dramatic fall
in mortality.

This is the ‘background to the 1936 study
of the social and economic environment of
16,362 families (55,206 individuals) whose
chief breadwinner earned up to £250 a year.
The book ranges over many departments and
activities of daily life, but it is not correct
to describe it—as the publisher does—as “‘a
complete picture of working-class life.”” The
vitally important aspect of work itself and all
its associated problems is not dealt with.
The dominant Motzv of the whole work is, as
the title implies, the standard of living of the
working classes, who are defined as those
earning not more than {250 a year and who
comprise 57 per cent of York’s population.
As the standard of living, which, as we have
said, is controllable by man, largely conditions the environment, it is as well for us to
see exactly what the standard of measurement used by Rowntree implies, particularly
as so much attention has been given to his
main finding that 31 per cent of the workingclass population is below “ the poverty line.”
In investigating Rowntree’s standard we
have drawn liberally on an examination of

Loy

the York survey made by P.E.P., which
should be referred to by those who requir¢
more detailed information.*

The amount of work involved in the survey
is such that it seems a pity that Rowntree
selected as his yardstick a theoretical standard and practically ignored actual dietary
and spending habits. It would have been
preferable to have ascertained how family
income actually was expended and to have
built up a poverty standard from actual
spending habits (assuming reasonable
economies necessary for life at a poverty
level) instead of using rigid theoretical
minima. To obtain ‘the necessaries of a
healthy life’ Rowntree takes as his standard,
for an urban family of man, wife and three
dependent children, the sum of 43s. 6d. per
week after excluding rent and rates. This
figure is made up of food 2os. 6d., clothing
8s., fuel and light 4s. 4d., household sundries
1s. 8d., and personal sundries gs. Unfortunately the author does not tell us how these
items are calculated but refers us to his earlier
book, The Human Needs of Labour.t To appreciate fully what these items mean it is
essential to consult this book and to refer also
to the 1933 Report of the British Medical Association. Rowntree describes the B.M.A. diet as
a minimum; but although he constantly
refers to his diet as the B.M.A. standard it
is actually lower, for, amongst other things,
he replaces fresh milk by condensed milk
and stipulates that all bread be home baked.
It should be recalled that the B.M.A. diet,
whilst not termed a minimum one, was
certainly not an optimum standard and it was
lower than the “ standard ration ” of Army
troops at home stations (1933) and considerably below the standard ration supplied to
Territorial soldiers during their Army training season, both of which diets are usually
supplemented from various sources. Examined from these and other angles therefore
Rowntree’s diet, which is below that suggested by the B.M.A., is indefensible. In
other respects Rowntree’s diet is inadequate

 

* Planning, No. 179. Published by P.E.P. Oct. 1941.
+ The Human Needs of Labour. Longmans, Green
& Co. Revised edition. 1937.
108

and out-of-date because he ignores the fact
that the B.M.A. experts subsequently found
that the diet in question was lower than could
be justified ; and because he applies the
Cathcart-Murray scale of ‘“‘ man-values,”’
co-efficients which express the caloric needs
of children and adults of different ages as

percentages of the requirements of a
“normal ’’ man of “ average”’ stature and
physique performing ‘“‘ moderate’”’ work.

This scale is now regarded as too low for the
caloric needs of children aged 5-18; and, as
the Chief Medical Officer of the Ministry of
Health pointed out in 1937,* it cannot be
applied to the protein, mineral and vitamin
requirements of women and_ children.
“ Recent work has shown, for example, that
a child of 12-14 years requires about 90 gm.
of protein per day for adequate nutrition,
whereas the needs of the adult male are in
the region of 70 gm. per day. The Cathcart
and Murray scale on the other hand places
a child of this age as 0-9 of a ‘ man,’ whereas
on the basis of protein requirements he would
be regarded as 1:3 of a ‘man.’” ThusRowntree’s co-efficients for children are low ;
and it is not surprising that, in his analysis
of a few family budgets, his four groups
(whose weekly incomes after paying rent
were 24s. 8d., 33s. gd., 57s. gd. and 69s. 7d.)
were all deficient in calorie intake: all
deficient in total protein and _ first-class
protein ; all deficient in calcium and iron.
Apart therefore from the facts’ that no
allowance at all is made for meals taken at
restaurants or canteens, and that, as the
author stresses, ““ the housewife must possess
an unusual amount of knowledge of the
nutritive value of different foodstuffs,” it can
be appreciated that Rowntree’s food diets
are extremely vulnerable to criticism on
nutritional grounds and also because they
are theoretical measurements. It is not
possible therefore to accept the statement
that a family of five could be adequately fed
on 20s. 6d. weekly at 1936 prices. (We may
mention that the cost of feeding five mentally
defective children in State institutions
amounted, at 1936 prices, to over 30s. per
week.) _

“* Annual Report for 1 1937, Dp. “129.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

So far as food is concerned we may thus
conclude that Rowntree’s standard of 20s. 6d.
is. inadequate in the light of up-to-date
nutritional requirements. His other items
are also open to criticism for not only do they
allow no margin for contingencies but no
provision is made for furniture, bedding and
other household equipment made necessary
by the normal wear and tear of family life.
For young married couples Rowntree states
on page 31 that he allows for equipment,
hire-purchase obligations, etc., a sum of 5s.
per week where there is one child and 3s. for
a couple with two children. On page 456,
however, it is stated that 5s. is allowed for
a couple with no children and 3s. for a couple
with one child. The sum of gs. on personal
sundries may appear high but when itemized*
the allowance is far from extravagant. In
particular, the sum of 3s. 4d. on “ all else ”’
has to cover, in addition to the items mentioned by Rowntree, such recognized necessities as the dentist and optician, shaving
materials, toothbrushes, toilet paper, haircuts, drugs and all the innumerable small
items of household expenditure. As eugenists
we might well add birth control, a subject
which curiously is completely ignored in this
book, despite its obvious importance to a
community which has succeeded in halving
its fertility in forty years.

It has been necessary to examine rather
closely the basis for the poverty line of
438. 6d. per week (53s. including average
rent) in order to obtain some conception of
the environment which must inevitably
accompany such a standard. Rowntree
fully recognizes the “ fodder basis ”’ of life
at his minimum level, but the measuring rod
used to gauge different levels of living needs
very careful working out, and it World have

 

 

s. d.

*Unemployment and Health Insurance _.... I 7

Contribution to sick and burial clubs a Io

Trade Union subscription - bees 6

Travelling to and from work . . I oO
Such necessaries as stamps, _writing- paper,

etc., for the family . 6

A daily newspaper 7

Wireless .... ; 6
All else: beer, ‘tobacco, presents, holidays,

books, travelling, etc... a .. 3 4

9,90

 
EUGENICS AND POVERTY

been preferable to use a somewhat less
stringent standard and one more in keeping
with modern nutritional knowledge. It is
really time we began to think and act in
terms of the average price of optimum diets
and not of the minimum price of minimum
diets. To go on repeating research work
directed to finding out the minimum expenditure on which life can be kept going
must, both consciously and subconsciously,
be inhibitive of progressive thought.

Even on this unduly low standard, however, Rowntree found that in 1936 (a
relatively prosperous year) no less than
31-1 per cent of York’s working-class
population, including 43 per cent of workingclass children, were living at or below the
poverty line thus defined. Rowntree believes
that roughly another 9 per cent were not in
fact enjoying the “ necessaries of a healthy
life ’’ because their income, though sufficient,
was not spent according to his theoretical
minima. The York survey’s findings may be
summarized as follows :

Class Available income in terms Percentage of
of a married couple with working-class
three children population

E 63s. 6d. and over 36°1
D 53S. 6d. to 63s. 5d. 13°9
C 438. 6d. to 53s. 5d. 18-9
B 338. 6d. to 43s. 5d. 16-9
A under 33s. 6d. 14°2

Below the minimum only 10:5 per cent
of breadwinners were skilled, compared with
31 per cent in Classes C and D and 49 per
cent in Class E. The average family below
the minimum, although not the largest,
contained most dependent children (1-13 in
a family of 3-37 persons) and the smallest
number of supplementary earners (0°57) ;
whereas the average family in Class E,
although the largest (3-60 persons) contained
the fewest dependent children (0-63) and
most supplementary earners (1:10). Classes
A and B together comprised 17,185 persons,
of whom 5,677 (33 per cent) were in families
whose average income fell short of the
minimum by at least 3s. per head. The
deficiency was 5s. or more per head for no

109

less than 8 per cent—more than one person
in twelve—whose income was at most.
equivalent to 18s. 6d. for a family of five,
after paying rent.

The main cause of poverty in Class A was
unemployment (42 per cent), inadequacy of
wages of breadwinners in regular work
(20-5 per cent) and old age (12-8 per cent) ;
but in Class B 43-2 per cent of poverty was
due to inadequate wages, 17-3 per cent to
unemployment and 16-2 per cent to old age.
Rowntree does not tell us, however, what
proportion of working-class children—or,
for that matter, of all children—were in
poverty through unemployment. One suspects that, proportionately, children suffer
from unemployment to a greater extent than
adults, a suspicion which is borne out by
examination of Unemployment Benefit and
Allowances statistics. Of all persons below
the minimum no less than 32-8 per cent were
there because of inadequate wages, and
another 9-5 per cent, persons in casual

-employment or working on their own

account, because of insufficient earnings ;
28:6 per cent were below the minimum
through unemployment. Thus largely economic causes were responsible for nearly threequarters of all poverty. Old age was the most
important “‘ natural ’’ cause (14-7 per cent),
followed by widowhood (7-8 per cent) and
illness (4-1 per cent). Notwithstanding the
development of social services, Mr. Rowntree
shows that if a man was unemployed his
chances of being in poverty were nearly nine
to one, Half of all unemployed heads of
families were in fact in Class A. For a man
in regular wage-work the chances were nearly
nine to one against. In sickness the chances
of life below the minimum were nearly two to
one; in old age they were even. In consequence 86-4 per cent of the unemployed
and their families were living below the
minimum. Among other groups the percentages were 63 for the sick, 44-4 for the
aged, 40°7 for the widows and 55-8 for
casual workers and those working on their
own account. Even among regular wageearners 15:8 per cent—just over one person
in six—were below the poverty line. |

The contribution made by public social
IIo

services to the income of each poverty group
varied considerably. The unemployed derived four-fifths of their income from social
services, the aged derived two-thirds, the
sick 56-9 per cent and the widows 50-7 per
cent. Social services contributed 38-2 per
cent of the total income of all below the
minimum (54:2 per cent in Class A and
28-8 per cent in Class B).

It has been repeatedly shown by advocates
of family allowances that children are a
cause of poverty. It is difficult to analyse
this factor in great detail as, unfortunately,
nowhere in the book are there adequate
statistics relating to the age, sex and occupational structure of the families in the different
classes. There is some material, but much of
it has to be collected together by the reader.
It is to be regretted that such a rare opportunity of obtaining a complete demographic
picture of York was not taken. However,
Rowntree states that among adult male
wage-workers earning less than 53s. a week
36-9 per cent were found to have three or
more children, compared with only 17-5 per
cent of those earning more than 53s. and
11-5 per cent of those earning 70s. or more.
These differences are said to be mainly due
to the greater fertility of the poorer fathers.
But children were also a cause of poverty.
Families with four or more children contained 23-6 per cent of all working-class
children in York; but 35-4 per cent of all
children below the minimum, and 48-6 per
cent of all children in Class A, were in such
families. The most revealing material in
Mr. Rowntree’s survey is contained in the
chapter on “ Three Periods of Economic
Stress.” While 31-1 per cent of the total
working-class population were living below
the minimum, the proportions in poverty in
different working-class age groups varied

greatly :
Age Per cent Age Per cent
Group below Group below
minimum minimum
Under 1 52°5 25 to 44 28°8
1to4 49°7 45 to 64 20°7
5 to 14 39°1 65 and over 47°5
15 to 24 23°7

These figures show that half of York’s
workers were being born into poverty or

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

were ending their lives below the minimum,
while over one-quarter were living below the
poverty line in middle life, the period when
they were bearing and rearing their children.
Although half of the children below the
minimum had fathers in regular employment,
Mr. Rowntree shows that 96 per cent of them
would remain below the minimum for at least
three years, 89-1 per cent for at least five
years, 66-1 per cent for at least nine years, and
no less than 49 per cent for at least thirteen
years—the whole of their childhood. ‘‘ There
is not one of these children,” writes Mr.
Rowntree, ‘‘ whose physique will not be
permanently injured through the privation
they have to undergo during the most
critical years of life... .. But the injury done
to the health of these children is not confined
to the privations from which they suffer
during childhood, for the fact that a child is
born into a family living below the minimum
means that the mother was in poverty and
her health consequently enfeebled, while
bearing it, and so the child not only suffers
after, but also before it is born.”

This abbreviated summary of the main
findings of the second survey of York shows
that in many respects the standard of living
of millions of people falls short of even a
stringent poverty line, for there is no reason
to believe that what is true of York is not
also true of the majority of our urban centres.
And if life at this level is what we conceive it
to be. then the compelling forces of environment must inexorably weaken and impair the
level of ‘‘ wholeness”’ attainable by present
and future generations. “‘ Slow rises worth
by poverty distressed ”’ is just as true to-day
as it was when written by Dr. Johnson. And
if we re-calculate Rowntree’s basic figure of
43s. 6d. and adopt a more generous standard
of 62s. 10d. weekly, we find that the amount
of poverty is thereby doubled. In other
words 64 per cent of the working-class
population would be below this standard.

From this sombre picture we can extract
some little comfort by comparing it with the
picture presented by the first York survey in
1899. Then 15-46 per cent of the workingclass population were living in what Rowntree
EUGENICS AND POVERTY

called “primary poverty ” *—a standard
much below that we have described—whilst
in 1936 the percentage had fallen to 6:8.
“ The economic condition of the workers is
better by 30 per cent than in 1899, though
working hours are shorter. Housing is
immeasurably better, health is better, education is better. Cheap means of transport,
the provision of public libraries and cheap
books, the wireless, the cinema and other
places of entertainment, have placed within
the reach of everyone forms of recreation
unknown, and some of them unthought of,
forty years ago.”

The causative forces of poverty were very
different in 1936 than in 1899. The factor of
low wages accounted for 52 per cent of
“primary poverty” in 1899 (the main
cause) against 9-2 per. cent in 1936. Significantly, ‘ largeness of family ”’ as a cause
has fallen from 22-2 per cent to 8 per cent,
whilst old age and illness have risen in
importance from 5:1 per cent to 23-5 per
cent. These changes mirror the altered age
structure of the community. The main
cause of destitution in 1936 was the unemployment of the chief breadwinner (44:5 per
cent), a factor which in 1899 accounted for
only 2:3 per cent of ‘‘ primary poverty.”

Alongside these changes in economic
conditions we find an all-round improvement
in the heights and weights of working-class
schoolchildren ; a reduction in mortality
rates and a dramatic decline in infant
mortality from 161 to 55 per 1,000 births.
This progress in improving environment is
gratifying but it has taken us forty years and,
as Rowntree points out, the poorest section of
the working class has only now achieved a
general death rate comparable to that of the
highest working-class group in 1899. Moreover, whilst there has occurred a great
reduction in the infant death rate for all
classes we find that the rate among the poorest workers exceeded that of the best-off by
43 per cent in 1899 and by 88 per cent in
1936. Thus, it is true to say that the poorest

*Here again something has gone wrong with
Rowntree’s statistics. On p. 102 he states that the cost
of the 1899 diet for a family of five is at 1936 prices,

19s. 5d. per week, but on p. 83 of Human Needs of
Labour the cost is given as 18s. 5d.

IIt

group is relatively worse off to-day than forty
years ago. The growth in the social services
has contributed to the reduction in absolute
mortality, for whereas at the beginning of the
century the average contribution from social
services towards the welfare of a York
worker’s family was 44d. per week (at 1936
prices), by 1936 it averaged 6s. 6d. per week ;
but it has apparently left untouched the gap
between the different social groups.
Turning aside from economic factors we
find that since 1899 there has been a striking
decline in what may be termed spiritual
interests. Church attendance in particular
has fallen greatly. Passive leisure pursuits
have grown enormously ; but whilst drinking
has steadily declined, betting and gambling
have grown enormously.. For example,
during the football season York was sending
18,000 to 20,000 letters a week to pool
promoters. One naturally asks why, but nowhere in his book does Rowntree attempt a
diagnosis of these changes in leisure activities.
Nor is there any attempt to study the
relation between financial and educational
opportunity (a survey which would have been
well worth while) ; and the treatment of the
social and economic effects of increasing age
and declining fertility is extremely scanty.
The facts are stated—with occasional errors
—and in the main attractively presented,
but apart from showing the economic
effects of instituting family allowances* and
of imposing statutory minimum wages,
Rowntree deliberately refrains from discussing remedies, and makes no endeavour
to throw light on the underlying causes of
the changes in social habits and fertility
patterns.t Yet these forty years have
witnessed a biological revolution ; the flight
from parenthood has set in and a community
which in 1899 was more than replacing its

*72'4 per cent of all persons in poverty on the
standard we have described would be raised above this
standard if an allowance of 5s. per week were paid in
respect of each dependent child. ~This, however, would
still leave a considerable number of persons in poverty
and the number would greatly increase if the poverty
line were raised to a level consistent with modern
nutritional requirements.

¢This question of differential fertility is discussed in
the Notes of the ee for the Oct. 1941 issue of the
REVIEW, Vol. 38, N
II2

numbers is now failing by at least 25 per cent
to effect replacement. Another forty years
of the same trend will mean that there will
be only an elderly York to survey. But this
task will have to be left to others. Seebohm
Rowntree, by his social studies and by the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

valuable material he has given us, deserves
well of all reviewers, and in a book of over
500 pages it is perhaps a little unfair to
grumble if everything has not been said that
every reviewer could wish for.

RACIAL MIXTURE IN GREAT BRITAIN:
SOME ANTHROPOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE ANGLO-NEGROID CROSS

A Preliminary Report

By K. L. LITTLE
(Lhe Duckworth Laboratory, University Museum of Ethnology, Cambridge)

ITH the exception of a large
number of family studies secured
by Miss R. M. Fleming,* little:

anthropological attention has so far been
given to the question of racial crossing in this
country, although the presence of some
fairly extensive hybrid communities in most
of our sea-port cities affords an excellent
opportunity for anthropometric investigation, particularly in respect to the AngloNegroid cross.t The present paper, comprising-a brief statistical analysis of the measurements of some ninety Anglo-Negroid or
‘‘ Coloured ” children, together with a smaller
“White ” sample of forty drawn from the
same environment, represents what it is
hoped may be merely a prelude to a wider
and statistically more adequate survey of the
subject, especially as far as the adult element
is concerned. The present data, including
those of a small number of adults with one
Fr adult exception, were gained entirely
from a community in Cardiff, where all the
subjects were born. In the course of the

“Physical Heredity in Human

*R. M. Fleming.
Vol. IX, Part 1,

Hybrids.” Annals of Eugentes.

PP. 55-81. 1939.
¢ K. L. Little. ‘“‘ The Study of Racial Mixture in the

British Commonwealth.”” EuGrenics Rervisw, Vol.
82. Jan. 1941.

enquiry the opportunity was taken of
examining a further sample of some eighty
subjects mainly of Anglo-Arab and AngloMediterranean parentage. These, however,
have been omitted from the present’ discussion for considerations of space. The
Anglo-Negroid adult sample is as yet too
small for statistical treatment, and has
similarly been omitted, although a few
particulars as to its characters are given
below.*

Briefly stated, the aspects of racial crossing
it is intended to cover comprise such questions as the segregation of both quantitative
and qualitative physical characters in the
hybrid population, the comparative variability of the respective groups, and comparative differences in growth and sex
differences. In the light of these considerations it was decided to employ as wide an
assortment of characters as was practicable,
and having regard to the specific racial
stocks involved, i.e. Negroid and Caucasoid

* It comprises four males and four females. Five of
these are first crosses, and two may be listed as NNW

and one as NWW (see later paragraph). Their cephalic
and nasal indices work out as follows :
3} .
CI. 74-1 CI. 75°2
N.I. 65-6 N.I. 81-8
