REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS 401

Rignano, EvuGenio. Essais de Synthése Scientifique. Paris, Librairie
Félix Alcan; 1912.
THIS is a remarkable book which will repay study. It is an attempt to
state, with brevity and without any exhaustive review of the evidence,
some of the generalisations or synthetic conclusions which have been
pained in the fields of biology and sociology. The author, so far as we
ave observed, does not profess to present any new facts or fresh evidence.
He is not a researcher or an experimentalist. He is frankly a theorist.
His aim is to philosophise the facts already garnered in the above-mentioned departments of science, to present a conspectus of assured results,
to systematise these results and show their inferences and implications. He
is obviously fully-equipped for this ambitious task. is thought is
always pregnant, and his style at once lucid and profound, terse and
pungent. The book suffers somewhat from limitations of space, and from
the vast extent of the field surveyed by the writer. To present in a short
volume of 294 pages an adequate outline of the philosophical import
of the various theories of development, evolution or “ transformism ”—to
use the term much employed by the writer—to discuss the nature of
nerve energy, of memory and of consciousness, to analyse the true import
of “le phénoméne religieux,” to deal with “le materialisme historique,”
and finally to subject the various doctrines of socialism to a close scrutiny,
might well seem an impossible task. But the book is a criticism, not an
exposition. It assumes a large amount of knowledge on the part of the
reader. It is addressed in the main to specialists, or at all events to
readers thoroughly familiar with current science and current philosophy.
As such it will be found valuable, the more so as we are not acquainted
with any book which takes exactly the same point of view. It is a summary—a critical summary—an attempt to “ mark time” and signalise the
point of the road which we have reached in the arduous march of science
and philosophy. As such we shall deal with it, without suggesting that
some other way would have been better, or asking from the author what
he does not profess to supply. He has a right to his method, while
we have a right to enquire whether the use which he makes of it is sound
and fruitful.

The preface is devoted to a discussion of the relative part played in
the advance of knowledge by the “ théoricien ” and the “ expérimentateur
spécialiste.” The author has much to say on the narrowness, the limitation of view, and the excessive “ concreteness ” which is apt to characterise
the researcher in some limited field of science, and the need for correcting
his conclusions by the work of synthesis, induction and generalisation.
“Le théoricien,” he insists, “ est enfin, en thése générale, moins exclusiviste, moins unilatéral, et plus objectif que le specialiste expérimentateur.” We believe this to be a most just contention. Many of the
paths of science are to-day almost choked by an accumulation of illdigested data, unorganised facts, the rough sweepings of our laboratories,
without order or method, and in this state wholly unfruitful. What is
needed is the illuminating hypothesis, the co-ordinating generalization.
Facts, no doubt, are all important, but it is often forgotten that observa.
tion and experiment are too often wholly in vain unless guided and con
trolled by some method or theory. On this subject one of the greatest of
all experimentalists, Claud Bernard, wrote as follows: “It is true that
the results of experiment must be recorded by a mind stripped of hypotheses and preconceived ideas. But we must be careful how we proscribe
the use of ideas and hypotheses when the work in hand is to set experiments on foot, or imagine means of observation. Here, on the contrary,
as we shall soon see, the imagination must be given free course; the idea
is the principal root of all reasoning and all invention, to it is due the
credit of every kind of initiative. To stifle or drive it away under pretext
that it may do harm were folly; all we need is to regulate it and provide
a criterion for it.”
402 EUGENICS REVIEW

In his first essay M. Rignano discusses “La Valeur Synthétique du
Transformisme,” subjecting to an acute analysis the work of Lamarck,
Darwin, Weismann, Galton, Roux, De Vries and other workers in this
field. The writer, with possibly a certain amount of bias, natural in a
Frenchman, inclines to a Neo-Lamarckian view of the law of descent,
rejecting both the theory of preformation and epigenesis as inadequate.
“Quw’il nous soit permis,” he says, “de rappeler ici que cette immense
collection de résultats expérimentaux, dout toute une série dépose décidément contre le préformisme, tandis qu’une autre série n’est pas moins
décidément contraire 4 l’épigénése, semble déposer plutét en faveur d’une
nouvelle hypothése centro-épigénétique, suivant laquelle le développement de chaque partie dépendrait, non. pas de celui de toutes les autres
parties du soma, mais bien plutét de l’action continuelle que la substance
germinale, qui serait située en zone bien determinée de ce dernier, dite
zone centrale, exercerait sur le reste de l’organisme pendant le cours
entier du développement; et que cette hypothése est peut-étre susceptible
de fournir 4 elle seule l’explication que lon cherche touchant la fagon
dont la transmissibilité des caractéres acquis pourrait se réaliser.” The
writer proceeds to deal at length with the well-known Mnemic theory
of evolution, associated in particular with the names of Hering and
Semon. According to this theory, memory is the general and fundamental function of all living substance. As the brain-cell is the seat of
individual memory, so the sex-cell is the seat of racial memory. Racial
memory begins with the union of the sex-cells. This act, by a species of
mnemonics, furnishes the clue to the next step, just as in brain memory
one event by association of ideas recalls another event. This theory is
supposed to throw light upon the specialised action of cells, the transmissibility of acquired characters, the innate instincts of animals, many
psychical phenomena, and the facts of assimilation. It is subjected to
a critical analysis by M. Rignano, who concludes, justly in our opinion,
that the analogy is misleading. “La comparison du phénoméne vital en
général avec le phénoméne mnémonique, malgré les profondes analogies
qu’on a mises en évidence, ne peut laisser de paraitre artificieuse, si méme
elle ne se réduit pas 4 une innocente métaphore, quand on ignore ce qu’est
en réalité le phénoméne mnémonique proprement dit. Comme ce dernier,
la mémoire psychique commune, appartient 4 une catégorie de phénoménesmoins généraux et plus complexes que le phénoméne vital, car tout
phénoméne de mémoire psychique est certainement un phénoméne vital,
tandis que la réciproque n’est pas vraie, comment le phénoméne
mnémonique peut-il servir A expliquer le phénoméne vital ? ”

In his second essay the author develops his “ Hypothése Centroépigénétique du Developpement,” of which we have already spoken. This
subject involves a discussion of the essential nature of life, and the
author, though abstaining from any dogmatic opinion, appears to incline
to the view that no physico-chemical theory of life is tenable, and that we
have to assume “ une énergie vitale, une forme d’énergie en soi différente
de toutes les autres.” This is Neo-Vitalism, a point of view long consigned to neglect, but in recent years revived by many thinkers, amongst
others by M. Bergson. The subject is too large and too difficult to be
more than alluded to here. It is enough to say that a crude mechanical
view of the nature of life, from being a dominant doctrine, has now to
fight for existence.

M. Rignano’s theory of Consciousness will be understood from the
following paragraph: “ Rien n’est plus propre que ces examples, que nous
pourrions multiplier 4 plaisir,—a mettre en évidence que chaque état
psychique n’est par lui-méme ni conscient, ni inconscient, mais qu’il
devient lun ou lautre seulement far rapport a@ quelque autre état
psychique. En d’autres terms, la conscience n’est pas un caractére en s01
REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS 403

a

qui puisse appartenir 4 un état psychique pour son propre compte; elle
est la caractéristique dun rapport entre deux ou plusieurs états
psychiques.” .

The essay upon “ Le Phénoméne Religieux ” contains some interesting
matter. The author cites with approval the well-known view of Hume
that primitive man derived his earliest conception of religion from the
notion that in the physical world events were controlled by a will, or
wills, similar to that of the human will. He does not, however, regard
this analysis as adequate, and finds the Ghost Theory of Spencer equally
insufficient to account for the facts. His own view is that the essential
element in primitive religion is the element of propitiation. “Le premier
homme qui se jeta la face contre terre, non plus seulement devant un
autre homme, celui-la fut le premier croyant et le premier fondateur de
toutes les religions.” According to this theory, fear of the unknown,
terror in the face of the brute forces of nature, and the belief that, by
acts of submission or by some form of sacrificial offering, evil could be
averted or benefits obtained, was the germ of religion. The intensity
and persistence of this belief are traced by M. Rignano to “ social suggestion,” to “le besoin d’une telle fonction de consolidation et de réglementation sociale qui ffit apte 4 faire d’un simple agrégat amorphe et
fluide d’individus, capables d’ailleurs de mener chacun une vie autonome
et isolée, un seul tout consistant et en fait un véritable organisme social.”
“Cest ainsi que la religion éléve et soutient toutes les institutions
sociales—a commenger par celle de la propriété individuelle ou collective—qui servent de diques soit pour contenir et canaliser le cours de
certaines séries de faits ou de rapports sociaux, soit pour opposer une
barriére infranchissable 4 des actes ou des rapports antisociaux.”

That these elements have entered into the genesis of religion can
hardly be denied. Whether such analysis is adequate is, however,
another question, too vast to be dealt with adequately here. While M.
Rignano thinks religion is destined to disappear as “ organe et phénoméne social ” he thinks it may endure as a “ manifestation psychique et
fait individuel.” On this subject he writes as follows: “ La projection
de notre propre finalisme en dehors de nous mémes dans l’univers tout
entier, dernier résidu philosophico-méta-physique du préjugé grossiérement aministe de homme primitif; l’aspiration au triomphe du bien sur
le mal; le besoin, encore plus en général, de croire que tout ce qui a de
valeur pour nous, quand méme nous en serions privés pour l’instant, se
conserve toujours, 4 travers tous les accidents du mon de réel, et comme
en puissance, pour se réaliser plus tard; tout cela joint aux plus douces,
intimes et ineffables consolations qu’est seule capable de donner Villusion
née d’un ardent désir; telles sont et demeureront de tout temps les sources
éternelles de religiosité pour toutes les Ames plus ou moins portées au
mysticisme.” |

The origin of religion is, no doubt, a fascinating subject, but one
involved in great difficulty and obscurity. We cannot really penetrate
with certainty into the mentality of primeval man. How far fear was the
dominant element, what weight is to be assigned to awe and reverence,
whether an inchoate cosmic sense of the littleness of man and the
grandeur and immensity of the universe—a sentiment which finds eloquent
and poignant expression in the Psalms—was operative, how far social
needs co-operated, whether primitive man was vexed with the “ Whence ?”
“Why?” and “ Whither?” which agitate our own minds, are questions
never likely to be finally answered. Most of the solutions offered are
too simple, too limited, too prosaic to be altogether satisfactory. The
philosophers commonly lack imagination. Perhaps it may turn out that
the religious sense is incapable of analysis, but is rather an original and
specific endowment of the human mind. We must expect the widest
differences of view upon this subject according to the mental endowments,
404 EUGENICS REVIEW

the preconceptions, and the prejudices of men. “ The history of religion,”
says Frazer, “is a long attempt to reconcile old custom with new reason,
to find a sound theory for absurd practice.” That is one point of view.
“ The essence of religion,” says Warde Fowler, “in all stages of civilisation lies in the feeling of the individual that his own life, his bodily and
mental welfare, is dependent upon the Divine, as he and his regard it.”
That is another point of view. To discuss these conflicting views with
any attempt at thoroughness would divert us too far from the proper field
of eugenics.

The concluding essays in M. Rignano’s work are devoted to a summary and criticism of collectivist and socialist theories and doctrines.
His remarks are temperate and lucid, but, as they do not present any
particular novelty, they need not detain us. He concludes this portion
of his subject with an amiable hope which we may be allowed to endorse :
“Quel que soit, du reste, cet avenir plus ou moins inconnu, nous pouvons
du moins—comme conclusion de tout ce qui vient d’étre dit—constater ce
fait qui est d’un bon augure. C’est que |’éveil d’une conscience collective
dans la classe la plus misérable, dans toute cette si grande fraction de
nos semblables jusqu'ici ravalée, constitute déja par lui-méme un
élargissement et un perfectionnement pour l’ensemble de la conscience
sociale; tandis que la puissance accrue de cette classe a déja rendu moins
inégales les diverses forces sociales en conflit. Il en est résulté un plus
grande sensibilité sociale 4 l’égard de toutes les peines et de toutes les
souffrances dont gémissent encore d’innombrables créatures humaines et
la formation d’un nouvel idéal supréme d’une équité plus grande. De
facon quil est permis désormais d’espérer que dans le choc de tous les
futurs antagonismes, quelle qu’en puisse étre la solution définitive,
YPhumanité n’aura plus 4 craindre de sombre dans de plus profonds abimes,
mais qu’en toute confiance ct sécurité elle pourra monter vers des cimes
plus hautes et de meilleures destinées.”

J. A. Lrnpsay.

Nieeforo, ALFREDO. Contributo allo studio della misura e della
diffusione della Cultura in Italia: I nuovi progetti per une
Statistica della Vita Intellettuale Italiana. Perugio, Unione
Tipografica Co-operativa, 1912.

IN the year rg1o a law was passed in Italy, in connection with the quin
uennial census, authorising the reorganisation of the Central Statistical

Office. On the invitation of the ministers concerned, Professor Niceforo

has taken part in the work of reorganisation, in particular by the

framing of several schemes for the collection and storage of statistical
data. Of these one of the most interesting is his proposal for forming

a card catalogue of all students at the universities and other institutions

for higher education, in order to investigate the diffusion of culture in

different parts of Italy and to obtain a statistical measure of the intellectual life of the country.

The secretary of each university would be required, at the beginning
of the academic year, to enter particulars concerning each student on the
face of a separate card which is divided into suitable spaces for the
various items, such as name, date, and place of birth, nationality, name
and occupation of father, place of residence of family, nature of proposed studies, and so on. To facilitate sorting, these cards have a
triangular space on the left hand upper corner tinted in different shades
to indicate the course of studies to be pursued. On the back of the card
is a list of the examinations involved in that particular course, with a
space after each in which the secretary is required to enter the student’s
degree of success. At the end of each academic year the cards, filled in
up to date, have to be sent to the Central Statistical Office to be filed and
to serve as the basis for statistical returns.
