EUGENICS AND RELIGION

Summary of a Debate arranged by the Eugenics Society

(April 25th, 1933)

three views were possible—first that

the Christian religion was compatible with eugenic ideals, secondly that
it was incompatible, as expounded by
Roman Catholic spokesmen, who had stigmatized eugenics as ‘‘ pagan principles and
immoral proposals’’; and thirdly, the view
he defended, that while there was no necessary connection between religion and
eugenics, Christianity might be increasingly converted by eugenics, though
eugenic ideals could not be changed by
Christianity.

Logical argument seldom made converts.
Yet equivocal attempts to conciliate all
views, or timorous avoidance of subjects
likely to provoke opposition, were invariably rewarded with the contempt that
moral cowardice always deserved.

Eugenics might be defined as ethics
based on biological study. ‘There was no
necessary connection between religion and
ethics, and still less between religion and
eugenics. When the conception of sin was
translated into moral and ethical terms,
almost endless varieties of conduct could be
defended or condemned. Christian thought
had produced less agreement, but far more
persecution, than the magical conceptions of
the heathen.

Marriage had not been made by religion.
Religions had imposed on that age-long
human habit religious or magical ideas that
marked especially the celebration or termination of human mating.

The New Testament story depicted Peter
as rather an ignorant fellow who, having
followed his Master’s prescription, deserted
his family and all natural obligations in
order to join a troop of idle beggars for
the personal reward of a specially reserved
throne with the other Apostles, where they
would judge the Twelve Tribes of Israel.

(iret G. H. Pitt-Rivers said that

tor

Thus, much Christian teaching could be
interpreted as incompatible with eugenic
ideals. It might even justify Tolstoy’s
contention that ‘‘ marriage is an unchristian institution.’? But the Pauline New
Testament writings were even more fiercely
inconsistent with any eugenic ideal of
morality, for St. Paul’s insistent references
to marriage were summed up in the words,
““ And I wish all men were even as I am
—unmarried.”’

“In those savage countries where magic
is as thoroughly institutionalized as our
Christian religion is with us, magic is
only resorted to where rational control is
impossible.”’ What the savage by labour,
by prevision, by knowledge gained through
daily experience and tradition, could easily
control, or the dangers against which he
could guard, he seldom distorted by
magical ideas. He was a realist about the
things he clearly recognized and controlled.
Having taken every precaution to ensure a
good crop of yams by planting at the right
time, by protecting his garden as best he
could from the ravages of wild beasts or
thieving men, he knew he had still to
reckon with inclement weather. This he
could not control, so he resorted to magic.

It was doubtful whether, even in the
practices and beliefs of Christianity, a clear
distinction could always be drawn between
religion and magic, or even whether it was
religion or magic which had had the greater
share in controlling our economic welfare
or disasters.

The processes of life and death, the problems of generation and fertilization, the
development of the individual, of embryology and ontogeny, were very mysterious
to us all, even when we studied them as
scientists, and concerned ourselves only
with the known and the discoverable. There
was no necessary connection, and there102

fore no necessary antagonism, between
religion and science, so long as religion
concerned herself only with the unknown,
and with the other world which is beyond
the range of science; but this meant that
religion must retire and cede her territory
step by step as science, very slowly and
gradually, conquered fresh territory in the
concrete world of the surely known. Eventually, as science extended her control of
observable phenomena, religion must retire
to the impregnable citadel of eschatology,
the world of death and the unknown hereafter, which was surely hers. Religion in
the end would hold sway where she had her
origin, in the minds and imaginations of men
who thought of death and tried anxiously
to peer across the veil. But for the fact
of death, and the thought of death, and
the dread of death, born in men’s hearts,
religion would never have been. There only
could religion, or its special study,
theology, survive in the minds of men of
science, for if it challenged science in the
world which science had conquered, it must
die.

THE OPPOSING VIEW

Dr. Herbert Gray said that in the first
place, he had nothing to say about the suggestion that religion and eugenics had no
relation whatever to each other, inasmuch
as religion was concerned with the whole of
life.

As to the compatibility of the aims of
religion and eugenics, everything depended
upon the definition of the aims of eugenics.
When they were defined as the promotion
of the fertility of naturally well-endowed
stocks, and the restriction of the fertility
of inferior stocks, there was nothing in
them with which religion need quarrel.

In speaking of religion, he was concerned
only with that conception of religion which
comes to us from Jesus Christ. Jesus
regarded marriage as a sacred institution,
held the rights of children to be divine
rights, and lived with the avowed aim of
helping mankind to abundance of life. He
could not therefore be associated with any

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

indifference to the biological quality of men
and women.

When eugenists insisted that it was the
duty of healthy couples to have not less
than three or four children, they only
insisted on something which was inherent
in the Christian conception of marriage.
As Christians we believed that to refuse
the ordained results of marriage was
wrong; and he wished that the Church
might avow its unwillingness to celebrate
the marriages of any couples who for selfish
reasons proposed to refuse parentage.

None the less, he held it equally clear
from the Christian point of view that it was
definitely wrong to bring children into the
world for whom no adequate provision
could be made. At the very centre of
Christian ethics stood a reverent regard for
the rights of children. To guard them,
serve them, and love them wisely was a
primary Christian duty. And therefore to
bring children into this world who from the
cradle must be condemned to insufficient
nourishment, impaired health, and poor
education was in the highest degree unChristian. Eugenists could not possibly
insist on this point more firmly than
Christians ought to do.

Till lately it might have been said that
religious institutions were on the whole
averse to the method of family limitation,
of which most eugenists heartily approve,
namely conception control. But that was
no longer the case. The Lambeth bishops
spoke definitely on this point, and the
position they adopted was that occupied to
a very large extent by the Free Churches.

For his part, he wished to say that he
definitely did not desire the cessation of
the intimate marriage relationship when
husbands and wives were still in the early
thirties, by which time they would
probably have had the three or four children whom they were able to bring up. He
believed that such a cessation was bad both
physically and morally.

Speaking on the subject of sterilization,
Dr. Gray said that he regarded it as by far
the best and most useful way of attaining
an end which society in its own interest
EUGENICS AND RELIGION

must attain, namely the prevention of
parentage among the feeble-minded. He
would go farther than merely making
voluntary sterilization of the feeble-minded
legal; he would make it compulsory, in the
name of mercy.

Dr. Gray had a good deal to say about
the subject of unsuccessful marriages
which, alike from the point of view of the
eugenist and from that of the Christian,
were disastrous. Admitting that some
reform of the divorce law was long overdue, it had to be realized that divorce was
only a partial solution of a very sad situation, and that the all-important thing in
the interests of society was that marriages
which were likely to end in failure should
not be entered into. ‘To that end a good
deal might be done if a kind of education

103

were offered to the young which was now
very seldom offered them. They ought to
be told on what basis a wise selection could
be made, and be helped to understand that
mere physical attraction is not enough.
And they ought further to be offered clear
knowledge of all that is known about the
technique of married life. When marriages
failed because there was no love in them,
the case was sad. When they failed in
spite of much true love, and only because
one or both of the two concerned remained
ignorant of the plain biological and psychological facts, the case was sadder still. But
such ignorance was preventable, and it was
one of the happiest signs of the times that
the churches were slowly but definitely
awakening to the duty of providing such
education for marriage.

\ pe Oey”

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

For the purpose of this quarterly journal devoted to the recording of current
researches, physiological zoology is regarded as comprising :

The physiology of embryonic and reconstitutional development
The physiology of environmental relationships

The physiology of the cell and protoplasm

The physiology of the nervous system and behaviour
Hormones and other features of chemical correlation

Sex in its physiological aspects

The physiological phases of genetics and cytology.

Phystological Zoology is an indispensable part of the literature in the field.

It is

edited by Charles Manning Child and Warder C. Allee of the University of Chicago
and published by the University of Chicago Press. ‘The yearly rate is 35s. 2d.

English Agents
Cambridge University Press

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 2.
