PROBLEMS OF CHILDBEARING*
By J. W. B. DOUGLAS, B.Sc., B.M., B.Ch.

N 1946 a joint committee of the Popula| ken Investigation Committee and the

Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynecologistst made an inquiry into the social
and economic problems of childbearing. The
reasons for undertaking this inquiry were
twofold. First, the health services were
about to be remodelled under the National
Health Services Act, and it was felt that if
the background of circumstances and needs
were not taken into account, the new maternity services would only incompletely fulfil the
functions for which they were designed.
Secondly,.it is well known that in Britain
fertility has fallen very markedly since the
1870's. There are reasons for thinking that
the medical and other costs associated with
the birth of a baby may to-day be a serious
deterrent to parenthood, not only for the
lower income groups, but for all sections of
the community. There is, then, an excellent
case for reducing the financial burden of
childbearing, but we have no idea how great
it is or what measures would be likely to be
effective in reducing it. There are, of course,
other deterrents than monetary ones, for
example, unsatisfactory conditions of confinement are often dictated by shortage of
beds, or by the ties of a large family ; unnecessary pain during labour may result
from a shortage of trained midwives. In
fact, all aspects of the maternity services are
of potential interest to the demographer.

Information Available Before this Survey
It is surprising that this inquiry was
needed at all. During the past thirty years

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on December 7th, 1948.

¢ Chairman: Professor James Young; secretary:
Professor D. V. Glass; director: J. W. B. Douglas;
research assistant : Miss G. Rowntree ; members: H.
G. E. Arthure, Miss A. J. M. T. Barnes, G. F. Gibberd,
Sir Eardley Holland, David Maxwell, Rufus Thomas,
C. P. Blacker, I. G. Davies, Miss C. L. Melly, R. M.
Titmuss, Lady Rhys Williams.

Funds for this inquiry were generously supplied by the
Nuffield Foundation and the National Birthday Trust.

32

there has been a rapid enlargement of the
scope of the maternity services, and in this
period large sums of public money have been
spent on them. It was to have been expected,
then, that some attempts would have been
made to measure what return, in improved
health and reduced mortality, has been
made from this expenditure. Thus it would
have been of the greatest value to know how
the use of the services had spread through
different sections of the community, and to
have observed the changes in the demand for
maternity beds and in the proportion of midwifery undertaken by doctors. It would also
have been interesting to have been able to
plot trends in the incidence of prematurity
and breast-feeding, and to study changes
in the medical and other costs of childbearing. But in no case were suitable data
available.

The Ministry of Health, it is true, send
each year to local authorities a form which
asks for certain statistics relating to the local
provision of maternity services and the use
made of them. Many of the statistics collected in this way have been shown to be
misleading, for though they give a rough
measure of the number using the services
they show neither the extent to which each
mother uses them nor the adequacy of the
attention given. Local authorities, also,
collect detailed records of all women who
use their maternity and child welfare services. But the data recorded vary from one
authority to another, and even information
common to the records of many authorities
may be collected in a variety of ways, making
comparison very difficult. A further disadvantage is that the records are collected
on a great number of separate cards and
forms, sometimes as many as ten or twelve,
each form containing a part, but not all, of
the information required. A summary is
seldom available, and it is very rare for the
forms to be filed together.
PROBLEMS OF CHILDBEARING 33

Nature of the Inquiry

Such considerations made it clear that the
type of information required could be
obtained only by personal interviews with
mothers whose experience could be regarded
as typical of the whole population of women
now bearing children. These interviews
would have to be undertaken in every type
of administrative authority, in all geographical regions and among all social groups.
It was, moreover, felt that the value of the
interviews would be greatly increased if they
were carried out by people who had an
intimate knowledge of the mothers’ problems, and who had access both to the
mothers and to the records of midwives and
local authorities. —

This inquiry was made possible by the
whole-hearted help of the medical officers of
health of 424 maternity and child welfare
authorities (92 per cent of all such authorities
in England and Wales) who allowed their
health visitors to undertake the interviews ;
by the careful interviewing of the health visitors and by the co-operation of the mothers.
It was decided to attempt to interview the
mothers of all children born in the first week
of March 1946, and in fact successful interviews were completed with 90 per cent of
them. In all, a total of 13,687 mothers cooperated, of whom 7,287 answered a questionnaire dealing mainly with the availability
of the maternity services and the use made
of them, and 6,400 a questionnaire on expenditure on medical and other costs
associated with the birth of their babies.
These interviews were made eight weeks after
the confinement, as it was thought that after
this interval mothers would have returned
home, purchased the layette, pram, etc., and
received bills for confinement care. On the
other hand, details of expenditure and expenses during pregnancy and the lying-in
period would still be fresh in their minds.

A background to the questionnaire survey
was provided by detailed studies in five
authorities of the quality of the maternity
services and the administrative problems
associated with them. At the same time it
was possible to test both the accuracy of

individual answers in the questionnaires and
the reality of recorded grievances.

The sample of mothers interviewed were
fully representative of married women confined in March 1946. Refusals were encountered in less than 2 per cent of cases,
but a further 7 per cent could not be interviewed because they were away, ill, etc. A
relatively high proportion of such contacts
had illegitimate or stillborn babies, but this
fact does not materially reduce the value of
conclusions drawn from the whole sample.

The results of the inquiry are set out in
considerable detail in the joint committee’s
report,* and only two aspects will be considered here. The first is the unequal availability of the services; the second, the
tendency for services to be designed to suit
the convenience of medical and administrative staff rather than that of the mothers
who use them.

Unequal Availability of Services

There are great inequalities in the maternity services available in different parts of the
the country and to different social groups.
From the eugenic point of view the social
inequalities are the more interesting and will
therefore be studied in some detail. In all
aspects of maternity care well-to-do mothers
get better attention than those who are poor.
They come under antenatal supervision
earlier; thus 61 per cent of the wives of
professional and salaried workers start supervision during the first three months of their
pregnancies as compared with only 37 per
cent of working-class wives. This is a matter
of some importance, because the inquiry
clearly shows that inadequate antenatal
supervision is associated with an increased
risk to the baby, who is more likely to be
premature, stillborn or die during the first
month of life. At the present time there are
many new incentives for women to put
themselves under supervision early in pregnancy. Thus it is necessary to book early in
order to secure a bed in hospital, and fear of
forfeiting her booking will ensure the
mother’s subsequent regular attendance.

* Maternity in Great Britain. 1948. Oxford University Press.
34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Extra rations for expectant mothers supply
a further incentive. Yet in spite of
this many working-class women attend too
late to obtain the full benefits of antenatal
care.

It seems that domestic ties and the difficulty of leaving young children are reasons
for many late attendances, and consequently
it is the mothers of large families, especially
those with young children, who get the least
satisfactory care. This is easy to understand when we consider the difficulties which
women encounter when they attend clinics.
These are often situated in unsuitable and
cold buildings far from the mother’s home
and from where she usually does her shopping. Appointment systems are seldom in
operation, and she may well have to wait for
two to three hours on a hard bench before
being examined. Many a busy housewife,
even if she can find someone to look after her
children while she is away, will feel that the,
to her, rather intangible benefits of supervision are a poor return for a morning or
afternoon of waiting. To encourage better
attendances appointment systems are needed
and also clinics serving small areas and
located near shopping centres. Greater
efforts should also be made to publicise the
antenatal services and stress the importance
of early and regular supervision.

The well-to-do are also much more likely
to be confined in institutions, largely because
they can afford a nursing home bed if no
hospital one is available. But within the
working-class group itself there are large
variations in the availability of hospital beds,
and these are often determined by family
ties, though also, of course, by the fact that,
when allocating maternity beds, priority is
given to women about to have their first
babies. How great a tie the younger children
can be is shown by the reasons given for
choosing the place of confinement. As size of
family increases, family ties exclude more
and more women from hospital confinement ;
thus, of those confined at home only I per
cent of those expecting a first baby, but as
many as 38 per cent of those expecting a
sixth or subsequent baby, are confined there,
because if they went into a hospital or

nursing home there would be nobody to help
in the house.

The restrictions imposed by large families
are especially evident if we consider the
number of children under five years of age.
One-third of those whose previous children
were all over five years were confined at
home, but the proportion increased to 56
per cent when there was one child under
five, to 68 per cent when there were two, and
to 83 per cent when there were more than
two. Although it is just these mothers with
a large number of younger children who
would most benefit from a rest in hospital,
the shortage of home helps and an almost
complete absence of residential nurseries
makes it impossible for them to leave home.

For these reasons home confinements frequently take place in unsuitable and overcrowded conditions. Some of the conditions
described in the questionnaires were very
bad indeed. Thus, one woman living in her
parents’ house slept during her confinement
in the same bed with her mother and sister ;
another slept in the same room with her
husband and three children who, while she
was in labour, had to wait on the landing
outside. In the whole sample of home confinements one out of five was in a home that
was crowded more than two persons to each
room. It is surprising that such overcrowded
home conditions, apart from the poverty
with which they are associated, do not by
themselves increase the risk of stillbirths or
neonatal deaths. On the other hand there is
much to suggest that domestic ties result in
many women being confined at home who
would more safely have been confined in
hospital.

Social class inequalities were particularly striking when considering relief from
pain. In 1946 analgesia was to a great extent
reserved for the well-to-do ; and the position
is still far from satisfactory, though since
that date analgesia has become more widely
available. Well-to-do women were more often
given analgesia because they could afford to
arrange for a doctor to deliver them. But
even among those attended by doctors it
seems that relief is more likely to be given to
rich than to poor women. Thus in home conPROBLEMS OF CHILDBEARING 35

finements 74 per cent of well-to-do wives
attended by their doctors were given analgesia, but only 44 per cent of working-class
wives. This may be because the better
educated more insistently demanded relief,
but this explanation does not excuse a discrimination that has given rise to numerous
complaints.

Throughout this inquiry it is apparent that
larger families restrict the use mothers are
able to make of the maternity services. There
is no fundamental reason why this should be
so, but in the past it has proved much easier
to ignore their special needs. Undoubtedly
the position could be greatly improved by the
better siting of centres, by equipping them
with playrooms, by arranging appointment
systems and by providing a more efficient
home help service or system of residential
nurseries so that women with many younger
children would be able to leave their homes
to have their babies in hospital.

Services for whose Convenience ?

The second aspect of the inquiry which we
are considering is the tendency for services
to be designed to suit the convenience of the
medical and administrative staff rather than
of the mother. This is found in all aspects of
the service. It has been found convenient in
many larger towns to concentrate supervision
at a central clinic. For the doctors this cuts
down travelling and eases the problems of
filing records and obtaining special examinations ; but for the mother it may mean long
journeys and long waiting. It may, moreover, reduce the continuity of care, for at
such antenatal clinics sessions are often
taken by health visitors rather than by midwives, these health visitors seeing expectant
women who come from outside their own
area and for whose children they will have no
later responsibility. For the midwife, too,
the central clinic has disadvantages, as it
may mean long journeys from her area of
work, and in fact often means that the antenatal care of her patients is largely taken
out of her hands.

The hours of sessions are also often
arranged to suit neither the midwives nor the
mothers. Thus, in some of the authorities

visited it was found that the antenatal clinics
were held at times when the midwives were on
their rounds and could not attend. Because
of this midwives often held afternoon or
evening clinics of their own, thus duplicating
the supervision and putting an unnecessary
burden on the expectant mother.

Another way in which the unsatisfactory
nature of the services shows itself is in the
number of different people through whose
hands each expectant mother passes. She
will often be seen by several different doctors, midwives and health visitors, each of
whom may have only an incomplete acquaintance with the history of her condition. Even
during labour she may be successively in the
charge of several different midwives ; thus
one woman passed through the hands of
three midwives, each of whom took a different view of her case. It is, of course,
frequently impossible for women to remain
under the care of the same person throughout pregnancy and confinement, but the
present low standard of continuity of care
could undoubtedly be raised.

To judge by the complaints of mothers,
and also by our experience during visits to
selected authorities, conditions in hospitals
leave much to be desired. Insufficient care
has been taken in their design and even in
some comparatively new buildings there is an
unnecessary lack of privacy. Many women
complained that the labour rooms were too
near the lying-in wards: e.g. ‘ would it be
possible to have mothers in labour in a
sound-proof room, as the noise some of
them make is very upsetting to the rest
having their babies.’”’ Even when labour
rooms are well removed from the wards they
sometimes open into each other without
intervening doors, or contain several beds
which may be in simultaneous use. To have
labour rooms near the wards and opening
one into the other is probably convenient for
the staff, but can be most distressing for the
patients.

The impression was also formed, from complaints and from visits to hospitals, that the
comfort of mothers often comes second to
hospital routine. It is, of course, necessary
for mothers to be awakened early in the
36 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

morning to feed their babies, but it is difficult to understand why in some hospitals
they are awakened at 4.30 a.m. and in others
at 6 a.m. There is also great variation in
visiting hours. Some hospitals allow visits
every day for an hour in the afternoon and
an hour in the evening ; others rigidly limit
visiting to two or three half-hours per week.
Some matrons feel that even the latter is too
much, and would prefer to stop visiting
altogether. Then, again, visitors are usually
admitted singly, but in a few hospitals there
is no limit to the number. Often the baby
can only be seen once a week by the father,
but other hospitals allow visitors to see the
baby whenever they come. The case for the
restriction of visitors is that they are liable
to introduce infection, and are therefore a
potential danger to the infant, especially if
he is premature. For this reason some
restriction of visiting is necessary, but a
compromise should be sought between satisfying the natural wish of the mother to see
her friends, and protecting her and her baby
from the risks of infection.

Some of these unsatisfactory conditions
arise from the fact that, in the past, maternity hospitals were primarily concerned with
abnormal midwifery and with patients who
could be legitimately regarded as ill. But
to-day approximately 40 per cent of expectant mothers book a hospital bed, the majority
of them being healthy women undergoing a
normal physiological process. This change in
the hospital population calls for very exten
SOCIETY

sive administrative readjustments which in
many cases have not been made.

Not only in hospitals but throughout the
maternity services there is an emphasis on
the abnormal side of childbirth which has
meant that other important aspects have not
been given the attention they deserve. If
women are to be encouraged to have children,
much more attention needs to be paid to the
material and psychological needs of expectant
mothers. This would involve both a rearrangement of the services and reorientation of the
training of doctors and midwives.

Conclusion

Many of the foregoing criticisms arise from
the fact that the maternity services have
grown haphazardly without any guidance
based on knowledge of the extent to which
they are used and the results they have
achieved. In the future they. will cater for an
even wider section of the population, and it
is more than ever important to see that they
are designed to meet the changing needs of
mothers and children. Many of the services
provided will, moreover, be of an experimental nature, and rapid and objective
estimates of their success will be necessary.
The present survey has defined the type of
information likely to give a reliable indication of the adequacy of the maternity services, and it is hoped that in the future the
Ministry of Health will periodically make
similar inquiries which will help to guide their
policies and enable them to allocate their
expenditure to the best advantage.

OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION

‘For the promotion of knowledge of the course of legisiation in different countries, more particularly in the several
parts of His Majesty’s Dominions, and in the United States.”
President: The Rt. Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.C.V.O.

Chairman of the Executive Committee: The Rt. Hon. Lord DU PARCQ

Editors: Sir ARNOLD McNAIR, K.C. _—‘ Sir CECIL CARR, K.C.B., K.C.,
assisted by
Professor H. C. GUTTERIDGE, K.C., and F. H. LAWSON, Esq., D.C.L.
Honorary Secretary: C. E. A. BEDWELL, Esq.

ONE GUINEA

Annual Subscription - - 
Address: THE ROYAL EMPIRE SOCIETY, NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, LONDON, W.C.2

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLI, No. 1
