THE EUGENICS REVIEW

final chapter deals with the future prospects for
effective control by which is implied “‘the contraction of differences, reconciliation of cultures,
and the satisfaction of personal needs and
achievement of personal happiness with the aid
of institutions and disciplines in a manner which
will further man’s still unknown destiny”’.

The extent of the author’s research is impressive but her book would be easier to assimilate, and its impact on the general reader might
be greater, if some of the chapters were shorter
in content and all were more concisely expressed.
It contains, however, much information for the
student and, as the author intends, may well
stimulate further consideration of the many
studies and reports now available on aspects of
population and birth control; no doubt with
this in mind she has appended a useful bibliography divided under chapter headings.

There is an adequate index. F.B.S.

Pethe, Vasant P. Demographic Profiles of an
Urban Population. Bombay, 1964. Popular
Prakashan. Pp. xvi+144. Price Rs. 15.00.

THIS IS A report on the results of a demographiceconomic survey of the city of Sholapur. A
random sample of 1,203 families was interviewed
in 1955. Due to the expansion of the cotton
textile industry, the city has grown rapidly
during the last two decades. Manufacturing
industry being the main source of employment,
over half of the heads of the families interviewed
were manual workers. As about seven-tenths of
the families were employed in low-paid occupations, their standard of living was found to be
very low. The dependency ratio was high; a
family on an average had 1-6 earners and 4-1
dependents. The level of literacy, especially for
the women, was low, and about one-third of the
adult males and over four-fifths of the adult
females were found to be illiterate.

The urban-industrial character of the city
made it an especially interesting area for the
study of patterns of fertility and reproduction.
A total of 1,337 women, who were currently
married, and were between thirteen and fifty
years of age, were included in the study of
fertility. The age-specific marital fertility rates
computed on the number of births which occurred

36

during the one year preceding the inquiry gave
a completed family size of seven children per
woman. The level of fertility has not shown any
change during the life-time of these women; the
number of children they actually had by various
durations of marriage tallied with the numbers
they were expected to have according to the
marriage duration—specific fertility rates based
on the births during the year of the inquiry.
Moreover, no significant difference was found
in the fertility of the various groups according
to their occupation, religion, caste, education or
income. Indeed no differences could be expected
owing to the complete absence of the practice of
family limitation. Over 90 per cent of the males
and females interviewed in connection with the
practice and attitude towards birth control were
unaware of the methods of family planning and
only 2 per cent had ever adopted any method
of birth control. Further, about three-quarters of
the males and over four-fifths of the females
interviewed showed no desire to get full information about family planning.

The attitude of the respondents towards the
general notion of family planning was favourable.
About half of them supported it. The support
was greater among advanced communities and
occupational grades of higher status, and increased with the increase in education. Nearly
half of the respondents considered a mediumsized family of four or five children as the
optimum size.

With this situation in 1955, the reader is left
wondering about the reactions of the people in
this urban-industrial population to the propaganda for family planning that presumably was
undertaken during the Second and the Third
Five Year Plans between 1955 and 1964. The
author points out that in the two family
planning clinics which, till 1955, were the only
ones to operate in this city of about 300,000
population, only 56 persons took advice on an
average in a year, but gives no indication of any
increase in the number of clinics or in their
attendance since then.

This book is another addition to the large
amount of literature showing the puzzle that in
India, while most couples desire a mediumsized family, and also have a favourable attitude
towards family planning, no significant practice
REVIEWS OF BOOKS

of contraception has emerged even in urban
areas. SAVITRI THAPAR

PSYCHOLOGY

Cattell, Raymond B. The Scientific Analysis of
Personality. A Pelican Original. Harmondsworth, 1965. Penguin. Pp. 370. Price 6s.

RAYMOND CATTELL IS such a prolific writer of
books in the area of personality and of experimental articles, that this Pelican will be welcomed
for providing a relatively simple overview of his
contributions. For the most part it covers the
same ground as Personality and Motivation
Structure and Measurement, but seems to have
rather more to say about practical applications
of personality tests (in education, counselling,
clinical work, social investigations, etc.). Moreover, like all his writings, it sparks off novel
ideas on every other page. Thus it is the ideal
answer for the student who has been told to
read up something about Cattell (and one hopes
that most serious psychology students are so
told).

Whether it can safely be recommended to the
intelligent layman or the scientist from another
discipline who wants to know what personality
psychology has accomplished, is another matter.
Cattell is the leading exponent in America, like
Eysenck in England, of the view that clinical
(e.g. Freudian) and literary approaches to personality will get us nowhere; we must measure
personality characteristics objectively, and sort
out the complexities by correlational (factor)
analysis. Most of the book indeed is devoted to
expounding these arguments, describing illustrative tests, and bringing out the implications
of the very large number of factors that he has
discovered. But though one sympathizes with
his aim and applauds his ingenuity and energy
in pursuing it, the reviewer at least is less certain
that he has reached his goal, or that scientific
personality testing for practical purposes is now
feasible; and the generality of psychologists
also seem to have their doubts. So often Cattell
appears to over-reach himself, as when he
claims to be able to raise the variance in school
achievement which can be predicted from about
25 per cent by intelligence tests alone, to over
75 per cent by combining intelligence, personality

and motivational tests. He can and does quote
numerous examples of striking group differences,
good achievers obtaining different factor scores
from poor ones, delinquents, leaders, homosexuals, neurotics, etc., differing from normals.
But the personality test scores of individuals,
and these group differences, tend to be highly
unstable and chancy, and there is really very
little evidence that personality tests can give
consistently accurate diagnoses. Indeed Cattell
himself points out, more clearly than in his
previous writings, how much test performance
depends on the characteristics of the measuring
instrument, how the individual reacts to it, his
temporary moods, the social role he is playing,
etc.; and while in theory these can also be
measured, we have not got very far in controlling
or allowing for them in practice. Cattell’s psychology, then, is supremely adventurous and
provocative, which is all to the good, but apt
to be over-optimistic and dogmatic. Another
example of this dogmatism may be drawn from
his discussion of hereditary vs. environmental
determination of his factors, where he claims
to have arrived at the perfect technique for
analysing such questions. Surely a technique
which fails to show that more intelligent parents
give greater intellectual stimulation to their
children than dull parents, and which proves
that spelling ability is more dependent than most
cognitive traits on heredity, should be regarded
as decidedly fallible. Or is one merely being
obscurantist?

Besides these more basic sections, the book
contains a lot of very sensible (though equally
provocative) discussion of the scientific psychologist’s approach to human affairs, education,
clinical diagnosis and treatment, guidance, etc.
Cattell writes vividly; and although the more
theoretical parts are heavy going, there is very
little statistics, and what there is is explained
with remarkable clarity. One feature of the
volume that may intrigue psychologists is the
extent to which he seems to be seeking a rapprochement with Eysenck, whose philosophy is
indeed similar, but who differs from him on a
number of rather fundamental points which are
here glossed over. Finally: a minor complaint.
No bibliography is provided, only a few references for further reading at the end of each

37
