A SUBCULTURAL FAMILY

By D. NEWLYN
(Research Asssstant, Royal Eastern Counties Inststution, Colchester)

HERE is at present widespread interest in the problem of mental
deficiency and it is common knowledge that there exist in our midst families,
most, or many, of whose members are below
normal in intelligence. There is also much
discussion about proposals for legislation
with a view to prevention or extermination
of such families. The detailed history of one
such family may be of use in demonstrating
some of the practical difficulties which
confront any such proposals. The family
described here may be taken as fairly typical,
only differing from others of the same class
which have been investigated in that it has
been possible to obtain more detailed and
comprehensive information than is often the
case, and it describes four generations.

To make the history clear we must go back
to the beginning of last century and focus
our attention upon three brothers, Joe, Ben,
and Sam Small. These men lived in a tiny
village, within easy walking distance of a
county town but nevertheless, until recently,
an isolated spot—the kind of place where
families were born, grew up and died without
ever moving farther than from one side of
the street to the other. There is only one
street, straggling down a hill, with the church
and school at the top, and the village inn at
the bottom, and the Smalls have lived in
one cottage for three generations.

Of Sam Small nothing seems to be known
personally, but his son, David, still lives in

the village and is recognized as being “‘ not
exactly the thing’ mentally. Probably, in
any but a quiet agricultural community, he
would have drifted into the workhouse, or
have been dealt with as mentally defective,
but he has in fact not only supported himself
by farm-work, but has married and brought
up seven children. Of these children, one is
said to be of quite normal mentality, two are
of average intelligence, but liable to fits of
uncontrollable temper, three were dull at
school but pass as normal, and one, Bill, is,
like his father, ‘‘ not exactly the thing.”’ Bill
has married a woman of lower mental level
than his own and their only child, a boy, is
mentally dull and a ‘‘ bundle of nerves ”’ but,
so far, not certified by the school medical
officer as mentally defective. Environment,
as well as heredity, is against this unfortunate
boy, as he is neglected and ill-treated by his
parents.

The second of the three brothers, Ben
Small, was apparently of a quarrelsome disposition, and on one occasion, in the course
of a fight with a fellow-workman, he was
hit on the head with a milking stool. His
relatives believe that it was in consequence
of this blow that he had to be removed to a
mental hospital, where he ultimately died.
Only two of Ben's children have been traced
—George and Sarah. George still lives in the
village, where he is considered normal, and
his only child, a girl of five, is doing well in
the infant school. Sarah is married and has

237
238

nine children, who are looked on at school as
a dull family, but none of them has yet been
picked out by the local education authority
as mentally defective.

The third brother, Joe Small, was unable
to read or write. This may mean nothing
more than lack of education, but it suggests
that he was below normal in intelligence. He
seems, however, to have been a steady,
reliable workman, and was employed as
horseman on the farm next to his cottage for
forty years. He had ten children. One
daughter died young in child-birth. The
other nine are said to be alive, but only three
have been traced. Archibald is normal
mentally and, while still living in his native
village, has employment in the neighbouring
town with a firm of agricultural implement
makers. Of his three children, the eldest,
Fred, had difficulty in learning to read and
write. He is of low mentality and was
noticed to be “ silly ’ in his behaviour when
at school. The second child, Nancy, is said
to be normal, and the youngest, Peggy, a
bright, sensible child, now ten years old, is
“head ” of the infant school.

Another son of Joe, Bert, is illiterate,
alcoholic and almost certainly feebleminded, though he manages to support
himself by farm-work. He is said to be
“‘happy-go-lucky’’ and good-tempered even
when drunk. He has married a woman who
is also mentally weak, and of their four
children, one is described by the schoolteacher as a “‘ very low normal,’’ the next is
considered definitely defective, but has not
yet been certified, and the other two (a
twin boy and girl) are too young for any
definite opinion of their mentality to be
formed. Bert had another child which died
in infancy as the result of scalds. The mother
is said to have upset some boiling water over
the child, and, instead of attending to it,
carried it up and down the village street to
show the neighbours.

Tom, the eldest of Joe Small’s family, is
of much the same mentality and temperament as Bert—amiable, but feeble-minded.
He is a satisfactory workman, having been
a cowman on the same farm for twenty-one
years. He is unable to read or write though

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

he says he attended a night-school for some
time after he started work, in a laudable
endeavour to learn. Tom’s wife came from
an altogether superior family living in the
same village. Her father was accepted for
the borough police force of the county town
at the age of 25. Four years later he was
dismissed from the force on account of
drunkenness and obtained employment as
warehouseman. He seems to have been able
to keep this employment but continued to
drink and, at the age of 40, he committed
suicide by hanging himself in the wash-house
behind his house. His widow now keeps a
very respectable lodging-house and seems to
be a capable woman.

It is surprising that the eldest daughter of
this couple should have married a man of
Tom Small’s mentality and social status.
Her nine brothers and sisters, though not
apparently more intelligent than she, are all
in superior positions and doing well. A Mrs.
Dawson, who lives a short distance from the
Smalls’ cottage and has always taken a
kindly interest in the family, described her
as ‘‘ a sweet woman ”’ who would have made
an excellent mother to a small family but
was not equal to the hardships of her married
life with Small. During the sixteen years she
had eight living children, two miscarriages
and finally a stillbirth which caused her own
death at the age of 37. Small was kind to
her but he has no idea of money values and
is said to have spent about 2s. a day out of
his meagre wages on beer. According to her
mother, Mrs. Small was consistently undernourished and all her confinements were
difficult.

Of the eight surviving children, the eldest,
Valerie, is normal mentally and is generally
spoken of as a “‘ very nice girl.’’ She is now
married, has moved away from her native
village and is said to have an ideal workingclass home with two apparently normal
babies. The second child, Kenneth, is feebleminded but not certified. He suffers badly
from asthma which prevents his keeping work
on a farm and so he lives with his father and
is responsible for the housework. The third
child, Daphne, is in an institution for the
mentally defective and her history will be
A SUBCULTURAL FAMILY

returned to later. The fourth, Daisy, was
dull at school but now passes as normal and
is said to be capable in a house. She is
married to an iron-moulder in a neighbouring
town but has no children. The fifth, Charlie,
is said to be normal. The next two children,
Tom and Ian, were both certified feebleminded under the Education Acts while at
school, but have never been certified under
the Mental Deficiency Acts. They are both
illiterate but are able to earn their living at
farm-work. They live with their father. The
youngest child, Mary, is thought by at least
one school-mistress to be feeble-minded, but
she has not, so far, been certified, possibly
because she has moved between various
schools in different areas.

The only member of this whole family
complex who has been actually certified
under the Mental Deficiency Act is Daphne,
Tom Small’s third child. She is a fat, rather
flabby but pleasant-looking girl of 25 with
pink cheeks and light curly hair. Her mental
age is 8 years. Her vocabulary is limited but
she speaks clearly, is capable of doing laundry
work and simple sewing and she enjoys outdoor games. In the institution she is smart
and well-behaved, but sometimes stubborn.

In her childhood, up to the time of her
mother’s death, she seems to have been fairly
well cared for, though the cottage (containing
only four rooms) was overcrowded and the
family lived in great poverty. Daphne was
sent regularly to the village school but disliked her lessons and was judged very backward. On one occasion, when she was I0 or
Ir years old, she stole the key of the school
from the caretaker and dropped it into the
dustbin outside the head-mistress’s house.
The key was not found until months
afterwards, when it was dug up in the garden,
which had been manured from the dustbin ;
but, in the meantime, Daphne had explained
that she thought, if she threw away the key,
that there could be no more school. It was
a blow to her to find that another key was
produced and the school opened as usual.

When Daphne was 12 her mother died.
The elder sister took charge of the household.
She seems to have had no control over
Daphne, who could always count on her

239

father’s support in any dispute. The first
thing she wanted, of course, was to get free
from school, so, on her thirteenth birthday,
she and her father announced that she was
fourteen and stated this so firmly and convincingly that they were believed—the school
registers were altered and Daphne was
allowed to leave. A year later they celebrated
her fourteenth birthday by proclaiming the
joke to the village! Three years later the
older sister, Valerie, married. Daphne became the housekeeper. In this capacity
she was deplorable. She spent the time
which should have been devoted to housework in “ running after’’ the workmen on
the farm, especially one particular cowman
who was her father’s friend and contemporary. The cottage remained dirty, untidy,
and practically unfurnished.

This state of affairs went on until Daphne
was 23. Then, one morning, her father went
to Mrs. Dawson to say that the girl was
‘awful queer’ and he thought she must
have influenza. He went on to his work and
Mrs. Dawson called at the cottage to see
Daphne. She found the girl lying on a pile
of dirty clothes, and evidently in labour, in
a room lacking even the barest necessities
in the way of furniture. The district nurse
was sent for, and she, Mrs. Dawson, and
Kenneth, rushed to and fro fetching the
necessary equipment, lighting fires and
heating water. Their preparations were
not completed before a little girl was born.
Daphne and the baby were removed by
ambulance later in the day to a maternity
home. There seems to have been some doubt
about the child’s paternity, but the cowman
valiantly came forward, paid the fees at the
maternity home and the bills for the baby’s
outfit and is still paying for the child’s
maintenance with a foster-mother. He
offered to marry Daphne but the authorities
interfered and an order was made for her
admission to an institution under the
Mental Deficiency Acts.

In surveying the details of this family
history, I wish to emphasize that, out of
nineteen individuals who are known to have
been of subnormal mentality, only two have
ever been definitely certified—old Ben Small
240

(who was certified under the Lunacy Act)
and Daphne. In the case of Daphne, had the
cowman married her before the birth of her
child, she would never have been certified
and the family never would have been
investigated. She is, in all probability, of
about the same mental grade as her father,
brothers, and some of her uncles and cousins.
Possibly she is more intelligent than some of
them. If she had not become subject to be
dealt with on account of her ‘‘ immo
conduct, she would have settled down and
brought up a family in the village and would
have remained unknown to the authorities.
It follows from all this that necessity for

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

certification is no true criterion of feeblemindedness, and no guide at all on questions
of heredity : in high-grade cases it is merely
a reflection of the morals of society. In each
part of the family which has been described,
the level of intelligence of the children is
similar to that of the parents, although there
is a range of intelligence from normality to
low-grade feeble-mindedness. It is not
possible from the study of such families as
this to ascertain the relative importance of
heredity and environment—all we can assert

is the general rule that within the same com
munity succeeding generations resemble one
another.

 

—$—$
S

CIENTIFIC BOOKS

 

Current and Standard ENGLISH, FRENCH and GERMAN Literature

in MEDICAL, CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL,

and PHYSICAL

SCIENCE supplied from stock, or obtained promptly to order.
A visit to this Department is respectfully sugested.
Please write for CATALOGUES, mentioning interests.

A. K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd.,

136 GOWER STREET
LONDON, WC. 1

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 4.
