THE SOCIAL PROBLEM GROUP

The President’s Account of the Society's next Task

By Sir BERNARD MALLET, K.C.B.

can claim to have raised the question of

eugenic sterilization from the status of
a vague social problem, about which there
has been much loose talking and thinking,
to a concrete political issue which has
received the careful scrutiny of a large
number of highly competent persons outside the Society. Our policy has been set
forth in a pamphlet which has received
widespread attention, and has been focused
in a bill which was recently introduced into
the House of Commons under the tenminutes rule. Our proposals have been
extensively noticed and commented on in
the Press, and of the daily and weekly
papers which have expressed opinions, the
great majority have been favourably disposed. There are now few educated persons
throughout the country who do not realize
that eugenic sterilization is an active contemporary social issue.

I would suggest that as, in the year 1931,
we have drawn public attention to the idea
of legalizing eugenic sterilization, so, in the
year 1932, we bring before the public the
idea of a ‘‘ Social Problem Group.’’ Such
a procedure would be a wholly logical
development of our activities this year, in
that the ultimate aim of our sterilization
policy is not to make the measure compulsory for sufferers from mental defects
and diseases, but rather to make it voluntarily practicable by the social problem
group, if such a group exists, as is alleged.
If the group does not exist, the useful scope
of our sterilization proposals will be
restricted. |

For a long time this Society has inclined
towards a belief in the existence of a social
problem group as a result of the researches
of Mr. E. J. Lidbetter into the relation of
heredity and social inadequacy in an East

|= the year 1931 the Eugenics Society

London area. It is hoped that the first
volume of Mr. Lidbetter’s book will appear
in 1932. ‘This alone should go far to direct
public attention to the group. But it is
desirable that it should be investigated from
other aspects.

I should like to draw the attention of
readers of the REVIEW to a way by which
they could help the Society in such an
investigation.

THE DISCOVERY OF THE GROUP

Since the idea of the existence of this
group is new, and since the term is little
known, a brief description will be given of
how the conception first originated. It
arose in connection with a recent investigation of the incidence of mental deficiency in
England and Wales in the following way.

The first authoritative pronouncement
upon this incidence was delivered by the
Royal Commission for the Care and Control of the Feebleminded which made its
report in the year 1909. This Report contained certain recommendations relating to
the process of ‘‘ ascertainment ”’ (i.e. to the
process by which mentally defective persons
are discovered and recognized as a preliminary to being dealt with) which were
incorporated in the Mental Deficiency Act
of the year 1913. This Act only came into
operation at the beginning of August 1914,
with the result that during the following
four years there was little opportunity for
its efficacy to be judged. When, after the
War, its workings came under scrutiny, it
was found that the process of ascertainment
was being inadequately carried out by
many Local Authorities. The result was
that in the year 1924 an Inter-departmental
Committee was jointly appointed by the
Boards of Education and Control, whose
terms of reference were to estimate how

203
204

many mentally defective persons there were
in England and Wales, and to make recommendations as to how these persons could
best be dealt with. This Committee came
to be called the ‘‘ Mental Deficiency Committee,’? and by it the conception of a
‘* Social Problem Group ’’ was formulated.

The chief statistical conclusion reached
by this Committee was that the incidence
of mental deficiency had apparently increased from 4.6 per thousand, as reported
by the Royal Commission in 1909, to 8.56
per thousand in 1929, the year in which the
report of the Mental Deficiency Committee
appeared. ‘That is to say that the incidence
had apparently nearly doubled in about
twenty years. The total number of mentally
defective persons in England and Wales was
moreover estimated as 300,000.

The conception of the ‘‘ Social Problem
Group ’? emerged from an analysis of the
types of families by which these three main
grades of mental defectives were produced.
These three grades have been given legal

definitions. The lowest or most defective
grade is that of idiocy. Idiots have a
‘“mental age’? of up to two, and

comprise some five per cent. of all defectives. The middle grade of imbecility comprises persons who, as adults, have a mental
age of from two to six, and includes some
20 per cent. of all defectives. Idiots and
imbeciles are often collectively referred to
as “low grade defectives.”’ The highest
grade of mental defective, known as the
feeble-minded, has a mental age of from six
to eight, and comprises some 75 per cent., or
about three quarters, of all defectives. The
feeble-minded are sometimes referred to as
““ high grade defectives.’’ It will thus be
seen that from the numerical standpoint
alone, feeble-mindedness presents a more
important social problem than idiocy and
imbecility combined.

TWO DIFFERENT SORTS OF FAMILIES

When Dr. E. O. Lewis, the investigator
of the Mental Deficiency Committee, came
to examine the families from which these
three grades of mental defectives arose, he
made an interesting discovery. He found

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that low grade defectives tended to be born
of parents who, in most observable respects,
differed little or not at all from the average
of the population. The feeble-minded
group, however, arose from families whose
general standard of living was conspicuously below that of the average. His
findings are summarized in the following
table, which shows the proportions of the
three grades of mental defectives found in
superior, good, average, poor, and very
poor homes.

Condition of Homes*

Grade Superior Good Average Poor Very Poor
Feebleminded 1.2 10.1 27.0 36.5 25.2
Imbeciles ... 5.9 23.7 36.2 19.5 14.7
Idiots » 9.5 23.0 40.5 21.6 5.4
All grades ... 2.4 13.2 29.3 32.7 22.3

THE “ SUBMERGED TENTH ”

Dr. Lewis’ procedure when investigating an
area for the presence of mental defectives was
to apply for information from the various
services and organizations which would
normally come into touch with defectives.
Such were the education authorities, prisons,
hospitals, public assistance authorities,
relieving officers, and charity organizations.
His was then the surprising experience of
finding the names of the same families
given him by several of these different and
independent bodies, as in one way or
another presenting difficulties and problems. These families, while not necessarily
certifiably defective, were composed of subnormal and low grade persons, who were
useless or, in various ways, burdensome to
the community, and presented “ social
problems.’’ From these families, it was
found, were recruited the bulk of unemployables, incorrigible slum makers, prostitutes, inebriates, habitual criminals, chronic
paupers, and high grade defectives that
existed in the community. This group was
christened the ‘‘ Social Problem Group,’’
and by the Mental Deficiency Committee it
was estimated as comprising about a tenth
of the total population of the country, that

* Report of the Mental Deficiency Committee,
Part IV, page 202.
THE SOCIAL PROBLEM GROUP

is to say, some four million persons. This
sweeping and comprehensive estimate was
adopted with singularly little comment by
a number of eminent authorities among
whom is included Sir George Newman, the
Chief Medical Officer of the Ministry of
Health. |

The actual words used by the Report to
describe the Social Problem Group are here
quoted :

** Let us assume that we could segregate
as a separate community all the families in
this country containing mental defectives of
the primary amentia type. We should find
that we had collected among them a most
interesting social group. It would include,
as everyone who has extensive practical
experience of social service would readily
admit, a much larger proportion of insane

persons, epileptics, paupers, criminals
(eshbectally  recidivists), wunemployables,
habitual slum dwellers, prostitutes, in
ebriates and other social inefficients than
would a group of families not containing
mental defectives. The overwhelming
majority of the families thus collected will
belong to that section of the community,
which we propose to term the ‘ social
problem’ or ‘subnormal’ group. This
group comprises approximately the lowest
Io per cent. in the social scale of most communities. Though the large majority of its
members are not so low grade mentally that
they can be actually certified as mentally
defective, it is possible that a not inconsiderable number of them might prove, if
examined by expert and experienced medical practitioners, to be certifiable and subject to be placed under care and control.’’

The Report also says :

‘‘In point of fact the disparity in the
actual as opposed to the potential fertility
of the normal and subnormal sections of the
population is increasing, the families of the
subnormal group remaining as large as
hitherto while those of the better social
groups are steadily diminishing in size.’’*

A BURDEN OF FOUR MILLION
Surely few more challenging statements
than this have ever been uttered by a

* Report of the Mental Deficiency Committee,
Part III, pp. 80 and 82.

205

Departmental Committee. Four million
persons in England and Wales who are the
great purveyors of social inefficiency, prostitution, feeble-mindedness and petty crime,
the chief architects of slumdom, the most
fertile strain in the community! Four
million persons in a socially well-defined
group forming the dregs of the community
and thriving upon it as a parasite thrives
upon a healthy and vigorous host. It is
difficult to conceive of a more sweeping or
socially significant generalization.

In this conception of the ‘‘ Social Problem Group,’’ the Mental Deficiency Committee has issued a challenge not only to
social reformers but to every thinking person in the country. It is a challenge which
it would befit a Royal Commission rather
than a private society to take up. In so
far, however, as the social problem group, if
it really exists as is alleged, has a special
interest for eugenists, the Council of the
Eugenics Society has sanctioned the formation of a committee whose aim it will be to
make a preliminary investigation of the
subject.

PROPOSED AIMS OF THE INVESTIGATION

The Mental Deficiency Committee has
stated that the social problem group contains an unduly large proportion of socially
inefficient and burdensome persons who fall
into the groups specified in the italicized
passage quoted above from the Mental
Deficiency Report. ‘These different groups
are dealt with by different organized bodies.
It is proposed to form as many sub-committees of a Social Problem Investigation
Committee as there are special groups, and
it will be the aim of these sub-committees
to ascertain whether the persons of whom
they have cognizance as falling within those
groups come of families who are appreciably
below the normal social average.

At a preliminary meeting held at the
rooms of the Eugenics Society on Friday,
July 31st, the formation of the following
sub-committees was approved, the members
of each sub-committee having power to
co-opt at their discretion.
206

. Public Assistance.

. Mental Disease and Defect.
. Epileptics.

. Criminals.

Slum Dwellers.
Unemployment.

. Prostitution.

Inebriates.

. Casuals.

The co-operation of persons having
special knowledge of these nine groups has
been invited. It was surmised that some of
these persons might have at their disposal or
might be able to obtain access to, records
which would go some way to answering the
essential question which the Committee has
set itself the task of answering—viz. are the
families from which the persons comprising
these groups tend to come, conspicuously
below the general social average?

A POSSIBLE BOOK

If sufficient interest can be aroused and
if the information obtained is adequate, it
might prove possible for the Society to produce a small book entitled ‘‘ The Social
Problem Group,’’ consisting of a short
introduction and nine subsequent sections
dealing with the groups above enumerated.

It is suggested that those Fellows and
Members of the Society who are interested
in this subject and who have the necessary
leisure might care to institute investigations of a similar kind in the neighbourhood
in which they live. ‘The best procedure for
conducting such enquiries is for the person

0 CON An BW DN H

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

or group of persons who are mainly
interested to form around themselves a
small committee (directed, if possible, by
an influential chairman) with power to form
sub-committees with a view to pursuing the
various special investigations. ‘There could
be no better way of interesting the residents
in a given locality in the principles of
eugenics than this. It is possible that the
findings may vary from place to place, and
it is clearly important that the investigations be conducted in a spirit of disinterested
impartiality. For these reasons it is advisable to include on the proposed committee at
least one public-spirited person who, while
retaining an open mind, is on general principles sceptical of the influence of heredity
in determining the various forms of human
inadequacy.

The results obtainable by such a small
investigation could not be regarded as final.
They could not be held definitely to establish or to refute this conception of the
existence of a social problem group. But in
so far as they would express the views of
persons with special knowledge of the constituent elements of this group, they might
well serve the purpose of drawing attention
to the necessity of instituting a more
ambitious and thorough investigation
equipped with financial aid—perhaps a
Royal Commission.

The General Secretary will be pleased to
give what assistance he can to those who
contemplate starting such an investigation
in the areas in which they live.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 3.
