THE STANDARDIZATION OF PEDIGREES, |
A RECOMMENDATION.

In view of the infinite number of ways in which pedigrees
may be drawn up it was recently thought desirable that the
Research Committee of the Eugenics Education Society should
consider what in their opinion was the best scheme among those
in use. It would clearly be of advantage if everyone would use
the same method provided the method was a good one. It is
highly improbable that this will ever come about; but it was
considered that the Committee might usefully draw up a scheme
which the Society could recommend to those who desire to
publish pedigrees of human inheritance. Then, should these
proposals meet with a favourable reception, it may be hoped
that the scheme will be more and more used for work, and that
many authors who now invent for themselves means of representing pedigrees will, in future, adopt the scheme described
below.

The conclusions to which the Committee came will now be
given as shortly as possible, and they should be read with
reference to the pedigree on page 390 which has _ been
constructed to illustrate all the various points. There will then
follow some discussion of these proposals together with the
reasons which prompted the Committee to adopt the more
essential points of the scheme.

It should be noted that a stbship is here used to mean a
group of individuals with both parents in common, and a stb
a member of such a group either male or female.

SCHEME ADOPTED BY THE RESEARCH COMMITTEE.

I. (a) The pedigree is to be represented by a descending
tree.

(b) A horizontal bar, afterwards called the sibship

coupling bar, is to be drawn for each sibship, and
384

(c)

(4)
(e)

(g)

EUGENICS REVIEW

from it vertical lines are to descend to the symbols
representing each sib, and an ascending vertical or
oblique line is to connect it with the coupling line
between the parental symbols.

In the case of twins the symbols representing them
are not to be directly connected with the sibship
coupling bar; a horizontal line is to be drawn connecting the symbols and on to this line a vertical bar
is to descend from the sibship coupling bar.

The sibs to be arranged in order of birth, the
eldest being placed at the left-hand end.

When the fraternity is incomplete or there is any
doubt as to the order of birth or any other matter,
a clearly worded note explaining to what cause (e.g.,
ignorance, parents only recently married, etc.) the
incompleteness is due, or in what particular point
there is room for doubt, is to be placed when space
allows below the row of symbols by which the sibship is represented, or if this is impracticable, below
the whole pedigree, using the Roman numeral and
letter denoting the sibship for reference.

For purposes of reference each generation is to be
represented by a Roman numeral, each sibship by a
letter, and each individual by an Arabic numeral
denoting its position in the sibship in order of birth.
The Roman numerals and the letters are to be
written boldly on the left-hand side of and on a level
with the sibship coupling bar, the Arabic numerals
to the left of and somewhat above the individuals
which they represent. Any sib in the pedigree can
thus be referred to clearly by quoting the generation
number, sibship letter and individual number.

The symbol denoting the mate of any sib to be
connected to it by a horizontal coupling line, which
is to be continuous in the case of legitimate
marriages, and a broken or dotted line when the
union is an irregular one.
THE STANDARDIZATION OF PEDIGREES 385

(h) Husbands and wives of members of a sibship to
be referred to by small Greek letters in conjunction
with the reference. numbers of their mates.

II. The male to be represented by a square and the
female by a circle. Where the sex is uncertain a
triangle may be used. Several individuals in one
sibship may be included in an enlarged symbol with
the number of individuals written within.

Ill. When the inheritance of any particular character,
pathological or otherwise, is being investigated, its
distribution in the family may be represented by
blacking in the symbols denoting the individuals
who exhibit it.

IV. (a) Capital letters, or combinations of a capital letter
and a small letter, written inside the symbol are to
be used to denote certain particular conditions. The
significance of these is to be in accordance with the
following schedule :—

T. tuberculosis S. syphilitic (Ca. cancer

I. insane A. alcoholic (including

F. feeble-minded CC. criminal Sarcoma)

Id. idiot or B. blind ? condition
imbecile D.M. deaf mute unknown

E. epileptic

Ability may be represented by four diametral
lines, making equal angles with one another at their
point of intersection.

(6) It is of the greatest possible importance that each
user of these symbols should define clearly the sense
in which he employs them.

(c) Any conditions may be indicated according to the
discretion of the recorder by blacking in a part of
the symbols.’ (It may further at times be found useful to divide the area of the symbol into three

1 Examples of ways in which this blacking in may be done,

®m © =o (mJ and so on, ad id.
386

EUGENICS REVIEW

equal parts to represent respectively the physical,
mental and sociological qualities. These areas may
then be left white to indicate a balance of advantageous, or made black to indicate a balance of
disadvantageous qualities.)

(2) When use is made of symbols of this description
a key to their meaning is to be placed on each page
on which pedigrees are recorded.

(e) Any symbol given in the schedule I[V(a) is not to
be used to signify any condition except that which it
indicates according to the schedule.

(f) Conditions only met with in one or very few
individuals in a family, when they cannot be represented by any of the symbols in the schedule to
IV(a), shall be described in footnotes or tables
referring to the individuals contained in the pedigree.

(g) In order to call attention to the fact that there is a
footnote or particular description referring to any
individual, a small black circle may be drawn just
below the square or circle representing the individual.

(h) The notes shall be arranged in the numerical order
of the generations and the alphabetical order of the
sibship and within the sibship in the birth order.

V. (a) Certain particulars about the death of the indi
viduals may be recorded in the pedigree chart by
means of letters and numbers written below the
squares or circles, and, when it is used, below the
black circle referred to in IV(g).

e.g. D. shall signify dead and a number written

beside it at the age at death.
D.81 _ shall signify died at the age of 81.
D.s. _ shall signify suicide, the age at death can be
represented in this case also by a number.
D.s.81 shall signify suicide at age of 81.
(6b) A smaller symbol with a diameter one-third of that
of an ordinary symbol is to be used for still-births
and miscarriages; and a symbol two-thirds of the
THE STANDARDIZATION OF PEDIGREES 387

diameter of an ordinary symbol is to be used for
‘‘ died in infancy ” (i.e., under one year).

It is not necessary to add much to the explanation of the
proposed scheme given above. It may be as well, however, to
amplify the meaning of some of the clauses and explain the
reasons which weighed with the Committee in adopting certain
features.

In the first place the scheme is intended particularly to
apply to charts prepared for publication, in which the use of
different colours is very undesirable, especially from the point
of view of expense. There is less need for standardizing
lecture diagrams, which may often be improved by the use of
different colours.

With regard to the general form of pedigree the descending
tree is by far the most widely used and seems to be much
clearer than any other system. Its weak point is that where
the pedigree is a long one, it takes very little space at the top
of the page compared with that taken up at the bottom.
Pedigrees, however, are seldom so lengthy and detailed as to
make this feature a serious drawback; the loss in clearness
involved by the system of representing pedigrees by spirals, as
iS sometimes done in Germany, is a more serious disadvantage.
It will be noticed that the method of numbering and lettering
recommended not only makes it easy to refer to any individual
and the mate of any individual, but also shows to what generation such an individual belongs, and what is his or her place in
the sibship with respect to order of birth.

The feature in the scheme to which exception is most likely
to be taken is the representation of males and females by
squares and circles. In England this system is more of a
novelty, than elsewhere. It is already largely used in Germany
and America. Throughout the preparation of this scheme
the Committee has endeavoured not so much to invent the
ideally best method of drawing a pedigree as to select what
they considered best in the schemes which are widely in use at
the present time; and the squares and circles have only been
adopted in view of the fact that they are already often employed.
It must be remembered that the o’ and 9 symbols, though
388 EUGENICS REVIEW

familiar to biologists, are not known to those who have no
biological knowledge, and that, therefore, the squares and
circles will be no more unfamiliar to many of those whom work
in heredity and eugenics interests, than the above mentioned
symbols. The chief point in favour of the squares and circles
is that they are much clearer than the o‘ and @ signs. To
make the latter signs really clear, it is necessary to draw the
lines outside the circles of some size; and, if this is done, either
far more room will be occupied by these symbols than by the
symbols suggested, or the area of the circle will be restricted ;
it will be seen later the restriction of the circle is undesirable
since it forms part of the scheme to place letters within them
in order to indicate certain characteristics. It is this undoubted
gain in clearness which has induced the Committee to adopt
this feature.

The methods recommended for indicating particular
characteristics of individuals shown on the pedigree chart are
dealt with in sections III. and IV. The general idea is that
fairly definite conditions should be represented by letters
placed within the symbols in accordance with the schedule given
in [V(a). Where one particular characteristic is being investigated, as is the case with most pedigrees, then all those
individuals showing that characteristic are to be represented by
symbols fully blacked in. Let us suppose that the sample
pedigree given on page 390 deals with a family of alcoholics,
then the fully blacked in symbols represent the alcoholic
members of the stock; individuals exhibiting characteristics
which also come within the schedule in IV(a) are represented
by symbols containing letters indicating those characteristics
as is the case with regard to I26, II B3, and others. The
advantage of this system is that the individuals exhibiting the
characteristic which is especially under investigation are made
obvious with the first glance at the pedigree. Further in
accordance with paragraph IV(c) ample latitude is given to the
recorder to invent methods of indicating any other characters
which he may wish to be shown. But it is of the greatest
possible importance that the meaning of every symbol, including those given in the schedule, should be defined. In the
THE STANDARDIZATION OF PEDIGREES 389

case of alcoholism, for example, it must be clearly stated what
is meant by this very wide term. Again, it is useless to mark
certain individuals as blind without saying whether or not
blindness due to accident is included, and so on. Therefore,
whether the symbol used is one given in the schedule or if it is
one invented at the discretion of the recorder, it must above all
things be carefully defined.

Other points of interest about any individual can be
recorded in footnotes; to draw attention to those individuals
with reference to whom there is a note, a black dot is placed
below and to the left of the symbols representing them. It is
not desirable to overload the pedigree chart with details, but as
explained in section V certain particulars with reference to
the deaths of which something is known may be entered.

There are certain features of the scheme that are brought
out by the sample pedigree on page 390 II Ar is the eldest
member of the fraternity. In this case the recorder was certain
that one such individual existed but no further information was
available even as regards sex. In the case of III A2 the
recorder knew of two individuals coming last in order of birth
but similarly knew nothing else about them. It should be
noticed that the union between II Bq and II B48 is an
irregular one, and is therefore represented by a dotted line.
Both III B4 and IV A5 died in infancy, are represented by
symbols two-thirds the size of a normal symbol. II A3 and
II Aq are twins. The symbols representing II A3 and II Bag:
are partly blacked in according to two different methods to
represent some special feature. A key to those symbols is given
at the bottom of the page. The method of noting information
with regard to death is shown in the cases of III A3, IIT Ba,
and IV A2. Lastly, it will be observed that the husbands and
wives are placed alongside their mates on the same horizontal
level; according to some schemes they are placed at a lower
level; the latter method certainly gives somewhat increased
clearness, but the extra amount of space required has been
considered by the Committee as an argument against its
adoption.
Ee

EUGENICS REVIEW

dB Ye

 

i 2 3 6
Meol@A OC EE
d 45 LS. 56
A
i 2 3 4 Sh
@ O
diss

Descriptive Notes on I. 2.

, I. .
” , 28 Key to special symbols. a
99 99 II. B. 2. ‘ 5
3 23 99 .

99 9 III. A. 2.
9 9° III. B. 2. ” ” ” i)
93 393 IV. A. I.

A. M. Carr-SAUNDERS

M. GREENWOOD

E. J. LIDBETTER

E. H. J. SCHUSTER

A. F. TREDGOLD

(Members of the Research Committee ).
