EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE. 57

sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between
thine eyes; and thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy
house and upon thy gates.”’

DISCUSSION.

Rev. Crecit Grant wished to assert that there was one practicable
reform for which cumulative evidence of such strength was already
available, that it was the immediate duty of the Eugenics Education
Society to take adequate measures to investigate that evidence. He
could himself pile up such evidence from very numerous sources,
including an appeal to the strong statements made in the morning sitting
by Mr. Badley, after many years’ experience, and he could appeal to
the known opinions of several of the most eminent of the members of
the Eugenics Society. But instead, he would rest his case boldly on
his own experience. It was an experience of fifteen years of bringing
up together boys and girls, of ages ranging from 2 to 20. ‘Those years
of close observation and investigation left him as certain that the
mixture of sexes and ages was a prophylactic against carnal temptation,
as he was certain that vaccination was a prophylactic against smallpox.
He would say that co-education, of almost any kind, under conscientious
management, would diminish by one-half the number of those who
failed to go through life pure. That bringing up together, under
proper conditions, boys and girls would stamp out unchastity, save in
rare cases of abnormality. He would submit three considerations no
less relevant to this conference: (1) that such co-education made for
better marriages and better choice, as it was based upon better and
deeper knowledge. (2) That the co-education of boys and girls resulted
in a more equable development on all sides, and there was more certainty of discovering in what direction lay their special inheritance and
strength, and how that might best be employed in the service of
humanity. (3) That in a co-educative school, direct hygienic teaching
could be given with perfect security. Of course, it should be
given wisely, but it could be imparted with tact, and, after
some experience, with perfect security. Finally, he submitted that
co-education was confronted at the present by a danger which was
grave and wholly undeserved, and into which he had not now time to
enter. The sole hope of co-education having a fair trial in our day
and generation seemed to rest with the active and undelayed help
afforded by the Eugenics Education Society. He felt the full responsisibility of what he was saying, but was not just a personal statement of
that kind, deliberately made, standing by itself, sufficient to justify,
nay even to compel such a society to take immediate steps to investigate
this matter? That was his challenge. If he were in order in doing so,
he would move that a committee be formed for that purpose. He would
take the earliest opportunity of doing so, for he was convinced that
co-education was, after religion, the most powerful agency under
social control in the direction of improving the racial qualities in the
future, physically, mentally, and morally.

CoLONEL DE BurcH (Boy Scouts) said that the organisation which
he represented was heart and soul with the aims of the Eugenic Educa58 EUGENICS REVIEW.

tion Society; he was prepared, in their name, to back up most
strenuously the resolution which he noticed was to be submitted to the
gathering. The country was spending millions of money on education,
and many mote millions on punishing after we had educated ; therefore
it was reasonably inferred there must be something wrong with the
system of education. Such an idea was at the root of the Boy Scouts
movement. Knowing well scores of boys as he did, he would say most
emphatically that among the thousands of boys embraced in the movement the lapses which eventuated in punishment were invariably due
to outbursts of animalism of some kind. Therefore everything possible
should be done to oppose and counteract that tendency. But he confessed to some feeling of alarm when he heard differences of opinion
among teachers on the matter. Some were for pressing the matter to
an issue and teaching the subject to boys and girls; others favoured
leaving it alone. He implored the meeting to have done with talking
and have some doing. Let an appeal be made to public opinion, and
Parliament if necessary, to carry out what was the burden of Miss
Bonwick’s speech. They of the Boy Scouts recognised no distinction ;
they co-ordinated the education of the youth when he came under their
influence ; no difference was recognised between one kind of education
and another. It was found quite as easy to talk to a boy on honour—
to himself, to God, and to the King, as well as honour to a woman
because she was a woman—as upon courtesy and purity in thought,
word, and deed. There was no reason for making the subject of sex
hygiene special, and it could be co-ordinated with other items of
education. The boys with whom the movement dealt were those who had
left the charge of the teachers, and an attempt was made to help them
on in the best possible way. The boy had a right to kind treatment,
and to be told all that concerned his life and the best that he could
get out of it. He hoped it would. not be thought out of place if he
quoted the words of a right reverend Prelate, that a boy had a right to
be born into the world, and not to be damned into the world. That
was, however, what was happening through the withholding of this
information. Sometimes, in consequence of that, a boy would turn
round and curse one to one’s face. The only ground on which definite
progress could be made was on that of real religious purpose and love
for one’s brother. He was a parent himself, and he heartily agreed
that the parent should begin this instruction at home, and the sooner the
better. If the parent failed, and the teacher failed, then the youth
fell between two stools, and one saw no hope. But there were signs
that parents and teachers were awakening to their responsibilities in the
matter. The Boy Scout movement would be found to be strong
supporters of this crusade. When one looked at the clubs, it made one
ashamed to see how elder people regarded the question. How often
did one hear the remark that it was necessary for young men to sow
their wild oats! He knew no sentence in the whole of literature which
so reeked of sin and shame, misery, remorse and death and damnation
as did this, which was so flippantly bandied about in the clubs.

Mr. GraHamM (Medical Inspector of Schools) spoke in favour of
co-education. In his own work he felt very strongly the importance of
the hygienic side, to which the curative was subordinate. Until quite
EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE. 59

recently the only parent one saw at the school was the irate parent.
But since the establishment of medical inspection in schools the
proportion had gone up. Teachers had told him they were, for the
first time in their lives, having a chance of seeing and talking to the
parents. When he, and the school nurse, talked to the parents about
the subjects now being discussed, they smiled and said there was
nothing in it. Still, they persevered ; and then suddenly a nurse would
come back from a locality and report ‘‘ They are all doing it!’ Why?
One woman tried the instruction and found it a success, and told her
neighbours. His suggestion was to mark such instruction ‘‘ Not
Compulsory,’’ because compulsion never did any good ; moreover, even
the poorest person had a code of honour, to which an appeal could
always be made. He would have a sentence put into the Code in this
wise: ‘‘ Time will be allowed to the teachers to have a conference with
the parents with respect to their children in the school.’”? That was
what Miss Bonwick had been doing in her own school, and individual
medical inspectors had been doing the same thing. The eloquent lady
thought the medical inspector should have nothing to do with it, but
she forgot the post was only yet four years old, whereas codified
education came in in 1870, yet this particular education had been
delayed till now. The fault lay with four classes of people: the
parents, the teachers, the doctors, and Whitehall. The first necessity
was to get the parent educated more. He was much impressed by Miss
Bonwick’s speech, telling what she was doing in a slum school, though
he did not like the word ‘‘ slum,’’ as it was a misnomer, seeing that one
found people residing there with morals as good as those anywhere
else. The boys and girls of the poorer classes usually left school
at 13 or 14 years of age. He had had cases in which a son aged
21 or 22 did not fill up a form because he could not write. The young
men who went into the Army, and whom a Field-Marshall spoke of
sometime ago, had to be—in the true sense—re-educated. Was it
likely that if they had been mixed up in brawling at home and in the
streets since they left school that they were likely to remember any
eugenic lessons they might have been taught? It was difficult for him
to believe it; something more was wanted. There was plenty of
material, but it needed mobilising. Information could be obtained
from Scotland, where every school was a mixed one; and he knew that
the boys did a great deal to protect the girls, while the girls, on their
part, did a great deal to uphold the honour of the boys. There was
to be seen quite a nice spirit of camaradarie. He felt he must thank
Professor Thomson for his admirable address and especially for the
Scripture quotation. In conclusion, all his hearers had studied the
Jewish race; wherever they were found, in any town, were there such
mothers, were there such babies? Were there any other people who
stood so devotedly by their Creed?

Mr. GOLLeDGE (St. John’s School, Ealing) said he considered
eugenics could be taught in school without having it set out as a special
subject. One lady said it was the children; who must be looked to now.
His experience was that the parents, in very many cases, had not the time
to look properly after the children. Those who taught in day schools
had the children under care during more waking hours than did the
parents, and they should not bother about the parents in regard to
60 EUGENICS REVIEW.

teaching these subjects. He agreed with Professor Thomson that in
the senior classes all the boys should have definite talks about eugenics ;
when they left school the control over them had gone. The night
schools only claimed a small proportion of them. Boys and girls
should be taught responsibility, and some serious aim in life. Some
attempt should be made along these lines, and leave the asking of
permission until afterwards. Many things would fall through if
permission were waited for before commencing. He thought this society
should make some appeal to the Board of Education to allow the
subject to be included in the curriculum. The President had referred
to the influence of books; but the teaching of many books was on the
principle ‘‘ Get married and be happy ever after.’’ If that was the
great moral, why not teach children how to be happily married? Certainly the teaching of the possible bad effects of the marriage of
cousins should be taught, as had been suggested already. He knew of
a girl of unsound stock, who had been married, and became insane at
24 years of age. Surely such a tragedy would have been prevented if
elementary knowledge had been brought into play.

Mr. W. SawTELL (Uxbridge County School) said there were two
points touched on that afternoon which might well be concentrated upon
at the moment. The first of them was introduced by the Rev. Cecil
Grant on co-education, and the other was as to the necessity, or advisability, or possibility of correlating the subject about which so much
had been said in this conference with the ordinary school subjects. It was
obvious there must be great difficulty in introducing sex hygiene with
other subjects in such a school as Mr. Grant had described. He
would like to second the proposition which Mr. Grant submitted, that
the question of co-education should be taken up by a committee, and
be considered in its bearing on the subject of to-day. He said he was a
firm believer in co-education, and his own school was a co-education
school, in which he had tried, to the best of his powers, to deal with
the difficult question of sex hygiene. But he found it impossible to do
so in a mixed class. He could, he thought, claim to have dealt with it
successfully among the boys; and on two occasions he had the difficult
task of asking the senior mistress to deal with it in the case of the
girls. It had, however, been faithfully and surely done. The school
had been established 54 years, and in the first term he had to charge
his boys to keep out anything which was wrong, and impress upon them
their duty in respecting and honouring the other sex. He gathered
them together and spoke to them as a body, though he admitted the
individual method was the better if time could be found for it. The
opportunity was taken when the boys were engaged in other work, so
that there was no unusual or disturbing feature introduced ; and in the
case of the girls it was introduced while they were engaged in needlework. He had been greatly helped by Canon Lyttelton’s admirable
book on the training of the young. He gave them a straight talk, and
charged them never to discuss such subjects among themselves. He
vividly remembered the thrill with which he received their promise to
that effect, a promise which he had reason for believing was faithfully
kept. He also got their undertaking to stamp out anything of the sort
which might intrude itself on their future lives; and he insisted on
reverence for the other sex, especially as it was the one to which
EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE. 6:

belonged their sisters and mothers. He remembered the enthusiasm with
which the boys received the sentiment that anyone who betrayed women
or perpetuated the disgrace of women already ruined, should be, as the
Bishop of London said, horsewhipped. The eugenic ideal harmonised
with the communal sense of the sanctity of marriage; and one should
foster particularly chivalry and due reserve. And he placed before his
boys the idea that thinking of these things apart from the true pure
love was, in the sight of God and of right-thinking men, hateful. Much
had been said in this debate about marriage; but what of those who
remained unmarried? It was very important to try to teach the youth
in the schools how they might continue living a pure and good life,
even though they might never be married. He quite agreed that these
matters should be treated scientifically, but at the same time, the
religious feeling should have a definite place, for only in that way would
their charges, ag well as themselves, ‘‘ be delivered from the adversities
which may happen to the body, and from all evil thoughts which may
assault and hurt the soul.’’

THE PRESIDENT said he would like, at this stage, to refer to the
suggested resolution which was alluded to by Mr. Grant. He thought
it was a good rule that no resolution should be moved at this meeting
of which due notice had not been given beforehand ; and he hoped Mr.
Sawtell and Mr. Grant would feel satisfied with the assurance that the
Eugenics Education Society would look into this question. If the
intended resolution should be carried, there would be an opportunity
of placing the idea before the Minister of Education.

Mr. Macnutt (Clarence School) said that schoolmasters would agree
that, in dealing with his boys, there were two important things: (1)
Curiosity, when once aroused, must be satisfied, at whatever cost. (2)
Whether dealing individually or collectively, whatever was said must
be raised to the highest possible pitch. The boy must be shown that if he
wished to attain success and distinction in the physical world, whether
in games or otherwise, he must abstain from the vices which had been
spoken of. That was sound for strong-willed boys, but all had not
the strength of will of a Kitchener. With the weak-willed the one thing
to do was to point persistently to the example of One who was
‘*tempted like as we are, yet without sin,’? and to remind the boy of
those beautiful words ‘‘ Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall
see God.’’

Mr. G. Lewis (Headmaster, Torreano Avenue School) said that
it was impossible for boys to go about the streets without seeing indecent
things ; and even if they had not seen them, other children would tell
them about it. Hence it was better that they should have information
properly given them before they arrived at 14 years of age. Some said
parents should give this teaching, but most of those who gave such
advice were not themselves parents. Those who were parents would
recognise the difficulty, even if they properly knew the facts, of giving
instruction in them to their children. He would rather speak to a dozen
school boys on the subject than to his own. It had been said there
were no mixed schools in England, except those of higher grade; but
there were 150 mixed schools in London alone, not any of them of
higher grade. He had been in charge of a mixed school for two years,
and his experience had been that the cases of indecency had now
62 EUGENICS REVIEW.

disappeared, except some slight sign from a boy who came from outside.
There was a question whether the paraphenalia in connection with mixed
schools did not mean wastage, but from the moral standpoint, he
thought mixed schools were best.

Miss Broome, referring to the statement that the schools in
Scotland were mixed, and that morality was higher in schools which
had the sexes mixed, asked whether the morality of Scotland was higher
than that of England. If not, she did not see why mixed schools should
be urged. In America they had had them for years, and were now
trying to get rid of them.

Miss Low asked whether Professor Arthur Thomson, when he said
he wished for no coercion, meant that, should the intended resolution
be passed, he was in favour of the Board of Education demanding that
this instruction should be given in the schools? That seemed to her to
be inconsistent.

ProFessor THOMSON replied that he did not think any teacher
should be compelled to go at all far against his or her own will in the
direction of sex education. In his paper he indicated a series of
gradations, any one step of which would be in a positive direction.
With regard to the question concerning the morals of Scotland, he
would merely say that in spite of the great advances which had been
made in the science of anthropometry, there had not yet been devised
any instrument by which to gauge the relative morality of the citizens
of various nations.

Tue PreEsIpENT: In bringing this interesting discussion to a close
I shall not attempt to make a definite summary of the proceedings,
‘because, in order to do so, one ought to study in detail all the speeches
which have been made, and all the valuable suggestions they contain.
No doubt, during this discussion, a good deal more has been said on
the question of sex hygiene than on the question of eugenics (hear, hear).
A good many of the speakers have even yet hardly recognized that
these are two very distinct subjects. Sex hygiene deals rather with the
present, and therefore is a subject of enormous importance to those who
are now being brought up in our schools in order to safely face the
dangers of the world. Eugenics deals with future generations, and its
aim is to ensure that our descendants, in times to come, shall have
better bodies, better minds, and better morals, than we have. The
contrast between sex hygiene and eugenics is somewhat analogous to the
contrast so often made between environment and heredity. We eugenists
are in no way opposed to all the many reforms which are directed to
improving the environment of the people; we give them the utmost
sympathy, and we wish them every success. But we do feel—and, if
I may say so with due respect to the speakers of to-day, it has not
been here shown that we are wrong—that those who have not studied
eugenics do not realize what an enormously important factor heredity
is in the progress of the world. Those who will take the trouble to
read any of the leading works dealing with eugenics, will, I am sure,
come to the conclusion that, besides looking to environment, we have the
paramount duty thrown on us of attending to heredity, so that each
generation may be better than the preceding one, and the man of the
future better than the man of to-day. Surely this is a noble ideal ever
to be kept fresh and effective in our own minds, and to be planted without
EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE. 63

fear in the minds of our children! Without attempting to summarize
the discussion, I may, however, point out that there are a few points on
which we are all in accord. In the first place, sex hygiene and eugenics
taken together form a subject of immense difficulty of enormous
importance to the nation, and one to be taught with the greatest
circumspection and the greatest care. Then, again, there seems to be a
general agreement that this matter has to be treated differently in the
different classes of schools, and under different circumstances; and,
all of us agree that, where the parents can do so, this matter should
be taken in hand by them; for they are the people who can do it
best. But the parents themselves want educating as much as anybody. Lastly, I think I shall find myself in accord with nearly all
in this room when I state that we ought not and we cannot stand
still ; we cannot remain where we are now in this matter of sex hygiene
and eugenics. We must move forward, even if we take some risks in
doing so. There was hardly a speaker who did not say something
against the present system. We had one or two who threw a little cold
water on some of the proposals made; but even they in every instance
implied that something ought to be done, and that we ought not to be
satisfied with the existing condition of things. If that is the case, what
is our next step? It seems to me that the next step obviously is, to
endeavour to ensure that the enquiry which we have commenced to-day
shall be continued ; and with this object in view, I suggest that a deputation should approach the Government with the request that this matter
may be investigated in a thorough and systematic way, in a way in which
a public meeting like this cannot possibly hope to deal with it. If the
resolution which I am about to propose is passed, J think it must be
left in the hands of the Committee who organized this meeting to
nominate that deputation. I hope no objection will be raised to that ;
and I assure you if it is left in our hands we will see that different
views are represented, and that no one special type of opinion is alone
put forward. No doubt there are differences amongst us; there always
must be in a progressive movement, for it is only out of differences that
the truth can come. But we must all agree that this is a question
necessitating further enquiry. Finally, if a deputation should go to
the Minister of Education, it is obvious that it will not go there from
this meeting with any mandate to express any particular views; it will
only go with the request that this enquiry should be continued with
the object of ensuring that we do not stop still where we now are.

The resolution I intend to propose is as follows :—

That the Minister of Education be asked to receive a deputation requesting an enquiry as to the advisability of encouraging the
presentation of the idea of racial responsibility to students in
training, and children at school.

Mr. Mortimer (National Association of Head Teachers) said he
had much pleasure in seconding the resolution which the President
submitted. Had he been asked to do so when he first entered the room
he would have hesitated about it, but the speeches he had heard had
thoroughly educated him up to the point at which he had now arrived.
He hoped it would be carried unanimously.

A delegate asked the President to accept an amendment to add
after the word ‘‘schools ’’ the words ‘‘ other than elementary.’’ He
64 EUGENICS REVIEW.

had talked the matter over with colleagues, and it was futile to go to
the Minister of Education to ask that eugenics should be introduced
into the primary schools. All the advocates of to-day were from
secondary, county, and high schools.

Another delegate seconded the amendment, and spoke in support of
the President’s remark that the issue had been confused in the speeches ;
sex hygiene had been discussed, not eugenics.

Miss Low pointed out that those who knew the methods of the
Board of Education would agree that once a matter of this kind was
put into form, there would be no escape. Already there were most
deplorable results from the Montessori method of teaching, and the
position would be intolerable if this subject were to be made compulsory.
The meeting had revealed the greatest conflict of opinion, and statements had been positively made by persons possessing not a tithe of the
knowledge of the greatest educationalist in Europe, Professor Freud,
who insisted that one had not to train the child, but to follow whither
the child led.

THE PRESIDENT pointed out that the resolution was only a request
for an enquiry. It would be best to treat educational matters as a
whole, and they would stand or fall by the resolution as originally
submitted.

The seconder of the amendment said he wished to offer it, in the
name of the National Union of Teachers, the strongest opposition, and
there would probably be, should the resolution be passed, a feeling
against it at the Board of Education. He did not wish to prevent the
passage of the resolution if the teachers present wished to pass it.

A delegate pointed out that children left the elementary schools at
too early an age for such a subject to be taught, and there were not the
same opportunities as in secondary and high schools. He did not wish
to hinder the teaching of sex hygiene in schools, but he warned the
meeting that this resolution would meet with strong opposition from
elementary teachers in the country. |

A delegate asked whether the resolution could be made to apply
only to teachers in training.

Mr. Mortimer, defending his action, said he could not understand his friends opposing a request for an enquiry, especially as the
subject was bound to have a beneficial effect wherever taught.

The resolution was then put, and carried by a large majority.

Mr. Kimmins proposed that the hearty thanks of the meeting be
accorded to Major Darwin for so kindly presiding, and to those who
had read such charming papers arid contributed to the discussion. He
desired to congratulate the Education Committee of the Society on the
admirable selection of readers of papers. A vast number of people
were taking a keen interest in this question, and he thought there was a
tendency to exaggerate the difficulties attendant on teaching it. Miss
Bonwick’s speech he regarded as of the greatest possible value.
Herbert Spencer said that children in schools were educated for all
professions except the noblest in the world, namely, that of parenthood.
It was a pleasure to see that the Eugenics Education Society was trying
to remove that reproach.

Carried by acclamation.

Tue PresipEnt having expressed his thanks, the meeting adjourned.
THE DEPUTATION.

THE Conference Committee, in conjunction with the Council of the
Eugenics Education Society, approached the Board of Education with a
request that the Minister should receive a deputation. The Minister of
Education requested Mr. Trevelyan, M.P., to represent him and receive
the deputation at noon on Wednesday, April 2nd, at the Board of Education Offices, Whitehall. Owing to the date fixed coming in the middle
of the Easter vacation, several of those who would otherwise have attended
were unavoidably prevented. Bishop Welldon, President of the Manchester Eugenics Education Society, was accidentally detained at the last
moment.

The members of the deputation were :—Major L. Darwin, President
of the Eugenics Education Society; the Very Rev. Dr. Inge, Dean of St.
Paul’s; the Rev. and Hon. Edward Lyttelton, Headmaster of Eton; Mr.
Nicholls, ex-President of the National Union of Teachers; Miss Tuke,
Principal of Bedford College, University of London; Mr. Russell, Headmaster of the King Alfred School; Mrs. Chambers, Hon. Secretary of the
Education Committee; Miss Bonwick, Headmistress of the Enfield Road
School; Mrs. Gotto, Hon. Secretary of the Eugenics Education Society.

MAJOR DARWIN, in introducing the deputation, gave a brief account of
the conference and of the motives which had actuated the Society in organising it, and emphasised the need for a general forward movement.
He indicated clearly that sex-hygiene and eugenics were two different subjects, but that the former might prove a useful foundation for the latter.
Though, in the opinion of some, eugenics could be taught without sexhygiene, he maintained that sex-hygiene should not be taught without a
recognition of the eugenic ideal. He urged the Board to give the matter
their earnest attention, and to consider whether it would not be possible to
introduce the subject into the training colleges.

Dr. LYTTELTON pointed out the danger of an increase of immorality
among school children, and urged that such a tendency would have serious
eugenic results. In connection with this subject, he called attention to
the decline of the feeling of parental responsibility. As a practical
measure he advocated the appointment of an itinerant lecturer to the
training colleges, suggesting that adequately instructed teachers could
act as missionaries to the parents and so educate public opinion.

Mr. NICHOLLS, representing the National Union of Teachers, deprecated any effort to include either eugenics or sex-hygiene in the code of
the elementary schools. He announced that both he himself and the Association were in full sympathy with the eugenic ideal, and agreed that its
introduction into training colleges was an urgent necessity. He suggested that teachers should be put in a better position to influence the
homes than they now occupy.

Miss TUKE considered the introduction of sex-hygiene and eugenics
into training colleges from two points of view: (a) the instruction of the
student with reference to her general equipment as a teacher; (5) as a subject for direct introduction into schools in which they should be instructed
for the purpose of teaching. She advocated the former method, and
indicated how it might be done.

Miss BONWICK gave an account of her own experience in approaching
piven and giving indirect eugenic and sex-hygiene teaching in her own
school.

As the deputation was of a private character, the full account of the
proceedings cannot be given. In his reply, Mr. Trevelyan expressed his
sympathy with the general objects which the deputation had put before
him. He said that while it was out of the question, as the deputation
recognised, for the Board of Education to make sex-hygiene or eugenics
compulsory subjects of instruction in public elementary schools or in
training colleges, they had no wish to discourage any experiments in
teaching on these lines. The Board recognised the importance of the
matter referred to, and would consider carefully the representations made
by the deputation.
