THE

EUGENICS REVIEW

THE RELATION OF EUGENICS TO OTHER
SCIENCES.

By Harry H. LAuGHtin, D.Sc.,
Eugenics Record Office, Cold Spring Harbour, Long Island, New York.

EUGENICS is a newly-organised science made into an effective and harmonious unit for studying and directing race-fortunes, by co-ordinating
and utilising the facts and forces of heredity, individual and social conduct,
vocational and educational fitting, anthropology, law, psychology, psychiatry,
institutional control, migration, mate-selection, differential fecundity and
survival, biography, genealogy, and history. Within the last decade the
work of this new science has so advanced that its future is now secure.
Eugenics has two lines of endeavour ; first, the negative—the cacogenic,
the dysgenic, or the restrictive—which seeks to cut off the descent-lines of
those individuals who are so meagrely or defectively endowed by nature
that their offspring are bound to be anti-social, or at least unable to care
for themselves, and who consequently entail a drag upon the more effective
members of society. Darwin states that the greatest step in man’s evolution came when he ceased to be guided by instinct and took to his intellect
the task of determining his own conduct. The conscious striving for racebetterment on the part of the socially inadequate is impossible; eugenical
appeal to them is fruitless. Therefore, society must control their reproduction. The building up of a great family-history archive for the whole body
of the socially inadequate of a nation is the first great pressing duty of this
aspect of eugenical work, for only by applying such knowledge can organised
society, through its laws and institutions, act intelligently in exercising this
much-needed control. Hence the necessity of close association between the
investigators in eugenics and institutions—both public and private, custodial and field— for all classes of the socially inadequate, namely: (1) The
feeble-minded ; (2) the insane; (3) the criminalistic (including the delinquent and wayward); (4) the epileptic; (5) the inebriate (including drughabitués); (6) the diseased (including the tuberculous, the syphilitic, the
leprous, and others with chronic infectious and legally segregable diseases) ;
(7) the blind (including those with seriously impaired sight); (8) the deaf
(including those with seriously impaired hearing) ; (9) the deformed (including the crippled) ; and (10) the dependent (including orphans, ne’er-do-wells,
homeless, tramps, and paupets), in so far as their inadequacies and handicaps have an heritable basis.. Charity and social service organisations of
all types must be led to co-operate with the custodial institutions and
eugenical research enterprises in the task of building and keeping up to
date a national pedigree-archive of the socially unadapted strains within
54 EUGENICS REVIEW.

our population. Finally, the law, by limiting marriage and by providing
for the segregation or asexualisation of those individuals proven by scientific study to be potential parents within the eugenical ban, must give
practical effect to the nation’s ideals of good human stock.

In America, one of the principal services of the Eugenics Record Office
has been in training field-workers in the principles and practice of gathering at first hand the pedigrees of socially inadequate folk. These pedigrees,
or family-history studies, as they are called, differ from the ordinary
genealogy in that the latter is largely a record of names, dates, and connections, while the family-history study is a biological enterprise. The
natural traits secured by first-hand measurement, and as reflected in the
reaction of the individual to his environment, are analysed and recorded. The
prime purpose of such studies from the eugenical point of view is to secure
data which will enable the student of eugenics to evaluate the hereditary
potentialities of the individual members of the family described. From the
institutional point of view the histories are exceedingly valuable in that they
throw light upon the diagnosis and prognosis of the individual custodial
case. They also secure many data valuable for parole and after-care
officers to have in hand. In fact, the combining of eugenical field-study
with after-care and parole work has worked out very successfully in many
places. The Eugenics Record Office has encouraged practical field-studies
by training a field-worker and lending such person to an institution
desirous of making the experiment as to the value of eugenical field-studies.
After a year of work on this joint basis, the field-workers of this office are
withdrawn and sent as missionaries, as it were, to other institutions while
the institutions which have had the introductory experience, as a rule,
instal the business of gathering biological pedigree-material as a part of
their regular institutional duties. This work bids fair to become universal
in progressive institutions, and is very encouraging to the eugenicist.

The second phase of eugenics is the positive—the constructive, aristogenic, or eugenics-proper phase—which has for its means the securing of
high fertility and fittest matings among the more talented families. It
seeks thereby not only the breeding of leaders in specific lines of human
endeavour, and the raising of the general level of intelligence, health, and
energy, but also the conservation amd further specialisation of races and
family-strains. The working out of the positive aspect of eugenics, both in
supplying data for pure scientific study, and in its application to life, is,
and will doubtless continue, largely a matter of eugenical education of the
families concerned. The intelligent classes can and must take their own
evolution in hand.

Doubtless one reason why the prohibition movement has made such
rapid culminating progress in America in the last few years is because
a generation ago laws were enacted requiring that the effect of alcohol
upon the human system be taught in the public schools. The children
who had these lessons are now the men of affairs. If the eugenical ideal
becomes established in the educational system of the country, we may
expect that many thousands of our better families will, within two decades,
establish family-archives on a biological or true pedigree-basis. We may
expect, further, that the eugenical factor in the form of a knowledge of
heredity will unconsciously, as well as consciously, guide mate-selection
THE RELATION OF EUGENICS TO OTHER SCIENCES. 55

to a very considerable degree. Furthermore, an enhanced sense of the
responsibilities of parenthood will be one of the results of the knowledge of
the manner of the transmission of human mental, physical, and moral
qualities.

In eugenics the association between its purely scientific phase and its
practical application is particularly close. For the investigator, eugenics
presents in the field of pure science the usual beauty of mathematical
form and theory, but apart from this its practical application as an agency
for human betterment is the compelling thing. The breeding of the
human animal is a slow and expensive process, but every marriage is an
eugenical experiment, exactly as if made solely for the purpose of securing data. But in order to secure these data the closest co-operation must
be had between the scientific investigator and the family whose welfare is
so closely bound up in the facts desired by the student. Such co-operation
between the student and the social unit primarily concerned with his
studies 1s growing in a very satisfactory manner.

Eugenics, by a demonstration of the validity and usefulness of its
newly-discovered principles and by its selection and organisation of existing knowledge, has become a branch of science which now functions as a
unit, and has therefore its own principles, problems, character, and aspirations. Since every science has a definite set of articulations within the
existing body of organised knowledge, it is fitting now for this new body
of knowledge to take stock of its possibilities in serving and of being
served by the various realms of human thought and action. The student
of eugenics thus seeking finds the following elements in his science :—

1. Genetics.

(a) Rules of heredity of specific traits in man.

(6) Practical application of the science of heredity and the
tules of breeding to race improvement. Theoretical basis for
cutting off undesirable strains and for selecting desirable mates
among the eugenically fit.

2. Genealogy.

(2) History and description of family-archives.

(6) Extension of family-tree study to include more traitdescription data.

3. Biography.

(a) Interpreting an individual’s personality and in early youth
predicting possibilities and achievements on the basis of pedigree,
equally important with opportunity.

4. Anthropology and ethnology.

(2) Anthropometry.

(6) Personal identification.

(c) Origin, culmination and decay of races.

(2) Physical, mental, and temperamental racial qualities.

(e) Studies im race-mixtures.

(7) Causes, records, and eugenical aspect of migration.

(g) War and the race.

(zk) Appearance and preservation of genius.

(z) Conscious racial betterment.
56

EUGENICS REVIEW.

5. History and archzology.

(a) Interpreting hispory on the basis of human conduct as
governed by the hereditary traits of the actors.

(4) Cultural origins and vicissitudes in relation to specific
natural human capacities.

(c) Influence of great men.

(2) History of eugenical factors.

6. Law and politics,

(2) Practical eugenical legislation—the eugenical code.

(6) Laws controlling marriage and divorce.

(c) Asexualisation laws.

(2) Legal control of the insane and defective.

(e) Immigration laws.

(f) Legal aspects of eugenical remedies, 7.¢e., the range and
limits of the State’s power to control human reproduction.

(g) Statesmanship—conserving national efficiency. |

7. Economics.

(a) Relation between production, exchange, distribution, and
consumption of wealth on the one hand, and hereditary traits and
racial fortunes on the other.

(6) Over population.

(c) Differential tax and subsidy treatment of parenthood and
sterility.

8. Statistics.

(a) Demographic records and analysis of racial conditions and
movements.

(6) Biometrical analysis of eugenical data.

(c) Census schedule made genealogical and anthropological.

(2) Birth, marriage, and death registration.

g. Sociology.

(2) Family and tribal organisation.

(6) What determines mate selection ?

(c) The marriage mores.

(2d) Polygamy and polyandry.

(e) Illegitimacy.

(f) Social control of differential fecundity.

(g) Social control of differential survival.

(2) Baby shows. .

() Establishing the family pedigree-archive custom.

(7) Criminology.

(2) Social treatment of the socially inadequate.

(1) Institutional control and management.
(2) Charity organisations,
(2) Standards of social adequacy.
(m) Social welfare movements.
10. Medicine and surgery.

(2) Anatomy.

(6) Physiology.

(c) Psychiatry.

(2) Hereditary diatheses.
THE RELATION OF EUGENICS TO OTHER SCIENCES. 57

(e) Hereditary deformities.
(f) Hereditary malfunction.
(g) Hygiene.
(1) General.
(2) Sex.
(3) Mental.
(2) Embryology.
(2) Gynecology.
(7) Determination of sexual] fertility.
(4) Treatment of sexual sterility.
(2) Artificial impregnation.
(m) Birth control.
(x) Sexual sterilising operations. Types: Surgical, therapeutic and physiological aspects.
11. Psychology.
(a) Comparative.
(6) Educational.
(¢) Vocational.
(zd) Mental, emotional, and volitional measurements.
(e) Character analysis.
12. Education.
(a) Profitable type of education determined by “pedigree and
juvenile promise.” |
(6) Promotions and entrance requirements based upon psychological tests as well as upon facts learned.
(c) National welfare, promoted by teaching eugenics in
schools. .
13. Religion.
(a) Relation between tribal and national aspirations and
religions and hereditary traits.
(6) Practical application of eugenics by the church.
(1) Influencing mate selection.
(2) Attitude toward fecundity.
By no means an exhaustive treatment, but an examination of some of
the salient features of each of these fields of eugenical activity follows :—
1. Genetics.—Genetics plays such an important part in eugenics that
the latter science is sometimes called the genetics of man. Eugenics is, of
course, much broader than that, but the expression serves to emphasise
the genetic factor. The determination of the facts of human heredity
must be assiduously sought at all times. All of the secrets of this problem
will, perhaps, never be known, but just now human genetics is a healthy
infant, and therefore promising of great growth. Granted that the chromosome-theory of heredity holds good and that there are 12 (haploid number)
chromosomes in man, there is one task in this potential field that deserves
special attention, because its consummation is at present both needed and
possible to achieve. Briefly, it is to map out roughly the human germplasm, that is, to chart the linear geography of the 12 chromosomes in
much the same manner as the Morgan group of investigators have charted
the four chromosomes of Drosophila. If the parallelism holds good, we
should expect 12 linkage-groups of unit-traits in man. This particular
58 EUGENICS REVIEW.

problem might profitably be attacked in this manner: Prepare recordcards as follows: Prepare a tabulating-machine card for each individual,
punched according to a code describing the family-connections and the
physical, mental, and temperamental qualities of the individual, with
pethaps 250 descriptive items for each individual. These cards should be
made out especially for the F,-generation, in pedigrees involving diverse
characters in the P -generation. A great many cards—say 50,000—should
be prepared. Then they should be sorted for correlations. If it were
found that there were 12 natural groups of traits, quite logically we could
conclude that each of these 12 trait-groups grew out of one of the
12 chromosomes, so far as the somatic aspects of the traits listed are
determined by chromatin. But which specific trait-group and which specific
chromosome we would not yet know. “Crossing-over” and the use of
cards for individuals descended from two parents, both of whom are not
heterozygous for the trait recorded, would complicate, but would not
destroy the possibility of a solution. We could, however, speak of a given
gene as lying in chromosome a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, or 1. The value
of such knowledge in predicting genetic behaviour of a number of traits
bound up in a given personality is obvious. The problem of just how
a characteristic or trait described on the individual analysis-card would
affect the correlation study, if such trait were a somatic complex of two
genes lying in separate chromosomes, must be clarified. Further analysis
of special cases would be expected to demonstrate the correlation between
a given trait-group and a given chromosome, and to locate the gene in
the chromosome.

But this is only a single problem. The collecting of pedigrees of
specific qualities, covering the whole range of human structure, physiology
and psychology must continue with a view to separating the factors of
heredity and environment, to analysing complex somatic aspects into
unit traits, and thus to add definite facts to the body of known rules
governing human heredity. In the race for knowledge, human genetics
must run at least abreast with plant and animal heredity-studies. As the
better human families establish their much-urged pedigree-archives,
eugenics must, to do its share, be able to analyse them to a degree of
refinement equal to the nicety of distinction made by the compilers in
their studies. It must be able to say, “In reference to this specific trait,
a child of this particular mating will, by a chance of a to b, possess this
trait to such and such a degree, and as a parent his potentiality to pass
it on will be thus and so.”

Analysis and summary of facts concerning the biological forces at
work for and against race betterment call for an increasing attention on
the part of eugenics. Such studies supply the mass-data so useful in judging the tendencies, the rates of action, and the end-product of the forces
which the eugenicist spends so much of his time in analysing.

2. Genealogy.—Genealogies and biographies have existed since civilisation began. At present the genealogist strives to work out the familynetwork, giving the names, dates, and connections. He is often content
to stop there. The task of eugenics is to prevail upon all of these workers
to strive to provide a description of the natural, physical, mental, and
temperamental qualities of each member listed in the net-work. When
THE RELATION OF EUGENICS TO OTHER SCIENCES. 59

this is done, the genealogist supplies a record of practical pedigree-value,
one which can be used in tracing the descent and re-combination of natural
qualities within the family-tree.

3. Biography.—The history of mankind is equivalent to the biographies
of all of its human units. The different weights that different men have
supplied in making history is so vast that we often shorten the statement
by saying that “the history of the race is the biographies of its great
men.” The eugenicist has the task of convincing the writer of biographies
that one of his principal duties in the description of the life of his subject
is to resolve the factors of nature and nurture—to evaluate the effect of
specific hereditary traits in making the human machine that turned out
the specific product which he is describing as a life’s contribution to history.

4. Anthropology and Ethnology.—To anthropology eugenics contributes a better instrument than the general science of man has heretofore
wielded in analysing the manner of the segregation, transmission, and recombination of hhereditary or racial traits, which traits comprise the
materials with which the anthropologist works, and the character of which
tralts constitutes the most fundamental basis of racial fortune. From the
older science of man eugenics draws records of gigantic eugenical experiments, involving new complexes, racial origins, developments, fusions,
selection, type-establishing, racial culmination, decay, and extinction, in
each case guided by the environment, needs, and prowess of the peoples
concerned. With the arrival of eugenics, the guidance becomes self-controlled, and the far-sighted tribe or nation may mow, if it will, control its
own evolution and destiny much more surely than heretofore.

Determining the forces governing the formation of races, tracing
their vicissitudes and describing their bodies and conduct, constitute the
tasks of the ethnologist and the anthropologist. More closely than any
other field enumerated in this list, these sciences are allied to pure
eugenical research. The ethnologist and the anthropologist study traits.
They furnish materials for eugenical study. In this study of hybrid races
eugenics, by its knowledge of heredity, aids ethnology in attacking many
of its problems of racial origins. In turn, the eugenicist finds the study of
anthropology and ethnology occupying a continuously greater proportion
of his interests. Eugenics is concerned with the improvement, diversifying and fixing of natural trait-complexes in families. It must in last
analysis deal with (@) the social, economic, and biological forces that
control mate-selection and fecundity, (4) the determination of the hereditary
make-up of an individual, and (c) the rules which determine the nature of
the offspring of given matings.

5. History and Archzology.—The historian, whose business is to lump
and synthesise and classify biographies to the extent that all names except
the most famous are lost sight of, must learn that the differences in the
human machines he is dealing with have made the thing which he calls
history read as it does. The student of history, reading his text-books, if
he has a proper foundation in eugenical training, will learn to interpret
the facts of his science in accordance with principles of truth more elementary than those he has currently used. Not only is the interpretation of
written history subject to this treatment, but especially are the facts of prehistory, as the archeologist brings them forth, capable of the clearest
60 EUGENICS REVIEW.

understanding only when we keep continually in mind What type of man
did this or that?—-What were his hereditary qualities?’—-What were his
talents, his likes, his dislikes, and his weaknesses?

History finds in eugenics an improved scheme of interpretation. In
short, the eugenical formula for this work is: A nation’s conduct, and
therefore its history, is the resultant of inborn traits of its own people,
as they react to and are acted upon, from generation to generation, by the
environment in which they live.

6. Law and Politics.—While the relation between law and politics, on
the one hand, and eugenics on the other, is largely the service which
eugenics expects from legal procedure, still in turn a service will be rendered to the legal and political systems of the country by a eugenical ideal
well established. In the field of criminal law, for instance, the analysis
of personality which eugenical pedigree-studies present, will give the law
a new viewpoint for governing its treatment of criminals, especially so far
as placing blame and responsibility and in attempting social salvage are
concerned. In the political field eugenics may be expected to develop a
higher idea for the patriotic outlook of the nation. As a rule, a nation feels
a general sentimental solicitude for the unborn generations, but when a
people learn that they can so attack the problems of human reproduction
that the future generations, so far as their innate traits are concerned,
will be improvements over the present, a higher and finer sentiment will
animate our political philosophy.

An ideal once established in a nation affects activities along many
lines. The Eugenics Record Office often receives letters from persons who
ask for the outline for a “model eugenic law.” We must understand that
the eugenical ideal cannot be wrought by a single so-called “eugenical
Statute,” but that it will affect legislation in many fields. Indeed, it will
be hard to conceive of any important national or state legislation as having
been duly considered unless, no matter what the particular subject may be,
its eugenical bearing be duly weighed. For instance, a law which relates
to taxes and renders treatment differential between parenthood and sterility
has its eugenical bearing. By the birth- and death-registration laws data
on differential fecundity and survival are provided. In laws governing
marriage and divorce the eugenical principle is more directly concerned.
In laws having for their purpose permanent commitment of the socially
inadequate to custodial institutions, or their sexual sterilisation, if at large,
are perhaps the most intimately eugeriical subjects for legislation. It is
thus probable that ultimately we may expect in all states, not a “eugenic
law,” whatever this may mean, but a eugenical code, comparable in its
far-reaching activities, for example, to the body of sanitary laws.

7. Economics.—The extension of commerce to the whole world makes
world-wide eugenics necessary, and, fortunately, possible. The increase
of efficiency in the production of wealth enables the world to hold many
more people. Modern medicine saves many more to maturity. Ultimately
the world will probably tend to become over-populated. Eugenical ideas
will enter into our national habits, to the end that our laws and religions
will demand and secure fit matings and more children from the most
effective types, and will establish a differential against the right and
ability of the socially less valuable to bear children, until those strains
THE RELATION OF EUGENICS TO OTHER SCIENCES. 61

most incompetent and suffering under the greatest natural handicap will
be forbidden to breed at all. The restriction of population on an economic
basis, unguided by eugenics, spells racial decay, but if directed by
biological principles, even though the pressure to action be economic,
restriction is a means of race-betterment.

For a country like America, which will doubtless again become
attractive to immigrants from all lands—although the prophets are
at war, some predicting immigrants by millions and some picturing us
begging for them after definitive peace—our immediate sanitary, political,
and economic welfare must be guarded, but also the eugenical dictum,
“Admit no immigrant who is a potential parent, whose kind we are unwilling to have grow into a large portion of our future population,” should
permeate every immigration statute and ruling. Practically, there is no
bigger task for national eugenics than to educate the people up to demanding this. Present economic forces should be willing and anxious to
co-operate with eugenics in determining a nation’s immigration: policy.

In normal.times the production of wealth is proportional to the natural
resources of the land and the available man-power. The unit of the latter
is largely a matter of national traits with which eugenics is so largely concerned. Law, government, education, commerce, and other forces interlock in determining a nation’s prosperity, but the most fundamental] factor
is the quality of the blood of the people.

In the matter of cost of social handicap, both directly to the state in
charities and institutions, and indirectly in personal ineffectiveness among
the people at large, the economist reckons jointly with the eugenicist.

8. Statistics.—Thus far the work of the United States Bureau of the
Census has been confined largely to the enumeration of individuals, and
the tabulation of wealth and its distribution. However, some special studies
have been made upon institutional population and upon the blind and the
deaf, as well as upon the insane, but this analytical work has not gone far
enough. One thing which is a pressing duty of eugenicists is to insist that
future censuses, both national and state, make serious efforts to evaluate
the social adequacy of the individuals whom they count, and to make
records of the family relationships. This involves social, and oftentimes
medical and anthropological diagnosis and classifications, but the economic,
social, and eugenical value of such work will many times repay the cost
involved in training a body of expert diagnosticians and of maintaining
them permanently on the staff of the Bureau of the Census.

Biometrical analyses of eugenical data are certain to yield more facts
of both theoretical and practical value than the usual unanalytical tabulations and summaries which characterise so many of our demographic
studies. As rapidly as they are developed, biometrical methods should be
applied to studies in human heredity and human conditions.

9. Sociology.—There is a tendency on the part of sociologists to
ascribe practically all of the factors of human destiny to matters of
environment. On the other extreme we cannot, of course, ascribe everything to heredity. The great problem now, as always, is to make a true
analysis of human reactions, ascribing to environment its true forces, and
to hereditary qualities which react to environment their due weight. No
headway can be made in claiming undue weight, either by biology or
eugenics, for heredity, or by sociology or euthenics for environment.
62 EUGENICS REVIEW.

The whole group of our national mores must eventually take cognisance of the facts of heredity in determining human possibilities. People
generally will demand that society be organised and managed so that
the fullest opportunities for fit matings be realised, and that natural talent
be given. fuller play.

The organisation of eugenic associations and clubs is to be encouraged.
The application to eugenical purposes of some of the efforts of existing
general community-betterment organisations is a force which should be
made use of by those concerned in the promotion of the general welfare.
There are many clubs and organisations in all parts of the country
that are anxious to do something altruistic. Many of these are looking
toward eugenics, indeed, some of them have become active collaborators
with the Eugenics Record Office in prevailing ypon their individual
members to direct their family-history studies along eugenical lines; others
are influencing the social activities of the community in the treatment of
the socially inadequate. This is a fruitful field for further efforts on the
part of eugenics. Especially promising appears to be co-operation with
patriotic societies, such as the Daughters of the American Revolution,
Daughters of the Confederacy, Colonial Dames, and Sons of Confederate
Veterans. These organisations are interested in the blood of the nation.

10. Medicine and Surgery.—The relationship between eugenics and
the medical] sciences has been so close that many persons are inclimed to
look upon eugemics as a branch of these sciences. Certainly, in so far as
the cacogenic aspect of eugenics is concerned, its relationship to
psychiatry is very intimate indeed. The early diagnosis of innate physical
and physiological handicaps must be made by the medical sciences. In
turn, the rules of the inheritance of these handicapping qualities which
medical sciences may have diagnosed can, without doubt, be much better
formulated and specific predictions made in reference to them by trained
eugenicists than by physicians. We have, therefore, here a field for
co-operation rather than for monopoly.

All of the work in the medical sciences has a eugenical bearing, in
that medicine has for its end, health, sanitation, and hygiene, which in
turn affect the differential survival of the race, which in turn determines
who shall reach the reproductive period, and consequently the whole work
of medicine must be rated as affecting very directly the eugenical status
and the outlook of the people.

Practical surgeons must be called upon to perform eugenical sterilisation, when it is legally ordered. The matter of disseminating knowledge
concerning birth-control is one in which the physician is held responsible.

11. Psychology.—Just as medicine is so closely associated with
eugenics in the field of health, sanitation, surgery, and physiological
qualities, so from the mental and temperamental fields, psychology supplies
the principles, data and practice used by eugenicists. Here again individual diagnosis is the work of the psychologist, but the analysis of
pedigrees and the study of the descent and re-combination of specific
mental, emotional, and volitional qualities is a task for the eugenicist.
Not the entire, but perhaps the principal constructive work of the science
of eugenics is found in the practical pedigree-application of qualities
studied by the psychologist.
THE RELATION OF EUGENICS TO OTHER SCIENCES. 63

12. Education.—lf in the future eugenics is to play a prominent réle
in improving and conserving our better American families, it will doubtless
be found that our public school system will serve as the principal agent
of consummation. The text-books on physielogy, natural history,
biography, history, and geography will be expected gradually to assume an
eugenical attitude; they wil! set forth facts concerning the nature and
control of the inborn potentialities of the individual, and will describe the
forces that govern the fortunes of these possibilities, so that, as a matter
of course, every educated youth will be taught the proper evaluation of
natural heritable qualities in human affairs.

Just now there are many school courses and social-service institutions
springing up, which have for their purpose the analysis of the individual,
with a view to pointing out to him the most profitable line of endeavour—
vocational guidance, it is called. This is a common meeting-ground for
eugenics, psychology, and the vocational school. The natural organisation
of the individual that fits him for profitable training for the particular task
is a matter of inheritance. The specific pedigree-facts and the known rules
of inheritance serve as the basis of judgment in each particular case.
When these facts and rules are considered, along with juvenile promise,
the foundation for the science of educational selection and vocational
guidance will have been well laid, and will be found to have drawn heavily
upon eugenical materials. The recent work of Davenport! on the
pedigree-analysis and juvenile promise of naval officers presents material
proof of this contention.

With the socially valuable families, the task of eugenics is one of
education, self-study, and self-direction. These families are to be shown
that, by establishing permanent family pedigree-archives, they can predict,
within limits measured principally by the extent and refinement of their
records, the natural endowments of the children of specific marriages, and
that the personal capacities and limitations of its members may more
profitably be determined in early youth. Organised society assumes the
whole task of correcting cacogenesis, but with aristogenesis eugenics acts
in the réle of instructor, archivist, advisor and research student.

13. Religion.—What could be more moral and consequently more
proper for moral instruction than the interpretation of human conduct as
modified by the two great factors of heredity and environment? With a
practical working knowledge of these two elemental factors in human
conduct such as modern field-studies supply, could not the moral leaders
of a country lay plans for calling forth in a much more effective manner a
highly moral conduct on the part of the people? But there is another
very practical religious phase. While the basis of marriage standards,
so far as the actual performing of the ceremony is concerned, must be
legally determined, still, as soon as the church develops an eugenical
creed, the legislatures of the more advanced states will not be long in
following with laws requiring that before the particular ceremony be
performed the candidates for marriage present evidence of the eugenical,
z.e., the biological, fitness of their particular mating. Until religion and
eugenics unite their efforts, the latter will not make much headway in its
practical application.

1 Davenport, Charles B. and Scudder, Mary T. ‘‘ Naval Officers: Their
Heredity and Development.’’ Carnegie Institution of Washington, 1919.
64 EUGENICS REVIEW.

To summarise, the eupenicist, finding that his science has secured for
itself a place in the field of thought and action, seeks a closer association
and more united service with each related realm of human endeavour.
Whenever a branch of learning is concerned with human reproduction,
social organisation, variation in individual structure or conduct, or racial
fortune, the new facts that eugenics has organised, and the new principles
that it has set forth may be effectively drawn upon by the particular
student of these distinct problems. Similarly, the eugenicist draws upon
all of these other integrated departments of knowledge for many of his
materials.
