Che Eugenics Loducation Society.

President: Mayor LEoNARD Darwin.
fbon. Secretaries: Mrs. A. C. Gorro. Dr. E. ScuHusTer. bon, Treasurer: Mr. von FLEIscHi.
Don. fSembers:

my

THE Rr. Hon. A. J. BALFrour, P.C., F.R.S. Str ARCHIBALD -GRIKIE, K.C.B., F.R.S.
Her GRACE, THE DUCHESS OF MARLBOROUGH. PROFESSOR A, WEISMANN.
Wice=Presidents:

Dr. RICHARD ARTHUR, M.L.A., President, New South Wales Branch.

SiR JAMES BARR, President, Liverpool Branch, :

Dr. BENHAM, President, Dunedin Branch, New Zealand.

Mr. H. W. Bisuop, S.M., President, Christchurch Branch, New Zealand.

Sir JAMES CRICHTON-BROWNE, F-R. S., Ex-President, 1908 to 1909. 7

BisHop. D’Arcy; President, Belfast Branch.

PROF. STARR JORDAN, Chairman, Education Committee, American Genetic Association.
PROFESSOR H. B. KIRK, M.A., Presiaent, Wellington Branch.

Mr. W. C. MARSHALL, M.A., President, Haslemere Branch,

THe RicHT Hon. Lorp Moutton, P.C., F.R.S., President, Birmingham Heredity Society.
Mr. J. L. Orrer, J.P., President, Brighton Branch.

M. EpMOND PERRIER, President, Société. Francaise d’Eugénique.

Dr. A. PLOETZ, President, Internationale Gesellschaft fiir Rassen Hygiene.

PROFESSOR E. B. PoutTon, F.R.S., President, Oxford Branch.

PROF, SERGI, President, Comitato Italiano per ‘gli Studi di Eugenica.

PrRoF. SEWARD, F.R.S., President, Cambridge Eugenics Society.

BISHOP WELLDON, President, Manchester Branch.

@sembers of Council:

Mr. CROFTON BLACK. Mrs. HENDERSON. Dr. ARCHDALL REID.
Sir E. BRaBROOK, C.B. . Major Hitts, F.R.S. Mr. JOHN RUSSELL.
Mrs, THEODORE CHAMBERS. VERY Rev. W. R. INGE, D.D.,  <Mr. F. C.’S. SCHILLER, D.Sc.
Hon. Str J. COCKBURN, K.C.M.G. Dean of St. Paul’s, Pror. A. SCHUSTER, F.R.S.
Mr. R. NEWTON-CRANE, Miss KIRBY. Sg Mr. EpGAR SCHUSTER, D.Sc.
Mr. A. E. CRAWLEY. Mr. ERNEST -LANE, F.R.C.S. Dr. C. G. SELIGMANN. ;
‘Sir H. CUNNINGHAM, K.C.LE. Pror, MACBRIDE. PrRor. C, SPEARMAN.
Dr. LANGDON Down. LaDY OWEN-MACKENZIE, Pror. J. A. THOMSON.:
Mr. HAVELOCK ELLIs. Mr. RoBerRtT MOND. Dr. A. F. TREDGOLD,
Pror. J. FINDLAY. Dr. F. W. Mott, F.R.S. Mrs, ALEC TWREDIE.
Mr. E. G. WHELER GALTON. Mr. G. P. MuDGE. Mr. W. C.D. WHETHAM, F.R.S.
Mr. M. GREENWOOD JUN. M.R.C.S. Mrs. G. POOLEY. Dr. DOUGLAS WHITE.
Dr. W. HADLEY. Mr. W. Rea, M.P. ~~ Dr. FLORENCE WILLEY.
Branch Representatives on the General Council, 1914-15.
Birmingbam:
Mr. Cargy GILSON, Mr. HumMpHREY HUMPHREYS. MR. PERCIVAL MILLS.
Liverpool: a
_ Mr. R. T. BopEy. Mr. R. D. LAURIE. Ap. T, R. BULLEY,
’  thaslemete : Manchester : Seltast:
Mr. W. C. MARSHALL. Dr. MUMFORD. ProF, J. A. LINDSAY.
Rew Zealand: Orford:
Tue Ilion. T. A. MACKENZIE. Dr. E. SCHUSTER.
Wew South Wales; Brigbton:
(Zo be appointed. ) Mr. A. J. HALL.
Research Committee: | ; Hducation Committee
Mr. EDGAR SCHUSTER, D.Sc., Chairman. Mrs. T. CHAMBERS, Secrefarv.
Mr. A. M. CaARR-SAUNDERS, Secretary. Pror. J. A. “*THOMSON.
Pror. MACBRIDE. PROF. FINDLAY.
PROF. SPEARMAN. > Miss BULCRAIG,
Dr. TREDGOLD. - . Miss TRENCH.
Dr. GREENWOOD. Mr. DIXON KINGHAM.
Mr, LIDBETTER. Mrs. GoTto.

Mrs. Gorro.
Publication Committee :

This Committee consists of the Executive Officers of the Society, Chairmen and Secretaries of Sub-Committees and

Branch representatives. 2 ; f : , ‘
N.B.—Other Committees are appointed from time to time for special purposes. en

“* Eugenics ts the study of agencies under social control that may improve or tmpaz
the racial qualities of future generations either physically or mentally.”
: OBJECTS.

I.—Persistently to set forth the National Importance of Eugenics in order to modify public opinion, and create a sense of respon- é c

~

~

sibility in the respect of bringing all matters pertaining to human parenthood under the domination of Eugenic ideals. ;

_.. Iii.=To further Eugenic Teaching, at home, in the schools, and elsewhere.

{1.—T > Spread a knowledge of the Laws of Heredity so far as they are surely known, and so far as that knowledge may affect the ss
improvemert of the race. : : tt ce

¥

3 SUBSCRIPTION. a Cae AE oe Rina

; Membership - - - - - One Guinea per Annum. haat
s Associate Membership - - ~ - Five Shillings per Annum. _ ee ea
se 3° PRIVILEGES. Se Cee Ce Sas GS eee aaa
Bee Attendance at Lectures, Discussions, and General Meetings, Use of Library.

  
  

 

Members only receive THE EUGENICS REVIEW free. ee ae Oe ia eS RE oe ae ie ae
Forms of Application for’ Membership and Associate Membership and full particulars of the Séctelu se
Set gt can be obtained of the Hon. Secretaries. PS tote (open eee

é OFFICES: Kingsway House, Kingsway, W.C. «=
FFICE HOURS: 10.30 a.m. to p.m. Saturdays 10.30 a.m. to 1 p.m. Sere

Ke Ae
ate tues

ag = > . _~ on on f ¢ - ¢ = = ** whet eg ae re -2 . 2 Sa

se

 
REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 327

no small merit to those who are already aware of the social need. It is
probably this habit of conciseness in statement which causes the chapter
dealing with Eugenics to appear too abrupt and too definite in statement, for although the author, in dealing in a few paragraphs with
hereditary transmission of taints, states that our knowledge is as yet very
incomplete, he pronounces with a definiteness upon certain points which
does not indicate the present vagueness of our information. This is a
tendency somewhat characteristic of American literature on sex-education.
Qualifying one’s remarks, however, with this caution, one has no hesitation in recommending this book as an aid towards instruction of parents,
teachers and social workers. N. MARCH.

Marett, Mr. R. R. The Threshold of Religion. London: Methuen and
Co., Ltd.; price 5s. net; pp. 220.

Mr. MaretTT’s work is of interest to eugenists, for he places anthropology
as a branch of biology, and the one that is likely to bring us to the true
meaning of life. This book is a new issue, with additional chapters. It
is made up of papers and addresses bearing on the nature and experience
of rudimentary religion. The primordial category of religion is held to
consist in the notion of power rather than in the notion of spirit: Several
positions advanced by Dr. Tylor, Dr. Frazer and Mr. Lang are acutely
criticised. Some very interesting things are said respecting 7abu, Mana,
and the Bullroarer. Tabu is regarded as the negative side of the supernatural to which (/ana corresponds as the positive side. The Bullroarer
is “perhaps the most ancient, widely spread and sacred religious symbol
in the world.”

Very suggestive and original is the chapter “ The Birth of Humility.”
The volume closes with a fascinating account of a visit to the caverns of
Niaux and Gargas. “The spirit of awe and mystery still broods in these
dark galleries within a mountain, that are to a modern mind symbolic of
nothing so much as of the dim subliminal recesses of the human soul.”

}. 3B.

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.
ENGLISH.

JOURNAL ROYAL STATISTICAL SOCIETY, June, Ixxvii., 1914. Pp. 705. Sugelector for Recording the Life History and Family Connections of every
ndividual, by Walter Hazell. The author proposes that each individual
should be provided with two numbers, that of the registration district in
which his birth occurred and an individual number. These two numbers
are to be produced by him throughout life whenever a record of marriage
or birth is made, and also to appear upon his death certificate. A life card
for each person born will be preserved at the general register office, and,
with the help of the system of personal numbers, entries of important
occurrences throughout his life will be made, as they are reported, upon
his life card. The idea is that an interested party, for instance, an intending bride or bridegroom, armed with the numbers could, from the life
card, glean particulars of importance, the degree of information available
depending upon the minuteness with which the system was carried out.
Mr. Hazell justly remarks in favour of his scheme that :—“ First, it would
tend to raise the life records of men to the level already attained by pedigree animals. This is not sarcasm, as I observe with some shame that we
seem to care less for the family history of a man than that of a beast.”
Mr. Hazell’s paper, which was read at the June meeting of the Royal
Statistical Society, provoked a lively discussion, to which the RegistrarGeneral and several other official statisticians contributed. Some of the
328 EUGENICS REVIEW.

speakers doubted whether the system would be as useful as the author
believed, but the general opinion was clearly favourable to the principle
of Mr. Hazell’s method, although those most conversant with the practical
aspects of registration thought that he had under-estimated the practical
difficulties involved. We are sure that all eugenists will heartily endorse
Mr. Hazell’s plea for a more convenient and accurate system of records,
even if they admit, as they probably will, that the obstacles to be surmounted in practice are indeed formidable. M. G.

THE JOURNAL OF GENETICS for October (Vol. iv., No. 2) contains two
chief papers. Miss M. Wheldale writes on “ Our present knowledge of the
Chemistry of the Mendelian Factors for Flower-colour.” A good deal
of her paper deals with somewhat technical chemistry, but the conclusions
arrived at are of great interest to students of genetics. Considering chiefly
the pigments of the Snapdragon (Antirrhinum), she shows that the white,
ivory and yellow varieties contain no anthocyanin, but that the ivory
has one flavone and the yellow a second in addition. The white contains
no flavone, but when either yellow or ivory is crossed with certain whites,
the F1 generation bears anthocyanin. This suggests that anthocyanin is
formed by a modification of flavone. Two anthocyanins have been
isolated from the Snapdragon, both of which contain a higher percentage
of oxygen than the flavones, and the magenta anthocyanin, which is
dominant over the red, contains more oxygen than the red. Evidence is
given that the anthocyanin molecules are considerably larger than those
of the flavones, and hence anthocyanin is not produced by mere oxidation
of flavone, but by some sort of condensation in addition. The results
obtained by several other workers in anthocyanins are discussed, and elsewhere in the current number of the journal Dr. A. E. Everest makes some
criticisms of Miss Wheldale’s previous work on the subject.

In the second paper Mr. C. Dobell writes on “ The Genetics of the
Ciliate Protozoa.” His article is a general review of our knowledge of
the life-history of these animals; he describes the earlier work and conclusions of Maupas, then the results of later investigations by Calkins,
Hertwig, Jennings, Woodruff, Popoff, and others, and finally discusses the
various conclusions which have been drawn. He concludes that many
of the problems associated with Ciliates do not exist in Nature, and that
they have largely arisen from the erroneous deduction that the Ciliate
body is comparable with a Metazoan “cell.” The hypothesis, for example,
that the “ purpose ” of conjugation is to cause rejuvenescence and to avoid
senility has been shown to be devoid of foundation, and with the disappearance of this belief the way is cleared for a study of many other
problems arising from Protozoan life-histories which have hitherto been
obscured by the assumption that “ the Protozoa are the simplest organisms
in which to study the great problems of biology.” There is a good deal
in Mr. Dobell’s memoir with which biologists of various schools may disagree, but it is excellent, not only as a presentation of our knowledge of
the subject in a fairly small space, but also as showing the inadequacy
of many beliefs which have been widely accepted, and the need for further
investigation unprejudiced by preconceived ideas. L. DONCASTER.

CHARITY ORGANISATION REVIEW, November, 1914. Vol. xxxvi. (new
series), No. 215. Notes on Social Work Abroad—Germany (continued).
Pp. 344-346. These notes afford information on the following subjects :—
“Women as Relief Officials”; “The Cecilienhilfe Association,” whose
object is “to protect needy families and individuals, for whom the State
and the Poor Law cannot adequately provide, against moral and social
ruin”; “Thrift and National Insurance.” An important step is the
arrangement arrived at between the Berlin sanitary authorities and the
women’s benevolent organisations, under which members of the latter
will attend the clinics and ascertain whether patients require help for
their families or themselves on leaving a hospital.
PERIODICAL LITERATURE, 329

THE PARENTS’ REVIEW, December, 1914. Vol. xxv., No. 12. School
Clinics (Part II.), by Leslie Kingsford, M.D., School Medical Officer,
Liverpool. The author continues his explanation of the administration
and organisation of a school clinic. The departments of a clinic are
like those of the out-patient department of a large hospital. His opinion
is that, in order to be run efficiently, clinics must be organised as one
piece of machinery with the other branches of the school medical service,
and efficiency will be more easily secured in a clinic run by the local
education authority than in one organised by local effort as a voluntary
clinic. An important feature is the possibility of ee in many
instances, the work of the clinic with the school and the home. An
important consideration is the educational possibilities for parents and
children of the clinic.

CHILD Stupy, October and November, 1914. Vol. vii., Nos. 6 and 7. /ntensive Child Culture. In this presidential address, delivered in Edinburgh
on June 5th, Sir James Crichton-Browne refers at length to the important
service that phrenology, under the guidance of Combe, rendered to education by insisting on the »rinciple that in order to raise any of our mental

_ powers into free and healthful action it is necessary to bring it within the

immediate influence of the members to which it is specially related. The
lecturer is of opinion that correlation of brain-growth and mind-growth
will afford the best guidance in child study, and suggests that :—
“A study of the convolutions in the lower animals, and in human
beings, healthy or mentally defective and diseased, will no doubt ultimately furnish valuable information; but I cannot think that a study of
their hereditary resemblances in persons of the same family will yield
results in any degree commensurate with the immense labour it must
entail... . Much more urgent and significant, it seems to me, is the
study of the order of appearance of the convolutions and fissures on the
surface of the brain in the young animal and in the young human being,
and the correlation of their appearance with first functional manifestations. . . . The period of youth is the period of brain growth, and the
important point to note in connection with brain growth is that it is
gradually diminishing in quantity as life goes on. At first very rapid,
it steadily slows down. The convolutional eruption in the fcetus is
prodigious, in the baby luxuriant, in the child moderate, and in the
adolescent imperceptible. And the same is it with psychological development; that is a steadily diminishing quantity as life goes on. It has been
truly said that the first moment of existence is the most instructive of
any, and that the older we grow the less do we learn.”

The second part of the address appears in the November issue of the
journal, the subjects considered being the Mental Evolution of the Child
during the first eight months of separate existence and the Diérvection of
Child Growth. Under the last head the lecturer gives an account of the
attempts to promote child growth by means of electrification. The results,
in the opinion of the Professor Arrhenius, who conveyed the information
personally, being negative.

Binet’s Mental Tests, vi. (continued), by Mr. H. Winch, M.A. In
dealing with series of tests for seven-year-old children the author compares the aptitude of English and French children of similar age groups.
Test I. is to decide the child’s capacity to perceive intentional omissions
in drawings of the human figure. As the result of tests made with groups
of English children ranging from four to seven years of age, the author
considers that English children are so far in advance that in English
schools the test should be applied in the case of five-year-old groups.
Test II., to decide the child’s knowledge of numbers. The author considers that in the case of English children the test should be applied
for six-year-old groups, and not seven-year-old groups, as with French
330 EUGENICS REVIEW.

children. Test III., to decide the child’s power to copy a phrase of
three words in script. Here again the decision is that the test is suitable ©
for six-year-old groups in English schools. Test IV. is concerned with
ability to draw a losange. In this instance the author decides that the
test is applicable to English children of the seven-year-old group. The
French tests being made with pen and ink, English tests were also made
in this way, but Mr. Winch is emphatically of opinion that the test
should be made with pencils.

A further continuation appears in the November number. Test V.,
for seven-year-old children, viz., repeating five numerals, not in consecutive order, ¢.g., 7, 3, 1; 4 9. ~The author states his preference for unassociated consonants, owing to possibility of greater
variation. This test is considered suitable for seven-year-old groups, as
in the case of French children. Test VI., the description of a picture.
In this instance the author considers the test adapted for five and sixyear-old groups in English schools. Test VII., counting test. In this
test a marked difference was apparent in the capacity of English and
French children. In the English schools 86 per cent. of the children in
the five-year-old group passed satisfactorily. Test VIII., naming pieces of
money. The result of this test induced the author to regard it as more
— for children of the eight-year-old group in the case of English
scholars.

Parent Educators, by Professor Bidart. VIII. and IX. Rebukes and
Punishments: Improper Methods. Translated by Miss M. S. Ryan, B.A.
Pp. 106-109. The author advocates the advisability of cherishing the child’s
feeling of honour, delicacy of conscience being regarded as the moral
safeguard of child and adult. Instances of mischievous forms of reprimand frequently employed, and their effect, are given. “ Public” reprimand is especially discouraged. The author considers that a child will
generally discover, by the expression of the parent, the fact that his
conduct is displeasing, and the effect of sparing him censure in public
will be to cause regret for his misbehaviour. Humiliation of a child is
likely to lower his self-respect and prove discouraging.

Methods of Rendering Punishment Effective and Infrequent.
Pp. 126-128. In this paper the same author points out that the efforts
of the parents should be the prevention of disobedience, and the prevention of serious faults. “Every fault,” says Théry, “has its external
symptoms, its particular expression. Obstinacy shows itself in the
mulish look, anger in the flushed countenance, jealously in the livid hue.”
These external signs, easily perceived because children do not know
how to dissimulate, should be noted by the parent and dealt with according to circumstances. Anger should be checked, in other cases an appeal
should be made to the child’s goodwill. The author considers the best
warning is that which is uttered quietly and calmly—“ If you continue to
do that you will make me angry.” The appeal is thus made to filial
affection instead of to fear. If a child wilfully disobeys, he should be
punished, but it is the disobedience that should be punished, not the
consequence of it.

Man, November, 1914. Vol. xiv., No. 11. Physical Anthropology—
On the Differentiation of Man from the Anthropoids. By Professor
Carveth Read, M.A. Pp. 181-186. In this paper, which was originally
read at the meeting of the British Association at Birmingham in September, 1913, the author, basing his remarks upon the hypothesis that the
differentiation of man from his nearest relatives may be traced to the
influence of one variation operating amidst the original anthropoid
conditions, viz., the adoption of a flesh diet and the habits of a hunter in
order to obtain it, aims at elucidating all the chief features that mark
this distinction.
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 331

He divides these features into (a) those of habit and function, and
6) those of structure, and instances the following, amongst others :—

(a) “ The carnivorous habit explains the adaptation of our species to a
ground life and to a world-wide diffusion. For this can have happened
only to an ape that found its food chiefly on the ground and was no
longer dependent on the fruits and highly nutritious vegetable products
of the tropical forests.. And this would be possible only to one that had
either become carnivorous or else had taken to a coarser diet of roots and
herbage such as the ungelates. That our species ever adopted the latter
alternative there is not the slightest evidence. Had it done so our alimentary canal would probably have lengthened. (2) That the earliest
known men were hunters, and that the earliest known artefacts are
weapons, agrees with our hypothesis. Any other hypothesis must explain
how they came to be so. (3) Man alone of the higher primates is social
and co-operative. The gibbon, indeed, may be called social but hardly
co-operative. Baboons seem to go furthest in co-operation. The most
backward men are most co-operative in hunting, war and tribal ceremonies. . . . It cannot indeed be supposed that man began by attacking
big game without weapons; and it would be absurd to suppose that he
first invented weapons and then attacked his prey. This is psychologically
impossible. (4) Man has lost the restraint of seasonal marriage (common
to the gorilla and orang, with other animals, as determined by food supply
and other conditions of infantile welfare); though according to Westermarck, traces of it survive in a few tribes. That our domestic carnivores
have also lost this restraint points probably to some condition of steadier
food supply as determining or permitting such a change in ourselves.
(5) Articulate speech may confidently be traced to social co-operation ;
since, had family life been sufficient for its development, the chimpanzee
and gorilla should have talked; or if social life merely, the gibbon; for
he, the most social, is also the most vocal of the anthropoids. (6) Wrought
weapons imply the use of tools and the development of the constructive
instinct. (7) The production of fire by the flaking of flints or the rubbing
of sticks together may easily have been discovered in the making of
weapons. (8) He must have learned to discriminate all sorts of animals;
their reactions to himself, manner of flight, attack, or defence... . He
must have adapted his weapons to his prey.

“(6) Structural differences. (1) The changes involved in the erect
gait (imperfectly attained by the gibbon) as the normal mode of progression—namely, the modification of the vertebral column, the balancing of
the head upon a relatively slender neck, changes in the joints, bones and
muscles of the legs, the lengthening of the legs and the specialisation of
the foot, in which the heel is developed more than in the gorilla, and
the great toe lies parallel with the other toes. (2) The specialisation of
the legs and feet, as it proceeded, made possible the specialisation of the
hands. (3) The reduction of the arms in length and massiveness may be
explained by (a) physiological compensation for the growth of the legs,
(6) mechanical compensation by the use of weapons, (c) lessening of the
weight of the body, and the improving of the balance and agility of a
runner. (4) The shortening of the muzzle. (5) At the same time the skull
increased in capacity to make room for the brains of an animal that
acquired much knowledge (parietal association area) and lived by the
application of its knowledge to the co-ordination of its very complex
activities (anterior association area), including language (Broca’s convolution). (6) Deals with the alimentary canal. (7) There is one characteristic
difference of man from the anthropoids of which the carnivorous habit of
man affords no satisfactory explanation—his relatively naked skin.”

Pd:
332 EUGENICS REVIEW.

FOREIGN.

POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY, November, 1914. Vol. Ixxxv., No. ¢
Science and the War. Pp. 516. In this editorial it is pointed out tha
one of the most serious aspects of the war is the diversion from scientific
work which it involves. It is estimated that if the contributions to pure
and applied science in the course of the next ten years be reduced by onehalf, the loss to the world in life and wealth would exceed that caused
directly by the destruction of war. “The death-rate in England has been
reduced from 23 per thousand to 14 per thousand in the course of 50
years. If by the advances of science and civilisation in the course of
ten years the death-rate would have been reduced to 11 per thousand, and
as the result of the war the reduction should be only to 12, so that for a
period of ten years the death-rate is 1 per thousand larger than it otherwise would have been, the deaths in England chargeable to the war, apart
from those directly caused by it, would be in the neighbourhood of 400,000,
and in the civilised world 4,000,000. There would be a corresponding
excess of ill-health and disease over what would have been suffered had
there been no war.”

The Distribution of Scientific Men among the Different Nations. In
an interesting editorial note this comparison is dealt with from various
standpoints. It is first pointed out that approximately the numbers of
scientific men of some distinction in different continental countries are as
follows :—Germany, 1,280; France, 423; Austria-Hungary, 236; Italy,
215; Switzerland, 214; Holland, 155; Sweden, 109; Russia, 97; Denmark, 94; Belgium, 90; Norway, 98; Portugal, 49; Spain, 41. Basing
the comparison on population the numbers of scientific men per million
for those countries is as follows :—Switzerland, 58; Norway, 37; Denmark, 34; Holland, 26; Sweden, 20; Germany, 19; Belgium, 12; France,
11; Portugal, 9; Italy, 6; Austria-Hungary, 5; Spain, 2; Russia, 1.
Taking the scientific men who were members of at least two foreign
academies, the distribution is as follows (Dr. E. C. Pickering, 1908) :—
Germany, 29; France, 12; England, 13; United States, 6; Austria, 4;
Italy, Sweden, Holland, Denmark and Russia, 3 each. The present distribution of the foreign members of the National Academy of Science is
as follows :—Germany, 18; Great Britain, 11; France, 4; Holland, 4;
Russia and Sweden, 2 each; Austria, Italy, Norway and Switzerland, 1
each.

The Ultra-Scientific School, by B. Horowitz (the College of the City
of New York). Pp. 463-466. The aim of this school, at the head of
which are Loch and Schafer, is to bring the phenomena of life within the
category of established laws—to regulate forces. To understand them is,
they consider, beyond their power. The origin of their ideas they trace
chiefly to Huxley. The author says: “Let it at once be stated clearly
and emphatically that the ultra-scientific view is based primarily upon
analogy—a very valuable method provided it is not carried to excess, and
provided also that sufficient experimental data are at hand... . Itis this
argument by analogy that has led the ultra-scientific school to its present
theory with regard to the origin of life. Lightly brushing aside the
meteoric theories of Kelvin, Helmholtz and Arrhenius as irrelevant in so
far as origin goes—for in their attempt to explain the first sign of life
on this planet they presuppose the existence of the germ elsewhere—
Schifer boldly upholds the hypothesis that life originated as the result
of the gradual evolution of inanimate material. In process of time the
simple substance became more and more complex and ultimately emerged
as the living germ—the nitrogenous colloid. But Schafer goes a step
further. Why are we to suppose that this happened but once, as all
theories with regard to origin have thus far assumed? Why are we to
suppose that at one time in the dim past a series of fortunate accidents
made life possible? Is it not more logical to assume that these evolutionary processes are going on to-day?”
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 333

In his summary the author remarks: “At present we know of no better
way of pursuing our search than through the sciences. But here we are
only safe when we apply them to the things we can grasp.”

Civilisation as a Selective Agency. By Roland Hugins, Cornell University. Pp. 476-486. It has been generally agreed that little, if any,
improvement of civilised man has occurred through selection. It is
recognised that many selective forces, whether favourable or deleterious,
have acted on the human race, but it cannot be asserted that there has
been in operation any constant and effective agency likely to bring about
marked advances in moral and intellectual qualities. Except among
thinkers who cling to the Lamarckian doctrine, it is generally accepted
that our inheritance is primitive inheritance, but it must be admitted
that the twentieth century, with its vast philanthropies and its insistence
on the ideal of service, differs from the hard life of the Greek and Latin
cities, with their indifference to human pain and the rights of the weaker
The author offers two possible views for the different moral complexions
of the ancient and modern world: “ First we may accept the orthodox
dictum, and maintain that any apparent changes are due to the increased
weight, so to speak, of the race’s moral heritage—to strengthened social
controls and the ascendency of new ethical types; or, secondly, we may
postulate a change in man’s innate moral nature accompanying and reinforcing the influence of the augmented social heritage. We shall be
justified in pursuing the second, and bolder, course only if we can discern
some selective agency adequate to effect the change. It is here suggested
that such a selective agency can be discerned as operative; an agency at
once powerful, comprehensive and continuous. We may denominate it the
elimination of the anti-social—that is, the constant cutting-off of those
elements in society which do not fit in with the requirements of orderly
civilised life. The forms that this process has taken ..... have been
many and diverse; but the result has been unified and focussed. Life in a
settled community creates an environment of its own, imposing new
standards of ‘fitness.’.. .

*« Selection has had an almost infinite variety of human material to
work on—all sorts of combinations between intellectual powers and moral
excellencies. What selection has apparently done, through those agencies
we have denominated the elimination of the anti-social, is to knock apart
the two sets of endowments, and to recombine them in ways which give
us, speaking broadly, a general average of greater moral stability linked
with lesser innate talent. Civilisation, in bending human nature to its
wheel, has softened it, and at the same time crushed out some of its
virgin vigour.”

i

POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY, November, 1914. Edited by J.
McKeen Cattell. Vol. Ixxxv., No. 5. Phenomena of Inheritance. By
Professor Edwin Grant Conklin, Princeton University. II. Modification
and Extension of Mendelian Principles. 1. Under the head Principles of
Unit Characters and Inheritance Factors, the author deals with “ inheritance factors and germinal units.” Regarding the principle of unit
characters there has been a good deal of criticism. It is contended that
unit characters cannot be independent and discreet things. The author
asserts, however, that “ for every inherited character there must have been
a germinal cause in the fertilised egg,” in fact a determiner of character.
He continues: “It is evident that there is not an exact one-to-one correspondence of inheritance units and adult characters. Many characters
may be decided by a single unit or factor; for example, all the numerous
secondary sexual characters which distinguish males from females are
decided by the original factor, which determines whether the germ cells
shall be ova or spermatozoa. On the other hand, two or more factors
may be concerned in the production of a single character. In many cases,
334 EUGENICS REVIEW.

among both animals and plants, the development of colour appears to
depend upon the presence in the germ cells and the co-operation in
development of at least two factors, viz., (1) a pigment factor P (for
black B, for brown Br., for yellow Y, for red R, etc.), and (2) a colour
developer C. When both of these factors are present colour develops;
when either one is absent no colour appears. Castle found that eight
different factors may be involved in producing the coat colours of rabbits;
these are: C, a common colour factor necessary to produce any colour;
B, a factor acting on C to produce black; Br., a factor acting on C to
produce brown; Y, a factor acting on C to produce yellow; I, a factor
which produces intensity of colour; U, a factor which determines zmzformity of colour; H, a factor for agouti, or wild gray pattern, in which
the tip of every hair is black, below which is a band of yellow, while the
basal part of the hair is gray; E, a factor for the extension of black or
brown, but not of yellow. Plate found that all of these factors, except
the last (E), are also involved in the production of the coat colours of
mice.”

2. Under the head VWodifications of the Principle of Dominance, the
author deals with “Sex and Sex-limited Inheritance” and “ Sex-linked
Inheritance.”

3. Under the head The Principle of Segregation he deals with
“Blending Inheritance.”

III. Mendelian Inheritance in Man. The author points out that the
study of human inheritance is necessarily less satisfactory and conclusive than in the case of lower animals because of the lack of “ pure
lines.” Naturally, experiments are out of the question—observation and
statistics must be relied on. Whereas the Christian era represents but
sixty generations of man, as many generations of Paramecium have been
obtained by Jennings in two months. Another difficulty is presented by
the limitation of human offspring, which renders it difficult to determine
the hereditary possibilities of a family. Sixty human traits have been
catalogued by Davenport and Plate which seem to be inherited in Mendelian fashion. Of these about fifty represent pathological or teratological conditions, and but a small number represent normal conditions.

The author brings forward numerous instances from leading authorities and concludes his article: “By means of these principles (Mendel’s
principles) the hereditary constitution of organisms can be analysed and
the real resemblances and differences of various organisms determined

. the once mysterious and apparently capricious phenomena of prepotency, atavism and reversion find a satisfactory explanation.”

Recent Mathematical Activities, by Professor G. A. Miller (University
of Illinois). In the field of mathematics the most important achievement
of present times is the memoir of the Finnish mathematical astronomer,
Karl F. Sundman, on the problem of three bodies. For this the Paris
Academy of Sciences have recently awarded him the Pontécoulant prize,
his work being considered epoch-making for analysis and for mathematical astronomy. Further, to mark their great appreciation of his
achievements, the Academy doubled the usual value of the prize. For
development in the theory of analytic functions during the meeting of
the Sixth Internationai Mathematical Congress, to be held at Stockholm
in 1916, the King of Sweden has offered a prize of a gold medal and three
thousand crowns (about £160). The author points out that, while prizes
have stimulated research activity in mathematics, the main stimulus has
been the opportunities afforded by various journals to make interesting
discoveries promptly known. He refers to the monumental work being
published in French and German which, begun in 1898, now approximates
twenty large volumes of 500 pages each. This naturally raises the question whether such a work can fulfill one of the main objects in view,
viz., provide the means of ascertaining rapidly what has been accomplished in a particular line.
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 335

Information of great value is being accumulated at the present time
under the direction of the “ International Commission on the Teaching of
Mathematics,” instituted at Rome in April, 1908. Meetings have been
held for the discussion of fundamental questions relating to mathematical
instructions. That at Paris this year was for the consideration of (1) the
results obtained by the introduction of the differential calculus in the
advanced classes of secondary schools, (2) the place and réle of mathematics in higher technical education.

The author remarks that “mathematics is a network formed by
intersecting thought roads, and the chief aim of the International Commission on the Teaching of Mathematics is to secure extensive information
as regards the choice of roads in various nations.” He also points out
that “a considerable number of mathematicians are interested in constructing unusually attractive toll roads, especially in those regions
where travellers are most abundant. Whether the prospect of tolls
derived from small royalties constitute the best means to secure improvements in our elementary text-books, and whether this system is apt to
continue to be efficient are questions which present many difficulties.
There appears to be an enormous waste along this line at present, resulting from unfruitful duplication.”

In conclusion, he remarks: “ As mathematics is such an old science,
the educator naturally looks to its activities with a view to predicting in
some measure the future activities of the younger sciences. Hence it is
especially interesting to note those activities which imply vigour and
promise for still greater achievements in the mathematical sciences.”

CHICAGO MEDICAL RECORDER, November, 1914. Vol. xxxvi., No. 11.
The Relationship between Epilepsy and Migraine. Meyer Solomon, M.D.
Pp. 627-8. There has been a good deal of proof of the clinical resemblance
and the clinical relationship of the two syndromes epilepsy and migraine.
Dr, George A. Waterman, of Boston, has collected evidence on both sides
and has also accumulated the opinions of various authorities in neurology.
Turner and Ulrich report relationship in a number of cases between
epilepsy and migraine, and Spratling, Spiller, Flateau, Parry, Price and
others seem to accord with these ideas. Gowers, Hubbell, Strohmayer and
Moebius are opposed.

As proof of the clinical relationship between migraine and epilepsy
Waterman states that “ (1) there may be an exchange of one disease for
another in different generations of the same family; (2) migraine may
occur in early life, epilepsy superseding later, with the disappearance or
diminution of the severity of the migraine and at times with the same
aura for the later epilepsy as for the earlier migraine; (3) patients whose
epilepsy has been cured by bromide treatment may later develop
migrainous attacks; (4) in migraine attacks in certain individuals symptoms of epilepsy may occur.”

The First Jury of Medical Women in the World’s History. Pp. 637-8.
In October six women doctors were summoned to act as jurors in the
Court for the insane at the Psychopathic Hospital before the County
Judge, and returned verdicts in 22 cases. This is the first instance of a
jury of medical women ever recorded.

Tuberculosis Meeting. P. 639. The fourteenth meeting of the Robert
Koch Society for the Study of Tuberculosis, affiliated with the Chicago
Tuberculosis Institute, was held on October 29th, the topic of the meeting
being “ Tuberculosis of the Larynx.”

The Second General Tuberculosis Conference under the auspices of
the Chicago Tuberculosis Institute was held on November 12th, when the
following papers were read :—“Co-operation of the Visiting Nurses,”
“The Work of the Municipal Tuberculosis Nurse,” “Co-operation of
School Nurses.”
336 EUGENICS REVIEW.

THe CHICAGO MEDICAL RECORDER, October, 1914. Vol. xxxvi., No. 10.
Research v. Custody—The Case of the Friends of the Insane, by Bayard
Holmes, M.D. (pp. 546-550). In this address, given at the State Conference of Charities and Correction, Racine, Wis., on October 1st, Dr.
Holmes pleads for the establishment of an institute of psychiatry for
Wisconsin, one of the functions being research into the cause and cure
of insanity.

A Federal Department of Public Health (pp. 568-9). An account of a
movement initiated in The Southern Medical Journal to establish a
central authority to undertake the work now carried out by the separate
State Boards of Health at considerable expense. The name of SurgeonGeneral Gorgas is coupled with the proposal.

THE JOURNAL OF HEREDITY, November, 1914. Vol. v., No. 11. Aryan
Agriculture, by Privatdozent Dr. Dettweiler, Inspector of Animal Husbandry, Rostock, Mecklenburg. (A slightly abridged translation of an
address delivered before the Dozentenverein, October gth, 1912.) (Pp.
473-481.) The conclusions arrived at by the lecturer are that, the most
important plant and animal products of Europe are indigenous; wheat
and barley were cultivated more than 50,000 years ago. On the authority
of Braungart, he holds that the Indo-Germans possessed, at least 10,000
years ago, a well-developed art of agriculture; the horse was the latest
of the important animals to be domesticated; the plough is of neolithic
origin. The author assumes that the original home of the Indo-Germans
was not Asia, but Northern Europe, where their culture was developed in
the late Stone Age, before their dispersal, and is therefore of greater
antiquity than that of Babylon or Egypt.

Coat Colour in Horses, by W. & Anderson, Assistant in Horse Husbandry, Kentucky Agricultural Experiment Station, Lexington (pp. 482488). The conclusions arrived at are based on a tabulation of colour of
42,165 horses. The author deals with errors in registry and in the
genetic description of colours; and on the connection between gray and
roan. The dominant colours are given as gray, roan and dun; and in
mating bay is dominant to black; black is dominant to chestnut, the
latter being recessive to all the others.

Albinism in Man, by A. E. Hamilton, of the Eugenics Record Office,
Cold Spring Harbour, Long Island, New York (pp. 489-491). A review of
the Pearson-Usher-Nettleship monograph, etc.

The Laws of Naudin Mendel, by Dr. E. Apert, of the Paris hospitals
(pp. 492-8). Mainly devoted to a statistical discussion of the Galton
Laboratory monograph on albinism. The author thinks the figures show
that albinism in man is a Mendelian recessive.

Origin of the Date Palm, by the Editor (pp. 498-508). In this article
the Editor, dealing with the discovery of fossil seeds of the date palm
in the tertiary deposits of Texas, points to the possibility that it may be
native to America. Reference is made to the fact that there are no
less than 5,000 named varieties in the sub-tropical regions of the world,
and to the connection of the date palm with the Semites, and its religious
importance. Also to its influence as a factor of natural selection.

Study of Old Americans, by Dr. Alex Hrdlicka, Curator, Division of
Physical Anthropology, U.S. Nat. Museum, Washington, D.C. (p. 509).
The author describes the means that are being taken to record for future
comparison the measurements of “ Old White Americans,” 1.e. descendants of American parentage on both father’s and mother’s side for at least
three generations.

A Degenerated Rose Blossom, by John C. Uhrlaub (p. 510). A photograph, with detaiis, of the reversion of the flowers to their original form,
viz., leaves.

Corn and Men, by Albert F. Blakeslee, Department of Genetics, Connecticut Agricultural College, Storrs, Connecticut (p. 511-518). A prePERIODICAL LITERATURE. 337

sentment of the inter-acting influence of heredity and environment. In
movements for betterment both factors should be considered.

MONIST, October, 1914. Vol. xxiv., No. 4. The Probable Origin of
Cnothera Lamarckiana Ser. by Hugo de Vries. (Pp. 594-607.) In this
article the author investigates the history of Cnothera Lamarckiana
Seringe in order to refute views offered by B. M. Davis in his article,
“'Was Lamarck’s Evening Primrose (Znothera Lamarckiana Seringe) a
form of Gnothera grandiflora Solander?” published in the Bulletin of
the Tor. Bot. Club, xxxix., 1912, 519-533, and other journals, in which
he remarks “that Lamarckiana has come down to us greatly modified,
that its parentage is far from pure, that it is in fact of hybrid origin.”
De Vries proves that this assertion is clearly contradicted by the preservation, in excellent condition, of the three specimens of Lamarck, Pounet
and Michaux, not known to Davis. He summarises the results of his historical investigation as follows :—

ok usilona Lamarckiana Ser. is represented by specimens in the
herbaria of Lamarck, Pourret and Michaux, and is, so far as this material
enables us to judge, at the present time exactly the same plant as it
was at that period. It has come down to us, through more than a
century, as unaltered and as constant as true species usually do.

“2. It has been a component of the flora of the Eastern United
States, where Michaux collected it and whence Lamarck derived his
specimen.

“3. At the present time it is component of the flora of England, and
is as well established in that country as is O. biennis in different parts of
Europe.

“4. The strain which is now in cultivation, and which was introduced into the trade about the middle of the last century, was probably
derived from some wild English locality, which itself may have come from
an introduction into Europe of the seeds, collected either by Michaux
himself or by some other botanist of his period.”

THE TRAINING SCHOOL BULLETIN, October, 1914. Vol. xi., No. 6.
An “Editorial” explains that the Bulletin has been again enlarged in
order to present more adequately information relating to research and
general institutional procedure along educational, medical and other
lines. For seven years the laboratory at this training school has been
making a scientific study of the various phases of mental deficiency. It
is known that in 60 to 7o per cent. of the cases feeble-mindedness is inherited, but other causes are being sought for.

The Binet Measuring Scale of Intelligence, by Dr. Henry H. Goddard. Pp. 86-91. This is an elaboration of an article which appeared in
March, 1913, the object being to explain the Binet-Simon scale for determining degrees of intelligence, and the care with which it must be
applied. ‘The author explains that Binet, whose researches in individual
psychology are world-famous, has studied both normal and defective
children, and that he tested all his tests over a period of many years
before standardising them. The scale has been objected to on the ground
that some children are taught things that other children are not; but the
author points out that, although some of the questions are a little affected
by instruction, Binet has been very successful in avoiding things that are
usually taught to children. The author’s conclusion is that the scale is
both accurate and practicable, but it requires a highly trained expert to
apply the test successfully. (See notes on “Child Study,” ante.)

One Year's Work, by Mrs. J J—. Pp. 98-99. This is an
account, by an intelligent, persevering woman, of a year’s work with a
defective girl of nine and a half, of whom she assumed charge. The
description of the child was: “ Head bent forward so that she faced the
floor. Her face was very large without the faintest gleam of intelligence.
She was loose-lipped, and dribbled at the mouth. . . . Her tongue lay

 
338 EUGENICS REVIEW.

flat in her mouth. She made no attempt to use it when she spoke. .. .
When I first tried to teach her to say words the only way I could get
her to use her tongue was to take it between my finger and thumb and
hold it where I wanted it to be.” At the end of a year the child could
read with expression and write little letters home. This record is a
further illustration of the fact that outside appearance, and even personal
habits, are no safe criterion of mental faculty.

An Experiment in Profitable Work. Pp. roo-102. This is an
account of work accomplished by mentally defective children in a New
York school. The class teacher, after careful investigation, decided on
brush-making, starting with shoe-brushes. The 16 boys forming the
class took to the work enthusiastically. Under supervision five of the
lads have developed into expert brush-makers able to earn a living.

ScienTIA. La moderna evoluzione delle dottrine e delle conoscenze
sulla Vita. Parte 1a. I problemi fondamentali bio-fisiologicit. C. Golgi
(pp. 199-224). In his address, delivered at the Lombardian Institute of
Sciences and Letters, on January 8th, the lecturer deals with progress in
fundamental bio-physiological problems. Starting with the pronouncement of the famous physiologist, Du Bois-Reymond regarding force and
matter (“Ignoramus .... ignorabimus”), the lecturer passes in review
the epoch-making discoveries that have occurred during the four decades
which have elapsed since they were uttered at Leipzig. He reviews the
light which recent years have thrown on our knowledge of human
physiology and, he hopes, on psychic phenomena. With reference to
the knowledge acquired on cell-organisation and its failure to reveal the
mystery of life, he suggests that this principle should now be sought in
other parts, more uly simple.

Future conquests in biology will, in his opinion, lie in the field of
physical chemistry. The fact that Cesario-Demel has obtained evidences
of revivification in hearts taken from corpses 43 hours after death, when
they presented evident signs of putrefaction points to changes that are
not only morphological and structural but also to physico-chemical
conditions.

Les lois de Vevolution de VArt. R. Maunier (pp. 269-273). In this
critique of M. Deonna’s “ L’Archéologie, sa valeur, ses méthodes ” (3 vols.,
Paris, 1912), the reviewer expresses the opinion that the theory of zsthetic
evolution propounded by M. Deonna is likely to prove of interest both on
account of the method of investigation followed by the author and the
conclusions he has evolved. M. Deonna maintains the principle of the
regularity of zsthetic phenomena; art changes as its milzeu changes. He
seeks for the laws which govern these changes. Beds

RIVISTA DI ANTROPOLOGIA. Vol. xviii. Fasc. III., 1913, published at
Rome. La Misura Della Vita, by Professor Alfredo Niceforo, is an
interesting study of the question of the variations in the weight of infants
at birth, especially as influenced by the fact of the infant being a first
or a later child. The subject is one which has engaged the attention
of many scientific writers. Of these we may mention Dr. Corrado Gini,
who presented a mass of data on the subject in the course of an important
paper for the First International Eugenics Congress. Professor Niceforo
adopts a slightly different standpoint, and the main conclusions at which
he arrives are summarised by himself as follows :—

(a) There is certainly a difference in weight between first-born
children and those born later. The latter are, on the average, heavier.

(5) The later-born show a slightly greater range of variability than
first-born children, and this increased range is still shown even when
exceptional cases (?.e. pathological cases) are eliminated from the
statistical curves.

(c) As compared with first-born children a greater number of the
later-born are found at one or other extreme end of the scale, and
especially at the heaviest end.
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 339

(zd) It seems that male and female infants differ from one another in
weight more if they belong to the ranks of the later-born than if they
are first-born children.

(e) Taking the average weight and the variability of infants as
affected by the age of the mother, and limiting ourselves to cases of
first-born children whose mothers are engaged in similar occupations, we
find that (1) the offspring of mothers of more than 25 years of age are
heavier than those whose mothers are under 19, and that (2) the range of
variation in weight seems greatest among the offspring of mothers whose
ages are less than 1g and over 25. It is greater, however, where the
mother is advanced in years than where she is very young, and lowest
where the mother is of medium age (20 to 24).

(f) Some of the smallest weights are found among the first-born of
very young mothers, while amongst those of mothers of advanced age
are instances of really heavy children.

(g) Even when we make selected groups of mothers alike from the
point of view of the amount of rest enjoyed by them during gestation, one
finds a greater variability as regards weight in the later-born than in
the first-born.

(z) But it is observed that the difference between such variabilities
lessens when one passes from the groups of mothers who have not rested
to those who have had a considerable period of repose, because the latter
groups have lost some of the lowest weights belonging to first-born
children. At the same time, so far as regards children of very heavy
weight, the difference remains in favour of the later-born.

(2) It cannot be said to be probable (still less can we assert it as a
fact) that any difference exists between the offspring of mothers who have
rested for two or three months during gestation and those who have
rested for a longer period. On the other hand, we can affirm that there
are unquestionably differences (always as regards weight) between the
children of mothers who worked all the time in unhygienic conditions (in
factories) and those of mothers who rested for some definite period.

H.

RIVISTA ITALIANA DI SOCIOLOGIA, Marzo-Aprile, 1914. La distribusione dei professori delle Université Italiane secondo Vordine di nascita,
by C. Gini. Professor Gini comments briefly on the discussion which has
raged over the alleged pathological weighing of the earlier born members
of families, and suggests that, assuming the results not to depend upon
faulty methods of computation, they may not be so much a consequence of
inherent inferiority as of greater variability in earlier born children perhaps leading to an undue incidence of both good and bad characters. A
circular addressed to professors in Italian universities produced replies
from 445; of these 416 belonged to families of two or more children, and
Professor Gini finds among these a considerable excess of earlier born
members who obtained university chairs (it is not clear whether the calculated number is determined by the method advocated by Pearson or by
that used by Goring and recommended by Cobb and others). Prof. Gini
refers to the objection that a family desire to place the eldest-born in a
creditable situation may be a source of bias, and advocates an extension of
the inquiry to other characters.

ARCHIV FUR RASSEN- UND GESELLSCHAFTS-BIOLOGIE, Vol. x.; 1913;
No. 6 (issued June 5th, 1914).

Séren Hansen (Copenhagen): Ueber die Minderwertigkeit der erstgeborenen Kinder (pp. 701-722). In consequence of the rapid fall in the birthrate in most civilised countries, considerable attention has been given of
late by biologists to the question of the relative inferiority of the firstborn. Although the results of a number of statistical investigations have
been published, among the earliest of which was Professor Pearson’s
340 EUGENICS REVIEW.

“First Study of the Statistics of Pulmonary Tuberculosis” (1907), none
are very convincing. The tendency, however, of such investigations as have already been carried out, is to show that there is indeed
a certain relative preponderance of morbidity, not only among the firstborn, but the first two or three children born, and this is corroborated
by the material used by Hansen in regard to feeble-mindedness and tuberculosis. Hansen considers it possible, in view of the fact of the earlierborn weighing less at birth than the later-born (up to the fifth or sixth
birth, when the weight again tends to decrease), that the circulatory
system of the uterus and its surroundings does not reach its full development during the first or even the second pregnancy, and suggests that
some of the observed phenomena of inferiority may be explained as a
result of innutrition and consequent arrest of development of the fcetus.
However, as Hansen says, the entire question is still far from having
been adequately investigated.

J. Kaup (Munich): Was Kosten die minderwertigen Elemente dem
Staat und der Gesellschaft? (pp. 723-748). In 1911, the Umschau, a German scientific weekly, offered a prize for the best answer to the question
as to how much the degenerate cost the nation every year. The jury
decided that none of the competitors had succeeded in giving a satisfactory answer, but awarded the prize to Ludwig Jens, a Poor Law official
in Hamburg, on account of the excellence of the method which he
employed in his investigation. Professor Kaup’s paper is, in part, a
criticism of Jens’, in part a presentation of the results of his own independent research. He, too, found it impossible to answer the question
with any degree of accuracy, if for no other reason than because we do
not know the relative proportion of hereditary to acquired defectiveness
in any population. Dr. Kaup believes that parents should be compelled
to pay for the support of their defective children in public institutions to
a greater extent than is now the case, and that in such institutions the
policy of permanent segregation should be applied in all cases where the
expectation of a high percentage of degenerate offspring is warranted.
Defectives who are of age should be put under the control of guardians.

Fritz Lens (Munich): I., Rassewertung in der hellenischen Philosophie.
II., Der Platonismus,; I1., Der Stoizismus (pp. 749-777). Count Gobineau
said of Ancient Greece, at the height of its civilisation, that it had exchanged its political vitality for a vast development of artistic and literary
capacity. According to Gobineau, all history is race-history, and as
history chooses its material according to relative values, and all values
must necessarily depend upon an ultimate highest value, the race therefore is the supreme standard of value for all the phenomena of this
world. As Gobineau was at the same time a devout Catholic, two wholly
antagonistic conceptions of life seem to have existed side by side in his
mind. Lens, in his discussion of Plato and the Pythagoreans, shows that
they, too, were much in the same case. He devotes considerable space
to an exposition of Plato’s doctrines in “ The Republic” and nine pages to
the Stoics.

The Kleinere Mitteilungen include a further contribution to the
controversy over Professor Boas’ work on the Changes in the Bodily Form
of Immigrants to the United States, by F. Schiff, and a discussion of the
question of Asiatic origin of the so-called Alpine Race, by Karl Felix
Wolf.

ARCHIV FUR RASSEN- UND GESELLSCHAFTS-BIOLOGIE, Vol. xi.; 1914;
No. 1 (issued July 17th, 1914).

J. Paulsen (Kiel): Die Herrschaft der Schwachen und der Schutz der
Starken in Deutschland. Kritische Betrachtungen eines Arsates wtber
soziale Fursorge (pp. 1-20). A criticism of the State Insurance Laws for
sickness and accident in Germany. The author discusses in turn their
effects upon the insured individual, the medical profession and science of
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. | 341

medicine, hospitals, nurses, etc., and is clearly disposed to pessimism.
His suggestions for improvements are based on his own experience as a
Kassenarat.

Géza von Hoffmann (Berlin): Die rassenhygientschen Gesetze des
Jahres 1913 in den Vereinigten Staaten von Nordamertka (pp. 21-32). A
paper supplementing the author’s book, Die Rassenhygiene in den Vere
wnigten Staaten von Nordamerika, including a resumé of recent legislation in regard to medical certificates before marriage, the prevention of
marriages by the unfit and sterilisation in various of the States of
America, and a translation of a decision of the Supreme Court of New
Jersey given in a test case tried in 1913, forbidding the sterilisation of a
woman patient in an institution for epileptics. The original report of the
case was printed in the “ Journal of the American Institute of Criminal
Law and Criminology,” January, 1914.

Leopold von Wiese (Diisseldorf): Die Rodias auf Ceylon (pp. 33-45).
An interesting and well-written account of a small outcaste tribe in
Ceylon, based in part on the earlier work of Knox (1689), P. Arunachalam
in the Ceylon Census Report for 1901 and Papers III., 1905, relating to
the Education of the Rodiyas in Ceylon, and E. B. Denham’s review of
the Ceylon census of 1911, in part on the author’s own observation.

Wilhelm Weinberg: Die Abnahme der Knabenziffer bei in mdannlicher Linie anssterbenden und erhalterenen Geschlechtern (pp. 46-95). An
elaborate mathematical study of the phenomenon, to which attention
was first called by Fahlbeck, that in families which have become extinct
in the male line, the relative proportion of male to female births decreases from generation to generation until is finally reaches zero. The
same thing is to be observed, although in a less intense degree, in certain
male lines which are still in existence. Some writers have interpreted
this tendency to be a sign of correlation between degeneracy and sex,
but Weinberg shows that it is dependent upon the action of such ordinary
factors as determine fertility, the percentage of marriages, etc., and that
it would work out in the same way if female instead of male lines
carried the family name.

HENRY BERGEN.
QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.

CENTRAL SOCIETY.

October 8th.—At the Grafton Galleries, 5.15 p.m., Mr. Theodore
Chambers on “Eugenics and the War.” Chairman, Major Leonard
Darwin.

December 3rd.—At the Grafton Galleries, 5.15 p.m., Professor J. L.
Myres on “ Causes of the Rise and Fall in the Population of the Ancient
World.” Chairman, Major Leonard Darwin.

COMMITTEES.
October 21st.—General Council Meeting.
December 16th.—Executive _,, Pr
MEETINGS.

October 13th.—Miss Edith Corry before the Chingford Women’s
Liberal Association on “ Eugenics.”

November 6th.—Mr. R. Dixon Kingham before the Council of the
Federation of Central London Adult Schools on “ The Ideal of Eugenics.”

November 11th.—Dr. M. Greenwood before the Sesame Club on “ The
Inheritance of Mental Characters.”

December 13th.—Mr. C. S. Stock before the Peel Institute Adult
School on “ Parenthood in Relation to Heredity.”

REPORTS FROM BRANCHES.

As might have been expected, the outbreak of war has had a very
serious effect on the general work of the society and its branches. Many
of the members of both the central and branch councils have joined the
Forces, but those who remain will maintain the organisation in an
efficient state, so that it may resume its normal work on the cessation of
hostilities. It is also recognised that there are a number of important
questions bearing upon eugenics directly connected with the war. Those
eugenists who remain in the country would do well to use their time
observing conditions and amassing information on these questions.

From Oxford we hear that the general conditions are so changed that
no attempt will be made to carry out the normal programme. The secretary of the Brighton Branch is serving with the R.A.M.C., and his duties
have been undertaken by another member of the committee.

LIVERPOOL.

No lectures have been arranged until after Christmas. There is
nothing to report further except that the branch has circularised the following letter among their own council and some of the professional bodies,
including the Architects’ Association and the Engineers’ Association :—

“October 24th, 1914.

“The Council of this Society has had before it the problem of the
effects of the present war upon members of the professional classes. It
is probable that they will suffer in several ways; those who minister
directly to the public pleasure by means of music, painting and the
drama, or who hold precarious positions as governess and tutor, are
earliest affected; later, the diminution of capital will curtail contracts in
constructive work, architecture and engineering will suffer, while law
and accountancy follow. Professional men and their families may thus
be brought into straits, and there is also the case of those who have
sacrificed a good professional position in order to join the ranks in the
Regular or Territorial Forces of the Crown.
QUARTERLY CHRONICLE. 343

“ Necessitous cases among officers’ families can be dealt with under
the Queen’s Fund, and those arising in industry and commerce under the
Prince of Wales’s Fund. It is particularly desirable that war distress
in the professional classes should not be overlooked, because their high
average of ability and character renders them, as a group, one of the
greatest assets of the nation.

“T have been instructed, therefore, by the Council of this Society to
approach the secretaries of the leading professional bodies in the Liverpool area upon this point. They may be able to give all necessary assistance to their own members from funds at their own disposal; if not, we
might be able to help according to the nature of the case and within
the limit of our own funds. It might be well also to bring the general
claims of the professional families needing war relief before the committee of the Town Hall Fund; but such representations would carry
most weight if made jointly, and if backed up by some clear individual
case. I shall be glad to hear from you on these points.

“To make our position quite plain, I would add that we have in
mind only those cases of necessity which arise directly out of the war;
not others which happen to occur at this time, but are due to more
ordinary causes.—Yours very truly,

: “R..'T.. BODEY,

“Hon. Secretary.”
NEW SOUTH WALES.

The visit of the British Association to Australia in September was
an event of much importance, and had been anticipated with pleasure by
the branch of the society. Many members of the Association were also
members of this society, and had promised to communicate with the
Dominion branch on arrival.

The following reports received from the secretary show that even the
war did not quite deaden all interest in eugenics :—

“It affords me much pleasure to report that on 21st ultimo we held a
very successful meeting in Sydney. The gathering was arranged in conjunction with the Economics and Commerce Association of this State—an
organisation connected with our Sydney University, and of which I am
one of the vice-presidents.

Professors Marett and Myres very kindly wrote me from Adelaide
on their way to Melbourne. They informed me of the interest in eugenics
of one of their party, Dr. F. von Luschan, of Berlin University. — I
immediately wired the latter at Melbourne, as a result of which he
gave an address on our subject at the meeting referred to. Other speakers
on the occasion were Professors E. C. K. Gonner, M.A. (president, Section F), Professor of Political Economy in the University of Liverpool;
Professor A. W. Kirkaldy, M.A. (recorder, Section F), Professor of
Finance in the University of Birmingham; and Professor H. O. Meredith, M.A., Professor of Economics in Queen’s University, Belfast. Dr.
von Luschan, as you probably know, is Professor of Anthropology in the
University of Berlin.

In spite of many counter attractions for the evening (our function,
of course, not being on the official list), we had a splendid attendance;
Dr. von. Luschan spoke for over an hour, and illustrated his remarks
with lantern views. His chief claim for eugenics was based on degeneracy, on which he gave many European statistics and diagrams. I am
of opinion that his contribution proved a genuine service to eugenic
thought in our midst. We had a mixed audience, with a very good proportion of young men, and the medical and professional element. A
number of working men were also present. The address referred to, as
well as those of the other distinguished gentlemen named (who all dealt
with economics), I feel sure did a great deal of good.
344 EUGENICS REVIEW.

I cordially thanked Dr. von Luschan on behalf of our society, and
extended him every courtesy within my power.

You will, I am sure, be glad to learn that the Director-General for
the Insane in this State (Dr. Eric Sinclair) was present, and at its close
was good enough to compliment me on the nature and success of the
gathering. He has accepted my invitation to be a vice-president of our
society. Dr. C. S. Willis, Principal Medical Officer, Medical Branch of
the State Education Department, was also present. He, too, is identifying
himself with our work.

I also have to report another interesting event. Dr. C. B. Davenport has been in Sydney, and we have had the pleasure of meeting and
hearing him. Unfortunately, I was not made aware of his intended visit
by the American eugenic centre, or we should have seen more of him.
He seemed very pleased with, and interested in, our work here, and
readily consented to speak from our platform. Although time was
limited, two functions were arranged—a luncheon in his honour, and a
meeting in the evening. Both took place on the 25th inst.

A representative gathering attended the luncheon. Our president,
Dr. R. Arthur, M.L.A., who presided, proposed the health of our guest.
The toast was supported by the Hon. Sir W. McMillan, K.C.M.G., and
Mr. John Sulman (a member of the State Housing Board, and a local
authority on modern town-planning), one of our new members. This
function enabled me to introduce Dr. Davenport to our principal members, and gave a personal touch to his visit which he seemed to enjoy.

At the Royal Society’s house in the evening Dr. Davenport gave an
address of over an hour on “ Eugenics in its Relation to Social Welfare.”
The result, I am pleased to be able to report, was a large attendance and
a thoroughly successful evening. We had a good proportion of young
men and women present, representative of all classes in our midst, from
leading professional men and women to the humble ranks of labouring
men. Keen interest was taken in the address for such a mixed audience,
and at its close an animated discussion took place, showing a spirit of
inquiry and attention. We regard the meeting as a fine piece of work
for our cause.

The two events made the week a memorable one in the history of
the eugenic movement here. They have strengthened the position of the
society. Dr. Davenport, having kindly consented thereto, he was unanimously elected as hon. life-member and vice-president of our society.”

J. C. ELDRIDGE,
Hon. Secretary.
HASLEMERE BRANCH.

This branch has held one meeting this quarter, on Thursday, November 26th. Mr. W. C. Marshall and the Rev. Canon Selwyn spoke on
“ Eugenics and War.” A discussion followed. L. E. Muir,

Hon. Secretary.
