A.I.D. Investigation Council

Evidence submitted to the Departmental Committee on Artificial Insemination

Tin COUNCIL is concerned with A.I.D.
in its global aspects and has necessarily to
take a broad view of the social, personal,
legal, eugenic, moral and religious considerations involved in the use of the technique.
Further, it is intended that the Council shall
be a continuing body, which will collect, collate
and disseminate information about the practice
of A.I.D. Up to date the Council has taken
evidence from most of the doctors in Great
Britain who have had experience in the technique.

General Considerations

(A) Evidence given to the Council over the last
six months confirms the impression that in Great
Britain A.I.D. is practised on a very small scale.
It seems from the evidence heard by the Council
that over the last fifteen years there has been only
a slight increase in demand and that at the present
time less than 100 children are born each year
as the result of A.I.D. The Council is unaware
of any factual basis for the much higher figures
often quoted.

(B) The Council, therefore, is of the opinion
that quantitatively the social problem involved is
negligible, and owes its present publicity to
qualititative legal and moral considerations, and
above all to the emotions likely to be encountered in a largely androcentric (malecentred) society.

The Council deplores the fact that a few
hundred healthy, normal and wanted children
born since the war as the result of A.I.D. appear
to give more concern to the public conscience
than do the tens of thousands of mentally
defective or unwanted ones born over the same
period as the result of coitus.

(C) The Council wishes to emphasize that
biological theory gives no support whatever to
the suggestion that A.I.D. children are in some
way different from other children because the
insemination was carried out artificially rather
than naturally. Practical results, so far as they
can be assessed from the inadequate follow-up

studies, are concordant. Moreover, the effects if
any of A.I. as such should manifest themselves
not only with A.I.D., but also with A.L.H.,
against which little is urged except that it is
relatively ineffective. On the biological side
there is clear evidence that the use of the
technique, per se, does not lead to adverse
effects; 10 million calves have now been born
in Great Britain as a result of A.I.

(D) On the eugenic side, it should be pointed
out that A.I. donors, unlike most fathers, have
been selected for their mental and physical
quality. In the experience of the only one of our
witnesses who has made a systematic follow-up
of cases, the quality of A.I.D. children is equal
to or above the average of their kind.

Answers on Note A*
1. In the light of the evidence it has accumulated
from witnesses, the Council is of the opinion that

(a) No adverse effect on the religious, social
or ethical well-being of society as a whole is to be
anticipated from A.I.D. on the scale it is at
present practised in Great Britain, provided that
the practitioner acts with a high sense of medical
and social responsibility. If the practice of A.I.D.
became widespread, however, the large increase
in the number of individuals making declarations
which they believed to be false might involve a
lowering of social morale unless legal steps were
taken to obviate the difficulty.

(b) A.I.D. has no ill effect on the institution
of marriage or on family relationships, provided
that certain precautions are observed, especially
that

(i) patients are carefully chosen and the
practice restricted to well-adjusted
married couples with a stable background,
of which the man is deemed in the light
of present knowledge to be infertile and
the woman fertile;

* Note A was circulated by the Departmental Committee; it sought the views of public and professional
bodies on various aspects of artificial insemination.

225

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1960, 51, 4.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(ii) the possibility of adoption and the alternative of wider humanitarian service are
explained to the couple;

(iii) both husband and wife sincerely want

A.I.D. and that both ask for it in writing;
(iv) in addition to positive qualities donors
are chosen to avoid any prominent
physical characteristic which might dissociate the child from the husband.

Given these qualifications, the Council is of
the opinion that a childless marriage, provided
it is stable, can be enriched by the fulfilment of
the parental urge in the possession of children.
By contrast, the Council deplores any attempt
to make a child, however conceived, a means of
consolidating an unstable marriage, and urge
that in A.I.D., as in normal propagation, the
ultimate deciding factor should always be a
reasonable probability that the child will be
glad to have been born.

(c) Given the precautions mentioned above
A.I.D. should have a favourable rather than an
adverse effect upon the relation between
husband and wife. The Council deprecates any
suggestion that the acceptance of A.I.D. by
husband and wife is necessarily a sign of
psychiatric disturbance.

2. The Council is of the opinion that
anonymity of the donor is essential; that given
this condition and the full approval of his wife,
there need be no adverse effects on the donor or
on his family life. With many donors the motive
is similar to that of blood donors. (In Bombay,
male blood donors are now invited to become
semen donors to help with the large-scale testing
of chemical spermicides in progress there.)
Payment to the donor, where it is made, should
be considered not as an inducement, but as a
method of putting the transaction on an
objective basis. Semen donors, like blood
donors, are normally paid in the U.S.A.

3. The Council is of the opinion that the
decision to employ A.I. is a personal and
private matter and should be kept so. Secrecy

226

therefore is highly desirable; especially, a child
should not be told that his “father” is infertile.
Given the selection of cases referred to above, it
is realistic to expect secrecy to be maintained by
both husband and wife.

4. The Council is of the opinion that, at present, only the doctor can and should keep
records. In English law, a child is presumed to be
the child of the marriage unless the husband can
prove otherwise, and the law should be extended
to include the A.I.D. child once the husband has
agreed to the use of the technique.

A donor should always be asked whether he
has acted as a donor for other doctors, so as
to avoid the concentration of half-sibs in one
district and the consequent possibility of consanguineous marriages. This problem has not
yet arisen; so far as the Council has been able
to find out the oldest A.I.D. child in Great
Britain is now only seventeen years of age. In
this connection it should be remembered that
adoption, where the identity of the parents is
withheld, or unknown, opens up the possibility
of marriage between full brother and sister.
In any event, the evidence available does not
suggest that one generation of consanguineous
marriage is biologically catastrophic.

5. The Council is opposed to new legislation
of a restrictive nature.

6. The Council deplores the suggestion that
A.I.D. amounts to adultery and considers that
such an interpretation is theologically and
etymologically untenable, though it recognises
that theological objection has also been urged
on other grounds. A.I.D. without the husband’s
consent should, however, be made a ground for
divorce. The Council is opposed to any alteration of the existing marriage law with the
exception of the amendment referred to in
paragraph 4 above. It considers that with A.I.D.
on its present negligible scale, the problems of
inheritance and succession occasioned thereby
have been greatly exaggerated for polemical
purposes.
