CORRESPONDENCE

Family Allowances

To the Editor, Eugenics Review

Srr,—The scheme for an indiscriminating State
payment of five shillings a week for every child
seems to overlook the experience of the similar
Spenhamland system described in Waters’s Economic History of England. Each birth added Is. 6d.
to the weekly allowance, the illegitimate birthrate
rose rapidly, and the rural population lost every
incentive to good work, thrift, or temperate living.
The employer-farmers were, in effect, subsidized
from the rates, which became crushing. A greatly
over-populated countryside resulted, most inhabitants drawing poor relief.

Human nature changes little. So similar results
from the scheme of Mrs. Hubback and Miss
Rathbone (vide her recent book The Case for
Family Allowances) seem probable, viz., a rapid
increase of the poorest classes. These do not go in
for family limitation. They would be largely
maintained by taxation of the self-supporting
classes. This would increase the tendency of the
latter to avoid having children, though such
children are the kind the nation most requires.
Employers not unlikely would reduce wages or
withhold legitimate increases, especially for unskilled workers not protected by strong trade
unions. Many wage-earners would reduce by the
amount of the family allowances the sum they give
for house expenses, and spend on themselves the
money saved. :

One reason adduced for family allowances is a
need to increase the birthrate, at present below
replacement level. As the population of this
densely crowded country has increased by several
millions since the last war, and millions are normally
unemployed, a reduction in population would seem
an advantage.

The Charity Organization Society handles
poverty from expert knowledge, and its opinion
(vide How to Help Cases of Distress) is as follows :
‘““ Large families of young children may readily fall
into distress. But a system of family allowances
will not meet the perennial difficulty of assisting
the man who is a low wage-earner and who has a
large family without making assistance more attractive to him than employment. Nor will family
allowances adequately and suitably relieve cases of
distress ;; this for the reason that they are to be
automatic. . . . An automatic scale will not settle
the problem of poverty ; that can only be settled by
careful case-work, by taking each case on its own
merits.”

It is certainly essential that every child be
adequately fed. But on the above-quoted experience and opinions an indiscriminate family
allowance for each child, or even for each child

94

after the first or second, paid whether the family
needs it or not—and probably the majority of
families do not—appears wasteful and demoralizing. Careful dealing with each case on its own
merits seems soundest.

London. J. P. BRANDER.

To the Editor, Eugenics Review

Sir,—The movement for family allowances is
really a mixture of two different movements which
have nothing in common except their name.

Fifty years ago Jane Hume Clapperton (Scientific
Meliorism) and G. A. Gaskell demanded what they
called ‘‘ Endowment of Mothers.”’ They held that
motherhood was a public service and should be
paid for directly, instead of leaving the mother to
beg from her husband. They had no desire, however, to stimulate the birthrate ; on the contrary
they were fervent neomalthusians.

This original aim has been overlaid by another,
viz., a desire to stimulate the birthrate. Just before
the war the Fabian Society published Parenthood
and Poverty by Louis Ginsburg, who says “ Protagonists of the family allowance almost invariably
consider allowances paid only to children after the
third” (p. 43). On the same page he says: “‘ An
allowance should be granted of 7s. per week for
every dependent child in excess of three.”’

We have thus two distinct programmes masquerading under the same name. One set of people
would give an allowance to every mother. The
other set would endow only a small minority of
mothers, those who have more than three children.
The great majority of mothers, instead of getting
anything, would probably have to pay heavier
taxes on their tea and sugar.

Finally I would point out the extraordinary folly
of trying to stimulate the birthrate before we know
how many people we shall be able to support after
the war. Mr. Colin Clark has shown that Britain
has a much higher standard of life than any other
densely populated country. That standard is
wholly due to our immense export trade of manufactured goods which we send all over the world,
obtaining food and raw materials in exchange.
Destroy that export trade and we sink to the level
of Italy or Japan. Who can possibly say what
export trade we shall have after the war ?

R. B. KERR.
335 Sydenham Road,
Croydon.

To the Editor, Eugenics Review :

S1r,—Mr. Brander’s and Mr. Kerr’s letters deal
between them with so many points that they
require an article in reply. I will, however, try to
deal with at least some of the points, and refer the
correspondents to Miss Rathbone’s Penguin on
