406 EUGENICS REVIEW

Transactions of the Second Annual Meeting of the American Association
for Study and Prevention of Infant Mortality. (Chicago,
November, 1911).

The papers included in this bulky volume are of very various interest
and of somewhat unequal value. Those dealing with the statistical
aspect of the question comment forcibly on the absence of a general
and uniform system of registration of births in the United States, and
also on the inadequate enforcement of such registration laws as exist. In
the campaign against infant mortality in America it would appear that
very great importance is attached to the education of girls in housewifery
and the care of children, and the discussion of the various proposals
for organising instruction in these matters contains much that 1s suggestive and interesting. The importance of eugenics in relation to the movement was recognised at the meeting by allotting to it a special section,
in which several valuable papers were read, most of them dealing with
the question from the Mendelian standpoint. In this section an inter-esting contribution was made by Mr. Roswell Johnson, who, on the basis
of results obtained with the Binet-Simon tests of mental capacity, expressed some scepticism as to the value of efforts to instil the principles
of intelligent motherhood into minds of naturally inferior quality.

Infantile Mortality. Report of the Special Committee appointed by the
Council of the Royal Statistical Sacitety to inquire into the
systems adopted in different countries for the registration of
births (including still-births) and deaths with reference to
infantile mortality.

This report embodies a mass of detailed and authoritative information which from its character does not admit of being summarised
further. The only point that can be specially singled out for notice here
is that, with reference to still-births, the subject which in the first
instance led to this inquiry, the Committee strongly recommend that
such births be registered, and further that an international definition
of “still-birth ” should be adopted. The report includes a valuable
memorandum prepared by the Chairman (Dr. Reginald Dudfield) dealing
with the principles to be followed in framing such a definition.

Ellis, Havelock. Zhe Task of Social Hygiene. Constable and Co.,
1912. ,

UNDER the term Social Hygiene, Mr. Havelock Ellis has included a
wide range of subjects. Of this width we need not complain, so long as
it is reasonable; but when we find the last 100 pages taken up with
discussions of war, an international language, and Socialism, we begin
to wonder what hygiene means. It is indeed a pity that these last three
essays were included at all'in a volume which might, in its other parts,
serve as an admirable introduction to eugenic methods of thought.

We may say at once that the book neither makes, nor claims to make,
any original contribution to science. It is a series of essays from the
pen of a sex-psychologist of high repute and wide mental range, in
which he deals with the status of women and their emancipation, the
problems connected with love and marriage, the significance of a falling
birth-rate, and the bearing of legal enactments on the nation’s morality ;
in the essay on “ Religion and the Child” he makes an interesting excursus into child psychology. .

Thus far the book should be read by anyone who wishes to appreciate
the complexity of the problems with which eugenics has to deal. Hitherto, he shows, social reform has dealt mainly with environment; we have
attempted to clean up the banks of the stream of life; now we have to
purify the stream itself. Reform of the living organism must work from
REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS 407

within outwards; no artificial system can be one of true eugenics. This
is sound teaching, such as we should expect from a psychologist.

The reader will realise that “things are not what they seem”; for
the author delights in making short work of current and conventional
opinions, and arriving at flatly contrary conclusions.

With the “ woman’s movement ” he has a deep-rooted sympathy; yet

his criticism of militancy is about the best we have seen. But if sympathetic with women’s political aspirations, he shows a still deeper
approval of the German “ emotional ” movement, whereby, he indicates,
women are seeking to alter their status by a practical revolt against the
conventional idea of marriage. While apparently regarding permanent
monogamous union as an ideal, he does not think it should be enforced
by the State; and he regards prostitution as the obverse of enforced
monogamy. With perfect logic he is ready to contemplate the withdrawal of the State from its position as regulating marriage, and is read
to face the confusion which would result. Such proposals make us rub
our eyes; they show up by contrast the true conservatism of the Majority
Report on Divorce.
A falling birth-rate he regards with no anxious eye; it is a necessary
and desirable accompaniment of civilisation. He makes out his case—
up to a point. Nor does he regard the greater fertility of the lower
classes, as compared with the higher, with regret; for “a civilised community is a lamp which burns at the top but is replenished from the
bottom.” | .

Early religious influence is commonly looked upon as of high importance; he views it as antagonistic to the true interests both of the child
and religion; the adolescent will be more deeply and truly religious
if the child’s religious instincts are allowed to mature with as little
artificial stimulus as possible.

Sexual attraction, he teaches, tends to bring like to like, not like to
unlike, as has been commonly held; in many respects, therefore, nature
and eugenics co-operate. . |

No kind of immorality should be regarded as criminal, unless it is
directly anti-social in its effect. The confusion of immorality with
crime he regards as a fundamental error whereby an enormous amount of
energy is wasted, or worse .

Such are a few of the conclusions. Whether the reader agree or disagree, the author is always instructive and suggestive, and carries to his
subject an exhaustive knowledge of the literature. His writings are not
to be neglected by any who wish to understand the significance of
eugenics.

Lofthouse, W. F. Ethics and the Family. Hodder and Stoughton;
7s. 6d. net.

Mr. LOFTHOUSE has written a book in which there is much to interest the
general reader. He considers the claim of the Christian church to be
the divine family and the persistence of the family as the true social unit
in all ages and civilisations to be two phenomena which should be investigated together. Anything which tends to destroy or break up the
one is a direct attack on the other. The conception of the family in
sociology corresponds with the conception of the atonement in theology.
Both are manifestations in different spheres of the same biological, lifepreserving, or spirit-informed instincts. The function of the institution
of the family is—like that of all institutions and social organisations—
to give freer play to the spirit which has called it into being. Such a
statement does not mean that the family has been invented in response to
an articulate demand. It is a growth, an organic part of the structure of
