CORRESPONDENCE

The Eugenics Society is not responsible for opinions expressed by correspondents

EUGENICS IN THE USSR?

To the Editor, The Eugenics Review

Sir,—It would be interesting to know what work
or thinking is being carried out on eugenics in
the USSR. To this end the National Lending
Library for Science and Technology was
requested to find any reference in Russian to the
subject of eugenics. Medical, sociological or
criminal journals or papers, it was thought,
might contain some, even oblique, reference such
as “improving the nation’’, “family welfare’’ or
“genetic inheritance of physical, mental or
emotional qualities’’. Any statistics on the subject
would be welcome. Any paper on abortion or
contraception might refer to negative eugenics.
Direct or oblique reference to eugenics might be
found in any law permitting the sterilization of
certain groups of mental defectives or criminals.
Any study of inherited or environmental
influences might give a clue. No clues, however,
were forthcoming in the period: 1921-1964.

A search by the National Lending Library for
Science and Technology, however, shows that a
book What is Eugenics ? by Philipchenco is dated
1921, while another book An Introduction to

Medical Genetics by Eproimson, dated 1964,
may indicate that, as a result of the discarding of
Lysenko’s views, interest in the subject of
heredity is being revived. A review of this book
by any of your readers working in this field
might be welcome especially as it appears that
since the early 1920s any work or even discussion
on this topic was forbidden.

In Time (26th March 1965) is an item which
may reflect a Russian interest in not only
quantity but quality. The mother of Leonov, the
Siberian cosmonaut, has nine children, thus
earning the Order of Maternal Glory, First
Class. Could not this equally well have been
called the Eugenics Medal? The press described
Leonov, age 30, as of notable endurance, coolness and high discipline and went into unusual
rhapsodies about his physical perfection. Jzvestia
wrote “Connoisseurs of bodily beauty, the
Ancient Greeks, would surely have judged his
build as athletic’’. Can this be an indication that
the USSR is now becoming in fact, if not in
name, eugenically minded ?

JAMES CAMPBELL
17 Meadway,
London, N.W.11

116
