THE EUGENICS REVIEW

particularly important in confirming the validity of the conclusions from in vitro studies
and provide striking evidence for the universality of the genetic code.

A great merit of this Symposium volume is that the subjects are by no means restricted
to the elucidation of the genetic code in its strict sense, i.e. the meaning of the 64-word
language of the DNA or RNA base sequence. Detailed accounts are given of recently
acquired knowledge of the biochemical mechanisms involved in the various steps in translation of RNA messages into protein, and of the structure of transfer RNA molecules and
their interactions with messenger RNA. In addition, there are many excellent contributions
devoted to the regulatory processes that control which segments of the totality of “‘information’’ stored in DNA are transcribed into messenger molecules under different environmental
conditions and are thus expressed in the cell in the form of active proteins. These studies
are particularly relevant to models of the mechanism of cellular differentiation in higher
organisms.

This volume is not light reading but it should prove invaluable for anyone interested
in the wide and rapidly progressing field which it covers.

JULIAN D. GROSS

Asimoy, Isaac. The Genetic Code. New York and London, 1962 (original edition). Signet
Science Library: New American Library. Pp. xiv + 187. Price 5s. Paperback.

THIS PAPERBACK BOOK Sets out to explain to the general reader who has little or no
background of biology or chemistry the “‘astonishing breakthrough” represented by the
progress of molecular biology in recent years and to look at the possibilities of “genetic
engineering” for the future.

Professor Asimov describes only those chemical features of molecules necessary to
put together a coherent story of elementary organic chemistry and then describes the relationships between molecules by analogy with everyday relationships such as words in
sentences. Building on this foundation he describes organic molecules, proteins, enzymes
and the like. He puts the question as to how information about the organization and functioning of animal or plant body is passed from generation to generation. He locates the
information in the chromosomes and continues the detective story by describing the
structure of the nucleic acids by the same methods as before. This part ends with the
structure and significance of the double helical constitution of the DNA in the chromosomes.

In the course of the story of protein synthesis he shows the relationship between DNA,
messenger RNA and transfer RNA. He elegantly describes the idea that certain triplets of
mononucleotides and their position in the DNA chain control the sequence of amino acids
in a protein chain. He describes what is known about the correspondence between specific
triplets and specific amino acids. Having thus outlined the “genetic code”, Professor
Asimov speculates as to the future and upon the possibility of repairing genetic deficiencies
and even synthesising new proteins to control chemical reactions in vitro.

It may be objected that the book is superficial, containing little of real biochemistry
and relying on a number of simplifications. But that would be to miss the point of the work
which is to convey to the ordinary reader what has been going on in molecular biology.
It is successful not only in this respect but also in conveying the great intellectual satisfaction
and excitement generated by these discoveries.

K. W. WILKES

McKusick, Victor A. Mendelian Inheritance in Man; Catalogs of Autosomal Dominant,
Autosomal Recessive, and X-linked Phenotypes. Baltimore, 1966. Johns Hopkins. (London,
Heinemann). Pp. xvii + 344. Price 60s.

270
REVIEWS OF BOOKS

THIS BOOK IS UNIQUE for it is a catalogue of all the autosomal dominant, autosomal.
recessive and X-lined phenotypes known in man. It is a formidable work for there are entries
on 837 dominant, 531 recessive and 119 X-linked phenotypes. The mode of inheritance has
not been firmly established in all these conditions but is well established, as the author
clearly indicates, in 269 of the dominant, 237 of the recessive and 68 of the X-linked
phenotypes. Each entry consists of the preferred designation for the condition, a brief
description of the phenotype with a summary of the essential genetic information relevant
to the condition, and one or more key up to date references. All the references are given in
full with inclusive pages and titles. In the case of the recessive phenotypes, information on
methods available for recognising carriers has also been included. There is an author index
and an excellent subject index which gives cross references for the preferred and alternative
designations for every condition listed.

Though some common phenotypes have been included, for example the ability to
taste PTC and colour blindness, the majority are rare. In the section on autosomal dominant
phenotypes certain co-dominant traits have been included such as the abnormal haemoglobins, red cell antigen types, leucocyte types and serum protein types.

In the Foreword Professor McKusick outlines the reasons for compiling such a monograph. Paramount among these is the inestimable value in genetic counselling and the importance of recognising heterogeneity of genetic diseases; an entity which at first appears
to be phenotypically homogeneous but with further study is often found to be genotypically,
and therefore fundamentally, a heterogeneous group of disorders:

In medical genetics there is little place for expressions such as “spectrum of
disease”, . . . Phenotypic overlap is not necessarily any basis for considering [two
diseases | fundamentally the same or closely related.

The conception of this work is brilliant, and its execution outstanding. Because the
information has been put on magnetic tape it is planned to keep the catalogue up to date
and republish it whenever sufficient new material has been accumulated.

ALAN E. H. EMERY

Bartolos, Mihaly, and Baramki, Theodore A. Medical Cytogenetics. Baltimore, 1967.
Williams and Wilkins. (Edinburgh, Livingstone). Pp. xxiii + 419. Price £5.

THIS BOOK IS PRIMARILY directed at the student and the clinician, and one must try to
assess how well if fulfils its purpose in relation to this. It consists of four parts, the first
of which deals with general genetic information, the human chromosomes and the techniques
of their study, the generalities about chromosome anomalies and the study of sex chromatin.
In the second part, devoted to sex-chromosome anomalies, there are four general chapters
on genetic sex, embryology, origin of abnormalities of sex development and intersexuality,
while the rest is devoted to clinical conditions with abnormal sex development, not only
those resulting from chromosome abnormalities. The third part deals with the autosomal
anomalies and includes a brief chapter (eight pages) on dermatoglyphics in general, while
part four briefly reviews the effects on chromosomes of ionizing radiation, viruses and drugs,
and deals with chromosomes in neoplastic disease and in radiation. The approach in Parts II
and III is essentially clinical: specific syndromes are considered and the chromosomal
findings are set out and discussed.

On the positive side of this book, the chapters that deal with the major autosomal
anomalies (Down’s, Edwards’s and Patau’s syndromes) are clear and accurate, as is the
brief general discussion of dermatoglyphics, though, incidentally, while the dermatoglyphic
findings in autosomal anomalies are given due consideration, nothing much is said about

271
