The Eugenics Education Society,
Prestdent : Major Mace Leowasn DARWIN.

u \p
Vices=Presidents :
SIR JAMES BARR, President, Liverpool Branch.
Dr. BENHAM, President, New Zealand Society.
S1rR JAMES CRICH TON-BROWNE, Ex-President, 1908 to 1909.
RIGHT Rev. C. F, D'Arcy, Bishop of Down, President, Belfast Branch.
PRoF. STARR JORDAN, President, Eugenic Section, American Genetic Association,
Mr. W. C. MARSHALL, President, Haslemere Branch.
RicHtT Hon. Lorp MOULTON, F.R.S., President, Birmingham Society for the Study of Heredity.
M. EDMOND PERRIER, President, Société Francaise d’Eugénique.
Dr. A. PLOETZ, President, International Society for Race Hygiene.
‘Pror. E. B. Poutton, F.R.S., President, Oxford Branch.
PROF. SERGI, President, Comitato Italiano per gli Studi de Eugenica.
PROF. SEWARD, F.R.S., President, Cambridge Eugenics Society.
RicuTt Rev. J. E. C. WELLDON, Dean of Manchester, President, Manchester Branch.
Hon. Secretary: Mrs, A. C. GoOTTo. . Hon. Treasurer: M&. YON FLEISCHL.
- Members of Council:
Mr. CROFTON BLACK. MR
Str E. BRABROOK, C.B.
Mrs. THEODORE CHAMBERS.
Hon. Sir JOHN CocKBurRN, K.C.M.G,
Mr. R. NEWTON-CRANE.
Mr. A. E. CRAWLEY.
Sir H. CuNNINGHAM, K.C.LE.
Dr. LANGDON Down.
Mr. HAVELOCK ELLIs.
ProF. J. FINDLAY.
Mr. E G. WHELER GALTON.
Mr. M. GREENWOOD, JuN., F.R.C.S.
Dr. W. HADLEY.
ADMIRAL HENDERSON.
Major HI is, F.R.S.
THE VERY Rev. W. R. INGE, DEAN OF
ST. PAUL’s.
Miss KIRBY.
Mr. Ernest Langs, F.R. C. Ss.

C. MARSHALL.

vroy ¢ OwEN- MACKENZIE.

Mr. RoBertT MOND.

Dr. F. W. Mott, F.R.S.

Mr. G. P. MupGce.

Mrs. G. POOLRY.

Mr. W. REA, M.P.

Dr. A. REID.

Mr. JOHN RUSSELL.

Dr. ETTI&£ SAYER.

Mr. F. C. S. SCHILLER, D.Sc.
Pror. A. SCHUSTER, F.R.S.
Mr. EDGAR ScHUSTER, D.Sc.
'Dr. C. G. SELIGMANN.

Pror. J. A. THOMSON. |

Dr. A. F. TREDGOLD.

Mrs. ALEC TWEEDIE.

Mr. W. C. D. WHETHAM, F.R.S.
Dr. DoucLas WHITE.

Dr. A. GORDON WILSON.

Birmingbam ;:
Mr. HUMPHREY HUMPHREYS. Mrs. JORDAN-LLOYD. Mr. J. P. MILLs.
Liverpool:
Mr. R. T. BopkEy. Mr. R. D. Laurie. Dr. W. B. WARRINGTON.
baslemere: Manchester: Belfast:

Mr. W. C. MARSHALL. Dr. MUMFORD. Pror. J. A. LINDSAY.

Rew Zealand: Oxford:
ADMIRAL HENDERSON. THE IION. T. A. MACKENZIE, Dr. E. SCHUSTER.

Research Committee :
Dr. E. SCHUSTER, Chairman.

Education Committee:
Mr. J. RUSSELL, Chairman.

Mr. A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS, Secretary.
Dr. GREEENWOOD.

Mr. LIDBETTER.

Dr. TREDGOLD.

Mrs. T. CHAMBERS, Secretary.
Miss BONWICK.
Mr. HOPE-JONES:
Mr. NICHOLS.
Miss TRENCH,
_ Publication Committee :
This Committee consists of the Executive Officers of the Society, Chairmen and Secretaries of Sub-Committees and the
Branch representatives,
. N.B.—Other Committees are appointed from time to time for special purposes.

“ Eugenics ts the study of agencies under social control that may improve or impatr
the racial guakties of future generations either physically or mentally.” 
OBJECTS. :
1,—Persistently to set forth the National Importance of Eugenics in order to modify public opinion, and create a sense of respone
sibility i in the respect of bringing all matters pertaining to human parenthood under the domination of Eugenic id
.—To spread a knowledge of the Laws of heredity so far as they are surely known, and so far as t knowledge may affect the
improvement of the race.
I1I.—To further Eugenic Teachers, at home, in the schools, and elsewhere.

BUSSCRTETION:

5

- Membersh

One Guinea per Annum.
. Associate

Five Shillings per Annum.

{
Membership o
PRIVILEGES.
Atthndance’ at Lectures, Discussions, and General Meetings, Use. of Library.
Members only receive THE EuGENICS REVIEW free. ~
Forms o Application for Membership and Associate Membership and full petialees y the Soctety

can be obtained of lon. Secretary.
FFICES: Kingsw
OFFICE HOURS: : 10.0 am. tot pain, Sat aye 0% a a. de. 1 pm.

4
THE

EUGENICS
REVIEW |

 

Vol. VI.

APRIL, 1914—JANUARY, 1915.

e
ae me ote te

e@, 0@ © tc, @
eect ee ?

PUBLISHED QUARTERLY
BY THE EUGENICS EDUCATION SOCIETY,
KINGSWAY HOUSE, W.C, ,
CONTENTS.

ARTICLES. PAGE
ANON., Eugenics and the War [Professional Classes War Relief
Council] . - 195
Burt, C., The Measurement of Intelligence by t the Binet Tests.
Part I... z . 36
Part II. . . . . - 140
CHAMBERS, T. G., Eugenics and the War . : : ‘ . 271
Coss, J. A., The Problem of the Sex-Ratio . . . . 157
DARWIN, Major L., The Habitual Criminal . . . . 204
DARWIN, SiR F., Francis Galton . . . . . ‘ I
HAMILTON, A. E., American Eugenics. . . . - 308
KEATINGE, M. W., Education and Eugenics : 2 . - 97
NETILESHIP, E., Consanguineous Marriages 130
Stmon, Dr. T., The Measurement of Intelligence (Translated from
the French by Dr. W. C. Sullivan) . 291
SMITH, G., A Contribution to the Biology of Sex : s . 8
SPEARMAN, C., The Heredity of Abilities . 219
YEARSLEY, M., F.R.C.S., The Problem of Deafness and its Prevention 116
CORRESPONDENCE.
Eugenic Aspect, The, of the Employment of Married Women:
A Reply. R. A. FISHER & C. S. STOCK . - 313
Eugenic Marriage Bills in the Scandinavian Countries. V. NAESER . 239
Measurement, The, of Intelligence. C. SPEARMAN ‘ 312
Primogeniture and Abnormality : A Possible Fallacy. W. C. RIVERS 58
Galton Anniversary 345
LIBRARY, ADDITIONS TO . . . . . 192, 268
NOTES AND COMMENTS.
Eugenic Aspect, The, of the Employment of Married Women . 154
Feeble-Minded, The, in Australasia ‘ . 156
Galton Day . , . . . . I
Inebriates’ Bill, The, of 1914 2 ‘ , . . . $3
Mental Deficiency Act, The . . . . . . §2
Scientific Study, The, ‘of Man : ‘ . . . . 153
OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS . . ; : . 73, 252

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

English ‘ : : . . . »  - 779 175 255, 327
Foreign . , . : ; : - 79) 179, 2575 332
American : 2 . . . . 84, 184, 257, 332

Continental . . : , , - 79, 179, 260, 338
iv

CONTENTS.

PAGE
PROCEEDINGS OF THE SOCIETY (Quarterly Chronicle) 89, 188, 264, 342
PROGRAMME, AUTUMN, 1914, ALTERATION OF

PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED

REVIEWS.

ALDRICH, M. A., W. A. CaRRUTH, C. B. DAVENPORT & others,
Eugenics. Twelve University Lectures . ‘ “ .
ANDREWS, C. B., Life, Emotion, and Intellect . . ‘
BARNETT, Mary G., Young Delinquents: A Study of Reformatory and
Industrial Schools . . . . g ‘
BULKLEY, M. E., The Feeding of School Children
CHESSER, E. SLOAN, From Girlhood to Womanhood
Woman, Marriage, and Motherhood . .
CLOUSTON, SIR T., Before 1 Wed . . ‘ .
CREIGHTON, LouIsE, The Social Disease and How to Fight it .

DAVENPORT, C. B., & A. J. ROSANOFF, Reply to the Criticism of Recent.

American Work, by Dr. Heron, of the Galton Laboratory
DEALEY, J. Q., The Family in its Sociological Aspects . . .
Detzous, L., La Famille Francaise et son Evolution . ‘ ‘
DIpDIN, Sir L., D.C.L., & Sir C. E. H. CHapwyck HEALEY, English

Church Law and Divorce. Part I. Notes on the Reformatio

Legum Ecclesiasticarum, by Sir L. Dibbin; Part II. Notes

on the Divorce and Re-marriage of Sir John Stawell, by

Sir C. Chadwyck Healey . . . ‘ .
Doucias, A. R., Some Suggestions Respecting the Care of the

Feeble-Minded, under the Mental Deficiency Bill, 1913
Doucias, S. O. G., A Theory of Civilisation . . .
DraGE, G., The State and the Poor

DRYSDALE, C. V., D.SC., The Small Family System : Is it Injurious or

Immoral ? : . .
EAMES, BLANCHE, Principles of Eugenics . .

ELDERTON, ETHEL, The Declining Birth-Rate : Report on the English ~

Birth-Rate. Part I., England North of the Humber
FAIRCHILD, H. P., Immigration ‘ ‘ . . .
FISCHER, DR. E., Die Rehobother Bastards und das Bastardierungs
problem beim Menschen * . . .
GALLICHAN, W. M., Women under Polygamy . : .
GaLLoway, T. W., Biology of Sex for Parents and Teachers .
GALTON, Sir F., Hereditary Genius. (New & cheap edition)
GAROFALO, BARON R., Criminology (Translated by R. W. Millar)
GREEN, C. E., F.R.S.E., The Cancer Problem: A Statistical Study
GREENWOOD, A., The Health and Physique of School Children

HaLpane, J. S., M.D., Mechanism, Life, and Personality: An Exam
ination of the Mechanistic Theory of Life and Mind.
Hartiey, C. Gasquoine (Mrs. Walter H. Gallichan), The Truth
about Women. . ‘ . ; . .
HartoG, M., Problems of Life and Reproduction : .
LAUGHLIN, H. H., Report of the Committee to Study and to Report
on the Best Practical Means of Cutting off the Defective
Germ Plasm in the American Population, Parts I. & II.
LEOPOLD, L., Prestige : A Psychological Study of Social Estimates
Lioyp, T., The Making of the Roman People . . ‘
McCase, J., The Principles of Evolution : . . ;
MALINOWSKI, B., PH.D., The Family among the Australian Aborigines

Mark, H. T., D.Lit., The Unfolding of Personality as the Chief Aim |

in Education s . .
Marett, R. R., The Threshold of Religion

239

94, 193, 269, 345

249
7O

169
319
171
171

250

173

165
70

68

63
316
243

170
318

320°
248.
316
318
326
251
250:
172
245
165
CONTENTS. -- Vv
REVIEWS (continued). PAGE
MICHELS, R., Sexual Ethics: A Study of Borderland Questions . 251
MONTESSORI, Maria, Pedagogical Anthropology (Translated by |
T. Cooper) . 66
Mott, Dr. F W., Nature and Nurture in Mental Development 323
OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS » 252
Births, Deaths, and Marriages in England and Wales (1912s
75th Annual Report of the Registrar-General, 1914 . 253
Board of Education. Annual Report for 1912 of Chief Medical
Officer, 1913 76
Census of England and Wales, 1git. Vol. x1. “ Infirmities, Persons returned as Totally Blind, Totally Deaf, Deaf and
Dumb, Lunatic, Imbecile, and Feeble-Minded . 73
Census of Scotland, 1911. Vol. WI., 1913 (on Marriage Fertility,
& on Infirmities) 76
English Convict, The: A Statistical Study, by C. Goring, Deputy
Medical Officer, H.M. Prison, Parkhurst. 73
Report of the Inspector under the Inebriates’ Acts, 1879 to 1900,
for the year Ig10. 1914. 75
Sixty-seventh Report of the Commissioners in Lunacy, 1913. 75
Statistique Internationale du Mouvement de la Population. Vol.
II., IQOI-10 - 252
PARKINSON, RT. REv. MONSIGNOR H,, D. D., PH. D., “A Primer of
Social Science 71
PEARL, R., A Contribution towards an Analysis of the Problem of
Inbreeding , 246
Genetics and Inbreeding 246
PEARL, R., & H. M. PARSHLEY, Data on Sex-Determination in Cattle 246
PEARSON, K., The Life, Letters, and Labours of Francis Galton, Vol. I. 240
PEARSON, KARL, & G. A. JAEDERHOLM, Mendelism and the Problem of
Mental Defect. II. On the Continuity of Mental Defect 324
PERIODICAL LITERATURE . » -77y 1755 255, 327
English—
Archives of Neurology and Psychiatry, Vol. VI., 1914 255
Bedrock,
Vol. I1., 1914 ‘ 175
Vol. m1., April, 1914. . ‘ 176
Charity Organisation Review, November, 1914 328
Child Study, October & November, 1914 : 329
Englishwoman, August, 1914 255
Hibbert Journal,
January & April, 1914. 177
May, 1914 . 178
Insurance Observer, January 3Ist, & February 6th, 1914 . . 78
ournal of Biological Chemistry, ‘March, 1914 . . 175, 255
ournal of Genetics,
April & June, 1914 261
October, 1914 328
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society,
ee 1913, January & February, 1914. 77
June, 1914 : 327
Journal of State Medicine,
April, 1914 177
August, 1914 255
Man, November, 1914 . » 320
Monist, The, October, 1914 337
Nature, April, 1914. 178
Parents’ Review, December, 1914 329
Quarterly Journal of Microscopical Science, February, 1914 175
vi CONTENTS.

REVIEWS (continued).
PERIODICAL LITERATURE (continued).
English (continued).

Science Progress, January, 1914
Scientific Proceedings of the Royal Dublin Society, June, 1914
Sociological Review, April, 1914
United Empire Magazine,
May, 1914
August, 1914
Foreign—
American.
American Anthropologist, The, October-December, 1913
Bulletin of the American Academy of # Medicine;
December, 1913 .
February & April, 1914 .
June & August, 1914.
Chicago Medical Recorder, The,
November, 1913 .
October, 1914
November, 1914 .
Journal, The, of Heredity,
January, 1914
February, 1914.
March & April, 1914
June & July, 1914
August, 1914
November, 1914 .
Popular Science Monthly,
January, 1914
February, 1914
April, 1914
June, July, August, & September, 1914
November, 1914 .
Social Diseases, Vol. Iv., No. 4
Training School Bulletin, The,
December, 1913
April, 1914
May, 1914
October, 1914
Continental.
Archiv fiir Frauenkunde und Eugenik, March & May, 1914
Archiv fiir Rassen- und Gesellschafts-Biologie,
May-June, 1913 .
July-August, 1913
September-October, 1913
June, 1914
July, 1914

PAGE

332)

- 179

Archivio per l’Antropologia ela Etnologia, No. 35 ‘Vol. XLVI.

Bulletin de la Statistique Générale de la F rance;
January, 1914 .
April, 1914
Enfance, L’, Anormale, January, 1914
Eugénique,
December, 1913, & January, ro14
February, 1914 . .
March & pnt 1914
May, 1914
Maanedsskrift for Sundhedspleje, 1913

78

255
178

179
255

257

87
187
257

86
336
335

88
184
185
258
259
330

84

184
259

333
88

86
186
258
337

262

79
80

339
184
84
182
183
83

182
260
CONTENTS. vil
REVIEWS (continued). PAGE
PERIODICAL LITERATURE (continued).
Foreign (continued).
Continental (continued.)

Neue Generation, Die, May & June, 1914 . . . 263

Revue de Pédotechnie, October & November, 1913, . . 183

Revue, La, Psychologique, December, 1913 . ‘ ' . 263

Rivista di Antropologia, Vol. XVIII., 1913. . . . 83

Rivista Italiana di Sociologia, March-April, 1914 . 339
Zeitschrift fiir Induktive Abstammungs- und Vererbungslebre,

November, 1913, & January, 1913 . . . 82

March, 1914 a ‘ ‘ ‘ . 181

Apnil, 1914 . . . 182

Pitt, ST. G. LANE Fox, The Purpose of ‘Education . ‘ - 174

PycraFT, W. P., The Courtship of Animals. 172

REISSHEIMER, H., Evolution by Co-operation: A Study in Bionomics 164
ROPER, A. G., Ancient Eugenics: The Arnold Prize Essay for 1913 . 62

SANDEMAN, G., Social Renewal . 171
SCHOFIELD, Dr. A. T., & Dr. P. VAUGHAN-JACKSON, What a Boy
Should Know. 166
TORELLE, ELLEN, Plant and Animal Children: How they Grow . 325
TREDGOLD, Dr. A. F., Mental Deficiency (Amentia), 2nd Edition . 168
WEBB, HELEN, Life and its Be innings . ‘ . 170
WESTERMARCK, E., Marriage Ceremonies in Morocco. . 164

WORMALD, J. & S.; A Guide to the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913 . 65
NOTES AND COMMENTS.

Galton Day.—On Monday, February 16th, took place the
first celebration by the Society of the anniversary of the birth
of Sir Francis Galton. The celebration was inaugurated by a
dinner at the Hotel Cecil, attended by 140 persons, members of
the Society and their friends. The guests of the Society
included Lord Sydenham, Sir Archibald Geikie, Sir Francis
Darwin, and Professor Bateson. Among the congratulatory
telegrams received was one from Dr. Ploetz on behalf of the
‘* Gesellschaft fiir Rassenhygiene.”’ Immediately after the
dinner the company repaired to the lecture room, where a considerable audience had already assembled. Here the proceedings
were opened by Major Leonard Darwin, who, in introducing
the lecturer, explained the object of the gathering in the
following words: ‘‘In the first place we desire to satisfy the
very natural wish which is felt for some outward expression of
our firm belief that posterity will owe a great debt of gratitude
to the man who first made it possible to start a definite
campaign in favour of racial advancement; and, in the second
place, we hope by means of these gatherings to make more widely
known the necessity for eugenic reform. We trust, therefore,
that this may prove to be the first of a long series of such
anniversary meetings; meetings at which addresses will be
delivered on subjects connected with eugenics, thus ensuring
that the meaning which Galton attached to that word shall
never be lost sight of. It may perhaps be said that there is a
danger in establishing an annual gathering in honour of any
scientific thinker, namely, the danger that we may thus tend to
cause his conclusions to be accepted as scientific dogmas outside the region of controversy. This harmful result from the
celebration of a Galton day is, however, very unlikely to be
felt; because all the writings of that keen thinker tend to show
that he held that our scientific faith must include a belief, not
only in the evolution in the past of living things, but also in
the continued evolution in the future of scientific theory. The
aim of eugenics according to its founder is to increase the
52 EUGENICS REVIEW.

probability of the men of the future being hereditarily endowed
with noble qualities; and Galton not only taught us how that
aim might be accomplished, but he also showed us in his own
person what those noble qualities were.’’ Sir Francis Darwin
then delivered his address which we publish in full on page 1.
The proceedings terminated with a vote of thanks to the lecturer,
proposed by the Dean of St. Paul’s and seconded by Mrs.
Scharlieb, and a vote of thanks to the chairman, proposed by
Major Hills and seconded by Mr. Whetham.

The Mental Deficiency Act, which comes into force on
April 1st, may be regarded as a very useful instalment of
legislation. It is, perhaps, the only piece of English social
law extant, in which the influence of heredity has been treated
as a practical factor in determining its provisions.

The Act does not go as far as some of its promoters may
have wished, yet most good things grow slowly, and legislators were well advised, in this instance, in adopting cautious
measures, where so much is debatable, so much untried, or
still in experimental stages. Much of its general utility even
now depends upon two factors, the passing of the Elementary
Education (Defective and Epileptic Children) Bill, introduced
by Mr. Joseph Pease this Session, and the increase of the
Treasury grant. Without the clauses making it compulsory to
establish special schools, children above school age needing
institutional care or guardianship will be left to drift into
danger, save in the unlikely event of the parents of the very
worst cases notifying the local authority of the necessity for the
certification and segregation of their defective children. Without an increased Treasury grant, the clause in the Act (30 [t]),
which makes it non-obligatory for a local authority to provide
either institutions, or guardianship, for persons within their
area, whom they ascertain to be mentally defective, if the money
provided by Parliament is less than half the net amount of the
cost, will affect more areas than is realised, as the Treasury
grant is at present only £150,000. It is permissive, however,
for any local authority to act without the grant, a fact which
should be borne in mind by those anxious to promote the movement. So far the most active authorities are the Poor Law
NOTES AND COMMENTS. 53

Guardians. Almost every union in the country is discussing
the possibilities of institutional treatment.

In addition to the existing colonies connected with the
London and Birmingham Boards of Guardians, twenty-four
unions in the North of England have already bought land for
this purpose; others have their plans almost completed. Many
county councils, on the other hand, have not even constituted
their ‘‘ committees for the care of defectives,’’ yet there appears
already, as at Wolverhampton, some little danger of disagreement between these rival authorities as to their relative spheres
of action. This spirit is to be deprecated, as there seems more
than enough for all to do in carrying out the provisions of the
Act. The formation of the Local Committees, the maintenance in institutions or provision of guardianship for defectives, whether under Poor Law or otherwise, the establishment
of special schools, and the co-ordination of voluntary effort
will require the devotion and interest of every agency available
for the aid of defectives for some time to come.

A. H. P. Kirsy.

The Inebriate’s Bill, of 1914, should be read in conjunction with the last published report of the inspector under the
Inebriates Acts. This partakes more of the nature of a general
than of an annual report. After defining carefully what he
means by an inebriate, Dr. Branthwaite makes a rough estimate
of the prevalence of inebriety. ‘‘ There are about 48,000
inebriates of all classes in England and Wales at the present
time (about 1°42 per 1,000 of the population), of which number
about 16,000 are persons in private life—whose habits have not
led to conviction in police courts—and 32,000 known to have
criminal or disorderly tendency.”’

With regard to the treatment of the non-criminal inebriate
he makes the following recommendations: (1) Legislation
should allow ‘‘an inebriate to enter into a legal pledge to
abstain, to surrender himself to the control of some friend
whom he can trust; such friend being in the position of
guardian, with power to prevent the patient from obtaining
drink during time of stress, when good intention would
otherwise succumb to abnormal desire.’’ (2) ‘‘ If these mild
54 EUGENICS REVIEW.

measures fail, . . . then the inebriate should be encouraged
to enter an institution for more effective control and supervision.”’ (3) As experience shows that only an insignificant
proportion of inebriates will submit voluntarily to institutional
control, it is desirable that powers should be available for the
application of restraint, under proper safeguards, ‘‘ during the
early days of an inebriate’s history.’’ ‘‘ When inebriety is
clearly defined, recovery can never be guaranteed; but it is
probable if restraint be applied during early days, and improbable later.’’ ‘‘ For a long time past our national respect for the
liberty of the subject has seemed to contra-indicate the compulsory application of restraint to persons who are inebriates
without being disorderly or criminal. But, however justifiable
the delay so that experience may prove necessity, the time has
come when there can be no further doubt as to the desirability
of making proper provision. Nearly 35 years’ experience of
legislation for inebriates has amply proved that the existence of
compulsory power is unavoidable, and has made it clear that
further progress is impossible so long as things remain as they
are.”

This is strong language for an official report, and Dr.
Branthwaite’s views concerning the treatment of criminal and
disorderly inebriates are expressed with equal force and directness. ‘‘ The necessity for compulsory restraint in such cases
has been accepted and acted on, for many years past. All that
is necessary now in regard to this phrase of the subject is to
emphasize the need for the removal of difficulties that now
prevent the early and more efficient exercise of restraint for
purposes of reformation, as distinct from restraint for the purpose of punishment.’’ ‘‘ All efforts at amendment of the law
should be directed towards rendering the imprisonment of
inebriates, as a preliminary to their treatment in reformatories,
a thing of the past, so far at least as this is possible.”’ ‘‘ It is
clear that repeated short penal sentences have no deterrent
influence over the inebriate.”” ‘‘It is difficult to describe
the proceeding ’’—a few weeks’ imprisonment, spasmodically
applied to habitual drunkards—‘‘as other than inhuman,
useless, and an absolute waste of public money.”’
NOTES AND COMMENTS. 55

After coming to these conclusions Dr. Branthwaite proceeds to summarize the findings of the three committees
of enquiry concerning the best methods of dealing with
habitual drunkards. These were the Select Committee of
1872, the Departmental Committee of 1892, and the Departmental Committee of 1908. The reports of all three committees are in practical agreement not only with regard to
essentials, but also with regard to details, but legislation
based on their findings, namely, the Habitual Drunkards
Act of 1879 and the Inebriates Act of 1898, has fallen far short
of carrying out their recommendations, and thus a further
amending Act is urgently needed. Dr. Branthwaite appears
to hold a sanguine view as to the probable reforming effect of
reformatories, provided that the inebriate finds shelter there early
enough in his career, and it is natural that in advocating
amendments of the existing law he should not in any way belittle
the possible good to be expected from them. But the prevalence of feeble-mindedness among the inmates of reformatories
makes it very doubtful whether short detention even at the most
hopeful time would have any lasting result in the majority of
them. In the present report no direct statement is made about
the rate of occurrence of mental defect, but from other reports
it appears to be present in more than half the persons admitted.
As among those who were sent to reformatories during 1912 53
out of 305 could neither read nor write, and 149 could only do so
imperfectly, it seems probable that little change has occurred
in this respect in recent years. It may thus be found that the
proper function of the reformatory is to provide a more or less
permanent place of shelter for the inebriate.

The Bill of 1914 gives practical effect to Dr. Branthwaite’s
recommendations which are themselves in accord with those of
the last Departmental Committee. What its fate will be this
session is still doubtful as its second reading appears to have
been indefinitely postponed. It is to be hoped that in spite of
the great amount of Parliamentary time likely to be occupied
with more contentious measures it may not be completely
abandoned.
56 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Eugenics and Education—We note with satisfaction that
the efforts of the Eugenics Education Society to further the view
that the idea of racial responsibility should be among the usual
lessons learnt at school has not been without result. In various
parts of the country there are indications that the importance of
this question is recognised and that a considerable body of opinion
in the teaching profession is agreed on what preliminary steps
should be taken. At the North of England Education Conference, held at Bradford at the beginning of January, two
papers were read by well-known eugenists. Dr. D’Ewart, Hon.
Secretary of the Manchester Branch of the Society, took
“* Eugenics and Sex Training ’’ as his subject, and Miss Norah
March, also a member of the Society, dealt with ‘‘ Sex Education
and Eugenic Training in the School.’’ Regret is often
expressed by those eugenists not in touch with the education
problems of the elementary schools that eugenics should so constantly be approached as if it were almost synonymous with sex
hygiene, but to those who have given close consideration to the
matter the conclusion seems unavoidable that although the two
subjects are theoretically distinct they cannot be practically
sundered. A sound eugenic ideal and a sense of individual
responsibility cannot be imparted except on the basis of an
elementary knowledge of the physiological laws of reproduction
and development. Miss March in her paper outlines the
possible methods of approaching the subject, in a way which
will be of great assistance to the teacher. She clearly states
that “‘the ultimate aim of sex-education will be attained when
one considers its application in education for parenthood.”’ It
is recognised that a large part of such education is rightly the
privilege of the parent, but in many cases the parents feel
unable to give it themselves and welcome the assistance of the
teacher. Miss March indicates how the various subjects of the
ordinary school curriculum, ‘‘literature, history, human
geography, and Bible knowledge,’’ may each be utilized in
implanting the eugenic ideal, and goes on to say ‘“‘It is
undesirable that there should be any special course of lessons in
moral training, such teaching should find its way unobtrusively,
yet very definitely, into the ordinary subjects.”’
NOTES AND COMMENTS. 57

Before any teaching, direct or indirect, can be given in the
school, it is essential that the teachers should learn something of
the subject themselves. An attempt to provide for them opportunities for so doing was recently made in the special course of
lectures for teachers, organized by the Society and given by
Professor J. A. Thomson and Dr. Greenwood. We learn with
pleasure that the University Extension Board for London will
probably include lectures on eugenics in its autumn programme.
Cambridge University has also recognized the importance of the
subject by authorizing a course of local lectures to be delivered
at Leicester by Dr. Marett Tims. Dr. Marett Tims takes for
his subject ‘‘ Man’s place in Nature: Biology and Eugenics,”’
and after an examination of the syllabus we have no hesitation
in saying that the subject is dealt with by him in such a way
that anyone taking full advantage of his lectures will acquire a
sound and comprehensive, though necessarily elementary,
knowledge of the subject. The consideration of man’s place in
nature, involving as it must the idea of evolution and some knowledge of structure and function and of the nature of social life,
is, perhaps, the fittest introduction to eugenics that could be
devised, yet hitherto the subject has seldom if ever been
approached in this way.

Before closing this brief review of ‘‘ Eugenics and
Education” we take the opportunity of emphasizing the vital
importance of obtaining the consent of the parents to any
proposal that their children should be taught such subjects
as eugenics and sex-hygiene. Without this consent and
co-operation, however good the intention of the teacher,
disastrous results may follow an attempt to introduce these
subjects. This has been shown particularly by the case of Miss
Oldham. On the other hand, in those cases in which the parents
have had the teacher’s aims and methods explained to them,
permission has been given by the indifferent and cordial
co-operation by the intelligent parents.
OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS.

THE ENGLISH CONVICT: A STATISTICAL STUDY BY CHARLES GORING, M.D.,
B.Sc. Lond., Deputy Medical Officer, H.M. Prison, Parkhurst.
Pp. 440; 49 fig.; 285 tables; index.

This masterly report contains a minute statistical analysis of the
criminal. The layman must not allow its publication by the Government
or its scientific treatment to deter him from studying it. Although by the
very nature of the work there is much in the way of figures and tables
and calculations that the ordinary man will not follow with ease, yet
the main body contains a mass of information and suggestive fact that
from its lucid presentation will absorb the attention of the philanthropist,
the social reformer, or of that large section interested in human nature,
while it will prove of especial importance to the eugenist. The breaking
up of the chapters into sections and an index makes its assimilation
much simpler.

The original idea was a statistical enquiry into the truth of the
theory of a criminal type, and of the view of Lombroso’s school of
thought, that the physique of the criminal predestined him to a life of
crime. But when the enormous mass of material came to hand, it was
felt that this could be profitably extended to a much fuller enquiry. The
material lay in those who were sentenced to the prisons at Dartmoor,
Parkhurst, Borstal and Portland after 1st June, 1902, until the number
of 3,000 had been reached. The statistical reduction of the data was
carried out at the Biometric Laboratory of the University of London.

The report opens with an introduction dealing first with the superstitions of criminality, in which Lombroso’s theories are dealt with at
some length, pointing out the unreliable and unscientific data admitted
by him; secondly, discussing the objects and means of the enquiry. Only
by a statistical method can a scientific basis be laid. The real question
to be discussed is whether the criminal is a morbid abnormality differing
qualitatively in his physical and mental make up from the ordinary man,
or whether he has certain qualities shared by all, in a larger or lesser

egree.

Part I. inquires into the alleged existence of a physical criminal
type. There is a brief explanation on the statistical methods employed.
After an examination dealing with 37 physical characteristics such as
head lengths, cephalic index, chin projection, eyesight, shape of the nose,
asymmetry of the face, of criminals divided up according to the nature of
their crimes—malicious damage to property, stealing and burglary, sexual
offences, and so forth. Dr. Goring concludes that “if there is any real
association between physical character and crime, this is so microscopic
in amount as not to be revealed. . . .”. He compares the criminals not
only with each other, but also with Oxford and Cambridge undergraduates
and others. “No evidence has emerged confirming the existence of a
criminal type such as Lombroso and his disciple have described.”

Part II., chapter I., deals with the physique of the criminal. He
is found to have a lesser stature and strength and diminished weight.
Although those convicted of violence to the person have an average degree
of strength and constitutional soundness considerably above not only the
criminal but also the general public. But the facts do not allow of
further deduction. The age incidence of the first crime centres round
three points, the most important one being 20-25, then a more protracted
and less emphatic middle age period of 35-45 and a transient period of
55-05.

In chapter II., the health of the criminal is discussed, he is seen to be,
if anything, slightly better off than law-abiding people. Disease, except
74 EUGENICS REVIEW.

those associated with alcoholism and venereal conditions, is not related
to crime, and except for epilepsy and insanity, morbid conditions per se
are no part of the force of circumstances by which criminals are made.

Chapter III. discusses the mental differentiation of criminals.
Temperament, whether phlegmatic, discontented, suspicious, or egotistic,
has no connection with crime; temper likewise, except that hot-headed
criminals tend to commit violent offences. Now comes what to the
eugenist is the most important part of an important document. The chief
factor in the causation of crime is mental defect, the coefficient of
correlation being ‘64. Mental defect supplies the link between crime and
alcohol (39), epilepsy (‘26), and sex offences (‘31). Mental defect is
variously estimated among criminals as from Io per cent. to 20 per cent.,
the latter probably being the more correct, while in the general population it is only “45 per cent. The crime most associated with it is stackfiring (52.9 of those convicted being mentally defective), then wilful
damage (22°2), arson (16°7), and so forth down to fraud (o'0). Fraud is
found to stand apart from other kinds of crime. Between the criminal’s
defective intelligence and defective physique there is found to be no connection.

In chapter IV., “ The Influence of the Force of Circumstances on the
Genesis of Crime,” Dr. Goring examines the nationality, education, both
formal and effective, employment, alcoholism, the influence of family life
in its different aspects, the standard of living of the parents, the age
of the subject at the death of the mother, the order of the subject
in his family, and the number in the family, as well as the relation
of first to subsequent convictions. He finds that an adverse environment
is related much more intimately to the intelligence of convicts than to
the degree of their recidivism or to the nature of the crimes they commit.

Chapter V. enquires into the fertility of the criminal. Although up to
40 the number in the family is the same as in the law-abiding classes,
after that it ceases. Dr. Goring brings forward an interesting physchological theory to account for this curious fact. It is not that the criminal
has become sterile, but that the long-suffering wives have become so tired
of their husbands’ misdeeds that they desert them. Although the criminal
comes from the most prolific stocks the average number in the criminal’s
family is less than half that of the general population.

Chapter VI., on the heredity of the criminal, will prove of especial
interest to the eugenist. Here there is a two-fold aim—(r1) “to determine
the correlation between parents and offspring and between contemporary
members of the same family with regard to their convictions for crime”;
(2) “to estimate from these facts related to other evidence how far any
resemblance in crime depends upon the influence of family contagion.”
The percentage of criminal offspring increases according as neither
parent, one parent, or both parents have been convicted. The correlation
between parents and sons is about ‘60, the resemblance between fathers
and sons being slightly greater. The fraternal correlation is about ‘45.
Here, as elsewhere, fraud seems to stand apart from other crimes, there
being a very small correlation. The greatest resemblance lies in those
classes where there is a taint of habitual or professional criminality—
stealing and burglary.

The influence of contagion he places very low. The fact that while
only one out of eight criminal men have a criminal wife, every other
criminal woman has a criminal husband he accounts for by selective
mating. As the average age of marriage is 25 and the modal age of
first crime is 19, most criminals have entered on their career before
marriage. The women find it harder to gain a law-abiding partner for
life than the men.

There is a chapter of general conclusions.
OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS. 75

The report brings out, as Sir E. Ruggles-Brice points out in a preface, the fact that the Borstal Institution is the best way of dealing with
crime in the individual, although in its connection with mental defect
the eugenist will see a deeper line of action.

H. R. S.

SIXTY-SEVENTH REPORT OF THE COMMISSIONERS IN LUNACY. 1913. Part I.
Eyre and Spottiswoode. pp. 125.

This report shows that on January rst, 1913, the number of the notified insane under care in England and Wales was 138,377, or a proportion
of 1 to 267, or 37°48 per 10,000 of the estimated population. Ten years
previously the ratio was 34°23, so that during this period it has increased
by 9'49 per cent.—in other words the proportion of insane to the population has risen from 1 in 292 in the year 1903 to 1 in 267 in the year
1913. This increase, in view of all the attention which has been paid to
the public health during the past thirty or forty years, cannot be regarded
as other than disquieting. Compared with earlier figures, say those of
1859-69, the increase in the ratio of insanity is very much greater, but
there is a fallacy in this comparison owing to the facts that certification
is now very much commoner than 50 years ago, whilst improved care
has lengthened the life of the insane and so caused an “ accumulation ”
and increase in the official figures. It is doubtful, however, if there has
been any appreciable change in these respects during the past ten years,
and the figures quoted would seem to indicate a real increase in the ratio
of insanity. In this connexion it may be noted that in the case of London,
whose population was practically the same in 1g11 as in Igor, the pauper
insane during this period have increased by 25 per cent. The Commissioners give some very interesting figures and charts showing the
incidence of insanity in the different counties. This varies very much,
for reasons which are by no means clear, and it is probable that careful
inquiries directed to ascertain these reasons would throw much valuable
light upon the whole question of the genesis of mental disease. So far as
remedial treatment is concerned, the recovery rates recorded each year
do not encourage much hope for further advance, and it will be very
gratifying to advocates of eugenics to find that the Commissioners say :
“It would seem to be needful to turn from the therapeutic side to the
preventive, if insanity is to be effectively controlled. . . . The recognition
of the share taken in the causation of insanity by heredity, alcoholism and
syphilis suggests that an appreciable diminution in its amount might
follow on a reasonable application of the principles of eugenics and of
social reform.” Truly the eugenic movement is advancing when such
words emanate from a Government department.

A. F. TREDGOLD.

THE REPORT OF THE INSPECTOR UNDER THE INEBRIATES ACTS, 1879 to 1900,
for the year 1912. 1914. [Cd. 7281.] Price 3d. Pp. 30.
An account of this report, with comments thereon, appears under the
heading “ The Inebriates Bill” on p. 53.

CENSUS OF ENGLAND AND WALES, 1911. Vol. XI. Infirmities.
Persons returned as Totally Blind, Totally Deaf, Deaf and Dumb, Lunatic
Imbecile and Feeble-minded. 1913. [Cd. 7020.] Price 9d. Pp. xv., 78.

These returns are slightly more detailed than those of 1901, in that
persons who are totally deaf are distinguished from those who are both
deaf and dumb. They suffer indeed not from lack of detail, but from lack
of accuracy, as is admitted with much frankness by the framers of the report, who on that ground “ have not felt justified in entering upon an elaborate analysis of the figures.” The usefulness of the report is further reduced
by reason of the fact that the nature and amount of the inaccuracy is
different from census to census, so that the figures for 1911 cannot be
fairly compared with those of 1901, and thus allow of any conclusion to
76 EUGENICS REVIEW.

be drawn as to the proportional increase or decrease of the infirmities

dealt with. _.
The following table shows the number of persons per million of each

sex who suffer from the defects enumerated :~—

Male. Female.
Blind ... be age i. wee 760 wee 702
Deaf (other than Deaf-Mutes) ... 610 pons 860
Deaf-Mutes_... as wa Boe 468 wes 373
Insane (including Lunatics, Imbeciles, and Feeble-minded Persons) 4370 ges 4604

The insane, male and female together, form 4,491 per million of the
population, made up of 2,957 lunatics, 704 imbeciles, and 830 feebleminded persons.

CENSUS OF SCOTLAND, 1911. Vol. III. 1913. [Cd. 7163.] Price
2s. 11d. Pp. lvi., 290.

The most interesting and valuable of the records contained
in this volume are those which deal with the fertility of marriage. This subject is so important that we will postpone its consideration
till the Scottish returns can be examined in combination with those obtained from England and Ireland. Next to this in eugenic importance
come the figures giving the numbers of the infirm. These are subject to
much the same sources of error as the English, and it is to be regretted
that they are not summarised in a strictly comparable form. The following table shows the numbers per million of the population of those
suffering from the infirmities enumerated :—

Blind wee wee wee ais 697
Deaf = ae a wee 845
Dumb wes bes we wee 560
Deaf and Dumb .... ~ oT 498
Lunatic _ vee wes wes 3302
Imbecile or Feeble-minded _... 1662

The deaf and dumb are included both among the deaf and among the
dumb, so the proportion of those who are deaf without being dumb is 347,
and of those who are dumb without being deaf is 62.

BOARD OF EDUCATION. Annual Report for 1912 of the Chief Medical
Officer. 1913. [Cd. 7184.] Price 2s. 6d. Pp. 414.

This report summarises the results obtained in 1912 from the medical
inspection of school children, the provision of which is a Statutory duty of
each local Education Authority. The opportunity for the systematic
observation of large numbers of children afforded in this way to individual
school medical officers would appear to an outsider to provide a wonderful
field for research into the nature and origin of diseases and defects. That
this opportunity is made some use of is shown by the report, which includes reference to many special inquiries. For example, on the relation
between heart disease and rheumatism, and on the fluctuations in body
temperature among normal children.

The theory that heredity plays any part in the causation of disease 1s
evidently repugnant to some official minds. Thus we find the curious dictum
that “ Epilepsy is looked upon by some as an inherited disease” used to
introduce the following statement (p. 111) :—“ Careful inquiry is made as
to the occurrence of heredity by Dr. Hume Griffith in respect of children
admitted into the Lingfield Colony, of which he is medical superintendent,
and the records of 95 children are shown in the following table :—No
information obtainable, 15; no family history obtained of epilepsy or
insanity, 40; history of epilepsy in near relatives, 27; history of insanity
in near relatives, 8; history of death from convulsions in infancy among
members of same family, 5. Deducting the 15 cases in which no family
history was obtainable, these figures show a family history of epilepsy in
337 per cent.; of insanity, 10 per cent.; of epilepsy, convulsions or inPERIODICAL LITERATURE. 97

sanity in 50 per cent.” The statement is not a very good example of how
to apply statistical methods, but possibly Dr. Hume Griffith’s data are
more adequately recorded elsewhere, although there is no reference to
any other channel of publication in the present report.

A more pressing question perhaps, from the eugenic point of view, is
the part played by heredity in tuberculosis, but although some at any rate
of the school medical officers use the presence or absence of family history
of tubercle as a guide in diagnosis, it does not appear to have occurred
to any of them to investigate this problem. It is to be hoped that some
may do so in the future.

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.
ENGLISH.

JOURNAL OF THE ROYAL STATISTICAL SOCIETY, December, 1913, January
and February, 1914. The December issue of this journal contains two
papers of value to eugenists. Miss Hutchins, in an interesting note on the
effect of infantile mortality on the proportion of the sexes, points out that
since in districts of high mortality the latter mainly affects the earlier
ages of life, the consequence is that the proportion of females living at
adult ages tends to be higher than in the Registrar-General’s healthy
districts. Mrs. Frances Wood’s study of the “Course of Real Wages in
London, 1900-12” is a valuable contribution to social statistics, and should
be read by all who have occasion to consider the problem of working class
prosperity at the present time as contrasted with the conditions prevailing
some years ago.

In the January number, Messrs. Greenwood and Yule publish a
critical analysis of the evidence supposed to show that diseased stocks are
peculiarly fertile, and that earlier born children are more liable to be
diseased. Their results should be compared with the similar conclusions
reached by Mr. J. A. Cobb in a letter appearing in the last number of
this REVIEW.

In the February part, the most important paper is “ The Fertility of
Marriage in Scotland: A Census Study,” by Dr. J. Craufurd Dunlop,
Superintendent of the Statistical Department of the Office of the RegistrarGeneral for Scotland. This paper is in effect a summary of the results obtained by the census authorities and now published (Vol. III. of the Report
of the Twelfth Decennial Census of Scotland. Cd. 7163). Attention may
be directed to the marked differences in fertility which characterise the
different social classes of Scotland. Taking marriages which had lasted
at least 15 years, and in which the wives were more than 22, but less than
27, at the time of marriage, the results are arranged in different groups.
Professional and allied occupations were found without exception to be of
low fertility, while most of the labouring class occupations exhibited a
high rate of fertility. To take a few instances, crofters and coal, shale
and ironstone miners yielded mean families of 7°04 and 7’or children
respectively. The figures for agricultural labourers and _ general
labourers were 6°42 and 6'29. At the other end of the scale, we find such
groups as physicians and surgeons, with a mean of 3'91, advocates and
solicitors with a mean of 3°92, and ministers and clergymen with a mean
of 4°33.

In the discussion on Dr. Dunlop’s paper certain difficulties of interpretation are noticed.

Another article in this number of interest to eugenists who employ
statistical methods is “A Study of Index Correlations,” by Mrs. Frances
Wood and Messrs. Brown and Greenwood, which treats of some practical
difficulties in the interpretation of correlation coefficients.
78 EUGENICS REVIEW.

INSURANCE OBSERVER, January 31st and February 6th, 1914. Rating of
Lives for Family History of Tuberculosis. Mr. C. A. Elliott, F.LA.
In the first place the experience of the Prudential Assurance Company,
recently analysed by Messrs. Rusher and Kenchington, is considered. In
these data no distinction appears to have been made between persons with
tuberculous parents, grandparents, brothers, sisters, uncles, or aunts. The
mortality of such lives as compared with normal experience showed that
a life of the former class aged 33 was equivalent to a select life aged 348,
one aged 45 equal to a select life aged 45°7, and one aged 57 to a select
life aged 56°3. Carrying the analysis further, Mr. Elliott concludes that
the following method would be an equitable one in the cases of proponents
otherwise healthy, but with a family history of tuberculosis :—Proponent
under 25, add 7 years; proponent 25-30, add five years; proponent 31-50,
add 3 years; proponent 51 or over, take select. These results have a
certain eugenic importance as showing that the experience of life assurance societies does not bear out the popular view that family history is
without importance in connection with tubercular diseases.

SCIENCE PROGRESS, Jan., 1914. Recent Advances in our Knowledge of
Syphilis. E. H. Ross, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P. Pp. 535-546. This short paper
covers a wide field. The date of the first appearance of the disease is discussed. Next the history of the discovery of the parasite which causes it is
dealt with. Credit for the discovery is usually given to Schaudinn, but
Dr. Ross maintains that in reality it is due to Siegel. A description of the
life history of the parasite in guinea pig syphilis follows. From this it
appears that a process of conjugation occurs, the spirochaete being the
male conjugant. The zygote formed by conjugation develops within one
of the lymphocytes of the host and there produces fresh forms by budding.
The elements budded off enter into fresh lymphocytes, where they may
give rise again to spirochaetes or to the female form with which the spirochaete unites. Structures resembling closely the various forms which are
produced in guinea pig syphilis have been found also in human syphilis,
thus it seems probable that the human parasite has a very similar life
history. Recently an epidemic of “ rabbit-pox ” has been observed among
wild rabbits and hares in Norfolk, and this has been investigated by the
author, who finds that it is produced by a parasite practically identical
with that of the guinea pig. He concludes his paper by suggesting that
it may be possible for human beings to obtain protection from the disease
by inoculation with rabbit syphilis, just as they are protected against
small-pox by inoculation with cow-pox.

The Influence of Nutrition and the Influence of Education in Mental
Development. F. W. Mott, M.D., F.R.S. Pp. 460-481. This is the third
Chadwick Trust lecture delivered by the author, of which the first two
were published in the October number of Sczence Progress. In the present
lecture he reviews the conditions necessary for normal mental development and describes the stimuli which bring various kinds of mental
activity into play. The practical bearing of the points discussed on the
rearing and education of children is indicated.

Eugenics and War. Pp. 591-593. This is an editorial note principally
concerned with Chancellor Jordan’s lecture on “ Eugenics and War ” which
was published in the October number of the EUGENICS REVIEW. The writer
urges that the historical instances adduced by Chancellor Jordan to support the view that the effects of war are dysgenic are not very convincing.
He also maintains that instances as good may be brought forward on the
opposite side. “For example, one of the most virile periods of English
history was that which followed immediately upon the dreadful Wars ot
the Roses. The greatest development of Prussia followed shortly after
the wars of Frederick the Great.” The complexity of the whole subject
is insisted on and Chancellor Jordan is blamed for not taking it sufficiently
into account. The writer also suggests that “ universal military training
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 79

may possibly have such a good effect as will swamp the occasional loss of
good men in the comparatively rare moments of war.”

FOREIGN.

ARCHIV FUR RASSEN- UND GESELLSCHAFTS-BIOLOGIE X., 3; May-June,
1913 (published December gth, 1913).

Max Hilzheimer: Bettrage sur Kenntnis der Formbildung bet unseren
Haustieren, insbesondere in bezug auf den Schddel (p. 273-289). A reply
to an article by Berthold Klatt, who, in Hilzheimer’s opinion, is disposed
to exaggerate the physiological aspect of the question as to the development of species of domestic animals and to neglect the morphological.
Hilzheimer comes to the conclusion that at any rate in regard to dogs
and swine, it is not the form of the skull as such that is transmitted, but
the capacity to develop a certain form of skull under certain definite
conditions of the environment. Fundamentally, “an animal is the
product of inherited characters and the effects of the environment.” Not
only domestic species, but also some of the sub-species of wild animals
are nothing else than forms that have adapted themselves to their environment. If they are placed in other surroundings their distinctive characters
will either be lost or modified in a few generations, perhaps even in the
first generation. “Although the statement that an animal is exclusively
the product of its native soil must not be accepted literally, nevertheless
those people who believe that the descendants of a fixed variety must
invariably resemble their parents would probably be somewhat astonished
at the results if they were to try, for example, to breed a few generations
of Percheron horses on the Steppes of Russia, or English bulldogs on the
Continent.”

Franz Boas: Die Analyse anthropometrischer Serien, nebst Bemerkungen tiber die Deutung der Instabilitat menschlicher Typen (p. 290-302).
Prof. Boas criticises, among other things, the present method of dividing
anthropometric series into a small number of arbitrarily deliminated groups
and of drawing conclusions from them by taking the relative percentage
of individuals in each. The article is also in part an answer to criticisms
of the author’s Changes in Bodily Form of Immigrants in the United
States, by Sergi, Toldt, Fehlinger and others, who either deny the physiological changes described by Boas or attempt to explain them away as
wholly a result of selection or of the correlation between cerebral index and
the size of the body (Auerbach, Schiff). Some anthropologists insist upon
believing that the cerebral index must be absolutely stable, and therefore
prefer to consider the observed phenomena as resulting from an alteration
in the composition of the population in question and not as an outcome of
actual physiological changes. Sergi holds that rapid alterations in the
germinal substance are impossible, and Boas asks if this opinion is not
due to an unnecessary narrowing-down of the term plasticity. When the
growth of the body is altered by the action of the environment, no one
hesitates to presuppose an inherited stature that is strongly influenced by
external conditions. Improved nutrition and the elimination of diseases
of childhood have in all probability something to do with it. Moreover,
children are not born with full-grown heads, and there is a long period of
pre-natal development during which external influences have ample time
to assert themselves. Boas does not attempt to state what these influences
are, but it seems to him much more probable that the cerebral index is
altered by the influence of the environment than by selection, which
apparently has no connection with the question at all. Not long ago he
was able to show that in the case of American Jews the resemblance
between parents and children is less in such characters as require a longer
period of growth than in such as develop in a shorter time. This must be
considered to be another expression of the influence of the environment.
80 EUGENICS REVIEW.

And although Boas does not venture to make universal application of this
observation, he thinks it quite probable that it may turn out to be a
general rule. ve

W. Weinberg: Uber neuere psychiatrische Vererbungsstatistik
(p. 303-312). A discussion of some recent studies from Dr. Davenport’s
Eugenics Record Office, in which it is attempted to apply Mendelian
formulae to the inheritance of nervous and mental weaknesses. Rosanoff
and Orr (Bulletin No. 5) consider the transmitted tendency to insanity
and neuroses of all sorts to be due to the presence of a simple recessive
factor, and according to their statistics this would appear quite probable.
Weinberg, however, points out that the children under consideration were
not arranged according to their ages, and that since the neuropathic constitution frequently does not become manifest until maturity has been
reached, the numbers given in the Bulletin must be much lower than those
required by the Mendelian theory. Consequently he believes that if all
the children were kept long enough under observation the numbers would
considerably exceed the Mendelian expectations. Weinberg does not think
that the material used is representative in the statistical sense. He mentions further the difficulty of obtaining certain knowledge whether in some
cases a neurosis is purely a transmitted character or acquired. It is also
obvious that sometimes a neuropathic tendency may remain latent and
unrecognised in either the parents or the children, and the possibility
must be considered of mutations in the germ-plasm of the parents caused
by one or another toxic influence, which finds no equivalent somatic expression. Nor does the failure to obtain Mendelian proportions in a
statistical study speak unconditionally either for or against a Mendelian
rule when the investigation is concerned with characters whose appearance is dependent upon exogenous inciting factors.

In contrast to Rosanoff and Orr, Davenport and Weeks (A First Study
in Inheritance in Epilepsy, Bulletin No. 4) start with the assumption that
neuropaths are heterozygotic (simplex). In regard to Heron’s criticisms of
the work of the Eugenics Record Office (noticed on p. 365-367 of the
January number of this REVIEW), Weinberg does not express a very
favourable opinion; but he naturally insists on the importance of making
use only of trustworthy and sufficiently complete material.

Stephen Kekule von Stradonitz: Das heutige Katserhaus Russlands
germanischen oder slawischen Stammes? (p. 313-325). An interesting
paper in which is shown by quotations from the memoirs of Catharine II.,
that the father of the Emperor Paul II. and consequently the male
ancestor of the present ruling house was not the German Karl Peter
Ulrich, Herzog of Holstein-Gottorp, afterwards Peter III., but the Russian
Sergei Vasilievitch Saltykoff.

Dr. Klatt replies to Dr. Hilzheimer, and Dr. Lenz and Sanitatsrat
Weinberg continue their controversy over the inheritance of haemophilia
in the Discussionen und Erkladrungen.

ARCHIV FUR RASSEN- UND GESELLSCHAFTS BIOLOGIE, X., 4; JulyAugust, 1913 (published January 3oth, 1914).

W. Weinberg: Auslesewirkungen bet biologisch  statistischen
Problemen, I. (p. 417-451). From a projected treatise on methods of
investigating problems in heredity. Both clinical and statistical methods
are useful, but the former do not yield results that can as a rule be
accepted as final. Genealogical tables are deceptive for the reason that
often what appears to be in them a rule is perhaps only an exception. In
doing statistical work one must learn to place an equal value on all facts,
whether they are of a positive or a negative sort. A description and
elucidation of the author’s Geschwister and Probanden methods follows:
In studying the genetic qualities of parents, we should not use as material
such of their children as are known to have inherited the characters under
investigation, for the reason that since they are known to possess these
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. SI

characters, their inclusion must tend to prejudice the result by
exaggerating the number of cases in which the characters in
question occur. On the other hand, by making use of a _ sufficient number of the brothers and sisters of such children, it is
probable that we can obtain more correct results. On p. 420 Dr. Weinberg
makes the statement that “when we find a character, which we hold to
be transmissible, in a child and not in his parents, if we have no reason
to believe that external influences alone have caused it to be latent in the
parents, we conclude that the character has a purely innate capacity for
remaining latent, and therefore assume that it must be a simple recessive
factor. We should, however, remember that in reality the conditions are
more complicated, that the visible appearance of a character must depend
upon the coincidence of several endogenous factors.” It would perhaps
have been well to mention, for the sake of avoiding misunderstanding,
the possibility that some transmissible characters which appear in children
and not in their parents, among them perhaps the most significant of all
from the point of view of social pathology, may be a result of mutations or
qnodifications of the germ-plasm caused by external, or by a combination
of external and internal, influences.

Constantino Bresciani-Turroni (Palermo): Uber die Korrelation
awischen Kérpergrésse und Kopfindex (p. 452-469). The conclusion
reached in this paper is that, in so far at least as the investigations described have extended, the correlation between size of body and cerebral
index 1s very small, if indeed it exist at all.

J. Strebel (Ziirich): Korrelation der Vererbung von Augenleiden
(Ektopia lentium cong., Ektopia pupillae, Myopie) und Herefehlern in der
Nachkommenschaft Schleuss-Winkler (p. 470-478). Ectopia lentis congenita is a dominant character, as Bateson supposed, and there are some
indications of its belonging to a sex-modified type of inherited defect.
From the accompanying genealogical table and the cases described, it is
evident that the factor of inheritance must also be considered in the case
of so-called non-congenital defects of the heart. The study of genuine
correlations throws important light on the diagnosis and etiology of otherwise obscure complexes of symptoms. .

Walter Claassen: Die Ausbreitung der Geschlechtskrankheiten in
Berlin, 1892 bis 1910 (p. 479-483). Using the most recent Statistische
Jahrbuch and its returns covering the number of cases treated by the
Gewerkskrankenverein to which 22 per cent. of the working men of Berlin
belong, Dr. Claassen comes to the conclusion that from 22’5 to 34 per cent.,
at the most, perhaps one-half of the male workers of Berlin are syphilitic
or have been so at one time during their lives. Although these figures are
very different from F. Lenz’s go per cent. (comp. his paper in No. 1 of the
Archiv for 1913), whose results were based upon the number of cases of
general paralysis treated in Berlin asylums, nevertheless, as Claassen
says, “this fact is in itself so terrible that it would scarcely seem necessary
to exaggerate it.” The same statistical material shows the possibility that
since 1892-94 the incidence of venereal diseases (mainly syphilis) among
men has increased by more than two-thirds, since 1896-1 by one-third,
and threefold among women since 1896-1900. In the Discussionen und
Erklarungen (p. 503-6) Lenz endeavours to show that his 90 per cent.
result is justified by the material used by Claassen.

Paul Kaznelson (Prag): Uder einige “Rassenmerkmale” des jiidischen
Volkes (p. 484-502). An interesting paper on certain peculiarities in the
somatic characters of the Jews, whose explanation is to be sought in the
history (racial composition) of the Jewish people (Physiognomy, blonde
types), also physiological and pathological characters (sexual and intellectual precocity), relative immunity to phthisis, insanity and diabetes.

HENRY BERGEN.
82 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ZEITSCHRIFT FUR INDUKTIVE ABSTAMMUNGS- UND VERERBUNGSLEHRE.
Band 2. Heft 1 and 2. Nov., 1913. Vererbungsgeschichtliche Einzelfragen. III. V. Haecker. Pp. 1-9. Professor Haecker continues his discussion of the outstanding problems of heredity and evolution. In this
article he deals with the inheritance of acquired characters. He distinguishes four principal forms which the so-called evidence of this mode of
inheritance takes. First there are the cases of the inheritance of an
induced pathological character as in the famous experiments of BrownSéquard; secondly, cases of inheritance of aberrant rather than of pathological characters as in the experiments of Blaringhem; thirdly, there are
the cases of change in some highly specialised adaptive character such as
instinct induced by a change in the environment of which examples may be
seen among domestic animals; fourthly, cases of the inheritance of some
new character directly induced by the environment as in the experiments
of Kammerer. Professor Haecker suggests that an explanation may be
found in what he calls the Pluripotenzhypothese; by this he means that
we may think of the organism as containing many potentialities, some
alone of which materialise; when, however, a change in the environment
occurs other potentialities may materialise and may continue to do so in
the offspring, although no longer subject to the same environment.

Colour Inheritance in the Horse. E. N. Wentworth. Pp. 10-17. This
article deals with recent experiments and observations upon horse breeding. The author is searching for “factors” that will account for the
observations. It is obvious that the facts known offer very great difficulties to any explanation by means of factors, and do not admit of the
relatively simple explanation of colour inheritance in mice and other
animals.

Die Variations Kurve in der Biologie. ¥. Auerbach. This is a long
technical paper of considerable interest to those who are acquainted with
modern statistical methods.

Arthilding bei der Copepodengattung Limnocalanus durch akkumulative Fernwirkung einer Mtlieuveradndung. S. E. Kman. Pp. 40-104. The
author has made certain observations of great interest upon two species of
Limnocalanus. These observations are summarised at the beginning of
the present paper; they have been published in detail elsewhere. It
appears that Limnocalanus grimaldii in late glacial times inhabited the sea
off the Scandinavian coast. Since glacial times the land has been raised,
and in consequence from time to time lakes have been formed containing
Limnocalanus grimaldii. These lakes have gradually become fresh, and
in those lakes that have been longest separated from the sea we find a
form Limnocalanus macrurus that is quite distinct from Limnocalanus
grimaldii. A careful examination of a series of these lakes, however,
shows a number of intervening forms that exhibit every grade between
the two species, and according to the author the extent to which the fresh
water forms differ from the marine form depends upon the length of time
that the former have been isolated. It has further been found that these
various forms are inherited and not directly due to the environment.
Upon the basis of these facts the author founds a lengthy discussion of
some sixty pages. It is of considerable interest, but the conclusion alone
can be noted here. He rejects selection as an explanation and is inclined
to believe in the cumulative influence of the environment; this influence
shows itself so slowly that it cannot be observed in ordinary experimental
work.

ZEITSCHRIFT FUR INDUKTIVE ABSTAMMUNGS- UND VERERBUNGSLEHRE.
Bd. xi. Heft 3. January, 1914. Studies on Variation and Selection. A. L. Hagerdoorn and A. C. Hagerdoorn. Pp. 145-183. This
paper takes the form of a_ series of comments upon _ several
problems connected with variation, inheritance, and selection. It
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 83

is suggested that the term “unit-difference” is to be _ preferred
to “ unit-character,” and that the phenomenon of “ dominance” is of very
secondary importance. It is maintained that recent work has shown that
both continuous and discontinuous variation may be due either to genetic
or non-genetic factors; from this it follows that both forms of variation
may at some time be inheritable and at another time non-inheritable.
The authors then enter into a long criticism of Castle’s experiments.
Castle concluded from these experiments that “ unit-characters ” could be
modified by selection; it is argued here that this conclusion was not
justified. There follows some criticism of statistical methods in the study
of inheritance and some interesting comments upon the increasing number
of instances in which it is held that a series of genetic factors influence
development in the same direction.

Notiz uber den Begriff der Kryptomerie. E. V. Tschermak. Pp. 183191. The author used the term “ Kyptomerie” some years ago to indicate
the phenomenon of the appearance of completely new characters—that is
to say, of characters that do not arise by the recombination of factors in
crossing. He suggests in this note that this may be due to the origin of a
lasting association between characters already present, or to the breaking
down of such an association. This differs from the result of ordinary
crossing when factors may be differently combined; for it is supposed that
there is a change in the influence of one factor upon another.

Versuche tiber Selektion und Vererbung bei vegetativer Vermehrung
von Albium salivum. P. Vogler. Pp. 192-199. Experiments were undertaken to answer two questions. Can distinct strains be isolated by selection from a population increasing by vegetative reproduction? Is selection
of small variations within a strain effective? The answer to the first
question is yes, to the latter no.

MAANEDSSKRIFT FOR SUNDHEDSPLEJE, 1913. The Investigation of the
Inheritance of Deaf-mutism for Eugenic Purposes. Dr. Séren Hansen.
Pp. 97-106. The Danish Anthropological Committee has now begun a
thorough investigation of the inheritance of deaf-mutism on the basis of
records from the deaf-mute institutions, supplemented by additional
information furnished by doctors and clergymen throughout the country.
A number of pedigrees have already been traced and specimens of these
are given in this paper.

EUGENIQUE, December, 1913. L’Alcool et L’Eugénique, Alcoolisme et
Divorce. Dr. P. L. Ladame. Pp. 177-191. In Geneva during the decade
1gOI-19g10 there were 1,812 decrees of divorce, and 676 of these were on the
ground of the drunkenness of one of the spouses. This number must be
regarded as a minimum estimate of the number of divorces due to alcoholism. To it must be added many of those cases in which the ground
was cruelty or violence, since the effect of alcohol on more or less pathological and degenerate brains must often be the cause of cruelty and
violence. Yet it must not be argued that the suppression of alcohol would
stop nine-tenths of the divorce cases. The case is by no means as simple
as this since mental defect is often the cause of alcoholism.

EUGENIQUE, Jan., 1914. Les Progrés de LEugénique. Dr. C. W.
Saleeby. Pp. 1-15. A lecture delivered before the French Eugenics Society
on January 7th. Dr. Saleeby describes the bearing of mendelian research
on eugenics, passes some strictures on biometry, and claims that the
Lamarckian theory of evolution provides a sound basis for a eugenic
policy. His pronouncements, particularly on the subject of biometry, drew
some searching criticisms from M. March, whose remarks appear in the
report of the discussion which followed Dr. Saleeby’s paper. They are
well worth reading.
$4 EUGENICS REVIEW.

EUGENIQUE, Feb., 1914. Le Retour au type dans les Meétissages
humains. Dr. J. Laumonier. Pp. 33-49. Two pedigrees of families derived from different racial crosses are described. In the first a blond
Hanoverian prisoner of war married in 1806 a dark, grey-eyed native of
Anjou, with the result that Hanoverian characteristics appeared in some,
but not half of their children, and in two succeeding generations were completely blotted out. In the second a Frenchman, resident in China,
married, in 1820, a Chinese. The majority of their children were Chinese
in appearance. One daughter, however, had predominantly French characteristics. She remained in China, married a Chinaman, and had children
who were all predominantly Chinese. Another daughter, of Chinese
appearance, lived in France and married a Frenchman, her children and
grandchildren have practically no Chinese characteristics. From cases
such as these Dr. Laumonier formulates the following “law” :—“ The
products of mixed marriages bear a closer resemblance to the parent, of
either sex, who belongs to the country in which they live than to the
other.” He regards this “law” as explaining such facts as the tendency
for the blond type to disappear, which has been noted in France, Switzerland, South Germany, and England, but it is obvious that the evidence
now brought forward is insufficient to establish its truth.

BULLETIN DE LA STATISTIQUE GENERALE DE LA FRANCE. Tome III.,
Fasc. II. Jan., 1914. Of especial interest in this number are (1) the
report on the working of the old-age pension scheme in France (p. 151).
(2) The results of the examination of the 1911 batch of recruits (p. 155) in
the French Army. The most important fact which emerges from this is
that in those districts in which the average size of the family is large the
degree of education seems relatively low and vice versd. (3) An elaborate
and detailed statistical study by de Ville-Chabrolle, entitled Le Travail
des Femmes en divers Pays, principalement dans L’Industrie, le Commerce
et les professions libérales.” Pp. 170-223. This article contains a perfect
mine of information concerning the numbers of women engaged in various
occupations in different countries, the percentages which can be deduced
from these numbers, and the changes which the numbers and percentages
have undergone in the last thirty years.

RIVISTA DI ANTROPOLOGIA. Vol. xviii. 1913. This substantial volume
opens with an article by Prof. Alfredo Niceforo. Su alcuni indict della
distribuzione dellintelligenza e delle attitudini tra gli uomini already
noticed in the July number of this REVIEW. Prof. Giovanni Marro presents
a detailed study of the skeletons of ancient Egyptians found in the
necropolis at Assuit dating from 2500-3000 B.C. This is followed by a well
illustrated essay in which Giuseppe Sergi attempts to place the Tasmanian
race in the light of recent anthropological investigations chiefly by
English and German writers of whose works he adds a bibliography. Dr.
Calza next discusses a particular malformation of the skull known as
bathrocephalia in normal persons and in criminals. The measurement of
intelligence in relation to biological and social factors is dealt with by
Dr. Saffiotti in a somewhat severely statistical manner, and there are a few
shorter papers besides on kindred subjects.

: H. RAND.

POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY. Jan., 1914. The Mechanism of Heredity
as Indicated by the Inheritance of Linked Characters. Professor T. H.
Morgan. Pp. 1-16. The author explains the linking or coupling of
characters which sometimes occurs in Mendelian inheritance by the hypothesis that the factors representing characters so linked or coupled are born
in the same chromosome. ‘The coupling occurs with various degrees of
intimacy, being sometimes a rigid bond and at other times merely a slight
tendency for the characters to be associated together in inheritance. In
order to explain this a further assumption is necessary. This is supplied
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 85

as follows :—“ It may be observed that when homologous pairs of chromosomes unite before maturation of the egg and sperm that they twist round
each other. In consequence parts of each chromosome may come to be on
one side of the twist, and other parts on the other side. If at times the
chromosomes break at the crossing point, and each then unites with that
part of the other chromosome that lies on the same side, the new chromosomes that emerge later from the pair will be made up of parts of each
chromosome to the extent to which breaking has taken place at some of
the crossed levels. In consequence the two new chromosomes are no
longer made up of the same parts as the original chromosomes, but of
pieces of both.” Thus the linkage will be disturbed or broken. The
theory outlined above is illustrated by reference to observations made on
the results of crossing different varieties of Drosophila, the fruit fly.

Cancer Research. Dr. Leo Loeb. Pp. 17-38. In a very clear and
interesting manner Dr. Loeb describes the nature of the various growths
to which the name of cancer may be applied and summarises what is
known of their causation and distribution. The question of inheritance is
not gone into at all exhaustively, but what is said on the subject is of
sufficient direct interest to eugenists to be worth quoting in full :—
“ Heredity is undoubtedly a factor in those cancers which develop occasionally in case of xeroderma pigmentosum or from pigmented moles.
We know that here the conditions preceding cancer are hereditary and
therefore cancer itself is indirectly hereditary. We furthermore know that
a certain class of cancers originates on the basis of embryonic malformations, and inasmuch as these are under certain—as yet not well defined—
conditions hereditary, we may assume that certain cancers belonging to
this class are also hereditary. There is indeed some evidence which points
to this conclusion. There is, for instance, a case known in which both
the mother and her one and one-fourth years old child became affected by
glioma of the retina (a tumour originating in modified nerve cells of
the eye). In another case a twenty-one-year-old man had 17 osteomata
(tumours consisting of bone tissue) symmetrically arranged, and his father
had similar tumours. It is furthermore known that in certain cases
polypus of the intestines are congenital and occur in several members of
the same family. On the basis of such polypus cancer not infrequently
develops.”

A Comparison of White and Coloured Children measured by the Binet
Scale of Intelligence. Josiah Morse, Ph.D. Pp. 75-79. The white and
coloured children tested belonged to the schools of Columbia, South
Carolina. The coloured children had, in the same manner as the white,
come from good homes and seemed to do their best in the tests, nevertheless a certain superiority was shown by the white children, as is indicated
in the following comparative table :—

Coloured. White.

Per cent. Per cent.
More than one year backward ... 29°4 wee 10°2
Satisfactory... sit a Le 69°8 a 84°4
More than one year advanced Lee 08 we 53

POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY, Feb., 1914. Current Progress in the Study
of Natural Selection. Dr. J. Arthur Harris. Pp. 128-146. In this paper,
which is a continuation of previous articles in the same journal, Dr. Harris
summarises definite evidence of a statistical nature as to the occurrence of
natural selection. He distinguishes two problems: (1) To determine in
any given case whether the death-rate is random or selective; (2) to ascertain what physical, physiological, or psychological characteristics make
for fitness or unfitness for survival. As the work is already a summary no
86 EUGENICS REVIEW.

attempt will be made further to summarise it here, but reference may
fittingly be made to Dr. Harris’ original contributions to the subject.
Working on garden beans, he found that those seeds which germinated
were not a random sample of the whole number planted, but that a certain
definite selection had occurred in that the very large beans and the very
small beans had to some extent been weeded out. Thus the variability of
those which germinated was distinctly less than that of the whole number
planted; the average size was also somewhat greater. Corresponding
results were obtained also with regard to seedlings. Nine thousand normal
and abnormal plants from a large number germinated in the greenhouse
were planted out in the field, and it was found that the mortality was
distinctly higher in the normal than in the abnormal plants. Dr. Harris
concludes by remarking that “evidences of the occurrence of natural
selection for many characteristics are rapidly accumulating. That
mortality is not random, but differential, and that the intensity of the
selective death-rate is a problem open to quantitative treatment are propositions supported by large bodies of sound scientific evidence.”

THE CHICAGO MEDICAL RECORDER. Vol. xxxv. No. 11. Nov., 1913.
Contains reports of the addresses delivered before the Chicago Medical
Society on October 1st on the subject of the teaching of sex hygiene in
the public schools. Professor C. R. Henderson, in describing the methods
and aims of the Chicago Society of Social Hygiene, of which he is
president, said (p. 596) that it was instituted for study and for giving
information in regard to sex hygiene, and expressed the hope that education with reference to sex, biological science, morals and physical training
will be taught to young and old. He gives two warnings; first, that
instruction is the least part of education, a high ideal must be instilled.
Secondly, that if disease could be prevented and sin made safe, while
prostitution was yet left, only half a victory would be won. Sex hygiene
must not deal too exclusively with prevention and with venereal poison,
but the deeper lying effects of character poison must also be prevented.

In “ The Innocent Bystander,” p. 590, Dr. William Belfield states that
in several of the United States a girl may lawfully sell her body for
sexual purposes at ro years of age, but may not sell a ring until she is 21.
This being the law, it may be accepted as an official utterance of public
sentiment that sexual indulgence among the unmarried is one of the
personal rights of men, and that this is a recognition of an instinct common to animals and men. It is now realised that this policy is detrimental
not only to the individual, but to the State as well, and that the instinct to
procreate must be restrained and regulated by the State, as are the savage
instincts to rob and slay.

In discussing Practical Possibilities, p. 600, Mrs. E. Flagg Young
reported that in 1912 the Chicago Board of Education appropriated five
thousand dollars for lectures to fathers and mothers on sex hygiene, and
in addition ten thousand dollars for such instruction in the High Schools
of the City during 1913. Two conditions were laid down: First, that the
lecturer must be a medical man or woman; second, that he must have the
power of dealing with the subject in a serious, noble, and high-minded
way. Mrs. Young thought that boys could be taught in large classes,
but girls in not larger groups than fifteen to twenty. That parents should
have option of allowing a child to attend or not.

Instruction in the School (p. 603) was dealt with by Dr. Rachelle
Yarros, while Rev. John W. Melody spoke of the desirability of givin
Instruction in the Home (p. 606), and discussed what the nature of suc
instruction should be and some of the objections to it.

THE TRAINING SCHOOL BULLETIN. Vol. x. No. 8. Dec., 1913.
Mental and Physical Development of Normal Children. E. A. Doll.
Pp. 113-120. The material of this article is taken from a chart compiled
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 37

by Professor Johnson (formerly of Clark University). The data were
originally gathered from the publications of Dewey, Tracy, Kirkpatrick,
and others. The compilation has been rescued from obscurity, and is
now presented in the form of continuous paragraphs. The child’s development is divided into five periods: (i.) 1-3 years, (ii.) 4-6 years, (ili.) 7-9
years, (iv.) 10-12 years, (v.) 12 years onwards. Under each period changes
in height, weight, brain, muscular development and activity, sense-perception, memory, imagination, interests, language, judgment, and reasoning
are summarised in two or three concise sentences. Sex differences are
noted in the later periods. Figures are given only occasionally, and minor
inaccuracies have not been revised in the light of later literature. But
the article is of great value as giving, in an extremely compact yet readable form, a reliable summary of the bodily and mental growth of the
normal child. CyRIL Burt.

BULLETIN OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF MEDICINE. Vol. xiv., No. 6,
December, 1913. The Schoolhouse as a Crime Contributor, E. C. Elliott.
The Physical Bases of Crime, from the Standpoint of the Judge of a
Juvenile Court, E. F. Waite. The Physical Bases of Crime as Observed
by a Prison Physician, Rock Sleyster. Crimes of the Adult from the
Standpoint of the Alienist, F. W. Robertson. The Physical Bases of
Crime—Viewed from the Prison. Z. R. Brockway. Pp. 383-411. These
papers, read at the annual meeting of the American Academy of Medicine
last June, deal with various aspects of the problem of criminality. The
subjects discussed are rather too large and complex to admit of being
adequately surveyed in the few pages which the authors have been able
to devote to their consideration; and as a result the papers are somewhat
vague and sketchy. They are interesting, of course, as expressing the
opinions of men of judgment and experience, and many of the views put
forward are sound and practical, but for the most part the authors have
had to be content with assertions in lieu of proofs, and such facts as they
have adduced in evidence have not always been presented in a very
critical spirit.

Professor Elliott, in his remarks, emphasises the importance of using
the school as a centre for the physical and social activities of children
outside of school hours, and advocates measures for securing a more continuous operation of school influences, so as to enable them to compete
more successfully with the crime-producing influences of the streets. Mr.
E. F. Waite, who writes with the authority of his experience as a judge of
the Juvenile Court of Minneapolis, expresses the opinion that physical
defects are responsible for an appreciable proportion of juvenile delinquency. He attaches, of course, a still greater importance to the influence
of mental deficiency, and he notes in this connection that in a series of
young offenders brought before him on examination by the Binet-Simon
tests showed that about 25 per cent. were feeble-minded. Similarly, the
Seattle Juvenile Court, one of the few that command the services of an
expert psychologist, reports that 18.5 per cent. of the delinquency with
which it deals is attributable to mental defect. Mr. Waite’s experience
leads him to urge very strongly the systematic examination of the
mentality of juvenile delinquents with a view to the detection and
segregation of the feeble-minded, a measure which he rightly considers
imperative both for the protection of society from the criminal and for
eugenic ends.

In his paper on “ The Physical Bases of Crime as Observed by a
Prison Physician,” Dr. Sleyster summarises the results of his anthropometric observations on 1,521 convicts in the Wisconsin State Prison. He
lays special stress on the fact that these convicts showed a marked
inferiority in height, amounting on the average to 1°8 inch, as compared
with the typical American, the standard for the latter being taken from
88 EUGENICS REVIEW.

the measurements reported by a number of life insurance companies and
referring to over 220,000 adults. Dr. Sleyster unhesitatingly sets down
this shortness of stature as “a marked and unmistakeable stigma of
degeneracy ”; but it would appear to be susceptible of other explanations,
and one of the most obvious is suggested by the fact, recorded in another
table in this paper, that upwards of 30 per cent. of the Wisconsin
prisoners are foreign-born. Mr. Brockway, who maintains the same thesis
of the organic inferiority of the criminal, also remarks that of the Elmira
prisoners “a majority were themselves immigrants or the immediate
descendants of immigrants from the crowded parts of Southern Europe ”—
a fact which might quite sufficiently account for their lack of inches.
Anthropometric statistics which take no regard of racial differences are
obviously of very qualified value. Dr. Sleyster attributes much importance to defective sight, both as an indication of degeneracy and as an
actual cause of criminal conduct through the influence of the nervous
strain incident to refractive troubles. He found defective vision in about
a third of the prisoners, astigmatism and myopia being specially frequent.
More details on this point would be of interest, as also data for comparison with the non-criminal population. The papers of Dr. Robertson
and Mr. Brockway deal with the question of crime and the criminal in
general terms, their views being in the main similar to those of the
other writers.

THE JOURNAL OF HerRepDITy. Vol. v. No. 1. Jan., 1914. How to
Improve the Race. Alexander Graham Bell. Pp. 1-7. The author points
out that the methods of practical eugenics must be entirely different to
those of the animal breeder. If the breeding of animals were restricted
by law and sentiment in the same way as that of human beings he believes
that it would be impossible to improve them by selection. In his opinion
little is to be gained by preventing the reproduction of defective and
undesirable stocks, and the most hopeful means of advance is by the
mating of the most desirable with one another. Yet “It is neither practicable nor advisable that the individuals referred to (the desirables)
should marry exclusively among themselves but only to a much greater
extent than now prevails.”

Eugenics and Breeding. O. F. Cook. Pp. 30-33. This paper teaches
a somewhat similar lesson to that of Mr. Graham Bell. The eugenist has
aims and must use methods differing from those of the animal breeder,
but yet may learn a useful lesson from the experiences of the latter. For
a knowledge of the laws of heredity, on which eugenics is based, may be
acquired by plant and animal breeding. The cultivation of the eugenic
instinct is more important to the future of the race than the weeding out
of defective persons.

Prenatal Influences. David Starr Jordan. Pp. 38-39. The author
insists that the theory of maternal impressions and of telegony have no
basis in fact.

SOCIAL DISEASES. Vol. iv. No. 4. This number is taken up mainly
with three papers read at the annual meeting of the American Society ot
Sanitary and Moral Prophylaxis, held at New York in April, 1913. Two
of these papers referred to the effect produced by syphilis on the nervous
system and its connection with insanity. The authors insisted on the close
connection between syphilis and general paralysis. Dr. Goodhart, the
title of whose paper was “ Syphilis and the Nervous System,” stated that
about 24 per cent. of infected people developed this condition: onset
occurring about 15 years after first infection. In its hereditary form
syphilis produced infantilism, hydrocephalus, and general paralysis. Dr.
Kirby (syphilis and insanity) stated that 14 per cent. of the admissions to
the New York State hospitals were due to general paralysis, this representing the ratio of the disease amongst the lower criminal classes. He quoted
Plaut to the effect that 45 per cent. of the children of paretics were
QUARTERLY CHRONICLE. 89

mentally or physically damaged, or both. Dr. Fisher read a paper on
“The Necessity for Social and Statutory Recognition of Syphilis,” in
which he urged that this disease should be treated on the same lines as
any other infectious disease, and that all individuals suffering from it, who
happened to come under State control, whether as criminals or recipients
of public charity, should be detained until the infectious stage was past.
The general tone of the meeting was in favour of notification, and
repressive measures in respect of the marriage of syphilitics. The experiences of the State of Michigan in this connection are instructive. Assuming, as we must, that syphilis is a race poison, and one that as eugenists
it is our duty to combat, it is none the less necessary for us to consider
most carefully our strategy in this campaign. Nothing is simpler than to
issue laws restricting the right of syphilitics to marry, nothing in appearance more righteous. When, however, we come to enforce this rule have
we any right to assume the presence of syphilis, that is (in present popular
acceptance) of guilt in the accused, without evidence? As far as the man
goes, perhaps, knowing the risks run by the average adolescent male;
certainly not in the case of the woman, unless very definite reasons are
adduced for suspicion. This objection may be got round no doubt on the
plea of the importance of the danger to the public in general, but the
existence of the objection will not tend to make the administrative application of the rule any the easier. Having overruled this objection, how
are we to find out the presence or absence of infection? The Wassermann
test is the only even approximately certain test, and this demands the
services of an expert, not many of whom are available except in large
centres. The proof being found and marriage forbidden, can we, prohibiting Marriage, prevent concubinage? In the socially speaking “ upper ”
classes perhaps, in the lower certainly no. And the further down the
social scale we go, the less possible will it be to prevent this short cut to
the fulfilment of the desires of the men and women affected. What
remains? The prison or the lethal chamber, and in addition, what is
even worse, one law for the rich and another for the poor. This is not
to say that the case is hopeless. Far from it. Education and facilities
for efficient treatment will do much; in time, a very long time, perhaps
all we hope for. Until the public are educated, the more cautious our
advance, the more successful is our fina] attack likely to be.

QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.
CENTRAL SOCIETY.

February 5th.—At the Grafton Galleries, 5.15 p.m., Professor C.
Spearman on “ The Inheritance of Mental Energy.” Chairman, Dr. Edgar
Schuster.

March sth.—At the Grafton Galleries, 5.15 p.m., Mr. M. W. Keatinge
on “ Education and Eugenics.” Chairman, Major Leonard Darwin.

February 16th.—First “ Galton Anniversary ” dinner and lecture at the
Hotel Ceci]. Lecture on “ Francis Galton” by Sir Francis Darwin, F.R.S.

COMMITTEES.
January i2th.—Finance Committee Meeting.
” 16th.—Executive Council ”
9 29th.—Research Committee ,,
February 2oth.—Executive Council ”
sf 26th.—Informal Council discussion, 12, Egerton

Place. Subject, “What Reforms in the
Treatment of Habitual Criminals should
now be Advocated on  Eugenic
Grounds? »

March 25th.—General Council Meeting.
go EUGENICS REVIEW.

MEETINGS.

December 21st.—Mr. R. Dixon Kingham at the Anerley Congregational Church on “ Parenthood and Patriotism.”

January 14th.—Dr. Murray Leslie before the Free Woman Discussion
Circle on “ The Woman’s Aspect of Eugenics.”

January 17th.—Dr. D’Ewart before the Eugenic Study Circle of the
Oldham Branch of the Workers’ Educational Association on “ Eugenics
and the Workers.”

January 27th.—Mr. R. T. Bodey before the Headingley Young
People’s Guild on “ Eugenics.”

January 27th.—Meeting at the Brighton Royal Pavilion to inaugurate
a branch of the Society. Speakers: The Mayor, Major L. Darwin, Mrs.
Gotto, Councillor Wellman, Rev. F. Asher, Dr. Hobhouse, Mr. A. O.
Jennings.

February 4th.—Mr. R. T. Bodey before the Halifax Branch of the
Child Study Society on “ The National and Scientific Aspects of Educational Policy.”

February 5th.—Miss Bonwick before the St. Luke’s Girls’ Social Club.
g February 6th.—Dr. M. Greenwood before the Hampstead Scientific

ociety.

February 13th.—Mr. R. Dixon Kingham on “ The Eugenic Ideal”
before the Nottingham Branch of the Workers’ Educational Association.

February 25th.—Dr. Edgar Schuster on “ Eugenics” before the Biological Club of the Working Men’s College, Crowndale Road.

March 3rd.—Mrs. Gotto before the St. Paul’s Literary Society, Croydon, on “ Literature and Eugenics.”

March 3rd.—Mrs. Gotto proposed at the Croydon Women’s Debating
Society that “Government on Eugenic Principles is both a social and
economic advantage to a community.”

March 6th.—Mrs. Gotto before the Walton-on-Thames Girls’ Club on
“Eugenics as a Practical Policy.”

BIRMINGHAM HEREDITY SOCIETY.

On February 3rd a lecture was delivered by Dr. A. F. Tredgold on
“ Degeneracy.” The lecturer deprecated the manner in which certain
enthusiasts had allowed Weissman’s views to become an obsession, so that
they denied that the somatoplasm could have any influence on the germ
plasm at all. He emphasised the fact that circulating toxins in the
parental blood, from whatever source derived, had a very definite effect
on the germ plasm, and ascribed most cases of degeneracy in the offspring
to this cause. He also asserted his belief that such degeneracy, especially
in the form of a weakened nervous system, could be again transmitted by
heredity, though the particular form in which the degeneracy manifested
itself might be different in parent and child. The lecturer evidently
believed that certain acquired characters could be transmitted, and
though he quoted no extensive statistics to prove his case, the members
present were deeply impressed by his views. After a few questions which
could only touch the fringe of an enormous subject, the meeting concluded
with a hearty vote of thanks.

On March 6th Dr. Edgar Schuster very kindly stepped into the breach
caused by the postponement of Dr. Mjéen’s intended tour. The title of
his paper was “ Eugenics and Human Analysis,” and he dealt extensively
with the efforts which he and others are making to measure physiological
and psychological qualities. Prefacing his remarks, he said that before
qualities could be compared they must be measured, and his description
of the methods by which this was attempted in the case of mental qualities
was always interesting and frequently very entertaining also. While
freely admitting that the difficulties of accurate measurement were great,
Dr. Schuster considered that data sufficiently accurate for the determinaQUARTERLY CHRONICLE. OI

tion of the coefficients of mental correlation between various relatives,
could now be obtained, and hinted, moreover, that a_ psychological
examination of this kind might come to replace in part the ordinary type
of examination so unpleasantly familiar to the modern student. The
former measured the mental capacity, the latter only the mental content.
The subject proved rather too technical to arouse much discussion, and
after Dr. Schuster had answered a few questions, the proceedings terminated. J. PERCIVAL MILLS, Hon. Secretary.

BELFAST BRANCH.

February 11th, 1914.—A public meeting of the Belfast Branch was
held in the Queen’: University on this date. The Right Rev. Dr. D’Arcy,
Bishop of Down, presided, and introduced the speaker of the evening, the
Rev. H. J. Rossington, M.A., B.D. The subject of Mr. Rossington’s
paper was “Eugenics and Politics.” The able manner in which the
various eugenic problems were handled elicited the admiration of the
audience. In the discussion which followed, Bishop D’Arcy, Canon
O’Connell, and Dr. W. J. Wilson took part.

March roth, 1914.—-On the afternoon of this day the Belfast Branch
had the privilege of hearing a lecture on “ Practicable Eugenics ” delivered
by Prof. J. Arthur Thomson, M.A., of Aberdeen University. There was
a large and representative audience, including’ many public men and the
leading members of the clerical and medical professions. In the unavoidable absence of Dr. D’Arcy, Bishop of Down, the chair was taken
by Mrs. D’Arcy, who, in a very suitable manner, introduced Prof.
Thomson. Through the generosity of the Lady Mayoress, the reception
was held in the Carlton Hall, and though the Lady Mayoress was unable
to be present on account of having to leave Belfast before the meeting
was held, she was really our hostess in absentia.

Prof. Thomson’s address was warmly appreciated, and though some
thought he did not go far enough in any of his eugenic suggestions, still
the beauty of the literary expression of the lecture appealed to all. Since
there were many present to whom eugenics previously had been a mere
name, the Branch could not have secured a lecturer better able to put
the subject in a more agreeable light.

A vote of thanks to Mrs. D’Arcy and Prof. Thomson was proposed by
Sir Otto Jaffé, seconded by Dr. Campbell, President of the Methodist
College, and conveyed by Prof. J. A. Lindsay, M.D. At the conclusion
tea was provided by the kindness of the Lady Mayoress.

W. JAMES WILSON, Hon. Sec.

HASLEMERE BRANCH.

_ A meeting of the branch was held on Monday, February 2nd, at St.
Edmund’s School, Hindhead, when Miss Morgan-Brown opened a discussion based on the article, “A Criticism of Eugenics,” from the October,
1913, REVIEW.

The branch arranged a public meeting on Saturday, March 14th, at
the Haslemere Hall, when Major Leonard Darwin spoke on “ Eugenics
and Some of Its Unsolved Problems.” Lord Parker of Waddington took
the chair. L. E. Muir, Hon. Sec.

LIVERPOOL.

Council meetings have been held on January 19th, February 13th, and
February 25th. The annual meeting was addressed by the President
upon “ Positive Eugenics”; the report and accounts for 1913 were read
and passed, and three officers re-elected; Miss James, Dr. Nathan Raw,
F.R.S.E., and Dr. George Macleod were elected to vacancies on the
Council. The February meeting was addressed by the Rev. James
Hamilton, M.A., upon “ Christianity and Eugenics.” The Hon. Secretary
g2 EUGENICS REVIEW.

spoke to the St. Mary’s Men’s Society on “The Trust of Life,” and has
lectured twice in Yorkshire. A smal] library has been formed for the
use of our members, but too recently to record its working.

R. T. Bopey, M.A., Hon. Secretary.

MANCHESTER AND DISTRICT.

During the first quarter of the year two public meetings have been
held. The first was addressed by Dr. Starr Jordan, but, being held in the
afternoon, was not a great success numerically.

On March toth the second was addressed in emergency by Dr.
D’Ewart on “ Eugenics and Insanity,” the main theme being that as the
bulk of insanity in England was attributed to heredity, alcohol, and
syphilis—preventable causes—the amount of insanity might be reduced
greatly in a very short time. Questions were numerous.

During the quarter members have been very active. Dr. Vipont
Brown has spoken on “Eugenics” and allied subjects on several occasions. Mr. Warburton, of Romiley, addressed a meeting there dealing
generally with the “Eugenics” and specifically with “ Feeblemindedness.” The Hon. Secretary addressed a large meeting of teachers at the
North of England Education Conference at Bradford on January 3rd,
the address leading up to Miss March’s paper on “Sex Training.” He
also spoke to a meeting of young men in the gymnasium of the Y.M.C.A.
on “Venereal Diseases.” The attention was as intense as usual when
this subject is definitely dealt with, and the numerous questions were
remarkable for their insight and intelligent grasp of the situation.

During the next few weeks the annual meeting will be held, and a
public meeting on “ Venereal Diseases.” Dr. Catherine Chisholm is to
speak on “Sex Training,” and the Hon. Secretary has been invited to

address a group of “ Scouts.”
J. D’Ewart, Hon. Sec.

OXFORD BRANCH.

On March 3rd, Mr. Rolleston Stables lectured before the Oxford
Branch on “ Eugenics.” Professor Poulton was in the chair.
E. SCHUSTER, Hon. Secretary.

A New Branch of the Society at Brighton.—A new branch of the
Society has been opened at Brighton, of which the mayor, Mr. Otter,
is president, and Mr. Wellman temporary honorary secretary. On
January 27th a public meeting was held at the Pavilion, the mayor
presided, and speeches were made by Major Darwin, Mrs. Gotto, and
others, after which the Rev. Felix Asher proposed that “a branch of
the Society should be opened in Brighton.” This was passed unanimously.
Members of the audience wishing to join the new branch were asked to
send in their names to the Committee of Management, who undertook to
call a meeting and formally adopt the constitution of the Society at an
early date. The constitution was formally adopted at the meeting held on
February 17th, and was ratified by the General Council on March 2sth.

A Course of Instruction in Statisties will be given at the Lister
Institute of Preventive Medicine on Fridays, at 5.30 p.m., during May—
July, 1914, by Dr. M. Greenwood, Junr. The syllabus is as follows :—
General Principles of Statistical Method. Chief Sources of Data. Census
Reports and Registrar-General’s Reports. Birth and Death-rates and how
they are corrected. The nature of a Life Table. The measurement of
Variation. The Standard Deviation. Frequency Curves. Significance of
Deviations from an Expected Value. Sampling Errors. Simple cases of
Mendelian proportions and their testing. Correlation and Regression.
Multiple Correlation and multiple Regression. So far as possible the
QUARTERLY CHRONICLE. 93

classes will be informal and mainly devoted to practical work and discussion. Although no previous knowledge will be assumed, students will
find it helpful to have read an elementary book on statistics, such as
“A Primer of Statistics,” by W. P. and E. Elderton (Black, price 1s. 6d.),
and if they could find time to revive their acquaintance with elementary
algebra this would also be an advantage. The fee for the course is one
guinea. Application to join should be made to the Hon. Secretary,
Eugenics Education Society, Kingsway House, Kingsway, W.C.

Introduction to the Study of Heredity—Professor McBride, of the
Imperial College of Science and Technology, has arranged a course of
lectures to be given in his department by Mr. H. M. Fuchs, and has most
kindly invited the council of the Eugenics Education Society to nominate
a certain number of students, who will be admitted to the course free of
charge. The lectures will take place at 5.30 p.m. on Wednesdays, commencing Wednesday, April 29th, and closing Wednesday, June 24th.
Members and associates wishing to attend should send in their application
to the Hon. Secretary immediately, to be placed before the council.

The following is the syllabus of the course :—

1. Introductory. The organism and cells. Growth and cell-division.
Sexual reproduction. Germ-cells. Maturation. Fertilisation. Development. Origin of germ-cells and their relation to the body. Other modes
of reproduction.

2. Heredity and Evolution. Heredity, meaning of term. Inheritable
and non-inheritable characters. Nature of species. Darwin’s evidences
for evolution.

3. Variation. Methods of recording variability. Inheritable and noninheritable variations. Pure races and populations.

4. Analysis of Heredity. Hybridisation—Mendel’s work. Its implications. Unit-characters, segregation, dominance, etc. Reversion.

5. Analysis of Heredity (continued). Presence and absence theory.
Quantitative characters. Coupling and repulsion of characters. Relation
of Galton’s statistical law to Mendel’s law.

6. Heredity of Sex. Mendelian interpretation. Parallel phenomena of
cytology. What are the carriers of hereditary qualities? Determination
of sex. Sex-limited characters.

7. Changes in Heredity. Mutation. Causes of the origin of new characters. Theories as to the origin of new races. Directions of future work.

8. Inheritance in Man.

Mesure de l’Intelligence is the title of the lecture which Dr. Simon,
the well-known colleague of Dr. Binet, has consented to deliver before the
Eugenics Education Society. By the kind permission of the Royal Society,
the lecture will be held at Burlington House on Tuesday, April 28th, 8.30
p.m. As the accommodation is limited, admission will be by ticket and
members should apply for tickets: without delay. The subject of the
lecture is of so much interest td others as well as eugenists, that after
April rsth tickets still unappropriated by members will be sent to other
persons who wish to attend.

Sex Education and Eugenie Training has been made the subject
of a course of four lectures by Miss N. March. They were especially
arranged for parents and teachers, and held at the Holborn Estate Girls’
School between March 2oth and 30th.

The Present State of the Science of Eugenies.—Under this
heading a letter from Prof. Pearson to the 7imes was discussed, and we
greatly regret to say his words were accidentally misquoted. The extract
should have read as follows :—“ But even he in the last few months of
his life saw that the popular movement he had started was likely to outgrow its knowledge, and feared that more evil than good might result
94 EUGENICS REVIEW.

from it.” As printed in the REVIEW the word “ years” was substituted for
the word “months.” Our sincere apologies are due to Prof. Pearson for
this mistake, and the consequent alteration in the meaning of his words.
In this discussion we also stated that “In 1910, when Sir Francis Galton’s
health was failing considerably, much of the correspondence was carried
on by his niece, Miss Biggs.” As these words may possibly have given the
impression that Sir Francis was failing mentally during this period, it
may be as well to state definitely that this was not intended. We believe
that he remained perfectly clear in intellect until the end. The object of
our note was to show that Sir Francis Galton did not withdraw his
approval from the work of the Society. This is shown by the fact that he
remained honorary President of the Society till his death.

A Course of Criminal Anthropology.—We have received from
the “Faculté Internationale de Pédologie de Bruxelles” particulars of a
course of six lectures on this subject to be given by Dr. Vervaeck. The
first lecture deals with the history and evolution of criminal anthropology.
The second with the influence of the environment in the production of
criminals. In the third the nature of the criminal is discussed, while the
fourth deals with heredity as a factor in the causation of criminality. The
fifth and sixth are practical demonstrations of the methods of examining
the physical and mental condition of criminals at the Laboratoire d’
anthropologte pénitentiaire de la prison de Forest, of which the lecturer
is the director.

PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED.

Amidexterity and Mental Culture, by H. MACNAUGHTON-JONES. (Publisher: W. Heinemann, London, 1914. Price 2s. 6d. Pp. 102.)
Cavour and the Making of Modern Italy, by PreTRO ORsI. (Publishers:

G. P. Putnam’s Sons, London, 1914. Price 5s. Pp. 385.)

Child Life and Labour, by M. ALDEN, M.D. (Publishers : Headley Bros.,
London, 1914. Third edition. Price 1s. 6d. Pp. 191.)

Commercialised Prostitution in New York City, by G. J. KNEELAND. (Publishers: Grant Richards, Ltd., London, 1913. Price 7s. 6d. Pp. 334.)

Eugenics and Social Welfare, Bulletin No. 3. The Bureau of Analysis
and Investigation State Board of Charities. State of New York, 1913.
The Capitol Albany, New York. Pp. 130.

Immigration, by H. PRaTT FaIRCHILD. (Publishers: The Macmillan Co.,
New York, 1913. Price 7s. 6d. Pp. 455.)

L’Uomo vied by CorRADO GINI. (Publisher: Atheneum, Roma, 1914.
Pp. 24.

Mental Deficiency (Amentia), by A. F. TREDGOLD, L.R.C.P., M.R.C.S.
(Publishers: Balliére, Tindall and Cox, London, 1914. 2nd Edition,
Revised and Enlarged. Price 12s. 6d. Pp. 4o1.)

Prostitution in Europe, by A. FLEXNER. (Publisher: Grant Richards,
London, 1914. Price 7s. 6d. Pp. 455.)

The Cancer Problem: A Statistical Study, by C. E. GREEN, F.R.S.E.
(Publishers : W. Green and Sons, Edinburgh and London, 3rd edition,
1914. Price 5s. Pp. 98.)

The Courtship of Animals, by W. P. PycraFt, A.L.B., F.Z.S. (Publisher:

_ Hutchinson, London, 1913. Price 6s. Pp. 318.)

The Great Scourge and How to End It, by C. PANKHURST, LL.B. (Publisher: E. Pankhurst, London, 1913. Pp. 155.) Deals with the
prevalence of venereal disease. A clear statement of the facts of the
case. The author sees a solution of the evil in “Votes for Women
and Chastity for Men.” With regard to the latter there are no two
opinions, but it is difficult to see why the former should materially
affect the case. It does not seem necessary to await an extension of
the franchise before attempting to remedy the evil. |
PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED. 95

The Health of the State, by StR GEORGE NEWMAN, M.D., F.R.S.E. (Publishers: Headley Bros., London, 1913. Price 1s. 6d. Pp. 198.)

The Mothers Reply: A Pamphlet for Mothers, by NELLIE M. SMITH.
(Publishers: The Society of Sanitary and Moral Prophylaxis, New
York, 1914. Price 10 cents. Pp. 24.)

The Problem of the Continuation School and Its Successful Solution in
Germany: A Consecutive Policy, by R. H. Best and C. K. OGDEN,
B.A. (Publisher: P. S. King, London, 1914. Price 1s. Pp. 70.)

The Quarterly Review, Nos. 432, July 1912, and 437, October, 1913.

The Unfolding of Personality as the Chief Aim in Education, by H.
THISELTON MARK, M.A., B.Sc. (Publisher: T. Fisher Unwin, London, 1912. Price-is. Pp. 224.)

Travail et Folie, by DR. A. MARIE and Dr. R. MARTIAL. (Publisher :
Bloud et Cie, Paris, 1909. Pp. 111.)
