REPORTS.

MEDICAL RESEARCH COMMITTEE: SPECIAL REPORT SERIES, NO. 34. THE
INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL ON MANUAL WORK AND NEURO-MUSCULAR
CO-ORDINATION.

THIs report records the result of an investigation carried out by Dr. H. M.
Vernon at the instance of the Advisory Scientific Committee of the Central
Control Board (Liquor Traffic), with a view to obtaining precise evidence
as to the degree to which the influence of alcohol on neuro-muscular activity
is affected by varying the conditions under which the drug is administered.
The points specially considered were the effects of dilution and of the
absence or presence of food in the stomach. In most of the experiments
the test employed was the repeated typing of a memorised passage, the
influence of alcohol being measured by the effects on speed and on
accuracy. In order to reduce these two variables to a single
expression, Dr. Vernon adopted the device of typing at two selected
speeds, and estimating from the results the time equivalent of a typing
error. The method is ingenious, but obviously open to criticism, as
introducing psychological factors of uncertain effect. And it appears
to be hardly necessary, since all the experiments show that alcohol
influences speed and accuracy in the same direction.

In addition to the typewriting tests, which were made with seven
subjects, experiments were carried out by three subjects in working an
adding machine, and by six subjects in pricking a target at arm’s length.

The most striking result brought out in all the experimental methods
is the effect of the presence or absence of food in the stomach. It was
found that the effect of a given dose of alcohol in disturbing neuro-muscular
co-ordination was on an average twice as great when taken on an empty
stomach as when taken with or after food. A similar but less considerable
exaltation of toxic effect was found when alcohol was given in strong as
opposed to dilute solution. These results agree with those obtained by
Dr. Mellanby (No. 31 of the Medical Research Committee, Special Report
Series), who made direct chemical estimation of the alcohol content of
the blood after administering the drug under varied conditions, and who
found that dilution, and still more the presence of food in the stomach,
had a marked effect in delaying and decreasing the absorption of alcohol
into the circulation.

In promoting the scientific investigation of such points as are dealt
with in these experiments, Lord D’Abernon has given a new aspect to the
study of the liquor question, and it is to be hoped that further research
on similar lines will be directed to the many other matters of practical
importance in connection with that question, on which, as he himself rightly
insisted, our knowledge is still deplorably deficient. wices

PENAL REFORM LEAGUE RECORD. Vol. VIII., Nos. 1 and 2; July, 1919.
London: 7, Dalmeny Avenue, N.7.
Tue League, though undoubtedly its influence is now inconsiderable in
comparison with what it will be, is doing strenuous and excellent spadework, as shown in a number of most interesting articles and abstracts
of various proceedings of their society (p. 14.) The lines upon which the
work at the Women’s Training Colony at Newbury is being carried out
certainly do not err on the side of Victorianism. They are, in fact, daring,
and perhaps crude, but they are decidedly a step in the right direction.
The League is also taking advantage of each new phase of social
evolution that may help them to get in the thin edge of their
234 EUGENICS REVIEW.

wedge in the right direction. Thus they state (p. 32), “smaller
wars than this have been followed by great increase of crime
and demoralisation. What is likely to follow this greatest of.
all wars? We do not know. . . . Large numbers of soldiers
will find their way into our prisons (p. 6). To condemn these men,
with their memories, to solitude and silence, seems . . . to be such
refinement of torture . . . that the public would (not) acquiesce
‘ if only the fact of our penal system . . . could be
brought home.” Much attention is also being given to  probation and remand work and the treatment of juvenile offenders
(p. 78). “Weare not here arguing for or against any one kind of punishment or another. One would rather a man whipped a boy and loved him
than that he should refrain from whipping him without feeling any affection
or respect for him. But what we plead for is a new attitude, a desire
to understand, a recognition of our abysmal ignorance in these things,
a reluctance to jump at hasty conclusions and quack remedies. For we
are all quacks in the Law Courts, and it will require years of patient and
loving investigation before we are much else.”

RESCUE WoRK: AN ENQUIRY AND A CRITICISM. 19, Tothill Street, Westminster, S.W.1; price 1s.

THIS is a carefully-compiled and thorough investigation of the subject
from all possible angles. Its study should prove useful to all, but more
especially to those engaged upon this form of social work, or about to
take it up. Without actually condemning any of the existing means of
dealing with the problems, it. yet throws much light upon many of the
defects of the present-day system, and at the same time gives a number
of valuable suggestions of possible, nay, of imperative modifications, improvements, and extensions of the work as it stands now. Every chapter
of the inquiry, however, leads to the ultimate conclusion that want of
trained workers—trained mentally, morally, and physically—and want of
funds to carry on the much-needed work, are the chief obstacles. This,
of course, is a vicious circle, for training and a life’s devotion to work of
this kind cannot be obtained or retained without adequate financial
resources; and these, again, are not likely to be forthcoming until the
nature of the work and its need become a matter of common knowledge.
The best of workers, if inadequately supported financially, or overworked owing to lack of helpers, must fail. L. K.

THe PLACE OF SEX EDUCATION IN BIOLOGY AND GENERAL SCIENCE, by E. F.
Van Buskirk, M.A. Washington Government Printing Office;
IQIQ.
THE results of Mr. Van Buskirk’s experiments in sex education by means
of classes in biology and general science as part of the ordinary curriculum of schools for either sex, ought to go far in establishing the
desirability of this proceeding in all schools all over the world. Of all
Nature’s phenomena, those founded on sex are the most insistent, and the
most obvious to be brought home to a human being throughout his whole
life. They are also, owing to our present-day education, those most likely
to be mis-interpreted and abused. From earliest times it has been found
necessary to enlighten young humanity upon the phenomena of astronomy,
astrology, geology, geography, botany, etc., with the aid of the accumulated knowledge of the ages. But for proper teaching, any child might
still be led to believe, from mere daily observation, that the sun goes
round the earth, Then why should the young generation not be taught,
and in a manner suited to its years and understanding and to the beauty
and importance of the subject, the full meaning and reasonableness of all
matters relating to sex? There are both safety and progress in knowledge,
and without it there is bound to be continual misinterpretation, neglect
and abuse, with its consequent detriment and wrecking of the most vital
of natural manifestations. L. K.
