ADOLESCENT GIRLHOOD UNDER MODERN
CONDITIONS, WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE
TO MOTHERHOOD

By Mary SCHARLIEB, M.S., M.D.

Tue period of Adolescence is one of the most important, if not
the most important period of life. It is the time during which
the greatest development occurs, the time in which the individual
changes from the common type of childhood to the specialised
type, feminine or masculine.

In girls the signs of adolescence are observed earlier than
they are in boys, and the changes involved are better marked.
Between the ages of 12 and 15 the girl undergoes a more or less
rapid evolution from the common to the feminine type, while the
boy remains more or less a child up to the age of 15, and even
then alters both more slowly and less completely, gradually
assuming the characteristics of manhood.

The signs of adolescence in girls may be considered under
three heads: (1) bodily, (2) mental, and (3) moral changes.

I. There are manifest changes in the bony skeleton,
affecting it as a whole, but in the greatest degree in the shape
and inclination of the pelvis. Before adolescence the child’s
pelvis somewhat resembles that of the adult male, but with the
approach of puberty the bones of the female pelvis alter wonderfully in shape, the upper boundary of the pelvis, called “ the
brim,”’ changes from an approximately heart-shaped figure to a
wide oval, with its long axis transverse. The vertical portion
of the hip bone becomes expanded and altered in direction, and
the sub-pubic arch widens until its angle from having a value of
60°-70° has that of an angle of 95° or more. These changes
coincide in time with an equally remarkable development of the
internal organs and are best marked in those girls in whom the
ADOLESCENT GIRLHOOD UNDER MODERN CONDITIONS 175

organic evolution is perfectly normal. At the same time the
sacro-vertebral angle becomes better marked, and in consequence
the inclination of the pelvis to the horizon is greatly increased
and therefore contributes to the characteristic female type both
of figure and gait.

In addition to these marked changes of shape, the bones
grow at a disproportionate rate; the increase of height during
three or four years of early adolescence in the girl greatly
exceeding the increase during the corresponding period in the
boy.

Among the early phenomena of puberty progressing part passu
with skeletal changes is the development of the bust. Other wellmarked outward characteristics are the wonderful clearing and
brightening of the complexion, the greater depth of colour and
brighter gloss of the hair; there is also usually a change of the
pigmentation of the iris, which, together with altered expression,
gives a new charm to the hitherto childish countenance. More
important is the development of the internal organs, not only
those of the generative system but also of the heart and great
blood-vessels. This is of the greatest importance, because if
these organs fail to develop adequately a special form of anemia
and ill-health is sure to supervene.

Muscular development also progresses during the period of
the adolescence.

(2) Probably the greatest mental change during adolescence
is to be found in some slight diminution of the verbal memory
which is so marked a gift in childhood, but this is more than
compensated by the rise into prominence of the reasoning faculty,
together with imagination, fancy, literary and artistic taste. I
do not dwell on these characteristics for there is no reason to
doubt that fathers, mothers, and teachers, are fully alive to the
importance of the rapid spring and exuberance of intellectual
vitality manifested by their adolescent pupils.

(3) Adolescents, both boys and girls, but more especially
the latter, show a rapid and disproportionate development of the
affections. This is the time beyond all others in life when girls
are apt to form overwhelming and most unhealthy attachments
to each other, or to women of maturer years. Not unfrequently
176 M. Scharlieb:

these absorbing friendships are carried beyond the bounds of
sanity, and form one of the most serious difficulties to guardians
and dangers to the young people.

The feminine nature wakes from sleep, and like a plant
putting forth tendrils must cling to something; failing the
natural support, for which indeed it is too immature, these
tendrils cling with sometimes disastrous force around the nearest
substitute. Together with this disproportionate development of
the affections comes an enormous increase and development of the
religious sense. The child that has been contented to take its
religion, its ritual, its prayers, almost for granted, suddenly
develops views and ideas, a passionate enthusiasm for some form
of worship, and probably a self-sacrificing devotion to religious
ideals, especially to the missionary cause.

A third set of feelings and affections, which are indeed but
the flower and natural development from the germs existent in
childhood, is the passionate motherly instinct. The little girl
who played calmly, and one might say platonically, with her dolls,
is seized during adolescence with the devouring need for protecting and mothering living creatures younger and more helpless
than herself. In some curious fashion, with all these passions,
certain characteristics are also developed that tend to hide them
from the unsympathetic or unobservant eye. The girl who has
hitherto been as frank and open-minded as her brother has
suddenly become shy, reticent, and extremely self-conscious : she
is contented to love her friend, worship her Saviour, and tend the
object of her motherly devotion in stillness and solitude; she has
but slight means of self-expression, and what she has she denies
herself, and probably passes for a child of unusually cold and
reticent nature. One of the worst effects of this exaggerated
reticence is that as we all tend to become what we are thought
to be, many girls whose deeper affections and aspirations are
misunderstood and overlooked tend to develop into cold and
cynical women.
>\" Tmmature tissues and organs are peculiarly unstable, and are
ridté ible to be injured and distorted by illness, over use, or
wrong use than are the tissues of adults. The time in which
growths inost rapid, development most marked, the time when
ADOLESCENT GIRLHOOD UNDER MODERN CONDITIONS 177

the maximum of good is possible, is also the time when the forces
of evil may produce the most disastrous effects.

To the natural and inevitable risks attendant on the rapid
Ghanges of adolescence must be added the results of our indifference
and ignorance, our unwise over-stimulation of body and mind
at this critical time, and the young girl’s own physical and
psychical peculiarities. Thus is formed a triad of malignant
influences.

The ignorance of parents and guardians of the laws of health
and the perversity of adolescent girls make the proper care of
their bodies extremely difficult.

Adolescent girls are as anxious to have the control of their
own individuality as was Phaeton to drive the chariot of the Sun,
and, as a rule, they are likely to be as successful as he was!
They are ignorant of the laws of Physiology and Hygiene, and of
the inexorable penalties exacted for the infraction of these
statutes. Thus we find sweets, pastry, cakes, and coffee, taking
the place of wholesome food; late hours, insufficient rest, and
feverish rivalry both in work and play forming poor substitutes
for adequate rest and steady work.

The rapidity with which development proceeds constitutes a
very real danger. The great increase in height puts a considerable strain on the circulatory and digestive organs, and the sudden
development of the bust makes a call on the musculature to
which it is too often unequal. The sense of fatigue leads the
young girl to lounge and to assume incorrect attitudes to relieve
the strain—she stands on one foot, crosses one leg over the other,
sits doubled over her work supporting her head on one hand.
The consequence of these attitudes is lateral curvature of the
spine. The muscles of one side of the back develop more than
the other, the bodies of the vertebrz rotate and carry with them
the ribs, producing a rounded prominence down one side of the
back, the shoulder blades hang unevenly, and one hip is apparently
higher than the other. Strange to say the deformity is often not
noticed until it has become severe and permanent—even then it
is usually the dressmaker who draws attention toit. Ifuntreated
and unchecked the deformity increases and in many cases causes
not only pressure on the thoracic and abdominal viscera but also
178 M. Scharlieb :

such deformity of the pelvic bones as interferes with the function
of parturition.

Oh! that those who have the charge of girls could realise the
dignity and sanctity of the healthy body, and that they might
learn the wisdom and the duty of teaching the young how to
maintain their bodies in health and beauty, how to avoid undue
exertion, chills, and strains, on the one hand, and equally
deleterious self-indulgence, sloth, and nervous follies on the other.

People are afraid of sullying the purity of children’s souls by
revealing to them the wonders of the structure and functions of
their own bodies. They shrink as from a moral plague from
telling them the wonderful story of the transmission of life, and
so, alas, they permit all that is pure and elevated to be dragged
down and defiled by the filthy secrets of the back stairs and
dormitory. Subjects on which neither parent, teacher, nor
doctor appear willing to touch are freely discussed by vulgar,
low-minded adults, and by terribly precocious but ignorant
schoolmates. The whole system is wrong, and until we recognise
the necessity of simplicity and frankness our children will
continue to suffer both in mind and body.

Unfortunately there is no difficulty in finding plenty of
illustrations of the mischievous results of overwork, bodily and
mental, and of our failure to understand, and to sympathise
with, and rightly to treat, the great and rapid changes that
occur in adolescence. In spite of all the toil, excitement, and
worry, of our present management, nay, rather in consequence
of it, there are but few girls who attain that degree of perfection
we desire for them. Our friends, the gardeners, would appear
to have a very superior system of cultivation to ours, for
whereas a stunted or deformed plant is the exception, and wellgrown healthy plants are the rule, the like result does not
appear to be usual in our cultivation of boys and girls. It seems
probable that some part of the explanation lies in the fact that
whereas the gardener provides only for the physical well-being
of his charges we are called upon to develop a much more
complex organism, and that we are responsible for the simultaneous development of body, soul, and spirit. Is it not then
probable that our failure generally arises in seeking to do too
ADOLESCENT GIRLHOOD UNDER MODERN CONDITIONS I79

much, and that the way out of our difficulty may lie in a more
elastic, less Procrustean scheme of education? Is it not also
necessary that we should recognise the very varying capabilities,
both bodily and mental, of young people ?

There is no doubt of the evil influence of mental overwork
on the whole organism. There was an old belief, now happily
disproved, that a change of work was equivalent to rest, but the
observations of doctors and educationalists, no less than the
scientific experiments of the late Professor Mosso and others,
prove that so long as our organism is one and indivisible the
over-fatigue of any part means the over-fatigue of the whole, and
we have learnt that it is worse than useless to expect that girls
whose mental powers are over-taxed can yet retain vigour and
health of body.

Early adolescence is undoubtedly one of the times when
great harm is also done by over-pressure in exercises and games.
When I was visiting Copenhagen and Stockholm, two or three
years ago, I was told by the head mistresses and by the
gymnastic instructors at many schools, that the girls who
enjoyed and profited by strenuous exercises up to I4 or 15
ceased to profit, and did their exercises languidly and badly,
during the time when the most momentous developments were
occurring. Exactly the same observations are made here in
England on the mental and physical capability of our young
people. To the brightness and eagerness of childhood there
frequently succeeds a period in which the body is languid and
the intelligence considerably blunted.

No doubt a great difficulty is felt in arranging curricula for
girls, As things are at present, not only must they pass the
same qualifying examinations as do boys, but the work must be
done in approximately the same time, and the intermediate
examinations must be passed in due course—and this is the real
gravamen of the situation. If the work could be differently
arranged, so that girls were not always working to the very top of
their capacity, if they were not always harassed by the imminence
of the various examinations, they would in all probability be quite
able to take the same degrees as their brothers, passing identical
examinations easily enough if only the arrangements could be
180 M. Scharlieb :

made more suitable. I should be the last person to wish to
make any undue difference between the sexes, and quite believe
that given a sufficiency of time, freedom from care, and a
carefully thought out curriculum, girls could safely do work
which is now found in many instances to be fatal to the
realisation of their hopes.

Of course in the great majority of cases no such special
consideration is necessary, and a strong young girl is quite able
to comply safely with the ordinary regulations, but there ought
to be acertain elasticity in academic arrangements which would
permit of those who are temporarily or permanently less vigorous
having a chance of taking more time and working less strenuously
without necessarily giving up their career.

The desirability of elasticity and of alternative forms of
curricula applies more to College than to School education.
There are certain fundamental subjects which must be taught to
all children alike, and nothing but evil can come from a premature
attempt at specialisation, but when the school phase has terminated, and a choice has been made of life work, a considerable
amount of variety would appear to be desirable, and neither
teacher, nor taught, should permit themselves to feel that there
is any hardship, and still less any disgrace, in taking a desirable
rest, either between School and College, or between any of the
successive phases of College work.

Much wariness, and a prolonged experience, are necessary
for those who have the care of young girls at College. It is
sometimes very difficult to save them from themselves, and to
detect the languor and disability that are sometimes successfully
disguised by over-conscientiousness, excess of emulation, and
undue ambition. It is not possible to give any general rule
whereby these states may be discriminated, but quite apart from
manifest ill-health I would suggest that any falling off in the
quantity and quality of sleep, and an alteration from happiness
and calm to restlessness and irritability, are frequent indications
that a young girl is working beyond her capacity. There is
doubtless a tendency to unduly reduce the amount of sleep.
Investigations made by Dr. Dukes, of Rugby, and Miss Alice
Ravenhill, have shown us how inadequate is the sleep secured by
ADOLESCENT GIRLHOOD UNDER MODERN CONDITIONS 181

children and young people, and it is quite certain that nothing
less than eight hours’ sleep is sufficient in the case of hard-worked
adolescent girls, and that indeed nine or ten hours would be
better.

The dangers to the moral nature may be classified under three
headings: (a) Possibility of exaggeration of religious development; (6) Perversion of religious development; (c) Exaggerations
and perversions of sexual or friendly affections.

From one point of view religious development cannot be
exaggerated, and the men and women with the highest aims, with
the most burning love to God and man, must be the most
successful and happiest of the race; but from another point of
view it is clear that the religious and even the altruistic side of
the nature may be developed out of all proportion to the
intellectual and the physical. Probably this asymmetry arises
less from the development of the religious than from the failure
to develope the intellectual and the bodily nature.

The subject concerns us at present chiefly from this point of
view, and instead of repressing the spiritual aspirations of the
young our endeavour should be to secure the harmonious
development of all three sides of the nature.

When the time comes for the development of the religious
side of the adolescent girl, care should be taken lest it develope
too entirely on the emotional and affective lines. The young
enthusiast should be trained not to waste her strength in merely
wishing to be good, or in vague and poetic aspirations for the
welfare of the race, but she should be trained to put her aspirations to practical use, and to translate into useful deeds her
fascinating visions of service to God and man.

The ebullition of the affections in adolescence somewhat
reminds one of the fermentation which occurs in grape juice.
Properly guided and wisely managed all this superabundant
vitality, enthusiasm, and devotion, will steady and clear into the
true elixir vite, the wine of life, but neglected or misdirected the
whole thing goes off in foam and froth, and, even worse, may
eventually settle down into nothing better than vinegar. .

Almost the same remarks apply to the over-exuberance of
the friendly and amative faculties, to the eagerness with which
182 a M. Scharlieb :

friendships are formed and sexual alliances desired. As a doctor
one is constantly meeting with young women whose lives have
been wrecked, or at any rate whose usefulness and happiness have
been marred, by the unchecked, undirected development of their
affections, and by what people too readily call “an unfortunate
love affair.” The moral processes need for their perfection just
as much guidance, sympathy, and wisdom as do the physical and
the mental, and if we want our young people to reach the
perfection that is really possible to them, all three sides of the
nature must be sympathetically understood by parents, guardians,
and teachers, who are charged with this sacred duty. |

Having regard to the dangers and the difficulties of adolescence, and more especially to our want of knowledge and
experience in these matters, we ought to study carefully the
effects of modern education on individual and national health.
It is, of course, probable that we shall never be able to reduce
this question to a statistical form, or to present the results of our
studies with mathematical precision, but we do want to know, so
far as may be possible, the answer to some such questions as the
following :

1. Are the women of the present day, say from 20 to 35
years of age, as strong, as well developed, and as competent for
their duties as mothers, as were the women of fifty years ago ?

2. Have we reason to believe that the intellectual and
physical training of to-day tends to the development of a healthy
body and a healthy mind, or does it lead to such conditions of
structure and function as interfere with the pre-natal life of their
offspring, and their capacity for suckling ?

3. Are there any means of gauging the influence of modern
education on rate of growth, increase of body weight, and the age
of puberty ?

4. What is the average age at which marriages are contracted, what the proportion of miscarriages and still-births to
living children, and the number of children of educated mothers
‘who survive and are in good health at the age of one year, 5
years, and I5 years?

5, A fifth set of questions arises in connection with the
nervous and mental health of educated women. It is a matter of
ADOLESCENT GIRLHOOD UNDER MODERN CONDITIONS 183

deepest interest to the community that we should know whether
modern education is likely to lead to the evolution of a more
efficient race, or whether its results are likely to be shown in an
increase of nervous disorders and mental disaster.

Although statistics, as said before, are not likely to be available, much could be done if parents, educationalists, and doctors,
would faithfully record the results as noticed by each competent
observer. The labour is great, but the prize is greater, and
nothing should be permitted to interfere with an honest and
united endeavour to place the well-being of the English race ona
really satisfactory and stable foundation. Apparently the great
want of the present day is an adequate sense of duty, and of the
power of self-control ; but until we have carefully and reasonably
made up our minds as to the best training to produce these
virtues it is hopeless to expect the best development of which our
race is capable.
