. Wo gt Shee oe : . ee re gy
: > a
PS | 7
¥

 
 

By J. M.

I

“HE future never resembles the past—
as we well know. But, generally
> m= speaking, our imagination and our
Bnowledge are too weak to tell us what

barticular changes to expect. We do not
Know what the future holds. Nevertheless,
as living and moving beings, we are forced
o act. Peace and comfort of mind require
hat we should hide from ourselves how little
we foresee. Yet we must be guided by some
nypothesis. We tend, therefore, to substitute
or the knowledge which is unattainable
certain conventions, the chief of which is to
ume, contrary to all likelihood, that the
future will resemble the past. This is how
we act in practice. Though it was, I think,
n ingredient in the complacency of the
nineteenth century that, in their philosophical reflections on human behaviour,
Bhey accepted an extraordinary contraption
of the Benthamite School, by which all
possible consequences of alternative courses
pf action were supposed to have attached
to them, first a number expressing their
comparative advantage, and secondly another number expressing the probability of
neir following from the course of action in
question ; so that multiplying together the
mumbers attached to all the possible consequences of a given action and adding the
results, we could discover what to do. In
this way a mythical system of probable
knowledge was employed to reduce the
future to the same calculable status as the
present. No one has ever acted on this
theory. But even to-day I believe that our
‘thought is sometimes influenced. by some
‘such pseudo-rationalistic notions.
_ _Now I emphasize to-night the importance
‘of this convention by which we assume the
‘c, ; she Galton Lecture, delivered before the Eugenics

Society on February 16th, 1937.

ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF A
DECLINING POPULATION*

KEYNES |

13

future to be much more like the past than
is reasonable—a convention of behaviour
which none of us could possibly do without—
because, as I think, it continues to influence
our minds even in those cases where we do
have good reason to expect a definite change.
And, perhaps, the most outstanding example
of a case where we in fact have a considerable
power of seeing into the future is the prospective trend of population. We know much
more securely than we know almost any
other social or economic factor relating to
the future that, in the place of the steady
and indeed steeply rising level of population
which we have experienced for a great
number of decades, we shall be faced in a
very short time with a stationary or a
declining level. The rate of decline is doubtful, but it is virtually certain that the changeover, compared with what we have been used
to, will be substantial. We have this unusual]
degree of knowledge concerning the future
because of the long but definite time-lag in
the effects of vital statistics. Nevertheless
the idea of the future being different from the
present is so repugnant to our conventional
modes of thought and behaviour that
we, most of us, offer a great resistance to
acting on it in practice. There are, indeed,
several important social consequences
already predictable as a result of a rise in
population being changed into a decline.
But my object this evening is to deal, in
particular, with one outstanding economic
consequence of this impending change; if,
that is to say, I can, for a moment, persuade
you sufficiently to depart from the established
conventions of your mind as to accept the
idea that the future will differ from the past.

II
An increasing population has a very important influence on the demand for capital.
Not only does the demand for capital—
14

apart from technical changes and an im
proved standard of life—increase more or
less in proportion to population. But, busi
ness expectations being based much more on 
present than on prospective demand, an era
of increasing population tends to promote
optimism, since demand will in general
tend to exceed, rather than fall short of,
what was hoped for. Moreover a mistake,
resulting in a particular type of capital
being in temporary over-supply, is in such
conditions rapidly corrected. But in an era
of declining population the opposite is true.
Demand tends to be below what was expected, and a state of over-supply is less
easily corrected. Thus a pessimistic atmosphere may ensue; and, although at long
last pessimism may tend to correct itself
through its effect on supply, the first result
to prosperity of a change-over from an increasing to a declining population may be
very disastrous.

In assessing the causes of the enormous
increase in capital during the nineteenth
century and since, too little importance, I
think, has been given to the influence of an
increasing population as distinct from other
influences. The demand for capital depends,
of course, on three factors: on population,
on the standard of life, and on capital
technique. By capital technique I mean the
relative importance of long processes as an
efficient method of procuring what is currently consumed, the factor I have in mind
being conveniently described as the period
of production, which is, roughly speaking, a
weighted average of the interval which
elapses between the work done and the consumption of the product. In other words the
demand for capital depends on the number of
consumers, the average level of consumption,
and the average period of production.

Now it is necessarily the case that an
increase in population increases proportionately the demand for capital ; and the progress of invention may be relied on to raise
the standard of life. But the effect of invention on the period of production depends on
the type of invention which is characteristic
of the age. It may have been true of the
nimeteenth century that improvements in

ishing the average period of production. For
as we get richer, our consumption tends to }
be directed towards those articles of con
- oom,

people, which have a relatively short average

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

transport, standards of housing and public

services were of such a character that they
did tend somewhat to increase the period
of consumption. It is well known that highly
durable objects were characteristic of the
Victorian civilization. But it is not equally
clear that the same thing is true to-day.
Many modern inventions are directed towards finding ways of reducing the amount
of capital investment necessary to produce
a given result ; and partly as the result of
our experience as to the rapidity of charige |
in tastes: and; technique, our preference is }
decidedly directed towards those types of |
capital goods which are not. too durable. I |
do not believe, therefore, that we can rely |
on current changes of technique being of the |
kind which tend of themselves to increase |
materially the average period of production. j
It may even be the case that, apart ‘from |
the effect of possible changes in the ‘Yate
of interest, the average period may. be }
tending to diminish. Moreover an improving ;
average level of consumption may con- |}
ceivably have, in itself, the effect of dimin- |

 

sumption, particularly the services of other

g

period of production. )

,

Now, if the number of consumers is falling ;
off and we cannot rely on any significant |
technical lengthening of the period of pro- .

«
»
“1
o
S
+
,

duction, the demand for a net increase of '
Capital goods is thrown back into being :
wholly dependent on an improvement in the
‘average level of consumption or on a fall in |

the rate of interest. I will attempt to give
a few very rough figures to illustrate -the
order of magnitude of the different factors
involved. | | a
Let us consider the period of. just. over
fifty years from 1860 to 1913. I find no
evidence of any important change in the
length of the technical period of production.
Statistics of quantity of real capital present
special difficulties. But those which we have
do not suggest that there have been large
changes in the amount of capital employed to
produce a unit of output. Two of the’ miost
  
  
    
  
   
   

 
  

  

ghi talized: servicés, those of housing
ad: of agriculture; ‘are old-established. AgriIture has:.diminished in relative imporince..Only if people were to spend a decidedly
creased proportion of their incomes on
ousing, as to which there is indeed a certain
ount of evidence, for the post-war period,
ould I expect a ‘significant lengthening of
e technical period of production. For the
fty years before the war, during which the
ng-period average of the rate of interest
yas fairly constant, I feel some confidence
hat the period was not lengthened by much
nore than 10 per cent., if as much.

Now during the same period the British
bopulation increased by about 50 per cent.,
pnd the population which British industry
d investment was serving by a much
ligher figure. And I suppose that the
tandard of life must have risen by somewhere about 60 per cent. Thus the increased
Jemand for capital was primarily attributable to the increasing population and to
he rising. standard of life, and only in a
ninor degree to technical changes of a kind
which called for an increasing capitalization
per unit of consumption. To sum up, the
population figures, which are reliable, indi
ate that about half the increase in capital

as required to serve the increasing population. Perhaps the figures were about as
follows, though I would emphasize that
these conclusions are very rough and to be
regarded only as broad pointers to what was
is oing On: —

 
  
   
  
 

1860 IQI3

. Real capital 100 270
Population -». Ooo 150
Standard of life ... 100 160
Period of Production roo IIo

It follows that a Stationary population
with the same improvement in the standard
of life and the same lengthening of the
‘period of production would have required an
increase in the stock of capital of only a
little more than half of the increase which
actually occurred. Moreover, whilst nearly
half of the home investment was required
by the increase in population, probably a
subsiantially higher proportion of the foreign

_ . SOME ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF A. DECLINING POPULATION

I5

investment of that period was attributable
to thiscause. is : —_

On the other hand it is possible that the
increase in average incomes, the decline in
the size of families, and a number of other
institutional and social influences may have
raised the proportion of the national income
which tends to be saved in conditions of full
employment. I do not feel confident about
this, since there are other factors, notably
the taxation of the very rich, which tend in
the opposite direction. But I think we can
Safely say—and this is sufficient for my
argument—that the proportion of the
national income which would be saved to-day
in conditions of full employment lies somewhere between 8 per cent. and 1 5 per cent.
of the income of each year. What annual
percentage increase in the stock of capital .
would this rate of saving involve? To
answer this we have to estimate how many
years of our national income the existing
stock of capital represents. This is not a
figure which we know accurately, but it is
possible to indicate an order of magnitude.
You will probably find when I tell you the
answer that it differs a good deal from what
you expect. The existing national stock of
capital is equal to about four times a year’s
national income. That is to say, if our
annual income is in the neighbourhood of
£4,000 millions, our stock of capital is perhaps £15,000 millions. (I am not here
including foreign investment, which would
raise the figure to, say, four and a half times.)
It follows that new investment at a rate of
somewhere between 8 per cent and 1 5 per
cent. of a year’s income means a cumulative
increment in the stock of capital of somewhere between 2 per cent. and 4 per cent.
per annum.

Let me recapitulate the argument. Please
take note that I have been making so far two:
tacit assumptions—namely that there is no
drastic change in the distribution of wealth
or in any other factor affecting the proportion of income that is saved ; and further,
that there is no large change in the rate of
interest sufficient to modify substantially the
length of the average period of production.
To the removal of these two assumptions
 

we shall return later. On these assumptions,
however, with our existing organization,
and in conditions of prosperity and full
employment, we shall have to discover a
demand for net additions to our stock of
capital amounting to somewhere between 2
per cent. and 4 per cent. annually. And this
will have to continue year after year indefinitely. Let us in what follows take the lower
estimate—namely 2 per cent.—since if this
is too low the argument will be a fortiori.

Hitherto the demand for new capital has
come from two sources, each of about equal
strength : a little less than half of it to meet
the demands of a growing population; a
little more than half of it to meet the
demands of inventions and improvements
which increase output per head and permit
a higher standard of life.

Now past experience shows that a greater
cumulative increment than I per cent. per
annum in the standard of life has seldom
proved practicable. Even if the fertility of
invention would permit more, we cannot
easily adjust ourselves to a greater rate of
change than this involves. There may have
been one or two decades in this country
during the past hundred years when improvement has proceeded at the rate of 1 per
cent. per annum. But generally speaking the
rate of improvement seems to have been
somewhat less than I per cent. per annum
cumulative.

I am here distinguishing, you will see,
between those inventions which enable a
unit of capital to yield a unit of product
with the aid of less labour than before, and
those which lead to a change in the amount
of capital employed more than in proportion
to the resulting output. I am assuming that
the former class of improvements will proceed in the future as in the recent past, and
am ready to take as my assumption that
they will proceed in the near future up to the
best standard we have ever experienced in
any previous decade ;and I calculate that
inventions falling under this head are not
likely to absorb much more than half of our
savings, assuming conditions of full employment and a stationary population. But in
the second category some inventions cut

some way and some the other, and it is not
clear—assuming. a constant rate of interest
—that the net result of invention changes
demand for capital per unit of output one
way or the other. : |
It follows, therefore, that to ensure
equilibrium conditions of prosperity over a
period of years it will be essential, esther that
we alter our institutions and the distribution |
of wealth in a way which causes a smaller
proportion of income to be saved, or that we
reduce the rate of interest sufficientiy io
make profitable very large changes in
technique or in the direction of consumption
which involve a much larger use of capital
in proportion to output. Or, of course, as
would be wisest, we could pursue both
policies to a certain extent. |

III

What relation do these views bear to the
older Malthusian theory that more capital
resources per head (chiefly envisaged by the
older writers in the shape of Land) must be
of immense benefit to the standard of life,
and that the growth of population was
disastrous to human standards by retarding
this increase? It may seem at first sight
that I am contesting this old theory and am
arguing, on the contrary, that a phase of
declining population will make it immensely
more difficult than before to maintain
prosperity. .

In a sense this is a true interpretation of
what I am saying. But if there are any old
Malthusians here present let them not
suppose that I am rejecting their essential
argument. Unquestionably a _ stationary
population does facilitate a rising standard
of life ; but on one condition only—namely
that the increase in resources or in consumption, as the case may be, which the stationariness of population makes possible, does
actually take place. For we ‘have..now
learned that we have another devil at our
elbow at least as fierce as the Malthusian—
namely the devil of unemployment escaping
through the breakdown of effective demand.
Perhaps we could call this devil too a
Malthusian devil, since it was Malthus
cts of population: as.

and sought to rationalize that problem,

    
 
   
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
   
  
 
  

the ‘older Malthus was no less disturbed
yy the facts of unemployment as he saw
em round him and sought—far less successally so far as his influence on the rest of the
jorld. was. concerned—to rationalize that
roblem too. Now when Malthusian devil
. is chained up, Malthusian devil U. is
able io break loose. When devil P. of
Population is chained up, we are free of one
nenace; but. we are more exposed to the
ther devil U. of Unemployed Resources
han we were before.
With a stationary population we shall, I
rgue, be absolutely dependent for the mainenance of prosperity and civil peace on

olicies of increasing consumption by a
More equal distribution of incomes and of
mrcing down the rate of interest so as to
nake profitable a substantial change in the
ength of the period of production. If we do
ot, of set and:determined purpose, pursue
mhese policies, then without question we

mtand to gain by. the chaining up of one
levil, and shall suffer from the perhaps more
intolerable deprédations of the other.

| Yet there will be many social and political
lorces to oppose the necessary change. It is
probable that we cannot make the changes
Wisely unless we make them gradually. We
ust foresee what is before us and move to
meet it half-way. If capitalist society rejects
p more equal distribution of incomes and the
Forces of banking and finance succeed in
Maintaining the rate of interest somewhere
near the figure which ruled on the average

shall be cheated of the benefits which we

during: the nineteenth century (which was,

_ by the way, a little Jowery than the rate of
Interest which rules to-day), then a chronic

tendency towards the under-employment of
resources must in the end sap and destroy
that form of society. But if, on the other
hand, persuaded and guided by the spirit of
the age and such enlightenment as there is,
it permits—as I believe it may—a gradual
evolution in our attitude towards accumulation, so that it shall be appropriate to the
circumstances of a stationary or declining
population, we shall be able, perhaps. to get
the best of both worlds—to maintain the
liberties and independence of our present
system, whilst its more signal faults gradually suffer euthanasia as the diminishing
importance of capital accumulation and the
rewards attaching to it fall into their proper
position in the social scheme. :

A too rapidly declining population would
obviously ‘involve many severe problems,
and there are strong reasons lying outside
the scope of this evening’s discussion why in
that event, or in the threat of that event,
measures ought to be taken to prevent it.
But a.stationary or slowly declining population may, if we exercise the necessary
strength and wisdom, enable us to raise the
standard of life to what it should be, whilst
retaining those parts of our traditional
scheme of life which we value the more now
that we see what happens to those who lose
them.

In the final summing up, therefore, I do
not depart from the old Malthusian conclusion. I only wish to warn you that the chaining up of the one devil may, if we are
careless, only serve to loose another still
fiercer and more intractable. |

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIX, No. 1.
