THE

EUGENICS REVIEW

FRANCIS GALTON,

1822—I9QI11.
Sir Francis Darwin, F.R.S.*
FRANCIS GALTON was born on February 16th, ninety-two years
ago, and to-day we are met together to remember him—a word
that seems to me more in tune with his nature than the more
formal expression commemorate.

He disliked pomposity, but he seems to have loved little
private ceremonials. For instance, when he opened the first
notebook in preparation for his autobiographical Memories, he
began page 1 with Falstaff’s words: ‘‘ Lord, Lord, how subject
we old men are to this vice of lying.’’ An inverted appeal
to Truth which no man ever stood less in need of. And
again at the foot of the very last page of his Memories is
a drawing of Galtonia candicans, a little ceremony without
words, a hieroglyphic glorification of the honour paid him in
giving his name to this African plant.

Many persons, and even some reviewers, form their
opinions of books by reading half-a-dozen passages at random.
I have been more scientific in selecting the first and last pages,
and from these I conclude that a simple and kindly commemoration is not out of harmony with the genius of this great and
loveable man.

I should like to express my appreciation of the honour done
me in asking me to give the first Galton lecture. In many
ways I am a bad choice, since I have had no share in his
science of eugenics, neither has my _ research-work been
directly connected with evolution. I can only hope that
in consideration of my delight in the fibre and flavour of
Galton’s mind, with its youth, its charm of humour, and its

ever-springing originality and acuteness, I say that I hope

t Being the first Galton Lecture, delivered before the Eugenics Education Society, Feb.
16th, 1914.
2 EUGENICS REVIEW.

these considerations may excuse me for having undertaken an
office for which I am in so many ways unfitted.

One of his most obvious characteristics .was his love of
method; I do not mean methodicalness, but that he took
delight in knowing how to do all manner of things in the very
best way. He also liked to teach his methods to others. Those
who never saw him, or even read his books, will exclaim
‘What a bore he must have been.’’ You might as well call
the lightening a bore for explaining that it was going to
thunder, or complain of the match for boring the gunpowder
as to the proper way of exploding. With Galton’s explanations there was a flash of clear words, a delightful smile or
gesture which seemed to say: ‘‘ That’s all—don’t let me take
up your time.’’ Nobody was ever more decidedly the very
antithesis of a bore than Francis Galton.

He first appeared on the literary and scientific stage as a
traveller, geographer, and author of a book on South Africa
(1853), and it was the experience there gained that enabled him
to write two years later, in 1855, that wonderful book ‘‘ The
Art of Travel.’’ There he teaches such vitally important things
as how to find water, how to train oxen as pack animals, to
pitch a tent, to build a fire, to cook, and a thousand other
secrets.

He liked, of course, to be useful to weary and thirsty
travellers, but he was as much, or more impelled by the love of
method for its own sake. He was in fact an artist in method.
The same thing is shown in a letter he wrote to “‘ Nature”
near the end of his life explaining how to cut a round cake on
scientific principles so that it shall not become stale. This
again was not so much a philanthropic desire that his fellow
men should not have dry cake, as delight in method.

When I re-read ‘‘ The Art of Travel’’ quite recently, I
could not find his method of preventing a donkey braying.
My recollection is that, observing a braying donkey with
tail erect, he argued if the tail were forcibly kept down, as
by tying a stone to it, that braying would not occur. I certainly believe myself to have read or heard that this most
Galtonian plan succeeded. If anyone can tell me where to
look for it I shall be grateful.
FRANCIS GALTON. 3

Later in life he tried to make his unique knowledge of use
to his country. He writes’ :-—

‘*The outbreak of the Crimean War showed the helplessness of our soldiers in the most elementary matters of camp-life.
Believing that something could be done by myself towards
removing this extraordinary and culpable ignorance, | offered
to give lectures on the subject, gratuitously, at the then newlyfounded camp at Aldershot.”’

He received no answer from the War Office, but a personal
application to Lord Palmerston led to his being installed. He
speaks of a few officers attending his course, and adds that the
‘‘rude teachings of the Crimean War soon superseded ’”’ his
own. The chief interest of the episode is the evidence it gives
of great and elaborate pains spent in the teaching of methods.

I must here be allowed to turn back to an earlier period of
his life in relation to what I have been speaking of. In illustrating the different dispositions of his sisters, both of whom
were dear to him, Galton writes? :—

‘* My eldest sister was just, my youngest merciful. When
my bread was buttered for me as a child, the former picked out
the butter that filled the big holes, the latter did not. Consequently I respected the former, and loved the latter.”’

Have we not here an early appreciation of method or must
we merely class the memory with the scene in ‘‘ Great Expectations,’’ where the terrifying elder sister, Mrs. Joe, prepares bread
and butter for her husband and for Pip (her little brother) in an
eminently just and disagreeable manner. May I be allowed to
add that a love of butter in the big holes is not hereditary in my
branch of the family; I should have loved the sister who picked
it out.

At a later stage in his boyhood, Galton transferred his
study of method from his sisters to his schoolmasters. He
describes what he suffered from the absurd limitations, which
still exist, in the education of English boys, and ‘‘ chafed ’’ at
the teaching he received. ‘‘ Grammar,”’ he says, ‘‘ and the dry
rudiments of Latin and Greek were abhorrent to me, for there

1 Memories, p. 163.
2? Memories, p. 14.
4 EUGENICS REVIEW.

seemed so little sense in them.’’! He suffered in fact like his
cousin, Charles Darwin, who groaned over the classics at
Shrewsbury School, and forgot what he learned, even to some
of the Greek letters, by the time he was nineteen.

In 1838, when Galton was sixteen years of age, he became
an indoor pupil at the Birmingham General Hospital. Here
the education was practical enough to suit even his scientific
mind, but to this coddled generation it seems a rough introduction to medicine. He had to prepare tinctures, extracts,
decoctions, and learned to make pills by hand—a slow enough
process. In later life, when he saw a pill-making machine at
work, it must have been his boyish memories which inspired
the characteristic calculation that if a grandmotherly Government possessed forty-five of these engines, it could supply each
inhabitant of the British Isles with one pill per diem.2 But this
is a digression.

It was in the surgery that he had most experience; he and
the other indoor pupils were called up at all hours to dress
burns, to patch broken heads, and reduce dislocations, with,
as it seems, very little instruction. It was doubtless a fine bit
of education in self-reliance, and he must have learned much
that was of use in South African travels. Whether as a
student of method he approved of his rough and ready education
is not quite clear. His genius for experiment, or rather that
priceless capacity for extracting unexpected conclusions from
experience, comes out in his account of a case in the Birmingham
Hospital. An injured drayman was brought in dead drunk,
and underwent amputation of the legs without any sign of
feeling pain. This set Galton wondering whether patients
might not with advantage be made drunk before operations—a
query which was soon happily answered by the discovery of
anzesthetics.

Another most characteristic event was his desire to learn
the properties of all the drugs in the pharmacopceia by personal
experience. He determined to dose himself alphabetically, but

1 Memories, p. 20.

* Memories, p. 28.
3 Memories, p. 35.
FRANCIS GALTON. 5

got no further than C., for the effects of croton oil put a stop to
his thirst for first-hand knowledge.

We must pass over his time at King’s College, London,
where, as he sat at lecture, he could see the ‘‘ sails of the
lighters moving in sunshine on the Thames,’’’ a vision which
stirred his blood with a longing for adventure, and which, |
as he characteristically noticed, always occurred when the
weather-cock on the Horse Guards showed that the south-west
wind was blowing.

We must, in like manner, skip his undergraduate days at
Trinity, Cambridge. We thus arrive by a devious route at
the period when he returned a traveller and geographer of
recognized merit, and began the work with which he was practically connected for many years, as a member of the Meteorological Committee.2 His best-known contribution in the
science was in a paper read before the Royal Society in 1862,
where his discovery of the anticyclone was first described; but
he also had a good deal to do with the printing and publishing
of the now familiar weather charts. Meteorology takes us from
1861 to 1863 that is nearly to 1865, when his first paper on
Heredity appeared, which was at the same time his first paper on
hereditary genius. This line of research was to form his chief
claim to celebrity, and must be separately treated.

Meanwhile I wish to say something of his love of experiment which is a branch of his devotion to method. We
only know of the more entertaining of his inquiries from his
delightful book of Memories, but I cannot avoid the fear that he
has left out many experiments even stranger than those he
published. My father had a special affection for what in his
own case he called ‘‘ Fool’s experiments.’’ These are what, I
am afraid, Galton may have omitted. Still there are records
of some delightful lines of work.3 He is probably the only
man who ever attempted to solve by experiment the problem
of free will and determinism. He limited his inquiry to the
question whether there exists in human affairs such a thing as an
a Memories, p. 48.

* Memories, p. 233.

3 Memories, p. 295.
6 EUGENICS REVIEW.

““uncaused and creative action.’’ The experiment, or rather
self-observation was carried on (1879) for six weeks, almost
continuously, and ‘“‘ off and on for many subsequent months.’’
He found that with practice he could nearly always trace the
‘‘ straightforward causation ’’’ of a given.action, which at first
seemed to have been performed ‘“‘ through a creative act, or by
inspiration.’’*

Then there was his attempt to experience the feelings of
the insane. ‘‘ The method tried was to invest everything I
met, whether human, animal, or inanimate, with the imaginary
attributes of a spy.’’2 The trial was only too successful; by
the time he had walked 14 miles to the cabstand at the east end
of the Green Park ‘‘ every horse in the stand seemed watching ’’ him, ‘‘ either with pricked ears, or disguising its espionage.’’3 He adds that hours passed before this uncanny
sensation wore off.

On another occasion he managed to create in his mind the
feelings of a savage for his idol, the idol in his own case being
a picture of Mr. Punch.

These experiments seem to me very characteristic of the
man in their originality, their humour, and their unexpected
measure of success, for personally, I should have prophesied
failure in all. They have a special bearing on Galton’s belief
that a quasi-religious enthusiasm for eugenics may be built up.
I have sometimes wondered that he should believe this great
change so feasible, but I understood how he came to think so
when I read of his strange power of impressing beliefs on
himself, with such force as to leave a trail of discomfort in the
mind after the make-believe had ceased.

These and similar trials were, I think, made in relation to
his desire to weigh and measure human faculty in a broad sense.
I remember his telling me of his experiments on the mind of
the British cabman. His method was to use alternately two
different forms of the address to which he wished to go. Thus
on Monday he would tell the man to drive him home to 42,

1 Memories, p. 295.

* Memories, p. 276.
3 Memories. p. 276.
FRANCIS GALTON. 7

Rutland Gate, on Tuesday he would say ‘‘ Rutland Gate, 42,’’
and so on. My recollection is that the cabmen understood
quickest the familiar formula in which the number precedes the
name of the street.

There was also a characteristic experiment or inquiry into
the intensity of boredom in a lecture audience, by counting the
number of fidgets per man per minute. In this case to avoid
the open use of a watch, he estimated time by the number of his
own breaths, ‘‘ of which there are fifteen in a minute.’’ I hope
my brother will forgive my adding that he found .the Royal
Geographical Society meetings good hunting-ground for fidgets,
for as Francis Galton remarks: ‘‘ Even there, dull memoirs are
occasionally read.’”?

Lastly, I must mention his plan of marking, by means of
a hidden apparatus, the beauty of the women he met in the
streets of different towns. He classified them as pretty, ugly
and indifferent, and I am glad that in his beauty map, London
came out top; Aberdeen, I regret to say was at the bottom.

But in speaking of measurement of human faculty we have
got quite out of any reasonably chronological sequence, for the
book bearing that title appeared in 1883. But the estimation of
human characteristics especially in relation to heredity was in
Galton’s mind several years earlier, and in 1865 he wrote the two
papers in Macmillan’s Magazine which contain the germs of his
later work on heredity and eugenics. It is unfortunate that the
research on heredity, together with its practical application to
human welfare in the new science of eugenics, should not have
more space given to it in his autobiographical Memories; there
are but thirty-seven pages—or 11 per cent of the whole book.
The specific importance of the subjects here dealt with is so
great that these thirty-seven pages outweigh, for this Society,
all the rest of the book. We should like to have had a fuller
account by the author of this remarkable work of 1865. He
does, however, tell us—and it is a very striking statement—
that the two articles ‘‘ expressed then, as clearly as I can do
now, the leading principles of Eugenics.”? The chief point in

1 Memories, p. 278.
7 Memories, p. 312.
8 EUGENICS REVIEW.

which he came to differ from the Macmillan articles was that he
was then ‘‘ too much disposed to think of marriage under some
regulation, and not enough of the effects of self-interest and of
social and religious sentiment.’”*

I imagine that the pendulum has now swung the other
way, and that one of the most hopeful and practical schemes
is the prevention of marriage among habitual criminals and the
feeble-minded.

Galton attributes his work in heredity in some measure to
the publication of the Origin of Species which, he says, ‘‘ made
a marked epoch ”’ in his ‘‘ mental development as it did in that
of human thought generally.’’?

That Galton personally felt no difficulty in assimilating
the new doctrine, he characteristically ascribes to a ‘* bent of
mind that both its illustrious author’’ and himself had
‘‘inherited from’’ their ‘‘common grandfather, Dr. Erasmus
Darwin.’’3 But in our day the name of Galton is intimately
connected in our minds with the science of heredity, and we
forget that he, like lesser men, was as a mine fired by the
Ongin.

He was ‘‘ encouraged,’’ he says, “‘ by the new views to
pursue many inquiries which had long interested’ him “and
which clustered round the central topics of heredity.’’ This
was the charge with which the mine had been loaded,—the
Origin was the fuse.

When that book was published in 1859, nearly everyone
here to-night must have been too young to know anything of
the great change in the colour of human thought which was
ushered in. There are more who may remember how twelve
years later when the Descent of Man came out, there was still
plenty of clerical and other forms of foolish bitterness. But a
man needs to have been in the full swing of mental activity in
1859 to perceive the greatness of the change due to the Origin
of Species.

His two papers in Macmillan’s Magazine, 1865, pp. 157

and 318, seem to me very remarkable and, as I have said, they
1 Memories, p. 310.
2? Memories, p. 287.
3 Memories, p. 288.
FRANCIS GALTON. 9

are passed over too lightly by the author in his Memories
(p. 310). They contain a statistical proof of the inheritance of
intellectual and moral qualities... And those who would allow
the truth of this statement must further agree that it is the first
statistical demonstration of this important fact that the world
has seen. And he insists that the whole spiritual nature of
man is heritable, so that in his opinion there are no traces of
that new element ‘“‘ specially fashioned in Heaven ’’? which (he
says) is commonly believed to be given to a baby at its birth.

The paper contains a very interesting discussion on the
development of social virtues by natural selection. He gives,
too, a characteristic explanation of that human attribute commonly known as original sin, the quality in fact which makes
men yield to base desires against and in spite of their sense
of what is right.

He says® that here ‘‘ the development of our nature under
Darwin’s law of natural selection has not yet overtaken the
development of our religious civilisation.’’ It may be more
briefly described as the conflict between the individual desires
with the tribal instincts. It must be remembered that for all
this discussion Galton had no Descent of Man to guide him.

I shall come back later to his clear and courageous statement of eugenics in 1865, meanwhile I must speak of heredity,
a word, by the way, introduced by Galton and for which he
seems to have been taken to task.

With regard to the machinery of reproduction the essay is
remarkable for containing what is practically identical with
Weismann’s continuity of the germ-cell, and Galton’s priority is
acknowledged by that author. But in science the credit goes
to the man who convinces the world, not to the man to whom
the idea first occurs. Not the man who finds a grain of new
and precious quality but to him who sows it, reaps it, grinds it
and feeds the world on it. This is true of this very Macmillan’s
Magazine article. Who would know of these admirable views
on Hereditary Genius and Eugenics, if this were Galton’s only

1 In Memories, p. 310, he criticises the statistical methods of this work.

2 Memories, p. 316.
3 Macmillan’s Magazine, p. 327.
10 EUGENICS REVIEW.

utterance? This is the grain which has increased and multiplied : and it is to-day familiar nutriment and is now assiduously
cultivated by the Eugenics Education Society. But if
Natural Inheritance, and Hereditary Genius had not been
written; if the papers on eugenics had not appeared, and
especially if he had not convinced’the world of his seriousness
by creating a eugenic foundation at University College, where
his friend Professor Karl Pearson carries on the Galtonian
traditions—why then the paper in Macmillan would have
counted for very little. But it was not quite unnoticed. By
my father it is referred to in the Variation of Animals and
Plants under Domestication. Galton was encouraged and
reassured by Darwin’s appreciation of his work: his words in
Hereditary Genius’ are ‘‘ I feel assured that, inasmuch as what I
then wrote was sufficient to earn the acceptance of Mr.
Darwin . . . the increased amount of evidence submitted in the
present volume is not likely to be gainsaid.’’ He was
characteristically generous in owning his debt to the author of
the Origin of Species and characteristically modest in the value
he ascribed to my father’s words of encouragement. The book
on Hereditary Genius strikes me as most impressive. It seems
as though the man whom the world had agreed to honour as an
admirable and indeed a brilliant worker in geography and
meteorology had suddenly grown big. He had shown himself
to have the power of sustaining a weighty argument in strong
and temperate phrase, speaking as a judge rather than an
advocate, and to have definitely taken rank with Darwin, Lyell,
Hooker and Huxley, men whose pens have dinted the world,
leaving their ineffaceable mark on the road trodden by the march
of science.

When I was working at the Life and Letters of Charles
Darwin, I naturally asked Mr. Galton for leave to publish the
letters he had received from my father. But he would not
agree. Mr. Darwin, he said, had spoken far too kindly of his
work and he preferred to keep the praise to himself. But later

when he wrote his Memories,? he fortunately realised that it is

1 Hereditary Genius, p. 2.
* He had already allowed Professor Seward and myself to publish them in
More Letters of Charles Darwin.
FRANCIS GALTON. Il

wiser to think of the value to the world of such documents, than
of private likes or dislikes. The letter my father wrote about
Hereditary Genius which Galton says ‘‘ made him most happy ”’
begins :—

‘‘T have only read about 50 pages of your book . . . , but
I must exhale myself, else something will go wrong in my inside,
I do not think I ever in all my life read anything more interesting and original.’”!

In reading this great book it is, I think, impossible to
doubt about the strength of the work. The quiet relentless way
in which his territory is pegged out, and the clear wisdom
with which the very terms of the new science are defined are
equally impressive. And for lighter enjoyment his illustrations
are to be recommended. He has to settle precisely what he
means by a man being eminent or illustrious before he can
begin to ask are these qualities hereditary. An eminent man
is one in four thousand, and to make clear what this implies,
he writes, ‘‘ On the most brilliant of starlight nights there are
never SO many as 4,000 stars visible to the naked eye at the
same time; yet we feel it to be an extraordinary distinction to a
star to be accounted as the brightest in the sky.’’? If we could
imagine that each new night shows us a fresh set of stars, we
might speculate as to how many nights we should watch the
sky before we found one bright enough for Galton.

In the same way he tries to make us see a million, because
in that number there is but one illustrious man. He
worked it out in Bushey Park where he had gone to see the
horse-chestnuts in flower, and came to the astonishing conclusion that taking one half only of the avenue and the flowers
visible on the sunny side of that row, it would require 10 miles
of avenue to give 1,000,000 spikes of blossom.

Later he defines mediocrity in a way not very flattering to
those, who, like myself, live in the country. Mediocrity? then
‘* defines the intellectual power found in most provincial gatherings, because the attractions of a more stirring life in the metro
* Memories, p. 290.
2 Hereditary Genius, p. 9.
3 Hereditary Genius, p. 31.
12 EUGENICS REVIEW.

polis and elsewhere are apt to draw away the abler classes of
men, and the silly and imbecile do not take a part in the gatherings.’’ On this last point, by the way, I am not convinced.
The research on the heredity of mental and moral characters
leads naturally to eugenics, as in the Macmillan paper of 1865.
But before dealing with this I must say a few words about
what, in the opinion of some, is Galton’s chief claim to
eminence—the study of heredity as a whole. There is no doubt
that he was the first to treat thoroughly and in a strict statistical
method, the steps by which one generation passes into the next.
He was pre-eminently a lover of statistics, he was indeed what
Goschen called himself: ‘‘ A passionate statistician.’’

He used Gauss’s Law of Error, which Quetelet had
already applied to human measurements. ‘‘ The primary
objects,’? he says,' ‘‘of the Gaussian Law of Error were
exactly opposed, in one sense, to those to which I applied them.
They were to get rid of, or to provide a just allowance for
errors. But these errors or deviations were the very things I
wanted to preserve and to know about.”’

This conception of variation impressed him deeply, so that
he remembered the exact spot in the grounds of Naworth
Castle where it first occurred to him ‘‘that the laws of
heredity? were solely concerned with deviations expressed in
statistical units.”

What may be called the final result of Galton’s work in
heredity is, I imagine, his ancestral law, namely that “‘ the
average contribution of each parent’’ to its offspring is one
quarter, or in other words that half of the qualities of the child
can be accounted for when we know its father and mother. In
the same way the four grandparents together contribute one
quarter and so on. He illustrates this by calculating how much
Norman blood a man has who descends from a Baron of
William the Conqueror’s. Assuming that the Baron weighed 14
stone, his descendant’s share in him is represented by 1/50
grain.3 |

1 Memories, p. 305.
2 Memories, p. 300.
3 Macmillan, p. 327.
FRANCIS GALTON. 13

This side of Galton’s work is, in the judgment of many,
his greatest claim to distinction as a master in the science of
heredity. How far this is so I shall not attempt to pronounce.
It is possibly still too soon to do so. Nevertheless it seems to
me that Mendelism (the main facts of which are no longer in
dispute) will compel the world (if it has not already done so)
to look at variation in a very different way to that of Galton.
The Mendelian does not and never will look at variation merely
as a “‘deviation expressed in statistical units.’’ Nor can he
accept the ancestral law, because he has convinced himself that
some ancestors contribute nothing in regard to certain
characters.

The contrast between Galtonism and Mendelism may be
illustrated by an example which if not a strict analogy has in
it something illuminating, especially for those who do not
know tco much of the subject. Galton seems to me like a
medizval chemist while Mendel is a modern one. Galton
can observe, or can follow the changes that occur when two
compounds are mixed. But he knows nothing of the mechanism
of what occurs. But the Mendelian is like a modern chemist
who calls the chemical elements to his aid, and is able to express
the result of the experiment in terms of these elements. This
is an enormous advantage, and if my analogy is to be trusted
it would seem as though a progressive study of heredity must
necessarily be on Mendelian lines.

But it obviously does not follow that the laborious and
skilful work of Galton and his school is wasted. Those who
wish to have made plain to them how Biometrics may illuminate
a problem which cannot as yet be solved in Mendelian fashion
should read Dr. Schuster’s most interesting book on eugenics.
I am thinking especially of the question as to the heredity of
tuberculosis and cancer. The relation between Galtonism and
Mendelism is also well and temperately discussed in Mr. Lock’s
Recent Progress in the Study of Variation, 1906.

But it is time to speak of Galton as a eugenist—on which if
we look to the distant future his fame will rest. For no one can
doubt that the science of eugenics must become a great and
beneficent force in the evolution of man.
14 EUGENICS REVIEW.

We must be persistent in urging its value, but we must also
be patient. We should remember how young is the subject.
As recently as 1901 Galton was, in his Huxley Lecture,
compelled to speak of eugenics in these terms* :—

‘*Tt has not hitherto been approached along the ways that
recent knowledge has laid open, and it occupies in consequence
a less dignified position in scientific estimation than it might.
It is smiled at as most desirable in itself and possibly worthy of
academic discussion, but absolutely out of the question as a
practical problem.’’ After explaining that the object of his
discourse was to ‘‘ show cause for a different opinion,’’ he goes
on with what, in his restrained stvle, is strong language: ‘I
shall show that our knowledge is already sufficient to justify
the pursuit of this perhaps the grandest of all objects.’’”

At the close of the lecture he speaks out as to the difficulties and the pre-eminent value of eugenics and once more of
the oppressive ‘‘ magnitude of the enquiry.”’

No one who reads this lecture of Sir Francis Galton’s is
likely to let eugenics go with a smile and a remark that it 1s not
a practical problem. It is one of the functions of the Eugenics
Education Society to spread the sanely scientific views here set
forth by Galton, and as far as I am able to judge the Society
has and is doing sound work in this direction.

In another essay,3 Galton discusses the meaning of the
‘‘Eu’’ in eugenics in a characteristic way. He imagines an
attempt among the animals in the Zoological Gardens to establish a code of absolute morality. With customary love of
detail, he supposes the inquiry to be undertaken by some
animal such as a sparrow or a rat which is intelligent and has
easy access to all the cages, and is therefore able to collect
opinions. There would be strongly pronounced differences
between the carnivorous animals and those which form their
natural prey. There would be a general agreement as to
maternal affection, though fishes and the cuckoo would laugh
at it. But all would agree on some eugenic principles: That

1 Essays in Eugenics, p. 1.
2 Essays in Eugenics, p. 1.

3 Essays in Eugenics, p. 35.
FRANCIS GALTON. 15

it is better to be healthy and vigorous than sickly and weak—
well-fitted for their part in life rather than the reverse, in fact
good specimens of their kind whatever that kind may be.

Sir Francis Galton goes on to give a list of qualities that
““nearly every one except cranks would take into account in
picking out the best specimens: of his class.’”’ The list would
‘* include health, energy, ability, manliness and courteous disposition.’’? I wish he had thought of eugenic mothers and had
translated manliness into the feminine equivalents of courage
and endurance. When I first read this list it struck me at
once how highly distinguished was Galton himself in all these
qualities. As we dwell on the qualities one by one, they seem
to call up echoes from the image we have of his character.
‘‘ Ability, manliness, and courteous disposition,’’ how strong
these were in him! I cannot help feeling that he might have
added one more quality from his own treasure-house, namely,
a sense of humour, which is so priceless an antiseptic to sentimentality, and was strongly and individually present in his
character.

In this same lecture,2 Galton sums up the stages in the
development of eugenics (I.) ‘‘ It must be made familiar as an
academic question.’’ (II.) As a practical subject worthy of
serious consideration. (III.) It must be ‘‘ introduced into the
national conscience, like a new religion.’”’ He recapitulates in
an eloquent phrase: ‘‘ It has, indeed, strong claims to become
an orthodox religious tenet of the future, for Eugenics
co-operates with the workings of Nature by securing that
humanity shall be represented by the fittest races. What
Nature does blindly, slowly, and ruthlessly, man may do
providently, quickly, and kindly.”’

Here we see the future of eugenics marked out for us, and
the last sentence might well serve as a motto for this Society.
How are we to work for the cause?

It is true that our opinions are formed by the daily papers,
and our actions as a nation are determined by political parties
which come and go largely by chance. But, however our

1 Essays in Eugenics, p. 37.
2 Essays in Eugenics, p. 42.
16 EUGENICS REVIEW.

opinions originate, if they are strongly and persistently urged
by a large majority of Englishmen, great changes in the
manner of human life may be effected. Persistence is the
great thing in all reforms, it is a case of my father’s favourite
quotation—“‘ It’s dogged as does it.’’ Francis Galton has
been temperately persistent in a marked degree. His caution
and wisdom are illustrated by the dates of his writings on
eugenics and heredity, which placed in order suggest a regiment
at slow march, not a bunch of heroes rushing on a breach.

Two papers in Macmillan’s Magazine ... ... 1865
EVENLY Genius 0 a8 gen ... 1869
Fraser’s Magazine ... 1873
Human Faculty (word Eugenics first employed) 1884
Natural Inheritance bee bee _ ... 1889
Huxley Lecture Lee - ve we ... IQOI
Sociological Society Papers we -_ 6. 1905
Memories wee ; , 1908

The temperateness of his march i is all ‘the more striking
when we remember the fiery impatience with which in
Hereditary Genius he spoke of the harm done by the church
by ordaining that the intellectuals, the literary, and the
sensitive should be celibates, and of the wholesale slaughter by
the Holy Inquisition of the courageous and clear minded who
dared to think for themselves.

From the first he had the support of Charles Darwin who
never wavered in his admiration of Galton’s purpose, though
he had doubts about the practicality of reform. His hesitation
in regard to eugenic method is expressed with a wise proviso as
to future possibilities: ‘‘ I have lately been led,’’ he says, ‘‘ to
reflect a little . . . on the artificial checks, but doubt greatly
whether such would be advantageous to the world at large at
present, however it may be in the distant future.’’* In the first
edition of the Descent of Man, 1874,” he distinctly gives his
adherence to the eugenic idea by his assertion that man might by
selection do something for the moral and physical qualities of
the race. It is a great thing that this Society should have

1 More Letters, II., p. 43 and 50.
2 One Volume Edit. 1894, p. 617.
FRANCIS GALTON. 17

had Francis Galton for its Hon. President. It entitles us to
feel assured that in following the line of action marked out for
ourselves we are on the right track, and that in the difficult
pioneer work of helping the English public to realise the deadly
need. of eugenic reform we are following in Galton’s steps. We
are also so fortunate as to have received the encouragement and
help at the hands of some of the leaders in the science of
heredity, Weismann, Yves Delage, Ray Lankester, the late
Adam Sedgwick, Poulton, Bateson, Punnett, and others.

Galton says somewhere’ that great men have long boyhoods, this was certainly true of him, though I should rather
describe as youthful the delightful qualities that never faded out
of his nature. It is, I believe, the correct thing to speak of the
‘“‘golden dreams of youth,’’ and if by this hackneyed phrase we
mean a keenly imaginative outlook, a hopefulness with a certain
dash about it—a generous courage such as a hero of romance
is credited with—then Francis Galton had undying youth.
And this makes his seriously measured progress in eugenics all
the more worthy of our admiration.

In. one of the Macmillan articles (p. 324) he wrote: ‘‘ Many
plan for that which they can never live to see. At the hour of
death they are still planning.”’

It was thus that Francis Galton died, and as year after year
we meet together on February 16th, let us think of him and
his plannings with affection and respect.

1 Macmillan’s Magazine, xii., p. 326.
