THE REVEREND D. SHERWIN BAILEY, Ph.D.

Public Morality and the Criminal Law

HEN THE WOLFENDEN (Homosexual
\ | \ / Offences and Prostitution) Report appeared in 1957, interest was focussed
mainly upon its proposals for revision of the law,
and especially that relating to certain forms of
criminal homosexualism. In subsequent discussion, Parliamentary debate, and legislation (the
Street Offences Act, 1958), legal reform of one
kind or another has continued to be the dominant issue. Recently, however, attention has been
directed to a question of greater ultimate importance, namely, the juridical principle stated in
Chapter IT of the Report, and emphasized from
time to time in the chapters which followed.
Some of the implications of this principle are
considered in a valuable essay* contributed to
the Church of England Moral Welfare Council’s
current series of pamphlets, a review of which
affords an occasion to survey the course of the
discussion to date.

Expressed in the simplest terms, the ““Wolfenden principle” asserts that for legal purposes
crime cannot be equated with sin—that moral
and legal wrongdoing are not necessarily one and
the same, and that consequently there is a realm
of private morality in which the operative sanctions are ethical, and the determinant of right
behaviour is personal responsibility and not fear
of criminal penalties—a realm, therefore, into
which it is not the law’s business to intrude. It
was inevitable that such a principle should arouse
criticism. It has been objected that the implied
distinction between crime and sin is superficial,
that private morality cannot be isolated from
public, that the delimitation of a realm of private
morality exempt from the sanctions of the
criminal law deprives the law of its preceptive
function and its power of moral restraint—and
so on. Such criticism showed the need for a
thorough examination of the principle itself, and

* Quentin Edwards. What is Unlawful? London, 1959.
Published for the Church of England Moral Welfare
council by the Church Information Office. Pp. 14. Price

s. 6d.

of the relation which it implied between law and
morality. Is there any connection between sin
and crime; and should the criminal law attempt
to define or enforce morality, and punish immorality? These were some of the questions
which Sir Patrick (now Lord Justice) Devlin set
out to consider in his Maccabaean Lecture
delivered in March 1959.f

Lord Devlin recognized that the criminal law
cannot now justify itself simply by reference to a
moral law; since the State leaves religion to the
private judgement and does not enforce any
particular, or indeed any, belief, it has forfeited
its right to enforce a morality founded on
religious doctrine. What then must provide the
basis for the criminal law? In order to answer
this question, three others must be asked: Has
society the right to pass moral judgements? If it
has, may it enforce its judgements by law? And
if so, may the law be invoked in all cases, or may
exceptions be made—and on what grounds?
Lord Devlin replies on the following lines:

Society has a right to pass moral judgements
because the very notion of society implies a community of ideas and, therefore, a common
morality founded upon general agreement as to
what is good and what is evil; and the individual
must submit to the bondage of this common
morality as part of the price which he must pay
for the society which he needs. It follows that
society has the right also to legislate against anything that constitutes a breach of the common
morality and, therefore, a threat to the common
good. To this right no theoretical limit can be
set; the attempt of the Wolfenden Committee to
set such a limit by introducing the qualifying idea
of exploitation of human weakness as a special
circumstance warranting the intervention of the
law, is vitiated by the simple fact that all wrongdoing involves exploitation of some kind. None

t The Enforcement of Morals, Maccabaean Lecture in
Jurisprudence of the British Academy, 1959. London,
1959. Published for the British Academy by Oxford
University Press. Pp. 26. Price 3s. 6d.

201

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1961, 52, 4.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the less, flexibility is necessary in practice.
Morality embraces both public and private
interests, and they must be reconciled in such a
way as to permit the maximum individual freedom consistent with the integrity of society; but
the limit of toleration is reached when a “real
feeling of reprobation” is aroused. Society’s
standard of moral judgement is that of the
“reasonable man”—“‘the man on the Clapham
omnibus,” and when anything excites him to
emotions of “intolerance, indignation, and
disgust,” it is an indication of the presence of
immorality demanding the intervention of the
law. It is true, of course, that the limits of
tolerance shift; but the law reacts slowly to such
changes, and the tendency is to avoid any
alterations or concessions which might convey an
impression ‘of ‘weakened moral judgement.

Thus the right of the law to enforce morality is
explained and defended. Finally, the claim is
advanced that there is a definite and proper
relation between. crime and sin. Morality is
necessary. to society, but it must be taught (which
is the office of religion) as well as enforced (which
is the. office of law); religion, therefore (which in
a Western context means the Christian religion)
is the ultimate basis of the public morality expressed in the standards of conduct approved by
the “reasonable man,” even though the law
cannot enforce that morality on doctrinal

grounds, but only on grounds of general accep
tance by. society.

_ Lord Devlin’s argument, in effect, amounts to
a repudiation of the liberal principal that the only
justification for coercion of the individual by the
community is to prevent harm to others—for
this is. the principle implicit in the postulation by
the Wolfenden Committee of a realm of private
morality into which it is not the law’s business
to intrude. In a broadcast criticism of The Enforcement of Morals,* the Professor of Jurisprudence in the University of Oxford observes
that the novel feature of Lord Devlin’s lecture is
his view of the nature of morality—that while
earlier opponents of the liberal view have
rejected it on the ground that morality is in fact

* H. L. A. Hart, Immorality and Treason, a talk given
on the B.B.C. Third Programme; it was reproduced from
‘The zarenens in Family Planning, Oct. 1959, vol. 8, no. 3,
pp. 6-9.

202

self-evident, being based on divine commands or
the rational conclusions of human reason, he
founds it rather upon something primarily subjective: the feelings of the “man on the Clapham
omnibus.” The latter is the type of that legal
fiction, the “‘reasonable man’’—and “reasonable,”’ as Lord Devlin points out, does not mean
“rational.” The attitude of this “reasonable
man” may be nothing but a bundle of emotional
prejudices; but if the majority in a society shares
his feelings, a common morality is established,
and according to Lord Devlin’s theory, may be
enforced by law.

Professor Hart subjects this view to a searching scrutiny. Its fatal weakness, of course, lies in
the fact that if a general attitude of intolerance,
indignation, and disgust may in some instances
be well-founded, in others it may equally be due
to prejudice, superstition, ignorance, or misunderstanding. It would be disastrous if the law
had no firmer basis than the emotions of the
majority—if dispassionate reason, knowledge,
and common-sense were not also allowed a voice
in its determination. Yet this is precisely what
has happened in the realm of private morality
which is concerned with sexual relation. Homosexual practices between men in private are
deemed to be criminal (but not lesbianism,
fornication, or adultery) simply because such
practices arouse in the “‘reasonable man”’ feelings
of reprobation so strong as to demand expression
in repressive statutes. It is not difficult to explain
why the emotions of the “reasonable man” are
excited by the thought of homosexualism and
not by the thought of fornication or adultery;
but to explain such emotions does not make them
right or rational. Lord Devlin’s conception of
public morality could be invoked to defend our
persecution of witches in the past, or the various
forms of racial discrimination with which we are
only too familiar to-day.

Before legal effect is given to the judgements of
a public morality based on feeling, it is necessary
to ask whether behaviour which is emotionally
offensive to the majority (or which the majority
can be induced to regard as emotionally offensive) is harmful, either in itself or in its repercussion upon the general moral code. In Professor
Hart’s view, Lord Devlin does not satisfactorily
consider and answer this question. He recognizes
PUBLIC MORALITY AND THE CRIMINAL LAW

that a morality based upon the consensus of a
majority, even if that consensus is one mainly of
feeling, is essentially a democratic notion, and
that democracy means the running of risks which
are inseparable from majority rule. But he insists
that loyalty to democratic principles does not
require us to maximize these risks, “‘yet this is
what we shall do if we mount the man in the
street on top of the Clapham omnibus and tell
him that if only he feels sick enough about what
other people do in private to demand its suppression by law, no theoretical criticism can be made
of his demand’’. And in this connection it is well
to remember the adventitious and irrelevant
means by which such sickness can so easily be
induced—the propaganda and pressures of many
dubious kinds which can build up artificial
emotions of reprobation to the point where they
have to find expression, and may do so through
the law.

On the other hand, it is good and necessary
that society should be able to give authoritative
expression to its genuine and well-founded moral
judgements. This is most appropriately done, in
Lord Devlin’s view, by means of legal sanctions
—a method which Professor Hart clearly repudiates, though he suggests no alternative; in
fact, this is a matter with which he is not directly
concerned. For consideration of such an alternative, we must turn to the essay by Mr. Quentin
Edwards to which reference has already been
made.

More precisely than the other two authors he
distinguishes between moral codes and criminal
codes, and between sin, crime, and immorality.
As to the first division, moral codes are mainly
hortative and must be flexible enough to bring
under condemnation even those offences, the
culpability of which can only be measured subjectively ; while criminal codes are almost entirely
prohibitive, and must be rigid enough to define
offences so exactly as to reduce to a minimum the
degree of discretion vested in the magistracy. As
to the second: sin is commonly defined as the
contravention of God’s will by thought, word,
deed, or the omission to do what is enjoined, and
must not be confused with crime (behaviour
which is declared to be punishable by the law)
or with immorality (behaviour which is below,
or contrary to, the standards of current public

morality); nor must crime and immorality be
treated as necessarily synonymous, for not all
declensions from public moral standards are
regarded as meriting criminal penalties. |

From these distinctions it is apparent that
there is a group of wrongs or offences which are
sinful or immoral (or both) but not criminal, and
are also public in the sense that they may involve
others than the agent, and are capable of disturbing the harmony of society. Into this intermediate
category come offences such as slander, and also
acts of venereal wrongdoing. Although they are
not criminal, they are for all that unlawful, either
in the strict sense of lacking the express approval
or protection of the law, or in the broad sense
that they are contrary to the accepted standards
of good morals or the implications of the common law. This conception of the “‘unlawful,” as
Mr. Edwards admits, is necessarily somewhat
imprecise, especially in the sexual realm, where
“‘the law’s sexual morality is the highest common
moral factor of the mass of the people”’—a
definition which does not seem to differ greatly
in substance from Lord Devlin’s idea of public
morality, and is open to the criticisms made by
Professor Hart. None the less it has practical
value because, among other things, it would
enable the law to register and declare in the least
objectionable way the current moral judgements
of society. OO

At present, such judgements can only be expressed through the sanctions of the criminal
law; whether or not they are so expressed depends, as we have seen, upon the emotional
attitude of the community to the behaviour upon
which its verdict is being passed. Thus in the
realm of private venereal conduct there is an
irrational discrimination between male homosexualism and most other forms of immorality,
resulting in the imposition upon one class of
offender of exemplary penalties which have no
conspicuous deterrent or reformatory value, and
appear to serve merely as a release for feelings of
hostility against a non-conforming minority and
its practices—relatively harmless though the
latter are to society when compared with adultery
or fornication. It is manifestly just as unsatisfactory that the law should be prostituted by
making its penalties the instruments of unpredictable or unreasonable social antipathies, as

203
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

it is right and necessary that society should be
able to demonstrate in a proper manner its
considered and reasonable disapproval of behaviour which is contrary to public morality, yet
unsuitable for criminal punishment.

The solution of this difficulty proposed by Mr.
Edwards is worthy of serious consideration. An
Act, for example, giving effect to the recommendations of the Wolfenden Committee could
begin by declaring all homosexual practices, male
and female alike, unlawful, and could then
proceed to make certain specified practices
criminal—those, for instance, involving minors.
Likewise, it should not prove difficult to write
into appropriate legislation a clear and, if
necessary, reiterated affirmation that fornication
and adultery are also unlawful acts. In the face of
such a declaration it would be impossible to
maintain the objection commonly made against
the Wolfenden proposals, that they would appear
to excuse immorality if not, indeed, to license it.
And society would have a more suitable, yet still
legal means of expressing its disapproval of
behaviour contrary to the standards of public
morality.

The concept of unlawfulness would, of course,
still remain juridical rather than moral or theological. Not every sin could, or ought to be so
defined, but only those in respect of which, for
the better ordering of society, it is deemed
salutary that the strictures of the law should reinforce those of religion and ethics, where a

suitable legislative opportunity presents itself.
On the other hand, it would permit the law to
exercise a preceptive function more acceptably
than is possible through criminal sanctions. At
the same time it would give at least qualified
recognition to the Wolfenden principle, by protecting the realm of private morality against unwarrantable intrusion by the law, while admitting
that private and public morality are inseparable
and react upon one another.

In the long run, the Wolfenden Committee’s
attempt to define the nature, range, and limitations of the criminal law as it affects venereal
wrongdoing may prove to be of greater significance than its specific recommendations upon
the legal issues which fell within its terms of
reference. It is encouraging, therefore, that attention is now being given to the principle which the
Committee laid down, and to the questions which
arise from it. The contributions reviewed in this
article clarify some of the problems which emerge
from consideration of the relation between public
morality, private morality, and the criminal law;
but they also raise others. The whole matter is
evidently one of great consequence, for moralists,
theologians, and sociologists as well as for jurists,
and it is to be hoped that before long some one
will develop comprehensively and with authority
the themes necessarily treated in brief by Lord
Justice Devlin, Professor Hart and Mr. Quentin

Edwards.

204
