FALLING POPULATION AND POSITIVE
EUGENICS

By B. S. BRAMWELL, ™.A., LL.B.

R. D. V. GLASS has shown in his

book, The Struggle for Population,

that the steps taken in other countries as well as here have had little effect,
except perhaps in Germany, in arresting the
fall in the birth-rate. He reckons that a
child adds 22 per cent. to the family cost of
living. No country at present offers inducements which approach this figure.

In the Eugenics Society we are concerned
with quality rather than quantity. It is
difficult to make a democracy realize the
disastrous effects of the differential birthrate. Its machinery works by counting
heads, not by appraising their contents. It
behoves us therefore to consider what steps
we can take, independently of the democratic
system, to arrest the falling birth-rate
amongst the more able and more prudent
members of the community. These in youth
are probably aiming high; they have to
wait for a position and an income upon
which they could marry without jeopardizing
their career. Most of them have to depend
on their own exertions for a livelihood,
and even where their family has private
means an allowance on marriage is exceptional.

What do we want them to do? The
eugenic answer may be stated in simple,
concrete terms. We want them to marry at
about the age of twenty-five and to have
four or five children by the time they reach
thirty-five.

Economics of the Professions

In most professions the amount available
to reward the members has little correlation
to their numbers. If the amount falls off or
increases, there will be a gradual adjustment
of numbers, but the time lag is very great.
Speaking generally, the amount of litigation
does not depend on the numbers called to

the bar and the number of operations for
appendicitis should not depend upon the
number of Fellows of the College of Surgeons.
If sin increases, more people do not take
orders, though if crime increases, the police
force may be increased. National services
in general differ from the professions as the
attempt is made to adjust their size to the
amount of work to be done. The skilled
trades unions are also wiser in their generation than the professional bodies, for they
restrict the number of apprentices in the
interests of the whole body—a policy which,
if not overdone, is a good thing.

There is a pool then in most professions
from which its numbers draw their remunerations. —The more some members draw from
it the less is available for others. A barrister
is employed on the advice of a solicitor; a
surgeon on the advice of a general practitioner. If the man with the biggest reputation is employed, the professional man
recommending him is freed from all responsibility, however much the great man may
bungle the case. Not so if he recommends an
unknown man; his position then may be
very unpleasant. So the man with the big
name may draw an inordinate amount out
of the pool and continue to do so when long
past his prime. In business you get a somewhat similar position ; in a stable business
the amount set aside to reward management
is more or less a fixture. If the older men at
the top draw too much, there is little left
for their juniors. Most men making a good
income are loath to retire and, whatever
their age, assert that their faculties were
never brighter. In two of our professions,
the Church and the Bar, one of the greatest
prizes is elevation to the Bench. It is of
interest therefore to note the ages of the
present occupants. In the following table
the facts may be seen at a glance:

273
274
Age groups (inclusive) Bishops Judges

Over 75 4 2
70 to 74 9 2
65 ,, 69 13 II
60 ,, 64 7 5
55 »» 59 4 10
50 », 54 4 6
45» 49 2 0

43 36

Retirement Age and Eugenics

What do we want from the point of view of
positive eugenics? I think that men should
retire at the age of 55, making room for
younger men. If men married at the age of
25 they would have educated their families
and started them on their careers by the time
they reached 55 and could afford to retire on
a comparatively modest pension.

Are there any occupations where men
succeed at an early age or retire so soon as
55? One may instance the head masters of
our public schools. We have lately had an
appointment of a man under 30. Some of
the banks allow their managers to retire at
55. In many hospitals the retiring age of
the staff is now 60. Most officers in the
Services have to retire long before this age.

Would the community suffer if this early
age of retirement became general? We may
consider the various occupations. I remember recently being puzzled by the poor
financial results of a company whose products
one met with in every office. One day I
read in The Times the will of its managing
director, aged over 80. I was puzzled no
longer. I had a friend, a solicitor, with an
aged partner who drew most of the profits
of the firm. When my friend returned from
the war, his partner was go, and after the
trenches my friend’s courage was sufficient
to tackle the matter. The old man admitted
that his partner did nearly all the work, but
pled in justification that he could not live on
less! In politics Lord Haldane said that the
House of Commons was no place for a man
over 60. It is reported, on what authority
I cannot say, that the Irish question might
have been settled in the ’eighties if Mr.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Gladstone had not been too deaf to hear an
offer made by Mr. Chamberlain, which his
set speech naturally ignored.

Take the Church ; are celibate bishops of
over seventy likely to command much weight
in matrimonial questions from young persons
of under thirty ? It is said that their work is
largely administrative ; it would be cruel to
suggest that a septuagenarian was in as
sorry a plight as the nonagenarian Archdeacon Pulteney, in the ‘Stalls of Barchester
Cathedral—‘‘ there was no single paper that
he could lay hands upon, no syllable of mine
that he could hear, and no fact in connection
with my business that he could remember.”
Still, three score years and ten on biblical
authority is an advanced age.

With regard to the judges there have
certainly been a number of remarkable
instances where age has not dimmed their
faculties. But then they are mostly old. In
the case of one younger man, Lord Birkenhead, ‘his judgments surprised his older
colleagues by their depth and erudition.
The time lost by indisposition is a matter
worthy of study and of real relevance to
litigants. We have recently had a delightful
correspondence in The Times, the gist of
which seems to be that unpaid justices
become more futile and acid with increasing
years and yet their salaried colleagues
mellow like old wine.

As for generals, I put down a number with
their age at the important date of their
career. Cromwell was 51 at Dunbar;
Wolfe was 32 at Quebec; Marlborough was
54 at Blenheim ; Clive was 32 at Plassey ;
Nelson was 47 at Trafalgar ; Wellington was
46 at Waterloo; Nicholson was 36 at
Delhi; Roberts was 48 at Kandahar ;
Kitchener was 48 at Omdurman; Buller
was 60 at the Tugela; French was 62 in
1914; Ian Hamilton was 62 at Helles and
Stopford 61 at Suvla; Maude was 52 at
Baghdad ; Haig was 57 at Passchendaele ;
and Allenby 58 at Damascus. Of foreign
generals we may note Hannibal was 29 when
he crossed the Alps; Alexander was 32 at
his death and Gustavus 38; Napoleon was
36 at Austerlitz. What is the best age for a
general? Would we have suffered much in
  
    
  
   
  
   
   
  

Feourse of our history by having a
Ring age of 55?

meaking generally on the question of age,
‘has often heard said that if a man has
done original work by the age of forty,
mever will. No doubt there are numerous
ieptions.

i should also like to draw attention to
Cattell’s statement.* ‘‘I have shown elsefre reason to believe that intelligence or
Fany rate success in intelligence tests,
ines in most people after about the age
m5. [here are some striking exceptions to
sand the nature and causation of the
are not at all clear.”

Plea for Modest Pensions
& word as to pensions. I have said these
need to be modest. But the pensioners’
Mirements are really easily met. The
fest items of expenditure of the profonal man liable to surtax are generally
Ation and the education and maintenance
his family. The latter under the system
falized will have ceased at 55. Surtax
fno longer worry and income tax will be
svery reduced rate. Housing accommodascan be on a much smaller scale; food
firements are distinctly less. If any of
‘family still live at home, they can conBite out of their earnings or by services
Hered to the household. Moreover, it is
ft that pensions should be modest. The
Bioner and the rentier are rewarded for
; services, but are paid out of present
suction. If their demands are too great,
er the consumer will pay too much, or
Factual producer will receive too little and
w strike. With a falling population this

; * EuGEenics REVIEW, 1936,,X XVIII, 202.

FALLING POPULATION AND POSITIVE EUGENICS

275

will become more aggravated. The producers,
practically all under 55, will be a smaller
percentage of the community than at
present. Apart from a strike of producers,
if industry were to languish, the matter
would probably be adjusted by the new
technique of devaluation, by which industry
is stimulated, wages can easily be raised, but
the pensioner and the rentier suffer.

A Practical Proposal

Now suppose these changes resulted in
the class in question marrying at an earlier
age, would there be any likelihood of larger
families ? We may note in passing that even
if no larger families resulted, the space
between generations would be lessened and
this would in the long run be a gain to the
community. Professor Carr-Saunders thinks
that without a change of outlook, we cannot
expect much result. He is not unhopeful of
this change of outlook. Events in Germany
are rather suggestive. Should this change
occur, anything which would make the way
easier for those who desire more children,
might produce big results. He is also hopeful
that it would have an advantageous result
for positive eugenics, as the larger families
would be produced by the more sober and
thoughtful members of the community.

A helpful innovation might be for eugenically minded persons to found scholarships
confined to second or third sons and
daughters. The class in question can
probably provide for the education of one
child without much strain. To provide for
several is quite another matter. The donor
could define the qualifications of the parents
of the recipient ; the award amongst those
qualified could be based on intelligence tests
rather than book learning.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVIII, No. 4.
