SOME ASPECTS OF EUGENICS AND THE
INCOME TAX.

Lecture given in the Wigmore Hall, June Ist, 1920.
By C. CROFTON BLACK, Barrister-at-Law.

Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, I am most grateful for the
honour you have conferred on me by asking me to speak on “ Some
Aspects of Eugenics and the Income Tax,” but, before proceeding with
my lecture, I wish to state that any views that I may advance must be
taken as expressing only my own personal opinions, and not as in any
way binding the Eugenics Education Society or its Council, of which
I am privileged to be a member. I think it important to make this
statement, more particularly as I believe this lecture may be reported
in the Society’s REVIEW, so that there can be no misunderstanding and
in order to ensure that future criticism, if any, may be directed against
me and not against the Society.

As this is the first time that I have addressed a meeting convened
by this organisation, I should like, with your permission, to state briefly
what, in my judgment, is the special work of the Eugenics Education
Society. This definition of the Society’s policy has a bearing, not only
on income tax, but on many of the important questions in which the
Society is interested. As I understand it, our chief aim is to educate
public opinion by setting forth the national importance of eugenics,
and I wish particularly to emphasise this definition of our work because
I cannot help feeling that some recent criticisms in the EUGENICS
REVIEW are based on a misapprehension of our objects and policy.

May I suggest, with all due deference, that many of these critics
misinterpret our aims? For instance, it is asked, why does not the
Eugenics Society express a definite view on the details of some particular question, such, for instance, as divorce reform or marriage of
the unfit? The critics who ask such questions are apt to be unrestrained
and vehement and sometimes seem to attack the Society as though it
were our duty to formulate a constructive policy on any great public
issue that may arise. It is, therefore, no surprise to many of us to be
asked what is the Eugenics Society doing? How can you hope to
accomplish anything when your members hold widely divergent views
on important questions of social reform? Why do you not formulate
a definite policy on urgent social questions? I should like at once to
answer these critics.

In the first place, the Society is accomplishing very good work, as
I hope to show in the course of my address this afternoon, and secondly,
I would say to all such critics that the Eugenics Education Society is,
from its title, an educative society, and its main object is, therefore,
to create a national conscience and so to guide public opinion as to gain
support for reforms, based on true eugenic principles, for the lasting
benefit of the race.
Q2 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Let me illustrate my meaning. We hold that before a man and
woman marry each should obtain a certificate of fitness. It is not for us
to dictate as to how this should be carried out in detail, but we hope
that if we introduce this proposal into the arena of public discussion,
the national conscience will be aroused and it will be felt that it is
wrong to undertake the responsibilities of marriage before being satisfied
that any offspring one may be privileged to bring into the world is
secured, as far as possible, a sound and healthy constitution. To those
who say that we stand for physical and medical reforms alone, I should
like to address this question: Do you maintain that education of the
public conscience on this question is without spiritual and moral gain
to the community? Surely this reform would place parenthood on a
higher level, reduce the number of improvident and thoughtless unions
and prove of lasting benefit to the child to be! To those who would say
we work for the benefit of posterity and ignore our duty to the living,
I would make this answer. If you will take but this one reform as an
example of our policy, you will see that we are bringing before the
public conscience the highest conception of marriage when we ask that
it shall be entered into, not recklessly or lightly, but after due consideration and realisation of the purpose for which it was ordained. To
do this we must lift the whole standard of modern opinion, must raise
the tone of modern society and place the marriage contract upon a higher
level. As a society which supports the principles of eugenics, it is
essential that we should take long views. Truly was it said by Mr.
Bonar Law at the Mansion House on May 4th last: ‘‘ History has taught
that great improvements are brought about, not by revolution, but by
evolution.” It appears to me that as a nation we are inclined to live
too much upon catch phrases, such as “ business as usual,” “ equality of
sacrifice,” “ ability to pay,” without really considering what, if anything,
we mean by them. Much harm is done by the thoughtless endeavours
of well-meaning persons to obtain some important change by short-cut
methods. It is a fact that no great reform can ever stand on a sound
and satisfactory basis unless public opinion has first been educated to
appreciate the reform and understand the reasons for its adoption. It
has been said that there is this difference between a politician and a
statesman: A politician looks to the next election, a statesman looks
to the next generation. Now, ladies and gentlemen, I hope that this
Society will always maintain its statesmanlike attitude and, if I may
say So, its true eugenic attitude, by looking to the next generation; and,
in reply to those of our critics who would press us for immediate and
definite decision on some detail of policy, I would say: You are taking
short views, you are asking the Society to support some measure which
will at once produce tangible results and you do not realise that to
obtain those results would ultimately prejudice the major reforms we
have in view, in other words, you are asking us to abandon the view
of the statesman and to come into line with that of the politician whose
policy is pure opportunism. One of the greatest thinkers of the last
century sums up the position in these words: “ The greater part of all
the mistakes in the world arise from the fact that men do not sufficiently
SOME ASPECTS OF EUGENICS AND THE INCOME TAX. 93

understand their own aims. They have undertaken to build a house and
spend no more labour on the foundation than would be necessary to erect
a hut.”

I must apologise for this dissertation on education of public opinion
which may appear to be outside the scope of the subject on which I
have been asked to address you this afternoon; but, as I will proceed
to show, and as you will, I think, agree, it is germane to the important
question of income tax considered from the eugenic standpoint. Let us
now pass to that subject.

It was, I believe, in 1917 that this Society, at its annual general
meeting, first considered the question of income tax and the penalisation
of parenthood by the methods of assessment then in force. In the following year, as appears in the Eleventh Annual Report, a letter from Major
Darwin, our President, was addressed to all members of Parliament,
and I should like to refresh your memory on certain contentions which
were put forward in that able letter. Major Darwin stated that the
proposal for reform advocated by the Eugenics Education Society was
that, for the purpose of granting exemptions and allowances, the total
income of a family should be regarded as if it consisted of a number
of separate incomes. He also urged that if children over school age
were not to be included in the number of persons supported, then a rebate
of income tax should be claimable by parents for the education of all
elder children. The letter also contained a pronouncement which, in
view of the important recommendations of the Royal Commission on
Income Tax, should be carefully noted, to the effect that, in the opinion
of the Eugenics Education Society, the allowances in force in the year
1918-19 were faulty because parents whose incomes were outside the
limit within which the child’s allowance could be claimed received no
relief.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, before proceeding further with the
work of the Eugenics Education Society in connection with this most
important and topical question of income tax, I should like to call
attention to the fact that it was this Society which first publicly brought
forward these questions, with the result that national Opinion was
aroused and other organisations adopted our views and gave evidence
before the Royal Commission. The Commission, in consequence, recommended important reforms, to which I will in a moment refer.

Let us return to the further work of our Society which was the only
one that took practical steps to obtain relief for the taxpayer in respect
of his family obligations. In 1918, when the Finance Bill for that year
was actually before Parliament, an amendment, drafted and put forward
by the Council of this Society, was moved in the House of Commons by
Colonel Sir Hamar Greenwood, the present Chief Secretary for Ireland,
in order to obtain the views of the then Chancellor of the Exchequer
and also that of the House. The object of this amendment to the
Finance Bill, introduced in the form of a new clause, was to provide
that, in fixing the amount of income tax payable by a married person,
widower or widow with dependent children the assessment should be
made by dividing the total income by the number of persons living
04 EUGENICS REVIEW.

thereon and taking each separate income so arrived at as the basis for
calculating the rate payable. For instance, where a family consists of
husband and wife and three children and the total income is £400 a
year, this sum would be treated as five incomes and consequently no tax
at all would be payable, seeing that each separate income comes within
the limit for total exemption from tax. The amendment was sym.
pathetically received by the House, and I should like, if I may, to quote
part of Mr. Bonar Law’s reply on behalf of the Government. “I have
great sympathy with this amendment, and quite admit that this is one
of the aspects of taxation that ought to be considered. We have begun
that already though what we are doing is done in a haphazard manner;
but I do quite realise that it is one of the elements in the consideration
of putting the income tax on a proper basis.” Our thanks are due to
others besides the mover and I am sure that so favourable a response
to the Society’s amendment emboldened some who agreed with our views
to come into line, with the result that public opinion was to some extent
instructed in this matter and the subsequent reception of our case submitted to the Royal Commission on Income Tax was undoubtedly helped
by this Parliamentary discussion on the Finance Bill. The Eugenics
Education Society has fully justified its interest in the methods of assessing income tax. It has put forward principles which, when discussed,
were generally accepted and we have proved that to educate public
opinion in this way has borne fruit in the reforms recommended by the
Royal Commission.

May I now proceed to point out additional measures which this
Society supports and the further principles which it advocates in connection with income tax reform? You have all, no doubt, read the
admirable evidence which was prepared by Major Darwin and given
before the Royal Commission on Income Tax on October 8th, 1919. It
is printed in the fifth instalment of the Minutes of Evidence (Cmd. 285)
on page 783. May I recommend all members of this Society and others
interested to read the able answers given by our President when under
cross-examination? More particularly, I wish ¢o refer to one or two
questions and answers with reference to a further reform with which our
President dealt in cross-examination and at the same time pressed upon
the Royal Commission. Major Darwin was asked by Mr. Pretyman, a
member of the Commission, if he would carry the family abatements
up to the highest incomes or whether he would not find a point at which
one would stop these allowances? At that time, they were made only
within the limits of certain annual incomes. Major Darwin answered
that he would like to carry them up to the very highest incomes and in an
admirably-expressed reply gave the reason for advocating that course.
He based his views upon the definite psychological effect which such a
reform would have on public opinion, particularly in relation to marriage
and parental responsibilities, and it was most satisfactory that the Royal
Commission not only supported Major Darwin’s view, but recommended
in their Report revised assessments for the purpose of giving effect to
that policy. We may, I think, congratulate the Society on the fact
that this proposal to extend the dependent allowance to all incomes has
SOME ASPECTS OF EUGENICS AND THE INCOME TAX. 95

been embodied in the Finance Bill for this year, thus carrying out a
reform first laid before Members of Parliament in 1917 by the Eugenics
Education Society in the letter to which I have already referred and
brought forward in practical form in 1918 when our amendment to carry
this reform into effect was discussed in the House of Commons.

I have already referred to the change in assessing income tax which
was being advocated by this Society, namely, that in arriving at the
income for taxation purposes one should consider the number of persons
living on the income, divide the total by that number and assess each
quotient as a separate income. Major Darwin was subject to considerable
cross-examination on this point, and I feel sure that all who have read
the official Report of the Evidence will congratulate him on the admirable
way in which he dealt with this most difficult subject. In answer to a
question by Mr. Armitage Smith, one of the members of the Commission,
he clearly showed that he was concerned with principles rather than
with the methods of administration.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, I wish for a moment to deal with this
question of principles and method. I do so because it was very carefully
discussed by several members of the Council previous to our President
giving evidence before the Royal Commission. Some members expressed
the view that we ought merely to press for increased abatements, as they
felt that the principle of separate imcomes for which we stood was of
such a nature that we could not hope to get it embodied in practical
concessions. I am glad, however, to say that this view was not adopted.
Some of us felt that if the Eugenics Education Society was to carry out
its true function, it must put forward the vital principles for which it
stands and educate public opinion rather than obtain some immediate
benefit. They were convinced that to adopt the opportunist policy of
abatements without regard to the major reform would be to take a retrograde step.

Let us for a moment consider this question of income tax. It appears
to me that those who thought we ought to have pressed merely for
increased abatements, without putting forward the true eugenic principle
for the assessment of income tax which the Society supports, were, if I
may say so with respect, confusing principles with administration.
Provided the principle of the family basis is accepted, we do not attempt
to dictate to the Commissioners as to the particular administrative
methods they should adopt. One has only to read the reports of the War
Wealth Enquiry Committee to find a case similar to that of income tax
reform. The Committee have one object, the taxation of war profits,
but they have discussed various alternative schemes of administration.

Before passing to the final report of the Royal Commission on
Income Tax, I should like to deal briefly with some reforms in income
tax assessments which this Society advocates in addition to the main
principle that the income should be considered for taxation purposes
in relation to the number of persons subsisting thereon. The further
reforms which this Society supports are chiefly that the cost of education
should be deducted from income tax assessments and that maternity
expenses should be considered exempt from taxation in the same way
96 EUGENICS REVIEW.

as are insurance premiums. May I go one step further and say that I
myself should like to see medical and surgical expenses placed on the
same basis? |

Now, ladies and gentlemen, I wish to say, in support of the advocacy
of deductions for educational expenses, etc., that the Eugenics Education
Society is by no means an organisation which is concerned merely with
what is popularly known as class legislation. Our object is to advocate
measures for the advantage of all sections of society and to prevent the
penalisation of those who are most worthy in whatever class they may be
born. It must be remembered that income tax payers are now found in
all walks of life, and surely it must be to the advantage, not only of
such persons, but also to the country as a whole, that every facility
should be given to them for the successful upbringing of their families
and that the doctrine of equality of opportunity should be applied on
a sound basis and should not be allowed to pass into the clap-trap
phrase of the tub orator. We have, therefore, advocated that the full
allowance for bona fide educational expenses should be made and that
the question of dependency of children should be fixed on a real basis
and not on a theoretical calculation of age which ignores the actual expenditure to be made by the parent for fees. Consider for one moment
the justice of this claim. It may be that a child who has reached the age
to which the dependent allowance has, up to the present, been allowed
then becomes a greater expense to his parents than before, especially
if they desire to provide further facilities for education. Parents often
wish that a boy or girl who has done brilliantly at school should be
trained for some profession, and the parents of a boy who shows great
aptitude for craftmanship will want to apprentice him to some important
trade. The problem arises in all families and in all walks of life and
is by no means confined to any one class. During the years when it is
necessary for the parents to maintain a child at a university or elsewhere,
years during which it may be necessary for the parent to pay apprenticeship fees to some large engineering firm, income tax assessments should
be so arranged as to encourage, and certainly not to retard, the payment
of such fees if the best is to be made of the ability which that child
possesses. If the professions are to be recruited from the ablest and
best in the land, if our craftsmanship is to stand supreme, every encouragement must be given to those who are likely to excel and to do
this is in the best interests of the State. Often it is those most able to
benefit who are debarred for financial reasons from the privilege of
advanced education. I support all reforms which will give equality of
opportunity in its truest sense to all without any consideration of socalled class distinctions. Every child should have the fullest opportunity to develop in the highest possible manner.

It was, therefore, a great hardship that dependency should be defined
merely by age, and that parents should be faced with the necessity for
allowing a child to enter the labour market who, after a few years’
further education, might develop on individual lines so that in after life
the ability with which he or she was endowed might be given full
opportunity for development. The policy of this Society, as set out in
SOME ASPECTS OF EUGENICS AND THE INCOME TAX. 97

our Report, has been to place before the public and Parliament the need
for reform in this matter of allowances for education expenses and our
propaganda has met with most encouraging results. In the Finance Bill
of this year, section 20 provides for a dependency allowance of £36
for the first child and £27 for each subsequent child and we have
obtained this most important concession, namely, that the sixteen-year
age limit no longer operates in an arbitrary manner, but if the child is
receiving full-time instruction at any university, college, school or other
educational establishment, then even after the age of sixteen the
allowance can be claimed provided the child is not entitled, in his or
her own right, to an income of £40 a year. There is also in the Finance
Bill a most encouraging proviso to the effect that no account shall be
taken of any income to which the child is entitled as a holder of a
scholarship or similar endowment when calculating this annual income of
£40. 1 think, however, this reform should be carried further and all
legitimate educational expenses on the widest basis should be allowed
free. The present relief does not, I fear, cover apprenticeship fees and
premiums paid in the professions and in respect of arts and crafts.

Again, as regards maternity fees, it would be of great value to many
families if some slight concession in income tax were made in respect
of such payments and I do suggest that medical and surgical fees should
be placed upon a similar basis, more particularly as there are many
persons who cannot effect insurances to meet expenses of this nature,
expenses which, in a large family, may unfortunately amount to a considerable sum.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, these particular reforms, namely, allowances for education, maternity and medical expenses are reforms which,
I venture to submit, would not be difficult in administration. It is easy
to estimate, as in the case of life insurance premiums, the exact sum
which should be allowed and to lift the burden of taxation and give
relief in the manner suggested must favourably affect the policy of
carrying out the social betterment of the nation. At the present time
parents who, often by the greatest personal sacrifice and unselfishness,
give to their children the opportunity for development of character and
talents on the best lines are penalised by taxation for so doing. This
should not be allowed. Reform is urgently required: relief, not penalty
for parenthood should be pressed for by the electorate.

I now wish to turn to a question which is highly controversial, and
I am afraid that many of you here may disagree entirely with my
personal views on this important and much-discussed question. I am
wholly opposed to the separation of the incomes of husband and wife
for the purposes of fixing the rate of assessment to income tax. May I
say that I support the view that-a wife should be assessed to income tax
separately from her husband, and I believe that in practice this can
always be arranged; but on the question of separating these incomes for
the purpose of fixing the rate, I hold the view that such a reform should
not be persisted in, chiefly for two reasons. The first reason is this:
it must always be remembered that the object of the Chancellor of the
Exchequer in budgetting and in fixing the amount payable for income tax
98 EUGENICS REVIEW.

is to obtain a definite sum for the purposes of the revenue. It therefore
follows that if relief is given to A. some further taxation must be paid
by B. and C. and others. Now, I maintain that the great test, when
assessing for income tax purposes, should be ability to pay in its real
sense. By ability to pay I mean that we should ascertain not merely
the pounds, shillings and pence owned by an individual, but the true
position having regard to the various commitments to which that particular tax-payer is liable. Let us take two cases. First, we will take
a husband and wife, each with £500 a year. If the reform were introduced and both were assessed at the rate payable in respect to £500,
the tax would be £120. I am taking unearned incomes. In this case
it might not be necessary for the husband to make any provision, by
insurance or otherwise, for his wife after his decease. Now, take for
comparison with this couple, a man who earns £1,000 a year and whose
wife has no income. That man’s contribution to the revenue would be
far in excess of this £120 per annum, though his income depends entirely
on his personal efforts and in the event of his decease, unless he had
provided for his wife by saving, he would leave her penniless. Now,
ladies and gentlemen, I maintain that to increase the second man’s
taxation so that the incomes of the first husband and wife may be
calculated separately for fixing the rate of assessment is opposed to
justice and ability to pay. Moreover, an examination of the figures
shows extraordinary results. If the husband has f£go00 and the wife
£100, the tax will be £168 15s.: if the husband has the whole income
it will be £187 10s. And I submit that these figures alone show that
the proposal is unworkable.

May I also say that I very much regret some of the arguments which
have been used in support of this separation of incomes for fixing the
assessment rate? The allegation that joint assessment is conducive to
immorality should not, to my mind, have been put forward and would
not have been made by any persons who had given the matter serious
consideration. I am certain that the class to whom this particular
income tax reform refers would repudiate the suggestion that there is any
increased immorality due to the present method of assessing the incomes
of married persons.

Now, may I pass to my second objection to this question of separate
assessments for husband and wife when fixing the rate payable? It is
this: the Society stands, as I have already stated, for the splitting up of
incomes into component parts according to the number of persons living
thereon, and if this principle were adopted in practice the joint incomes
of husband and wife would be treated as two incomes for the purpose
of assessment. There is, however, this difference between our method
and that advocated by others: the joint income would be divided into
equal parts for the purpose of fixing the rate and not into two unequal
parts fixed by the amount of income held by each person. The Society,
however, goes far beyond the question of husband and wife only: we
advocate reform for the benefit of the whole family. In standing for
this reform, I wish again to refer to the splendid progress which the
Society has made since it first came into the open to advocate this
SOME ASPECTS OF EUGENICS AND THE INCOME TAX. 99

principle. It is, I submit, a matter for congratulation that, in the
Report of the Royal Commission on Income Tax there is a complete
section headed “ The Family Basis,” and it is a tribute to the efforts
of those who support the principles of the Eugenics Education Society
that the Report, in the section on liability to income tax contains these
words ‘the plan has come to be known as the ‘ family basis.?” Now,
ladies and gentlemen, this heading and the recommendations in the
Report together with the reforms set out in the Finance Bill of this
year, to which I have referred, are a complete answer to critics who
ask what the Society has done? On this important question, at all
events, we have already succeeded in educating public opinion to such
an extent that a Royal Commission on Income Tax adopts the phrase
‘‘the family basis” in its Report, and the Legislature has before it
measures for placing on the statute book reforms advocated for many
years by the Eugenics Education Society.

At first our progress was naturally slow, but during the last few
years we have made considerable headway. Further reforms and concessions are certainly needed and it rests with the public to see that
these are brought into operation. I opened my address by stating that
the objects of the Society are educational. We are often attacked,
more often misrepresented, but I hope I have shown you this afternoon,
in the lecture to which you have been kind enough to listen, that we are
not supporters of a policy based on a foundation of fallacious reasoning,
but that we stand as the advocates of measures which, if introduced,
would benefit not only the present generation, but those who may come
after it. It is the policy of this Society, and may it ever so remain,
without fear or favour, and free from all political partisanship, to do
what it can to guide public opinion into sound and reasoned channels,
with this great end in view, that the national conscience may be so
aroused as to give its vigorous support to all reforms which lead to the
uplifting of the race, to the development of character and the betterment
of humanity.
