POPULATION CONTROL
Dr. Binnie Dunlop's Address to the Eugenics Society

T the rooms of the Linnean Society,

Burlington House, on October 29th,

Dr. Binnie Dunlop read a paper

entitled ‘‘ Eugenics, Present and Future ”’ to

a members’ meeting of the Exugentcs Society.

Sir Humphry Rolleston, President of the
Eugenics Society, was in the chair.

If, said Dr. Dunlop, in a population or in
a section of a population, no woman had
more than two confinements, that population
or that section of the population would
decline in numbers. This fact showed that
eugenists could advocate moderate policies.
For example, if it were indeed the case that
voluntary sterilization could not become
widely available without an Act of Parliament, all that was needed in the long run
for eugenics was that the operation should
be made legal for any person with two
children.

It was doubtful, however, if sterilization
would become more popular than the usual
contraceptive methods and thus appreciably
hasten the decline of the relatively high
birth-rate of the poorest third of the population. But this birth-rate—and the serious
rate of racial deterioration which it implied,
although there were many eugenic couples
in this section—would fall rapidly if artificial
abortion were made legal for any woman
with two children. This, or a bigger reform
of the law of abortion, would certainly be
enforced by public opinion within twenty
years, and thereafter the natality of the

t third would fall quickly. But even
if it did fall below the replacement birth-rate
level, as was needed, would it remain below
that level? Doubt arose, first, because this
complete birth control would ultimately
eliminate poverty, gross degeneracy, and
the stocks whose women dreaded child-birth
or were not philoprogenitive—in other words,
would ultimately make all rich enough, fit
enough and willing enough to have three
or more children; secondly, because the

251

majority of couples desired at least one child
of each sex, which brought more than two
children into many homes; and thirdly,
because the proportion of Roman Catholics
in the poorest section would presumably have
increased greatly. In view of these three
factors we should not e much from
eugenic education or, if the social system
continued to be a capitalistic one, from the
poorest couples having very small families
in order to approximate their standard of
living to that of the richer couples. Therefore it would seem that legislation would
ultimately be needed to ensure the maintenance of eugenic selection and a high
standard of living, more especially if socialism came. So why, asked the speaker, not
have legislation now?

The fact given at the outset suggested two
legislative possibilities—based on making
voluntary sterilization and abortion available
to any person with two children. Firstly,
there might be a law that no woman should
have more than two confinements without
an official permit—granted, say, by a local
population committee and a national one. It
could be enforced if a strong majority of the
voters so wished, and it would enable the
State to control the quantity and the quality
of the population. Secondly, there might be
a law forbidding any woman in the poorest
third of the nation to have more than two
confinements. It would fix attention upon
what is and always will be, whatever the
social system, the fundamental eugenic need ;
it would ensure a very high standard of living
for all: it would show other countries the
way to prosperity and race improvement ;
and it would be a fitting answer to the
Casti Connubii encyclical of January 1931,
which enjoined Roman Catholics to obstruct
the birth-control means and eugenic doctrines whereby man can improve his standard
of living and the quality of his race. It would
be an injustice to the genetically well252

endowed couples in the poorest third, but
the children in these cases would rise into
the higher sections.

The two ideas might well be combined
thus: No woman in the poorest third (or,
under socialism, in the lowest grades) of the
nation should be allowed to have more than
two confinements, and no woman in the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

other sections (or grades) should have more
than two confinements without an official
permit. Whatever the social system might
be, said Dr. Dunlop, conditions essential for
the maintenance of a high standard of living
were a low birth-rate, eugenic selection, and
a self-regarding incentive to effort.

The Society of Genealogists

Has an unrivalled collection of data, including an index of over
two million slips relating to Births, Marriages, Wills, etc. The
Society has also a Library of over 10,000 volumes, including
typescripts and MSS. of Parish registers not to be found elsewhere. The Genealogists’ Magazine, the official organ of the

ublished quarterly and is free to Members. The
rooms can be used for Research purposes from 10-6 daily, including Saturdays. A prospectus giving the objects of the
Society will be sent free on application, or the Secretary will
be pleased to show the Society’s Collections to anyone interested.

Society, is

Apply to the Secretary,
The Sotiety of Genealogists,
Chaucer House, Make Place,

Telephone Museum 8760. London, W.C.1

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 4.
