IZ

discussion, under proper authority and by
competent persons—if they can be found—
effectively supported and properly financed.
Whilst ameliorative and palliative social
measures have been widely and fully
developed, this great field of research into

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

human heredity has been neglected. Investigation on the lines I have endeavoured to
suggest would not only indicate the dimensions of the problem, but would also afford
some indication of the possible lines of
remedial measures.

=) Oy”

THE SOCIETY'S FURTHER PROJECTS

Galton Dinner, the President, Sir

Bernard Mallet, said there was a special
appropriateness in his subject to a piece of
work to which the Society was now turning
its attention—namely, an attempt to investigate, so far as a private, unofficial body
could do so, the existence of a sub-normal
class (or social problem group) in the community, supposed to comprise about onetenth of the population, or some four
million persons, as was suggested by the
Mental Deficiency Committee in 1929, following on the investigations of Dr. E. O.
Lewis. It had been suggested in their
report that, ‘‘if we could segregate as a
separate community all the families in this
country containing mental defectives of the
primary amentia type, it would be found to
include a much larger proportion of insane

[¢ introducing Mr. Lidbetter at the

persons, epileptics, paupers, criminals
(especially _recidivists), | unemployables,
habitual slum dwellers, prostitutes, in
ebriates, and other social inefficients, than
would a group of families not containing
mental defectives.”’

Sir Bernard did not wish to go into
details of the Society’s scheme, but said
that among the results expected were those
from local investigations, such as had been
instituted by Mr. Caradog Jones of Liverpool. It was suggested in an article, which
he had signed, in the October number of
the Eucenics REviEw, that the Society
would be very glad to get into touch with,

and to assist, any Fellows or Members who
might feel inclined to set up investigations
of a similar kind in the neighbourhood in
which they lived. It seemed that a diagnosis
of this kind, which would, as it were, focus
or localize all this social inefficiency, should
make the treatment to be applied to the evil
easier than it was at present. The connection of this investigation with the researches
on which Mr. Lidbetter had been engaged
for many years into the relation of heredity
and social inadequacy in an East-end of
London area would become very apparent
from his address.

In remarking generally on the work of
the Society, Sir Bernard said it was sometimes reproached with a neglect of positive
eugenics in its propaganda. If that meant
that they ought to advocate something like
the breeding up of a race of super-men, he
must say that he shared the doubts expressed the other day as to positive eugenics
by Sir Oliver Lodge. There was no
*“mould into which we can or ought to
attempt to fit human beings,’”’ and variety
was of the essence of growth.

He feared that there was not much to be
done in these days by advocating further
relief from taxation of the classes the limitation of whose families they deplored ; but
he did not see any reason to despair of the
influence which the spread of eugenic
knowledge, and of the real danger arising
from the differential fertility of the social
classes, might have, in time, in encouraging
THE SOCIETY’S FURTHER PROJECTS

and increasing reproduction from sound
stocks in all classes. He thought there was
room for experiments like that of the
eugenic settlement at Les Jardins Ungemach, near Strasbourg (of which an account
by M. Dachert was given in the REVIEW
last April) which gave a practical demonstration of a most valuable kind of what
could be done to preserve and increase the
birth rate among the better types. If there
were any millionaires left, he would like
to appeal to one of them to start such a
settlement in this country as an example.
Meanwhile, there was enough work in the
direction of negative eugenics to keep us
busy for many years to come.

The Society could congratulate itself on
the very noticeable increase of interest in
eugenics among the general public in quite
recent years.
newspaper or magazine without coming
across intelligent comment on the subject,
and no discourse on national or social progress or improvement was now complete
without at least some reference to eugenics.

It was difficult to open a

13

As instances of this, Sir Bernard quoted
the strong eugenic opinions broadcast on
the wireless last autumn by Lord
D’Abernon and Mr. Amery (reported in the
January number of this REVIEW), and said
that they were typical of the general feeling
on the subject—a feeling very different from
that of a few years ago. It would be absurd,
he added, to claim that such a change in
public opinion was due entirely to the work
of the Eugenics Society which, he was well
aware, had many severe critics. It was
only one of various scientific agencies and
tendencies which had brought about that
result. But he thought that their advance
had been due, more than to any other cause,
to the teaching and influence of our
honorary resident, Major Leonard
Darwin, who had developed the Society from
very small beginnings and so long guided
its activities. And he claimed that the
recent campaign in favour of voluntary
sterilization had done much to draw attention to the whole field of eugenic reform
advocated by the Society.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 1.
