SOME REFLECTIONS ON GENIUS*
By W. RUSSELL BRAIN, M.A., D.M., F.R.C.P.

The Nature of Genius

ERHAPS the best justification for
Piereosie genius as the subject of a lec
ture to commemorate Francis Galton
is that he was intensely interested in it, and
his curiosity was so far-reaching that we can
discuss hardly any aspect of genius without
finding it illuminated by a reflection from
some facet of his thought. For genius is a
manifestation of human faculties, and it is
related to heritable qualities, some of which
are good, while others are bad. It comes
to fruition through a complex interplay of
nature and environment and it is one of the
greatest of social values. It is of the utmost
importance to society, therefore, to study
those laws which govern its appearance. In
the past, and to a large extent even to-day,
genius has seemed mysterious, but this will
not always be so. Even to-day we are beginning to see the directions along ‘which
research must be pursued if we are to understand it better. Genius is mysterious, like
many other scientific problems, only because
we do not at present possess the data with
which to understand it.

The word ‘ genius”’ is surrounded by an
emotional aura. We must begin by separating the uncritical admiration which is often
the appropriate response to the works and
personality of genius from the dispassionate
spirit of inquiry which sees genius as the
product of scientific laws which, however
complex they may be, have nothing to do
with miracles.

What then is genius? Galtonf used the
term ‘“‘ hereditary genius’”’ to express “an
ability that was exceptionally high and at
the same time inborn.’”’ Kretschmer{ proposes a different definition. “‘ We shall give
the name genius,” he writes, “‘ to those men
who are able to arouse permanently, and in

* The Galton Lecture, delivered before the Eugenics
Society on February 16th, 1948.

+ Hereditary Genius, 2nd ed., p. viii.
} The Psychology of Men of Genius.

I2

the highest degree, that positive, scientifically grounded feeling of worth and value in
a wide group of human beings. But we shall
only do so in those cases where the value
arises with psychological necessity, out of the
special mental structure of the bringer of
value, not where a stroke of luck or some
coincidence of factors has thrown it in his
lap.”” Galton later, in the preface to the
second edition of Hereditary Genius, regretted
that he chose such a title, and said that on
looking back he would have preferred
“Hereditary Ability.” Thus he clearly
recognized that the subject of his study was
in some respects different from genius in the
popular sense of the term, which is broadly
the meaning defined by Kretschmer. Galton
was concerned with the general laws of the
inheritance of exceptional ability, which is
often an important factor in genius in the
popular sense. Kretschmer is interested in
the particular psychological qualities which
distinguish the genius from persons who
merely possess exceptional ability. The two
approaches are complementary to each
other.

When Galton uses the term “ability”
what does he mean by it? He means
ability to be a judge, a statesman, a poet, a
musician—in other words, to be exceptionally successful in one of a variety of
callings. Are we therefore justified in concluding that some unitary factor underlies
these varied manifestations of “‘ ability,”’
such as “ the ability to acquire and manipulate concepts’ postulated by Terman* as
“ the sine gua non of genius ”’? Galton’s own
work shows that such a view is too simple,
for he demonstrated that some forms of
hereditary ability manifest themselves in
various spheres of activity, but others do
not. Thus judges, statesmen, poets and
other literary men appear fairly frequently
in each other’s families. Scientists have

* Psychological Approach to the Biography of Genius.
The Eugenics Society and Hamish Hamilton, p. 1.
SOME REFLECTIONS ON GENIUS 13

many relatives who are scientists and a
smaller number who distinguish themselves
as men of affairs, but few writers and almost
no poets, artists or musicians among their
relations. And the eminent relatives of
artists tend themselves to be artists, and
those of musicians to be musicians. Galton
himself pointed out that Mendelssohn and
Meyerbeer were the only musicians on his
list whose eminent kinsmen achieved success
in careers other than as musicians. Some
allowance must be made for environment in
the shape of family tradition, but I do not
think that this can explain the variability of
the manifestations of hereditary ability in
some families and its comparative fixity in
others.

My first aim in this lecture is to try to discover what is the source of these differences,
and I shall suggest to you that they depend
upon differences in the organization of the
nervous system. And that will lead me to
another question: since the genius is by
definition abnormal, and is so by virtue of
an abnormal nervous system, what is the
relationship between the nervous abnormality we call genius and those more familiar
abnormalities we call disease ?

The Cerebral Basis of Genius

A neurologist is naturally interested in the
cerebral basis of genius. How does the brain
of the genius differ from that of the ordinary
person? Burt* has recently proposed a
physiological interpretation of intelligence.
“The mental processes essentially required
by intelligence tests,’’ he points out, “‘ involve
the integration of a variety of perceptual and
motor activities into a systematic whole :
the more the processes tested depend upon
this integration the closer they correlate
with intelligence.”” He goes on to conclude
that ‘‘ the individual differences in integrative capacity revealed by the tests may be
primarily due to differences in the neuronic
architecture of the central nervous system,”
and “finally, being structural, these differences may readily be conceived as being
largely, if not mainly, dependent on genetic

* Intelligence and Fertility. The Eugenics Society
and Hamish Hamilton, p. 38.

factors, i.e. in popular language, as being
inherited or at least innate.’’ I am sure that
this is fundamentally true, but I propose to
develop and elaborate it. Burt begins by
talking of function and, being concerned with
inheritance, ends by discussing structure.
The two approaches are complementary, but
I am going to consider mainly the physiological. The nervous system _ consists
anatomically of units—the nerve cells—
which are very much alike, but we must not
conceive of the genius as being necessarily
more richly endowed with nerve-cells than
the ordinary person. What is important is
their organization. Nerve-cells are grouped
into functional patterns, which are best
called “‘ schemas.”’ Where the genius excels
the ordinary person is that in some respect
he is richer in schemas. This may mean that
he has more nerve-cells, we do not know, but
it is quite possible for the same number of
cells to be arranged either in simple or in
complex patterns, just as a child’s reader and
Shakespeare’s works are composed of the
same twenty-six letters; and the normal
number of nerve-cells is so large that differences of organization by themselves could
account for profound differences of functional capacity. Without going into the
question of what is being tested by intelligence tests, and whether the function being
explored is single or multiple, there can be no
doubt that it is a function or a group of
functions of a highly special kind. The
schemas are those concerned in conceptual
or abstract thought. This is of the essence
of some kinds of genius, but by no means of
all. Consider the different parts played by
intelligence in the philosopher, in whose
work conceptual thought turns round and
reflects upon itself, the scientist who directs
it upon the data of observation, and the artist
in whom its réle is altogether more obscure,
and intimately related to feeling.

The relationship between intelligence and
the use of words is of special importance for
the study of genius. No doubt thinking of
some kind can occur without words, but the
whole of human culture has been rendered
possible by the evolution of speech. We do
not first have thoughts and then put them
14 | THE, EUGENICS REVIEW

into words ; we use words in order to think,
or, to be more accurate, the schemas which
underlie the use of speech play an essential
part in the construction and evocation of the
schemas for conceptual thought. This does
not mean that intelligence is identical with
the capacity for speech, but that in the
individual as in the history of the race the
higher levels of conceptual thought are
attainable only in the presence of a highly
developed capacity for the use of verbal
symbols. Just as intelligence exhibits a wide
range of variation throughout a population,
so also does speech. Indeed, there is evidence
that different functions concerned in the use
of verbal symbols may vary independently,
and this is especially true of the use of visual
symbols in reading and writing. Extreme
degrees of congenital ‘ word-blindness ”’
attract attention early; minor defects of
reading, writing and spelling are probably
much commoner and constitute permanent
handicaps in intellectual development. At
the other extreme high literary ability
may occur in families, e.g. the Bronté
sisters. These facts suggest that hereditary
factors may in part determine whether a
person’s capacity for verbal symbolization is
subnormal, normal or above the average.

Memory plays a vital part in both speech
and intelligence. Many great writers have
possessed remarkable memories. Boswell*
says that Dr. Johnson’s memory “ was so
tenacious that he never forgot anything that
he either heard or read.” . Coleridge described
his own memory as “ tenacious and systematizing.”’ Having read a book in the morning
he could in the evening repeat whole pages
verbatim. It was, as Lowesf says, “ one of
the most extraordinary memories of which
there is record, stored with the spoils of
omnivorous reading, and endowed into the
bargain with an almost uncanny power of
association.”

Shelley{ is said to have been able to read
for sixteen hours a day. “‘ He took in seven
or eight lines at a glance, and his mind seized
the sense with a velocity equal to the

* Life of Johnson. Birkbeck Hill’s edn., vol. i, p. 48.

¢ The Road to Xanadu, p. 43.
} Shelley, by Newman Ivey White, vol. i, Pp. 96.

twinkling of an eye. Often would a single
word enable him at once to comprehend the
meaning of the sentence. His memory was
prodigious.’’ Taking speech alone into consideration, the better the memory the larger
the vocabulary and the greater the richness
and differentiation of thought.

Inspiration and the Unconscious Mind
Perhaps the most remarkable feature of the
creations of genius is the extent to which they
arise independently of the conscious mind.
This has always been recognized by poets and
artists. Inspiration means the inbreathing
of an impulse from without, felt to be in some
way separate from the conscious personality,
and often therefore personified by primitive
thought. As Goethe* put it: ‘‘ No productiveness of the highest kind, no remarkable
discovery, no great thought that bears fruit
and has results is in the power of anyone ;
such things are above earthly control.’’ The
process of creation is apt to be accompanied
by a high degree of emotional excitement, so
that often the artist feels possessed, and
compelled to work with continuous energy
until he has fulfilled his task. Those who are
interested in the psychology of poetic
inspiration will find it analysed at length in
Livingston Lowes’ remarkable book on
Coleridge, The Road to Xanadu, in which he
traces the sources of the images in The
Ancient Mariner and Kubla Khan, and shows
how they become modified and fused in
the unconscious to emerge in Kubla Khan as
a dreamlike stream of fantasy, but in The
Ancient Mariner subdued and integrated by
creative thought.t The ordinary man has
been prone to dismiss poetic inspiration as
a harmless form of madness of no interest
except to the few eccentrics who enjoy
poetry. But the geniuses of science have
recognized that the inspiration which leads
to scientific discovery does not differ from
that of the poet in its nature but only in its
subject-matter.{ An admirable illustration

' * Conversations of Goethe with Eckermann. Every-_
man edn., p. 250.

t See also Principles of Literary Criticism, by I. A.
Richards, and The Poetic Image, by C. Day Lewis. _
t See The Anatomy of Inspiration, by Rosamund
E. M. Harding.
SOME REFLECTIONS ON GENIUS | 15

of this is given by Poincaré* in a discussion
of mathematical discovery. After describing
how he made some of his own discoveries, he
says: ‘“‘One is at once struck by these
appearances of sudden illumination, obvious
indications of a long course of previous unconscious work... .
...1s not possible, or in any case not fruitful, unless it is first preceded and then followed by a period of conscious work. These
sudden inspirations are never produced ...
except after some days of voluntary efforts
which appeared absolutely fruitless, in which
one thought one had accomplished nothing,
and seemed to be on a totally wrong track.
These efforts, however, were not as barren
as one thought ; they set the unconscious
machine in motion, and without them it
would not have worked at all, and would not
have produced anything. The necessity for

the second period of conscious work can be>

even more readily understood. It is necessary to work out the result of inspiration, to
deduce the immediate consequences and put
them in order, and to set out the demonstrations, but, above all, it is necessary to verify
them.’’ Here a mathematician of genius is
describing precisely the same process as went
to the making of The Ancient Mariner.

I shall not now follow Poincaré in his
speculations as to the nature of the work done
by the unconscious mind in creation, but
merely point out that the creative genius,
whether he be an artist, a scientist or an
abstract thinker, possesses this unconscious
capacity to an extent far exceeding that of
the ordinary man. It would seem to presuppose a memory capable of retaining all
the relevant data and associative processes of
exceptional richness by which the data can
-be brought together into novel and fruitful
combinations in what Galton,t who also
studied creative thinking, called ‘‘ the antechamber of consciousness.’”” These unconscious mnemic and associative functions
depend upon the richness and complexity of
those physiological dispositions of nerve-cells
we have called ‘‘schemas.”’ The artist in

*. Science and Method, p. 46, et seq.
{ Inquiries into Human Faculty and its Development.
Everyman edn., p. 146.

 

This unconscious work

words must be unusually well-equipped with
verbal and ideational schemas, but what kind
of artist in words a man is will depend upon
subtle differences. The philosopher and the
poet are both word-users, but how differently they employ them! Galton* said:
““ An over-ready perception of sharp mental
pictures is antagonistic to the acquirement
of habits of highly generalized and abstract
thought, especially when the steps of reasoning are carried on by words as symbols.”
The poet, who uses words to evoke images,
and images to move and delight, is the very
opposite of the thinker, who must detach his
thought from the concrete and purge it of
feeling. Can anyone doubt that, these differences between geniuses and ordinary folk
and between one type of genius and another
depend upon differences of neural organization, partly innate and partly developed by
use ? What a supreme development of the
cerebral processes of speech must have been
present in Shakespeare to have provided
him with that vast vocabulary from which
he drew inexhaustibly fresh felicities of
phrase to startle us with their beauty! And
how rich must have been his neural centres
of feeling to have enabled him to respond in
sympathy with every note of the gamut of
human passion, and find words for every
nuance of love and hate, pity and terror!
The poet uses words to evoke images, and
images to arouse feelings, and he employs
new combinations of words to shock his
readers into new experiences or to revivify
old ones. And most poets have believed that
these combinations of words should excite
pleasure in virtue of rhythm and rhyme or
assonance. Anyone who has the smallest
experience of writing verse knows that the
choice of words is only to a very limited
extent conscious, and this is equally true of
words representing images or ideas, and of
words as pleasurable combinations of sounds.
Mr. Ivor Brown} makes this point in his
comments on these lines of Shakespeare :
‘Can such things be

And overcome us like a summer cloud
Without special wonder ? ”’

oo * Ibid.,; p. 60.
t The Observer, November gth, 1947, p. 2.
16 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

‘“ What a symphony on the ‘u’ sound is
here!’’ says Mr. Brown. “ How far was
Shakespeare’s knack of pouring high emotion
into such enchanting melody a consciously
contrived thing? Perhaps this kind of

assonance just bubbled up in him as second 
nature. He can never have found the time
to give each line a day of contemplation.”

“High emotion ’”’ is the purpose of the
creative writer who is a poet, novelist or playwright, and he must therefore possess a rich
development of those basal structures of the
brain which are concerned with feeling. Asa
result he is able, as Shelley* said in describing
his own powers, “‘ to apprehend minute and
remote distinctions of feeling, whether relative to external nature, or to the living beings
which surround us.’’ Surely it is the alliance
of this high development of feeling with
intelligence and the capacity for expression
that makes the creative artist. And it is this
which distinguishes Coleridge the poet from
the many other Coleridges of outstanding
intellectual capacity that his family produced in successive generations. Though
these functions are distinguishable in thought,
and even depend upon areas of the brain
which are anatomically distinct, we must
recognize that in artistic creation they are
integrated into a unity, for reflection enriches and subtilizes feeling, and the word
is a true creator of thought. As Blakeft put
it: ‘‘ Ideas cannot be given but in their
minutely Appropriate Words, nor can a
Design be made without its minutely Appropriate Execution.”’

I cannot do more than allude to the psychological characteristics that distinguish
the great military leader, statesman and
administrator, and which, as many genealogies show, are often inherited. The genius in
these fields must possess an outstanding
intelligence which operates upon the minds
of men as well as upon their material circumstances. As with the artist, however, it is a
special blend of feeling with thought that
enables his cerebral schemas to reflect the
thoughts and feelings of his fellows, and to

* Shelley, by Newman Ivey White, loc. ctt., p. 530.

f{ Quoted in Fearful Symmetry, by Northrop Frye,
Pp. 93.

modify the pattern of events by discerning
in them meanings that elude the less gifted.
But his task is far harder than that of the
novelist or the playwright, for he must take
his characters as he finds them, and by his
superior knowledge and will impose his plot
upon theirs. He is the artist in action.

Musical Genius

Musical genius presents features which
suggest that it depends upon a _ highly
specific development of the nervous system.
Musical ability is inherited, and it does not
seem to be correlated in inheritance with any
other form of ability. The most notable
example is of course the Bach family, which
was actively musical for seven (or according
to Galton, eight) generations. ‘“‘ Of some
sixty Bachs known by name and profession
all but seven were organists, cantors or town
musicians, many of them of eminence in their
professions.”"* The innate character of
musical talent is illustrated by the extremely early age at which it is often exhibited, as, for example, by Mozart and
Beethoven, though music teems with infant
prodigies. The sense of absolute pitch probably depends upon the inborn organization
of the nervous system. Mozart exhibited it
at the age of seven. Sir Frederick Ouseley
at the age of five said: ‘‘ Only think, Papa
blows his nose in G’’!t The greatest musicians do not always possess it ; Schumann
and Wagner, for example, did not.

We cannot say what is the neural basis of
musical genius without first knowing what
cerebral activity underlies the enjoyment of
music in the average person. Clearly there
must be good hearing and a high capacity to
discriminate musical notes, which is probably
cerebral rather than auditory.{ But this in
turn must meet with a responsiveness of the
feeling centres, so that certain combinations
and sequences of notes cause not only pleasure—or discomfort !—but also other feelings,
which vary in their intensity and definiteness

* The Oxford Companion to Music, by P. A. Scholes,

Pp. 56. —

t Ibid., p. 2.

t See Inquiries into Human Faculty. Everyman edn.,
p- 19.
SOME REFLECTIONS ON GENIUS 17

in different persons. To this executants add
a motor skill.

It may seem useless to ask why music
arouses emotions, and certain sorts of music
certain emotions; there is no answer in
terms of thought. If I may speculate for a
moment I would suggest that the answer is
to be found in terms of cerebral function,
namely that in musical people the electrical
rhythms excited in the hearing centres of the
brain by musical sounds evoke resonances in
the rhythms of the emotional centres, so that
such people respond to music with feeling.*
The unmusical lack these resonances, either
because their auditory discrimination is too
poor, or because they do not possess the
linkages between hearing and feeling. The
musical genius has both in high degree, and
since, unlike the artist in words, he has no
vocabulary to learn and needs no experience
of life as his raw material, he comes into the
world almost fully equipped to exercise his
talent, and has only to acquire the necessary
skill with his hands.

Within musical genius we _ recognize
different kinds of ability. In ‘‘ pure music,”
as, for example, Mozart’s symphonies or
the Brandenburg concertos, “‘ nothing is
involved but our perception of musical
quality and the delight those perceptions
afford.” In opera and the finest religious
music the composer discovers tunes and harmonies that express and reinforce the
emotional content of the words. In what
many would consider the most satisfying
music of all, such as Beethoven’s last four
quartets, the genius of the composer evokes
in the listener not only delight in the music
as such, but emotions which can be expressed
only, and that inadequately, in such terms
as mystics use. It would take us too deeply
into musical esthetics and too speculatively
into neurophysiology to discuss the basis of
these differences.

One characteristic that sharply distin
* It is interesting that in those rare individuals in
whom music causes epileptic attacks the emotional
response to music appears to be abnormal and to
precede the attack. (See Shaw and Hill, J. Neurol.,

Neurosurg. & Psychiat., 1947, 10, 107.)
¢ Beethoven, by J. W. N. Sullivan. The New Library,

p- 511,

guishes musical genius from musical appreciation remains to be mentioned. No composer
of genius has been a woman, and this must
surely be due to innate and not cultural
causes, for women have not lacked access to
musical instruments. Indeed, as executants
they can hold their own with men on many ;
and more women than men appreciate music,
if one may conclude this from the presence
of twice as many women as men at public
concerts in this country. Does the fact that
men make music for women to enjoy support
Darwin’s theory* that the biological link
between sound and feeling in music lies in
the fact that music is a highly developed
form of the sexual calls of animals ?

The concept of physiological schemas
underlying both the conscious and the unconscious processes of mind can be used to
bring the idiot savant and the calculating
boy into line with the conception of genius
here proposed. These bizarre and limited
geniuses are freaks endowed with the
schemas of genius in a narrow field, but their
schemas work physiologically and not
psychologically, so that the process, like
artistic inspiration, is unconscious, and the
possessor can give no explanation of how
it is done.

Genius and Mental Disorder

The belief that there is a correlation between genius and mental disease is a very
old one, and there are many reasons why it
should have become widely accepted. There
have been insane geniuses, and many more
whose behaviour has differed strikingly from
that which the average person regards as
normal. Indeed, since a genius is by definition mentally abnormal in one sense, it
requires only a slight lapse of logic to consider him mentally abnormal in another, i.e.
in the sense of insane or at least unstable.
Both insanity and genius tend to excite a
somewhat similar emotional reaction, because they seem to be the result of mental
processes which the ordinary man does not
share. Galtont himself thought that ‘ there

* The Descent of Man, 2nd edn., p. 572, and The
Expression of the Emotions, p. 219.
+ Hereditary Genius, 2nd edn., p. ix.
18 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

is a large residuum of evidence which points
to a painfully close relation between the two,
and,’’ he went on, “‘ I must add that my own
later observations have tended in the same
direction, for I have been surprised at finding
how often insanity or idiocy has appeared
among the near relations of exceptionally
able men.”’ But only statistical evidence can
settle this question. Havelock Ellis,*
counting every reported case of insanity,
including senile disorders, among 1,030
British men of genius, found an incidence of
only 4-2 per cent, while less than 2 per cent
were reported to have had insane parents
or children. The incidence is significantly
higher among poets, yet among 150 poets
born since 1700, and included in the Oxford
Book of English Verse, only twenty-two, or
approximately 15 per cent, are known to
have been either insane or so grossly psychopathic as to be seriously neurotic or opium
or alcohol addicts. In spite of this, poetry is
not a dangerous trade. On the contrary. Mr.
Harold Nicolsont has drawn attention to
the longevity of the thirty-two most famous
British poets who flourished between the
middle of the fourteenth and the middle of

the nineteenth century, nineteen of whom.

lived beyond the age of 60 and ten beyond
70. I have carried this investigation farther
by taking 150 poets born between 1700 and
1862 whose work is represented in the Oxford
Book of English Verse. Their average age at
death was 70: thirty-two lived to between
60 and 70, thirty-three to between 70 and 80,
twenty-seven to between 80 and go, and two
were over 90 when they died. As far as can
be ascertained, the longevity of poets does
not differ significantly from that of the
general population.

Mr. Nicolson has recently defended the
mental health of authors. True, some of
them may have been eccentric, but few have
been actually insane.
their peculiarities are not symptoms of
mental disorder. ‘‘ Of course,’’ he says, “‘ all
creative writers are nervous; even Horace,
that complacent hedonist, referred to them

* A Study of British Genius.
t The Lancet, 1947, ii, 709.
t Ibid.

Apart from these,

as the ‘genus irritabile vatum’—‘that tetchy
breed of bards’; but to be nervous, even to
be extremely nervous, does not necessarily
imply that one is suffering from a nervous
disease.”’

I propose to consider separately what Mr.
Nicolson calls ‘‘ nervousness,’’ and actual
insanity. He first defines ‘‘ creative writers ”’
as those who “ by the force of their imagination, or the delicacy of their perception .. .
have discovered new combinations of experience,’’ and he adds that “‘ the creative writer,
the poet and the artist do... possess a
certain nervous sensibility, which manifests
itself not merely in their receptivity to
inspiration, but also in certain, apparently
morbid, eccentricities.’’ Goethe* held similar
views, but drew a different conclusion from
them. Speaking to Eckermann about poets
he said: ‘‘ Their extraordinary achievements presuppose a very delicate organization, which makes them susceptible to
unusual emotions and capable of hearing
celestial voices. Such an organization in conflict with the world and the elements is easily
disturbed and injured; he who does not,
like Voltaire, combine with great sensibility
an equally uncommon toughness is liable to
constant illness.” Is “‘nervous”’ in Mr.
Nicolson’s sense the same as ‘“‘neurotic”’ ?
If we ask what is meant by “ neurotic ’’ we
are faced at once by the chaotic state of
psychological thought. Psychiatrists use the
term in at least four different ways: (1) to
indicate a failure to adapt to life owing to
certain psychological defects ; (2) to describe
various different abnormal symptoms; (3)
for many different theoretical accounts of the
psychological causation of (1) or (2); and
(4) genetically, to indicate an inherited basis
for the tendency to develop the condition
explained by (1), (2) or (3).

Eysenckf. in his recent statistical study
finds that the characteristics of neurotic
introverts include anxiety, depression, obsessional tendencies and irritability. According
to their own statements their feelings are
easily hurt, they are self-conscious, moody

* Conversations of Goethe with Eckermann. Everyman

edn., pp. 335-6.
¢ Dimensions of Personality, p. 246.
SOME REFLECTIONS ON GENIUS 19

and given to day-dreaming. He* distinguishes a factor for neuroticism from a factor
for introversion, the former operating in the
(conative) sphere of will and activity and the
latter in the (affective) sphere of feeling. Let
us leave on one side the question whether the
symptoms enumerated are due to the introversion alone or to the combination of introversion and neuroticism. Is there any difference between Mr. Nicolson’s ‘“ nervous”
creative writer and Dr. Eysenck’s neurotic
introvert, except that the former possesses
higher intelligence and powers of expression? Given this intellectual equipment and
sufficient drive, the writer’s sensitive feelings
and his moods provide the raw materials
upon which his self-consciousness directs his
analytical thought. His day-dreaming becomes imagination, his obsessions ever and
again turn his eyes upon those dark places
of the mind from which the normal man
hurriedly averts his gaze, and the flame of
his words distils from his experience the
quintessence of his raptures and his agonies.
So I would suggest that those traits which Mr.
Nicholson calls “‘ nervous ”’ in the genius are
genetically and psychogenetically identical
with those which we term neurotic in the
ordinary man. |

The form of insanity which is most closely
related to genius is cyclothymia, the manicdepressive state. Many men of genius have
either been cyclothymes themselves or have
been cycloids with a family history of cyclothymia. Three poets born in the eighteenth
century—Smart, Cowper and Clare—were
cyclothymes who were periodically insane.
Other noted cyclothymes were James Boswell, George Fox, the founder of Quakerism,
Goethe, Robert Mayer, who discovered the
law of conservation of energy, and Hugo
Wolf, the composer. Isaac Newtonf at the
age of 50 suffered from a mental disorder
characterized by depression and delusions.
Dr. Johnson was racked by obsessions and
compulsions, but his recurrent depression
may mean that he was also a cyclothyme.

* Ibtd., p. 261.
t Isaac Newton, by J. W. N. Sullivan.

Dickens* manifested some obsessional traits,
but his general mood of elation, associated
with hyperactivity and broken by short
recurrent periods of depression, suggests
that he too was cycloid.

No man is a genius because he is a cyclothyme, but the association of cyclothymia
with the intellectual equipment of genius
modifies in a distinctive way the character
and the creations of genius. Several such
effects may be noted. The creativeness of the
genius may show a rhythm determined by
the cyclothymia, cycles of productiveness
alternating with cycles of sterility. This has
been traced in the life of Goethe by Mébius,t
who believes that it illuminates even his love
affairs, and applied to musical compositions
in the case of Hugo Wolf.{ Secondly, the
untiring energy and flight of ideas of the
phase of elation may persist as a milder
enduring state without disorder of thought,
and add greatly to the productivity of the
artist, as was the case with Dickens. Moreover, the cyclothyme often possesses a rich
endowment of feeling which sharpens his
sensibility to nature and to personal relationships, and contributes a characteristic zest
to his work. I hope to publish an analysis
of the influence of mania upon the poetry
of Christopher Smart, who left one poem,
“‘ Jubilate Agno,” written while he was
insane, and the better-known “Song to
David,”’ written during convalescence. Finally, the extroversion of the cyclothyme
enables him to speak to the ordinary man,
while the introversion of the schizothyme
makes his ideas so personal as to be in
extreme cases unintelligible.

To sum up, then, I have presented the view
that genius is usually the resultant of a
number of factors. Intelligence is doubtless
the most important, and this is the distinguishing feature of those families in which
great ability is transmitted through successive
generations, often manifesting itself in a wide
range of achievements.§ This is what Dr.

*See Charles Dickens's Letters. The Nonesuch
Dickens, 1, p. 791, and 2, pp. 17, 24, and 169.

¢ Quoted by Kretschmer, /oc. cit.

¢ “ Manie et Inspiration Musicale,”” R. Pauly and H.

Hecaen, Ann. med-psychol., 1939, 97, 389.
§ Terman, /oc. cit., p. Io.
20

Johnson* meant when he said: ‘“‘ The true
genius is a mind of large general powers,
accidentally determined to some particular
direction.”’ But there is reason to think that
there are specific abilities distinct from intelligence which, when associated with it,
decide the character of genius. Power of
verbal expression is one such talent, and
musical ability is another. Probably many
factors are concerned, and it is the uniqueness of particularly favourable combinations
that makes the genius.

Most geniuses are perfectly sane, but
among creative artists, especially, the predominant réle of the feelings explains the
closer correlation between genius and mental
instability. Here those very traits which in
the less intelligent prove a social handicap
may, when linked with high intellectual
capacity and powers of artistic expression,
become a social value, for in the social
balance sheet of genius the deficiencies of the
individual may be the assets of society. Is
there not sometimes an overlap between the
psychopath and the saint, the pervert and
the reformer, which makes it impossible to
distinguish them by current psychology ?
__* Boswell's Life of Johnson. Birkbeck Hill’s edn.,
vol. ii, p. 437, note 2.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

Edited by Warder C. Allee, the University of Chicago.

In the October 1947 number:

ing EFFECT OF TEMPERATURE ON THE INTERSEX CHARACTER OF DAPHNIA LONGISPINA. By Katuerine K.

SANFORD.

Tae EFFECT OF CERTAIN DEPRESSING AGENTS ON INTRACELLULAR OXIDATION OF INDICATORS IN HYDRA.

y C. M. Cuip.

RESPONSES OF FISH MELANOPHORES TO CHEMICAL WARFARE AGENTS. By C. Lapp Prossszr, BruNo von LimBacH
and Gzorce W. BENNETT, with Technical Assistance of MARIAN

EFFECTS OF TESTOSTERONE PROPIONATE ON SEX DEVELOPMENT IN FEMALE AMBYSTOMA LARVAE. By

BEATRICE MINTZ.

THE EFFECT OF MALE HORMONE ON AGGRESSIVE BEHAVIOR IN MICE. By Exizasetu A. BEEMAN.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY i is published quarterly in January, April, July. and October
nadian postage 20c.

THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS, 5750 Ellis Avenue, CHICAGO

Subscription $10 a year

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The obsessional scrupulosity of John Woolman helped to liberate the slaves, and
Charles Dickens’s “‘ morbid ’’ preoccupation
with cruelty and prisons moved his “ normal’’ fellow countrymen to abolish abuses
which their own insensitiveness had long
tolerated. Who can say whether Donne,
Swift, Boswell, Johnson, Shelley, Darwin,
Dickens and Ruskin would have been of
more or less value to the world without their
psychological handicaps ? And would human
culture be the richer or the poorer without
its obsessionals and its cyclothymes? Is Mr.
Edmund Wilson* right when he likens such
geniuses to Philoctetes in Sophocles’s play
of that name? ‘ The victim of a malodorous
disease which renders him abhorrent to
society and periodically degrades him and
makes him helpless is also the master of a
superhuman art which everybody has to
respect and which the normal man feels he
needs. ... The bow would be useless without Philoctetes himself. It is in the nature of
things—of this world where the divine and
the human fuse—that they cannot have the
irresistible weapon without its loathsome
owner.”

* The Wound and the Bow, p. 294.

F, JAMEs.

Single copies $3 Foreign postage 48c.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XL, No. 1
