REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 363

and government by the able, but only by violent civic struggles between
the aspirants to power (as in Oriental monarchies and Latin American
presidencies), or aim at so subtle a system of checks and precautions that
no man can control everything, and government can be securely carried
on by mediocrities (as in old Japan, the Chinese mandarinate, and the
older British universities)? Lastly, might not much instruction accrue
from studying the anomalous cases of illustrious men too great for their
country, who failed because they were not properly supported, such as
Vercingetorix in Czsarian Gaul, Arminius in’ Augustan Germany,
Skanderbeg of Albania, Wallenstein the Bohemian, and, above all, the
great family of Hamilcar Barka, which so nearly changed the course
of history and gave to the supine and short-sighted traders of Carthage the
victory over imperial Rome. It seems probable that in the end all these
apparent exceptions would only deepen our appreciation of the power of
personalities in history and of the absurdity of trying to do without them,
and so lead science to correct an error into which only gross ignorance of
its own history could have betrayed it. F. C. S. SCHILLER.

Wallin, J. E. Watiace. Experimental Studies of Mental Defectives: A
Critique of the Binet-Simon Tests and a Contribution to the
Psychology of Epilepsy. (Education Psychology Monographs,
No. 7). Warwick and York, Inc. Baltimore, USA. : 1912.

THE ingenious scale devised by the late M. Binet for measuring the intelligence of backward school children of Paris assumed that mental efficiency
could be measured in terms of age. By actual experiment he found that
most normal children of four could just repeat three figures from
memory, name common objects such as a knife or a penny, distinguish
the longer of two unequal lines, and give their sex. At six they could
just repeat sentences of sixteen syllables, define common objects in terms
of their use, distinguish pictures of ugly and pretty faces, carry out three
simple commissions successively from a single instruction, distinguish
morning from afternoon, and give their age. At nine they could repeat
the days of the week; at ten, the months of the year; at twelve, seven
figures or twenty-six syllables. A list containing about five tests suitable
for each age from three to thirteen was accordingly drawn up. A child of
eight who can answer all the tests for the age of six, but fails for those
of seven or eight, is said to have a mental age of six; and to be backward
or retarded by two years. A retardation of two or more years denotes
mental deficiency such as would qualify a child for admission to special
schools.

The scheme has been taken up enthusiastically in America and elsewhere, and has even appeared in the regulations published in this country
by the Board of Education. American investigators have applied it to
groups of a thousand children; and, as an inference from their results,
(somewhat hastily obtained, it must be confessed), have declared enthusiastically in favour of the value of scale.

Dr. Wallin has been more cautious. He realises that the Binet-Simon
scale is not “a wonderful mental X-ray machine,” and that it has suffered
considerably from being “victimised by the indiscriminate exploiter ”
before it had been perfected by its ingenious inventor. His book contains
one of the most thorough studies of the scale that has been published
in the English language; and his analysis does not hesitate to criticise
the imperfections involved in assigning certain tests to certain ages or
in calculating the mental age according to certain arbitrary rules from
the results obtained. He has further used a second series of tests of a
more experimental nature (dynamometer, form-board, ataxiagraph, and
others) with a view to studying the underlying problem of variation in
mental and physical traits.

His conclusion is as follows: “ While it does not scale different
grades of intelligence with the degree of accuracy which would be desired,
364 EUGENICS REVIEW.

the Binet-Simon scale does enable us to grade and classify defective
individuals far more rapidly and satisfactorily than would be possible
by the ordinary methods of observation.” But he adds a note of warning.
“The function of the Binet-Simon, or any other graded scale of intelligence, is to give us a preliminary and not a final survey or rating of the
individual who may be tested.”

Critical and extensive as Dr. Wallin’s work has been, it appears not
to be quite critical or extensive enough. In the first place, most of
the conclusions in the present volume are drawn from the investigation of a peculiar group of individuals—namely, the patients at the New
Jersey State Village for Epileptics. In the editor’s preface it is
claimed that, although many eminent individuals are said to have been
epileptics—for instance, Julius Cesar, Mohammed, and possibly St. Paul
—yet the majority of epileptics exhibit a mild degree of feeblemindedness which places them in the class known in America as
“morons.” “These children,” he adds, “ resemble more the typical laggard of the public schools than the typical feeble-minded child... ..

or this reason, the more we can discover as to the psychology of the
epileptic, the more successful will be our educational measures.” Nevertheless, in several ways the epileptic appears to be distinctly atypical :
he suffers from an unusual impairment of memory; he is particularly
inefficient in the more intellectual tests and in the tests calling for adjustment to new situations; he suffers from a peculiar bluntness in the
sensory discrimination of weights, and from a pronounced retardation of
rate in the stream of thought and in motor response. His other mental
processes seem, by comparison, nearly, if not quite, intact. Hence,
peculiar methods of testing and scoring are necessary. He must be
examined over the widest possible range of years. In each of the higher
years there will probably be one or two tests at which he fails, and one
or two at which he is successful. Consequently, the estimate of his
intelligence will be largely dependent upon the way in which credit is
given for tests for a mentality far higher than that which is characteristic of
the age at which he first begins to fail. These are difficulties of a special
kind which Binet naturally did not contemplate. Hence, the chapter on
“testing the tests,” though for this very reason extremely suggestive,
remains at the same time inconclusive. Dr. Wallin, however, promises
later to publish a second research upon ordinary public school children;
and the comparison of the two sets of data will undoubtedly prove most
instructive.

The peculiar nature of his data enables him, in the earlier part
of his book, to criticise the scale from a new point of view somewhat
drastically. Yet his final estimate seems too lenient. To the unprejudiced observer, the true conclusion to be drawn from Dr. Wallin’s data
is, I think, this: except for rough and popular purposes, any measurement of mental capacity in terms of age is unsatisfactory. Who would
measure height or weight in terms of years? The unit fluctuates in its
significance all along the scale.. When the child is just beginning to
walk and talk, when he is seven or eight, when he is ten or eleven,
when he is on the verge of puberty, when he is twenty-one, when he is
in the prime of life, and when he reaches the climacteric—at these
different periods a retardation of a single year means very different
things. In the case of children, age, of course, must be taken into
account; but it does follow that it must be erected in a scale of
measurement.

Such a mode of measurement is particularly untrustworthy from the
standpoint of eugenic investigations. It confuses at the very outset congenital with environmental influences. The plausibility of the scale rests
on two distinct and disparate facts. First, in the course of natural
development, certain functions do not normally emerge until certain
fairly definite periods have been reached. Familiar instances are the
REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 365

power to walk, and the power.to procreate. Retardation or precocity in
the emergence of these functions may be of profound significance in estimating a child’s congenital endowment. Secondly, however, the successive appearance of certain powers may merely indicate that society
finds it convenient to instil certain items of knowledge or certain dexterities only after other more simpler ones have been acquired. The fact that
most children can recite the days of the week at the age of nine, while
but few can recite the months of the year till the age of ten, may simply
mean that, directly or indirectly, we teach the former list first. A displacement in the relative or absolute time at which these mechanical
memories appear is, more often than not, quite insignificant for the
diagnosis of intelligence. In his later revision of the scale (1911), Binet
proposed to omit all tests depending upon knowledge acquired in school.
Dr. Wallin, however, strongly advocates the retention of the earlier (1908)
scheme. So far as the importance of retaining tests of scholastic knowledge is concerned, he seems obviously night. But, if retained, they should
be sharply separated from tests measuring capacity for the most
part inborn and should constitute a distinct system of pedagogical tests,
complete in themselves.

In this country psychologists have paid attention chiefly to experimental tests measuring general intelligence in units of their own. Only
recently has attention turned to use of everyday questions with everyday
units. The former method still seems to hold its own. At the recent
meeting of the British Association in Birmingham results from both
methods were reported in new subsection of psychology. The correlations of Binet tests with empirical estimates of intelligence ranged from
about "4 to ‘6; those of the more rapid but more technical experimental tests rose to between ‘7 and ‘9. In view of the provisions of the recent Mental Deficiency Act, the relative value of these
methods of diagnosis is of utmost importance; and further investigations
along the lines of Dr. Wallin’s—using both methods side by side—are
most urgently needed. CYRIL Burt.

Heron, Davip, D.Sc. Mendelism and the Problem of Mental Defect.
I.: A Criticism of Recent American Work. Questions of the
Day and of the Fray. No. vii. London. ODulau and Co.;
1913; price 2s. net; pp. 62, with 4 diagrams.
A GOOD deal of attention has been attracted by the assertion, based upon
results obtained by workers associated with the American Eugenics Record
Office, that some forms of mental defect behave in respect of hereditary
transmission like simple Mendelian characters. The importance of the
conclusion, if correct, justifies a searching examination of the methods
by which it has been reached. The publication under notice provides
such a criticism and certain aspects of it appear to us to call for more
detailed attention than we are accustomed to devote to a pamphlet of 62
pages. We shall divide our remarks into two sections, the first dealing
with the substance of Dr. Heron’s criticisms; the second with their form.
At the beginning of the paper, attention is directed to a statement of Dr.
Davenport’s, which appears to sanction the belief that a mating of the
“weak ” with the “ strong” is eugenically justifiable. If, as Dr. Heron
supposes, this advice be tendered without qualification we agree with
with him in regarding it as thoroughly unsound, but the passage cited on
page 7 of Dr. Heron’s paper suggests to us that Dr. Davenport may
merely have meant that such a course was the lesser of two evils. Prima
facie, however, Dr. Davenport’s utterance appears to have been rash.
Passing now to the papers directly criticised by Dr. Heron, we may
remark that a scientifically valid comparison between theory and expectation in a case of supposed Mendelian inheritance involves (2) a uniform
system of classification, (0) a correct statistical method. With regard to
the former, Dr. Heron argues in detail that the categories used are vague,
