EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE ENGLISH
CRIMINAL LAW * |

By CECIL BINNEY, M.A., Barrister-at-Law

T may be a convenient introduction to
my subject to explain how I came to
write this paper. About a year ago I
had the pleasure of listening to an interesting
paper read to this Society; the subject,
except that it was connected with eugenics,
was entirely remote from my present subject
and the reader was not a lawyer—but in the
discussion which followed the criminal law
was introduced and I noticed that he was
under the impression that such parts of the
criminal law as were relevant not only could
be justified on eugenic grounds, but might
be supposed to have been enacted on those
grounds. This strange error might, I thought,
be sufficiently widespread to require refutation. The truth is that the criminal law of
England originated with the Courts punishing
certain obvious gross violations of person
and property—murder, robbery and so forth
—which in still earlier times would have
given rise to a blood feud. Apart from
certain alterations which reflected and enforced the growing power of the Crown, the
development of the criminal law for centuries
consisted in its gradual extension to protect
person and property from invasions more
subtle or less violent than those prohibited
by our simple Anglo-Saxon ancestors. Questions involving marriage or sexual morality,
being within the jurisdiction of the Church
Courts, entered little into the criminal law
before the Reformation, and not greatly
thereafter till the Victorian age, and the
extensive sexual legislation of that period
was based almost entirely on moral rather
than eugenic considerations. With this in
mind, it seemed to me that it might be of
interest to this Soczety if I were to embark,
not on the barren historical enquiry, how
far our criminal law is eugenic in its origin,
*A paper read before the Eugenics Society on
January 16th, 1945.

but rather on the practical question how far
it is eugenic or dysgenic in its effect.

I was particularly led to produce this
paper because for several years I had been
meditating one on the far more interesting
question how far the law concerning the
inheritance of property—not only English
law but other systems of law—had a eugenic
or dysgenic effect. I reluctantly abandoned
this project, not only because I doubted my
own competence to deal with this difficult
branch of law, but because I came to the
conclusion that, though the effect of the law
of property is important and extensive, it
is social rather than in a strict sense eugenic.

Laws Affecting Immigration

It is indeed obvious that a great part of the
law cannot have any effect which is directly
either eugenic or dysgenic. It is generally
recognized that the Bills of Exchange Act,
1882, and the Partnership Act, 1890, are
two of the most successful of modern statutes.
Neither in substance nor in language is
either in need of amendment—which cannot
be said of many Acts of Parliament passed
with far higher aims and more general public
interest. But legislation of this type, however valuable, is not eugenic—except in
this very general sense that a good commercial law will not only help the most intelligent
and industrious to flourish and bring up
families, but will attract desirable elements
to this country. The development of London
to be the world’s commercial and financial
centre was partly due to the excellence of
our commercial law, and this commercial
development caused the settlement in England and the gradual absorption into the
population of the best type of alien. This has
enriched England in every sense. One has
only to open any periodical interested in the
doings of English high society to come

105
106

across the names of families now well known
and Anglicized which originated in this way.

It is unfortunate that at the present time
the feebleness of the English criminal law
and its administration is likely to produce
the opposite effect by landing us with all
the bad characters of the world. Fraudulent
bankrupts from Eastern Europe, sharepushers from across the Atlantic, prostitutes
who would not be tolerated in any capital
but London, crooks who know that cheques
can be cashed in England with impunity
not enjoyed on the Riviera—in fact, undesirables of every description are entitled
to look upon England as their special paradise. There may be some slight difficulty
in getting here, but once arrived they know
that the law will be lenient to them and, if
they can establish that there is no country
to which they can be deported or that the
country to which they belong will execute
them on arrival, they can remain here
indefinitely, subject only to occasional short
sentences on the rare occasions when a conviction is obtained against them. The fact
that England has obtained in recent years,
particularly since the Nazis seized power in
Germany, a number of immigrants of a
valuable type, and very many others whose
presence may at least be argued to be beneficial to us, need not blind us to the fact
that reformation of criminals and elimination
of bad types by eugenic measures is inade
quate, while our stock is being poisoned by |

the continual immigration of undesirables.
My remarks are not intended to refer
specially to immigrants from Germany,
though it is obvious that among the first to
leave must have been those who were wishing
to escape from the police, and whom the

German government did not wish to retain..

Many of them before their arrival in Germany had left Poland or Hungary or other
countries in similar circumstances. That
we do not like them in England is no argument against Germany, Poland or Hungary,
or against Jews. If Hungary had by its
wealth and the leniency of its criminal law
been equally attractive, it would no doubt
have been filled with criminals from England.
In fact, the only countries which have offered

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

any attraction to our undesirables have been

‘the United States and the Dominions, and

they have protected themselves with the
strictest laws as to immigration and deportation. None of the bad characters who
arrive here will have hesitation in producing
children, which will be British subjects by
birth and will be irremovable.

There are two separate branches of the law
involved, the law as to aliens, their immigration, control and expulsion, and the general
law against crime, which applies to everyone
in this country, Englishman and alien alike.
The law as to aliens is not a branch of the
criminal law, although breaches of it are
punishable in the criminal courts; nor is
any amendment of it particularly necessary.
The Home Secretary possesses the widest
possible powers, and an order for the deportation of an alien cannot be questioned in any
way in the law courts ; but the use he makes
of these powers is entirely within his discretion. If the fullest use was made of
them to keep out of this country aliens of
dubious character or antecedents, and to
deport forthwith those reasonably suspected
of bad behaviour, it would make no difference
whether our criminal law was severe or lax
as compared with those of other countries ;
but, so long as it is practicable for undesirable
aliens to come to this country and to remain
here, they will be encouraged to do so by
the laxity of our criminal law and the lightness of the sentences imposed. Moreover,
British subjects with criminal records are
entitled to return to England and their
willingness to do so will be largely affected
by the severity or leniency of our criminal
law.

It is fair to point out that one’s view may
be distorted by listening in law courts to
the police giving accounts of alien criminals
or criminals who have returned here after
serving sentences abroad, while one has not
the same facilities for listening to proceedings
in foreign courts. Further, the leniency of
our criminal law is confined to offences of
dishonesty. It is severe in dealing with
breaches of sexual morality, and, on the
other side of the balance sheet to the thieves
and swindlers who come here for refuge, one
EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE ENGLISH CRIMINAL LAW

should put the number of Englishmen—
they are necessarily persons of some social
position or financial resources to be able to
do it—who find it safer to live abroad. The
respective value to the countries where they
resided of Oscar Wilde, D. H. Lawrence or
Lord Byron, on the one hand, and Steinie
Morrison and Eddie Guerin, on the other,
is, of course, a matter of opinion.

Offences Against the Person Act, 1861
But all this is in the nature of a digression,
for the purpose of this paper is to consider
the more direct effects of our criminal law,
and this, like our civil law, is for the most
part not directly either eugenic or dysgenic,
since it is concerned, at least if one limits
oneself to the consideration of crime of any
gravity, with the protection of property.
It is likely to remain so, notwithstanding
the advance of Socialism; for the property
which exists becomes, if anything, in greater
need of legal protection than before, when
it comes to be owned by the community.
As eugenists, we are more likely to be
interested in such parts of the criminal law
aS exist to protect the person or are concerned in one way or another with sex,
marriage and the procreation of children.
It will be more useful to consider individual
crimes or groups of crimes in their eugenic
aspect rather than attempt to formulate
general principles of an abstract character.
I will only make one generalization: that
we shall have to approach the problem from
two different points of view—one might call
them positive and negative, but it is
probably more accurate to speak of them
as the points of view of the prosecution and
of the defence. We shall have to consider
the dysgenic effect of the criminal law in
forbidding what we as eugenists may

advocate; but it is gratifying to add that 
in a far larger number of cases we shall have
no particular sympathy with the crimes
under consideration—to that extent we
shall be on the side of the angels, or, at
least, of the police—but shall be considering
how far the law against them and its practical application is eugenic or the reverse.
The various provisions against wounding

107

and poisoning contained in the Offences
Against the Person Act, 1861, are not
eugenic in their effect, except in the very
general sense that any law which is beneficial
in its effect is eugenic, and it is obviously
desirable that the criminal law should prohibit violence and poisoning. On the other
hand, some of these sections of the Act may
act dysgenically in forbidding a sterilizing
operation which may be eugenically desirable. Some years ago this Society was kind
enough to entrust me with the task of producing a pamphlet on the law on this subject, so I will add nothing to what I then
said, except that the -opinion which I then
expressed that sterilizing was illegal under
the 1861 Act has been confirmed by the
decision in Rex v. Donovan (1934) 2 K.B.
498, and the possibility of sterilization being
declared by the Judges to be punishable

‘under the Common Law has been made more

real by the decision in Rex v. Manley (1933)
1 K.B. 529, that it is a Common Law misdemeanour to tell lies to the police about
imaginary crimes, the first example for a
long time of a new crime being, in effect,
created by the Judges.

But though the legal prohibition of
sterilization—assuming that it is observed
by medical men—may prevent operations
eugenically desirable, we cannot, as eugenists,
advocate that it should be unconditionally
legalized. To repeat an example I have
previously given to this Society, one can
imagine-a dubious doctor establishing himself in a shop in a Midland town and advertising sterilization to the local factory girls
as a greater attraction to the male sex and
a more durable one than permanent waving
and offering to do it for £15, payable by
instalments. One would not be either surprised or distressed if under the present law
such a person found himself in the dock. If
sterilization is to be legalized it must be for
definite purposes and subject to proper safeguards, and if it is to be of much eugenic
importance, it will have to be legalized ; for
it is principally required in the case of. mentally defective persons, whom no doctor is
likely to take the risk of sterilizing in the
present state of the law, since, apart from
108

other legal objections, they may not have
the necessary intelligence to consent to the
operation.

Contraception

I need only briefly remark that I do not
think that artificial insemination (of a willing
woman, of course) can possibly be an offence
against the criminal law on either of the
grounds on which sterilization may be
illegal, before passing on from it to other
acts intended to prevent the birth of children. Neither the use of contraceptives nor
their sale is contrary to the law, though this
may be rather because they have gradually
come into use without Parliament having
thought fit to legislate on the subject than
as a result of any conscious policy. We
may yet see efforts to make their sale illegal,
but a law to this effect would be eugenically
calamitous. Its principal results would be
an enormous increase in abortion, blackmail,
fraud, profiteering and unnatural vices of
every description. It might or might not
increase morality, if that is the word for it ;
demographically it would add slightly to
the population; eugenically, though it
might produce some children who were of
a desirable character in spite of the unfortunate circumstances in which they had
come into the world, it would tend rather
to increase the number of unwanted
illegitimate children as well as upsetting
the lives of otherwise. contented and regulated families. As has been pointed out by
this Society, it is a prerequisite of producing
children eugenically that parents should
have it in their power to decide whether,
when, and at what intervals they are to
have children at all.

Many persons who are not opposed to the
use of contraceptives have expressed their
support of some measure to control their
sale or restrict it in various ways, and rely
on the analogy of the Act passed in 1917,
which makes it an offence punishable by
two years’ hard labour to advertise any
kind of treatment for venereal disease or for
anyone but a qualified medical practitioner
to treat it. The value of this measure is
beyond question. I have no recollection

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of any prosecution being brought under it,
but this does not mean that it is unnecessary
or ineffective. A self-constituted healer of
venereal diseases is not likely to flourish
in competition with genuine doctors and
hospitals except by a good deal of advertisement, and an Act making any advertisement
a penal offence is likely to put him out of
business.

But the analogy between the cure of
venereal diseases and the sale of contraceptives is not a close one. Everyone desires
the cure and prevention of venereal disease
unless there still exist any obscure fanatics
who think it should remain as a divine
punishment of the children for the sins of
the parents ; and everyone except those with
an irrational and violent prejudice against
the medical profession will. agree that
doctors are the people to cure it. From a
eugenic point of view the suppression of
venereal disease is vital.

The sale of contraceptives raisés more
controversial issues, and if it is to be made
a State monopoly or something of the kind,
we shall naturally want to know by whom
and on what principles it would be run.
Other than purely eugenic considerations
may weigh with us, but it is clear that as
eugenists we could not approve any scheme
of control if it had the effect of withholding
or providing contraceptives without consideration of the suitability for parenthood
of the persons concerned. So far as such a
measure was intended to prevent the sale
of bogus or harmful contraceptives, it would
obviously be welcomed by eugenists; and
there can be no doubt where our sympathies
lie in the prosecutions which are already
brought under the general law against fraud,
occasionally in respect of worthless contraceptives, but more frequently against the
fraudulent vendors of supposed abortifacients. In many of these cases the charge
of fraud is an alternative to a charge of

supplying drugs for the purpose of inducing
abortion.

Abortion :
Abortion is a crime which is widely prevalent in fact and the subject of a good deal
EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE ENGLISH CRIMINAL LAW

of confusion of thought in controversy, on
the part both of its bitterest opponents and
of its defenders. The former stress the
point that its possibility is an encouragement to immorality, which is no doubt
true. The advocates of legalizing what is
now known in popular speech as an “‘ illegal
operation ’’ and which is, in fact, the one
operation commonly performed which is
specifically forbidden by statute, point out
that it is merely doing on one occasion
what sterilization would effect for good
and all.

Both these points of view omit a: most
vital consideration, the rights of the unborn
child. Such a phrase may seem inapplicable
to the first weeks after conception, and it
may be argued metaphysically that a being
which is not yet conscious cannot have
rights, just as it is maintained by some
theologians that animals can have no rights.
But this is a mere matter of words, for the
duties of individuals are not necessarily
dependent on the existence of some correlative rights possessed by other individuals. An illegal operation, that is to say,
an offence against section 58 of the Offences
Against the Person Act, 1861, does destroy
a physically existing thing which in the
ordinary course of nature would develop
into a baby. It is entirely different from
the imaginary children-which might exist
but for the use of contraceptives by their
possible parents. They are a mere figment
of the imagination and are metaphysically
in the same position as the unborn children
which figure in Chancery proceedings for
the interpretation of wills, not because they
have rights but because it is necessary to
ascertain what rights they would have if
they were to come into existence. No one
can logically oppose contraception in the
interests of children, unless, like the Mormons or the Hindus, he believes that it is
a moral duty to bring into the world as
many children as possible. On the other
hand, few people would maintain that
parents have a moral right up to the moment
before its birth to destroy the organism
which they have originated, any more than
they would maintain that parents have a

109

right to commit infanticide—a right well
recognized in antiquity and among many
primitive peoples—after the child is born.
(The modern statutory crime of infanticide
is another matter, being an amelioration
of the law caused by the popular revulsion
at sentences of death being pronounced with
no prospect of théir being executed on
unfortunate girls who had killed their
illegitimate babies.) |

It was formerly an anomaly of the law
that, though abortion was a crime and the
killing of a newly born child was murder,
there was an intermediate period during
which it might be destroyed with impunity.
I have never discovered whether this was a
mere legal curiosity or a defect which permitted a number of unwanted children to
be got rid of : the Infant Life (Preservation)
Act has been on the statute book since
1929, and I have no recollection of any prosecution being brought under it.

Although the law of England may seem
logical in fixing the moment of conception
as that from which any attempt to produce
a miscarriage is unlawful, it was anciently
only from the time that a child became
viable or was quickened that it was against
the law to interfere with it, since this was
the point at which it was believed to receive
an immortal soul and thus become a human
being. It was doubtless for this reason
that until 1931 sentence of death could be
passed on an expectant mother unless she
could show that she was “‘ quick with child,”
that is to say, the child had reached a
certain stage in its development; mere
pregnancy was not sufficient. She could, in
fact, be sufficiently pregnant to be liable to
penal servitude for life if she took steps to
terminate this condition, but not sufficiently
prégnant to save herself from execution if
she were found guilty of murder. She was
also, in theory, liable to be brought back
and hanged after her child was born.

On this point the law has been brought
more into accord with civilized ideas. So far
as the prohibition of abortion is concerned,
the suggestion has often been made that
we should readopt, though for other reasons,
the medieval law that it should not be an
IIo

offence to procure a woman’s miscarriage
until the expected child has become
quickened. It is impossible to say whether
such an alteration in the law would be
eugenic or dysgenic. Although it would
make it permissible to terminate the pregnancy of women unlikely to produce sane
and healthy children, this would be equally
legal in other cases ; it would, presumably,
be for the mother, not the doctor, to decide
whether it was to be. done, and it does not
necessarily follow that the most dysgenic
parents would be the most unwilling to
have children. On the contrary, the worst
children are likely to come into the world
anyhow (unless compulsory powers are given
to the doctors or the State to terminate
pregnancy in the interests of the State), for
if their mothers are of a sufficiently low type,
neither they nor anyone else will be concerned
to procure their miscarriage.

There are more limited proposals for
alteration in the abortion laws which are
more obviously eugenic in their tendencies.
There is, for example, the proposal sponsored
by this Socrety that abortion should be permitted in the case of children begotten as
the result of rape or incest. This proposal
came into prominence some years ago as the
result of the trial of Mr. Aleck Bourne at
the Old Bailey—a case which, despite the
publicity it received, does not appear to
have made any great alteration in the law
and certainly none of direct importance to
eugenists, since the question at issue was
how far dangerous a pregnancy need be
to a woman’s health to warrant a doctor in
terminating it.

Nobody can think it desirable that children
should be brought into the world as the
result of rape or incest; but that such
pregnancies should be terminated does not
necessarily follow. In a sense the two cases
are dissimilar. The child which results from
incest is likely to start life ill-endowed, but
there is no reason why its mother should
necessarily feel antipathy for its father or
a desire to get rid of it. The woman who is
pregnant as a result of rape may well desire
to destroy her unborn child; but, so far
as I know, there is no reason why the circum
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

stances of its conception should prevent its
flourishing and there is not necessarily any
reason why the father should be a person
whose children would be of a dysgenic type.
Nevertheless, as a practical question, almost
everyone will sympathize with any effort
made to terminate the pregnancy of a woman
in this condition, if she so desires it. Personally, I do not believe this proposed
alteration in the law is workable. None of
its advocates have suggested who is to decide,
or how, whether the woman has in fact been
raped ; it will clearly be impossible to wait
for the result of a prosecution, if one can be
brought, and it would be very hard on the
woman if she were to be bound by its result.
The problem of women who have been
raped and become pregnant is one that, like
many others, can be left to the good sense
of doctors and policemen. No one is likely
to prosecute a doctor for terminating thé

' pregnancy of a girl who has been raped,

unless he asks for it, as Mr. Bourne almost
literally did.

Another proposed amendment in the
law which cannot be ignored in a paper
dealing with eugenics is that which would
permit the termination of pregnancy in the
case of the issue of completely dysgenic
parents. That such a measure would be
eugenic in its effects goes without saying,
and one supposes that almost any doctor,
unless he had strong religious opinions to
the contrary, would feel himself justified in
practice in doing this, for no one can wish
to help to bring into the world a child which
is mentally defective or hopelessly deformed.
But to frame such a measure is a practical
task of considerable difficulty. Assuming that
abortion is to remain a crime, we cannot
enact a measure which would provide a
defence in any case where the woman was
prepared to swear she had become pregnant
by a man who was defective or otherwise
undesirable. Even if we found it necessary
to confine the inquiry to the female—and in
practice the number of women who allow
themselves to become pregnant by mentally
defective men is not large—we cannot give
what in a sense is a privileged status to
women who, while perfectly responsible for
EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE ENGLISH CRIMINAL LAW

their actions, can allege that they have
heritable defects which stop them having
desirable children. It would appear, therefore, that the only practicable alteration in
the law in this direction would be a permission to medical men to terminate preg
nancy in the case of mentally defective.

women. That such women would not become
pregnant if the present law were observed
is an irrelevant consideration, but it may be
generally agreed that it would be better to
permit, and arrange for, the sterilization of
such women than to legalize the termination
of each pregnancy as it occurred. In any
case, legalization of abortion in mental
defectives would require elaborate safeguards
such as have been suggested by this Society
in respect of the sterilization of mental
defectives.
cient to enact that it was to be permissible
with the patient’s consent when in many
cases it would be doubtful whether she was
capable of giving a rational consent.

I have spent a long time on the subject of
abortion. Everyone must dislike it ; everyone must regard it, apart from anything
else, as the result of a failure in contraceptive
methods. But it is immensely prevalent,
since in numberless cases the only alternative
appears to be something worse. The object
of the authorities seems to be generally to
punish those who do it as an occupation
rather than those who resort to them, and
to punish with particular severity those who
perform the operation badly; indeed, in
many such cases they are convicted of manslaughter, the unfortunate woman having
died.

Bigamy

Another crime which cannot fail to interest us as eugenists is bigamy, though, in
the strictest sense of the word, it has nothing
to do with eugenics. A woman is as likely
to bear desirable children to a bigamous
husband as to her lawful husband, and
bigamy is therefore neither eugenic nor
dysgenic. It is true that there are many
bigamists who ought not to have a family
of children, let alone two or three families,
though they are unlikely to be deformed or

It would obviously be insuffi- .

Iitl

in the ordinary sense defective, for they
must be capable of exercising some attraction on normal women. But it is idle to
consider the antecedents of children irrespective of the circumstances in which they are
brought up and it cannot be good that
children should be born of irregular unions.
But much that is,said about bigamy shows
a_ considerable confusion of thought. As
long as a man is encouraged and subsidized
by the State to divorce his wife in order to
start a family with another woman, and as
long as he is allowed to leave his wife and
family without a divorce and have children
by a woman to whom he is not married, I
cannot see that he makes it much worse by
going through a bogus marriage with the
second woman. One would not think much
of the hypothetical woman who would
marry a man who had deserted his wife and
family and been divorced, but would not
live with the same man in identical circumstances, except for not’having been married
at the register office. Circumstances alter
cases and bigamy varies in gravity from a
mere technical breach of law to an offence
of real gravity—though it is an exaggeration
for judges to say it is equivalent to rape.
Some of the biggest blackguards one ever
sees in a dock are bigamists among other
things. But most bigamists are fairly harmless people ; the troubles in which they are
actors are not soluble by alterations in the
criminal law. Female bigamists raise less
problems than male ones, for the quantity
or quality of a woman’s children are not
likely to be affected by the question whether
they are begotten by one or more husbands.
Sexual Offences

I now come to sexual offences in the strict
sense of the word, and if I should seem to
devote considerable time to them, I should
point out, besides their obvious eugenic
significance, that of all the persons charged
with offences of sufficient gravity to be
tried at Assizes, about one quarter are
accused of sexual offences.. The acts with
which they are charged can be put into
three groups: those which constitute a
wrong to some individual, those which are
ITZ

punished by the State on the ground that
they are grossly immoral, and those which
there is some reasonable ground for making
penal, though they do no physical harm to
any existing individual. The first group
may be briefly dealt with. Acts of violence
must be suppressed in any civilized state,
whether they are concerned, or not, with
sex. Rape and indecent assault are part
of the general law against crime. Only in
a very few cases of rape is there any direct
effect on posterity, and with this problem
I have already dealt, though all such crimes
are likely to have a deleterious effect on
the victims by producing in them a definite
repugnance to marriage and parenthood.
This is an additional reason, if any were
required, for their suppression.

Homosexuality

Turning to the second group, the English
law regarding what are often called “ unnatural offences’’ (though the phrase is
obviously inaccurate) is not in its entirety
defensible by any rational person, for it
has no consistent basis. By this I do not
mean merely that it is not the function of
the criminal law to suppress immorality,
but that there is no rational basis on which
the particular acts in question are made
crimes. Shortly, it may be said that any
sexual acts between males are crimes ;. that
no sexual acts between females are; and
that of sexual acts between persons of opposite sexes, the vast majority are not crimes,
but a few are. The distinction between the
sexes is not necessarily illogical, for the
physical difference between the sexes may
be said to justify it. I am, however, certain
that the penalizing of homosexuality between
males is bad eugenically and in every other
way. The argument is sometimes advanced
that but for this law men would take to
homosexual practices and not marry or
have children. This: seems to me an
absurdity. The number of men who could
be affected in this way by the criminal law
is negligible. On the other hand, a conviction for homosexuality is the one thing
likely to brand a man for ever and, especially
if he is sent to prison, to confirm him in

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the same practices which he would otherwise have given up. Nearly twenty years
ago I saw two young men standing in the
dock at Bury Assizes. They were workingclass lads of good character: one was a
serving soldier, one was happily married.
After they had committed one act of immorality together, one chose for some
unexplained reason to confess to the police ;
the other was questioned and admitted it ;
both were charged, both pleaded guilty and
were sent to gaol. I have often pondered
over this sentence, which cannot conceivably
have done anything but harm to everyone
concerned, though it may have done something to deter the people of Suffolk from
confessing their sins to the local police.
Many of the men one has seen charged
with these offences had been long married ;
others were young men of the kind I have
just mentioned. With a very few exceptions,
those brought up on this kind of charge are
not of a peculiar or advancedly effeminate
type. Even though one knows the offences
with which they are charged, it is impossible
to see anything in their appearance to distinguish them from the others in the dock
or, indeed, in the jury-box. ©

Even if we are to have a law against
homosexuality there is no reason why it
should depend on the exact physical act:
done and on nothing else, whether it is
punishable with penal servitude for life or
merely two years’ hard labour ; nor is there
any reason, eugenic or otherwise, why it
should be possible to charge homosexuals
with the special offence of importuning for
an immoral purpose rather than under the
general Jaw against homosexuality, except
that this enables the police to get men sent
to gaol by the magistrate, instead of being
tried by a jury which would probably let
them off—importuning being the only offence
known to the law and subject to serious
punishment for which there is no right of
trial by jury. This appears to be due to a
<historical accident. A Royal Commission,
to whose attention it was brought, made the
fatuous recommendation that as there were
not many cases—which is untrue—nothing
need be done.
EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE

I do not suggest that lesbianism, which
was fairly recently discussed in the law
courts in a slander action, should be made
criminal. I would only point out that there
is more ground for doing this on eugenic
grounds than for punishing male homosexuals, for I think it is generally accepted
that women who adopt these practices are
unlikely to get married or have children.
Not only is this ignored by the criminal
law, but a married man whose wife is taken
away from him by another woman is left
practically without redress in the divorce
court.

Considering the importance which the
English law attaches to exact physical details
in matters of sex—I have in mind not only
the criminal law but the law as to divorce
and nullity of marriage—it is not surprising
that while, generally speaking, an adult
man and woman are permitted to have
sexual intercourse as much as they like and
in any way they like without interference
by the State, one particular form of sexual
connection is punishable with penal servitude for life. It is immaterial whether the
woman is the man’s wife or a prostitute or
anyone else. There are few prosecutions for
this astonishing offence, though at one time
it showed signs of becoming popular as a
blackmailing weapon in society divorces.
It is an obvious absurdity and the law is
only not a public laughing-stock, because
good taste, the Lord Chamberlain’s department, and our very strict laws against
indecent publications prevent it from being
brought to the attention of the public.
Incest 
As a lawyer concerned to defend the
system which he is paid to administer, I
turn more gladly to the third group of sexual
offences, some of which are, indeed, the only
offences on the statute book which can be
regarded as having a eugenic origin or
purpose.

Principal among these is incest. It is
surprising and, indeed, it is really a historical accident that this was not made
criminal till 1908, and I believe that the
Act was passed largely on eugenic grounds.

ENGLISH CRIMINAL LAW II3
There are a number of prosecutions. In
most of them the accused is the father of
the girl, occasionally the grandfather. There
is generally very little to be said for such
defendants. The girls are often fairly young
and there is often a considerable element of
intimidation, though there may be no
possibility of getting a conviction for rape,
and the girl may be over the statutory age
of consent. I do not ever remember a case
in which the woman was also charged, nor
any case in which it would have been right
that she should be charged. Of the other
relationships prohibited by the statute, I
know of no prosecution for incest between
a mother and her son. There are a fair
number of cases of incest between brother
and sister, in some cases both being charged.
It is generally accepted that such unions
must be dysgenic, but I do not know whether
this is scientifically established. Assuming
that it is true as a general proposition, there
is nothing inherently improbable in the argument that, since in very few cases brother
and sister feel any sexual desire for one
another, it may well be that in the few
cases where this exists there must be individual factors which might also operate
to prevent the children being abnormal. So
far as I know, the only real evidence is to
be derived either from poor law or criminal
records, or from the history of certain famous
families. Several royal lines are instanced
as showing defects due to inbreeding. On
the other hand, there is the notable example
of the Ptolemies, among whom it was usual
for the reigning monarch to marry his sister.
We may not have adequate information as
to their capabilities, but since they retained
for three centuries, against foreign and
domestic enemies, a throne to which their
founder had no title whatever, and during
this period Egypt led the world not only in
commerce but in art and literature, it is
impossible to suppose that they were de
enerates. One cannot, however, instance

leopatra, who was the last of the line to
reign and who was a woman of incontestable
ability and strength of character, since she
was not, so far as I have been able to ascertain, herself seriously inbred. Evidence from
114

police and poor law authorities is misleading,
since many of the persons accused of incest
are of very poor stock and likely in any
event to have inferior children; equally,
one must discount statements to the effect
that the child born was normal, since the
standard adopted is probably not high. It

may be added that many actual cases of

incest’ between brother and sister are due
less to any special attraction between them
than to close proximity in slum conditions.
Certainly, as a practical question, no eugenist
would wish to amend the law against incest
except by strengthening it. The most obvious
alteration would be to prohibit sexual connection between uncle and niece, which is not
at present a crime. The Act of Parliament
is concerned strictly with blood relationship :
it takes no account of the incestuous adultery
—for example, between a man and his sisterin-law—which was so important in canon
law and English divorce law, but is, I suppose, quite unimportant eugenically, since
it is only by a theological fiction that it is
incestuous.

Offences Against Young Girls |

I can pass briefly over offences against
girls under the age of consent, which are so
important to Assize Court - practitioners.
Actually, there are two ages of consent.
Connection with a girl under the age of
thirteen is a crime punishable as heavily as
rape, to which, indeed, it closely approximates. No one will sympathize with men
found guilty of this crime, and the effect on
the girls is likely to be deplorable. It is
otherwise with the offence, a much less
serious one, of having carnal knowledge of a
girl between the ages of thirteen and sixteen.
The almost incredible badness of the draftsmanship of the statutes relating to this
offence has given rise to so many problems
and absurdities that it is difficult for a practising barrister not to approach a discussion
of it in a spirit of buffoonery. It is also
somewhat curious that for many years after
sixteen had become the age of consent, and,
in fact, till 19209, girls could be legally married
at the age of twelve, an anomaly only rational
on the basis that marriage is a less important

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

decision than fornication, or that marriage
is so excellent a state that it does not matter
by whom or in what circumstances it is
undertaken. For the benefit of those who
have not attended criminal courts, I should
mention that the culprits charged with this
crime are not the wealthy roués of sensational fiction ; occasionally they are elderly
villagers who ought to know better, but in
the majority of cases they are village lads
who were possibly quite unaware that there
is an age of consent. Quite often they are
genuinely fond of the girls and anxious to
marry them. The latter also are not the
innocent little victims of seduction, but
strapping young country girls who have
thoroughly enjoyed themselves. It is fair
to say that the judges administer this branch
of the law in a reasonable and sympathetie
spirit.

It is difficult to say what, as eugenists,
we should make of this crime. Presumably,
by the time a girl is capable of having a
baby she is physically old enough to do so
and there is no reason to suppose that thebabies, the occurrence of which generally
brings these cases to light, are worse than
other babies; but taking eugenics in the
broad sense in which I have already used
the word, it is deplorable that a girl should’
have an illegitimate child before she has had
a chance of getting married. The difficulty
arises from the fact that women are
physically able to have children before they
are capable, quite apart from possible
economic difficulties, of maintaining the
position of a married woman in a modern
state. In the Victorian age public opinion
saw nothing wrong in the marriage of girls
of sixteen, and this was not inconsistent with
the little that was then expected of women
in the way of intellectual capacity or
responsibility. It is certainly desirable that
the age of consent should be observed, but
it is obvious that in many cases it is not;
a prosecution cannot ever improve matters,
except as a deterrent to others, and a sentence of imprisonment is likely to make
things worse for everyone concerned. To
raise the age of consent—which is sometimes
advocated—would be calamitous, however
EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE ENGLISH CRIMINAL LAW

strongly we may feel that sixteen and nine
months is in practice too low an age for a
girl to start having children.

Intercourse With Mental Defectives

More important to eugenists, but far less
important to practising lawyers, is the offence
of having connection with a mentally defective woman. I do not know how prevalent
this crime is, but there are few prosecutions
and still fewer convictions. Probably this
law, like many laws about sex, is not
generally enforced, and the difficulties of
doing so are obvious. This is much to be
regretted. If this offence were to be stamped
out, there would be no real need, except in
order to permit them to marry one another,
for the sterilization of mental defectives
which this Society has so persistently advocated, for the number of cases in which
normal women allow themselves to become
pregnant by mentally defective men must
be negligible.

Conclusion

I must not embark on a disquisition on the
alterations in the law of sexual offences
which we may expect or wish to see. I will
only say this: that, as eugenists, we should
like to see the end of two evils—persons who
to their knowledge have venereal disease
having connection with other persons and
thus spreading the disease, and coloured men
having children by white women. (The
opposite form of miscegenation is practically unknown in England.) It is interesting
to note that an attempt was made in the
Victorian era to secure a conviction for an
act of the former type, but it was held not
to be an offence under the existing law.

I should point out that of racial miscegenation I am speaking rather as a criminal
lawyer than a eugenist. It is not scientifically
established that children so produced are of
an inferior type, but as a practical matter
one cannot wish to see their number increased in modern England. Apart from
offences of other kinds, such as living on
prostitution, infanticide and crimes of violence, which arise from black men living
with white women, it is obvious that the

II5

children of such unions start life under very
unfavourable auspices. There is no country
to which they can go but England and in
this country they generally sink to the lowest.
level of the population ; the men are likely
to take to crime, the girls will almost
certainly become prostitutes. It has been
remarked that the half-caste children of
yellow men have a better chance in life
owing to their appearance less obviously
marking them off from their fellow-citizens.
I remember once seeing one of them giving
evidence at the Old Bailey. If she had not
curled her hair and painted her face in the
vain attempt to look European, she would
have been a very pretty girl of a Mongolian
type: nevertheless, she was an East-End
prostitute. Of course no such disadvantages
attend persons of mixed origin but of
European stock who, having white skins,
can pass as ordinary Englishmen if necessary.
They are not particularly likely to get into
trouble with the police unless the outbreak
of a European war puts them in the unfortunate position of having a foot in both
camps. My remarks are applicable only to
the children of those who can fairly be
described as coloured people.

I am far from saying that I advocate the
passing of penal laws on these subjects.
Apart from the difficulty of proving the
offences and a general unwillingness to create
new crimes, it will be readily seen that either
proposal would provoke acute controversy
on other than eugenic grounds. One would
not be surprised at either proposal being
put forward; but from past experience of
the legislature I believe that it is more
likely, if it strengthens the existing laws
against sexual crime, to do so on what are
regarded as moral grounds and probably
with bad results.

I have now touched upon all the serious
crimes which can be regarded as having
any direct eugenic significance. They are
only a few of the crimes upon the statute
book and the charges brought in respect of
them are not numerous compared with the
total number of criminal prosecutions ; but
they are for the most part offences which
loom large in the eyes of a practising lawVer,
116

because the law, rightly or wrongly, treats
them with greater gravity, though it does
not necessarily punish them with heavier
penalties, than the general run of cases

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

involving money or property. It thus comes
about that they form a large proportion of
the business of the most important criminal
courts.

CURRENT NOTES ON DEMOGRAPHY
By D. V. GLASS

1. Population Movements in France during
the War.

URING the occupation of France,
| «= customary annual publication

of current vital statistics (the
volumes entitled Statistique du Mouvement
de la Population) was abandoned. Instead,
statisticians turned their attention to historical demography and produced, under the
auspices of the Statistique Générale, a series
of admirable studies on the historical aspects
of fertility, mortality, naturalization and
migration.* Now, however, the French
Statistical Office is endeavouring to make
up for lost time, and the new volume of
Statistique du Mouvement de la Populationt
provides comprehensive data for the years
1939-42 inclusive. The object of this note is
to draw attention to some of the more
important points brought out by the new
statistics.

The general trend of replacement is shown
by the following table (Table I) of official
reproduction rates.{ From 1935 to 1939
these rates follow a course similar to that

* These studies are [P. Depoid], Reproduction Neitte
en Europe depuis l’Origine des Statistiques de lV’ Etat
Civil, Paris, 1941; [P. Delaporte], Evolution de la
Mortalité en Europe depuis VOrigine des Statistiques
de l’ Etat Civil, Paris, 1941; [P. Depoid], Les Naturali.sations en Fvance (1870-2940), Paris 1942; and [?]
Mouvements Migratoives entre la France et I’ Etranger,
Paris, 1943. .

t Paris, 1945. Unless otherwise stated, references
are to this publication. The present notes were
‘actually written on the basis of the corrected page
proofs. At the time of going to press, the published
vor itself had not yet been received.

P. 11.

TABLE I
G.R.R. N.R.R.
1935-7 1°00 0°87
19306... IOI 0°88
1937... 1°02 0°89
1938..—m 1:04 0-91 v
1939... 1-06 0°93
1940... 0:97 0:82
1941... 0-90 0-77
1942... 0-98 0°85

shown by many other Western countries, a
general upswing which may have been connected with increases in employment. The
fall in 1940 and 1941 is comparable with,
that experienced in England and Wales, and
so is the rise in 1942, though the fall is
greater and the rise less in France. It will
be remembered that both the fall and the
rise in France after 1940 took place while
the male population was substantially depleted. In the 87 Departments, according to
the official estimate, the male population
fell by just over 2 millions between January
Ist, 1939, and December 31st, 1942, the
bulk of the fall occurring in the first half of
1940.* Thus, as Gasc pointed out (cf.
EUGENICS REVIEW, 1945, 37, p. 62), the fall
in fertility in 1941 was really less, and the rise
in 1942 greater, than the figures suggest.
It is officially estimated that about 800,000
married men were out of France in 1940,
and more than 600,000 in 1941. The following table shows the comparative legitimate
fertility rates (per 1,000 married women
aged 15-49 years) calculated on all married
women as well as on those married women

*P. 5. This includes a net figure of 1-03 million

prisoners of war and 0-31 million French workers in
Germany as of December 31st, 1942.
