REVIEWS OF BOOKS

CONTRACEPTION

Fryer, Peter. The Birth Controllers. London,
1965. Secker and Warburg. Pp. 269+ Pp. 115
Notes, Bibliography and Index. Price 42s.

A BOOK SUCH AS this has been long awaited,
for it contains accurate and readily available
information covering the whole of the history
and development of conception control (inaccurately dubbed “birth control’ at a special
meeting convened to decide on a telling title for
the movement) together with an _ extensive
bibliography, innumerable interesting notes and
lively descriptions of the actors who have played
their part in this most human of dramas.
Although perhaps “martyrs” would be a more
apt word than “actors”. Too little do we appreciate the enormous benefits we all enjoy to-day
as a result of their sacrifices. Moreover, the time
has now come when the printed word need not
conform to extreme delicacy of expression, with
a result—particularly in a subject such as this—
which is especially refreshing. In the past a considerable amount of personal research was
needed even to discover, for instance, exactly
what it was that John Humphrey Noyes advocated and practised at his Oneida Community,
or just what it was that the Reverend Joseph
Townsend recommended to Jeremy Bentham.
And it will be news to many to learn that Annie
Besant (“rhymes with pleasant’) gave birth
prematurely to her daughter Mabel as the result
of a blow from her clergyman husband while
she was pleading with him to restrict their
family—and in this connection it is noteworthy
that it was the better-off and better educated
classes which first adopted family restriction.
The poorer classes regarded babies as “‘savings
banks” because of the fact that they became
breadwinners, working in the mills, from the
earliest possible age. Not until the Workshop
Regulation Act of 1867 did it become illegal to
employ a child below the age of eight, and from
eight to thirteen they were only allowed to work
half time. Then the Education Acts of 1870 and
1876 compelled parents to send their children
to school between the ages of five and fourteen
and no employment was allowed under the age
of ten. It was not until these Acts began to be

felt that family limitation had any appeal to the
poorer classes.

Another good point with this book is that the
author has not allowed the large amount of
research, which has clearly been necessary, to
dull his sense of humour—which indeed is
almost Rabelaisian in places.

Could such courageous and high-minded
pioneers as Dr. Charles Knowlton, in America,
and our own Francis Place, Dale Owen,
Bradlaugh, Annie Besant and many others have
seen this book they would feel that their efforts
and sufferings have at last received honourable
notice. Let us hope that it is not too late for
Margaret Sanger—now in her ninth decade—to
read of and recall her former tribulations and
her triumphs and reflect again on the told and
untold misery and suffering directly attributable
to the life and work of the misguided and infamous Anthony Comstock.

Cc. W. USHER

Draper, Elizabeth. Birth Control in the Modern
World. A Pelican Original. Harmondsworth,
1965. Penguin. Pp. 332. Price Ss.

IN THIS BOOK the author discusses all aspects of
birth control, stressing its essential and interrelated importance to society as the humane
solution to population pressures and to individual happiness and well-being.

There are four parts. The first, “Introducing
the Problem’’, poses the question why control?
The second, “Reproduction and Control’,
comprises three chapters—sex, sexuality and
eugenic selection, infertility and associated disorders, and, lastly, methods of control which are
categorized as “mystical” and “rational” and
explained in detail and at some length.

The book is sub-titled “The Role of the
Individual in Population Control” and this is
emphasized in part three which, under the heading “Society and the Individual” discusses interactions, education and attitudes both of religions
and of states—‘‘the two great authoritative influences in birth control”. The fourth part,
“Practice and Prospects”’, includes a description
of the search for new methods and an assessment
of the extent to which contraception is used.
The population problem is discussed and the

35
