CONTROL OF MENTAL DISEASE

The Functions of Experts and Poor Law
By the Reverend J. C. PRINGLE

(Secretary of the Charity Organization Society)

about the Report of the Mental Deficiciency Committee* that a writer who
wishes to add anything to the discussion
must say bluntly, ‘‘ Yes, but I want to say
something, too: do let me do so!’’ ‘The
present writer desires in particular to shout
out something very loud to his fellow members in the Eugenics Society. It is from the
point of view of the practical social worker
—extremely practical—immersed in it every
day and all day, and with lamentably little
time to acquire even a reasonable academic
equipment—that he craves their attention.
Remembering the tradition of the
Eugenics Society and the master-thought of

2 much has been said and written

its existence, what is its rdle in the crisis—

for it is a crisis—produced by the appearance of this Report and its not too badly
founded statement that we are breeding
to-day twice as many mental deficients as
we were less than a generation ago? ‘The
importance of this question lies in the
fewness of the groups on this island who
necessarily take any serious notice of the
incident at all.

There is an important body, the Central
Association for Mental Welfare, with its
quarterly publication and its annual conference, which, being at least technically a
voluntary body, can write to the Press and
carry on propaganda if so minded. It is,
however, rightly and naturally dominated
by representatives of local authorities, and,
still more, by the question of what it is that
local authorities, taken as a whole, ought to
do. ‘The C.A.M.W. has resolved to utilize
such energy, and such articulateness as it
possesses in a particular direction, viz.,

* It is assumed that the reader has read Mr. Eldon
Moore’s article on the Report which appeared in the
last issue of this REVIEW.

171

by all and any means to secure that local
authorities shall provide more beds for
mental deficients, and that every kind of
pressure shall be brought to bear upon
those local authorities who are backward in
this matter. Having so decided, the
C.A.M.W. is particularly concerned to tell
all persons with red herrings to keep off.
In a practical world they feel that it is right
even to suppress lines of thought and
inquiry which might conceivably give a
conceivable member of a conceivable local
authority a chance of moving for delay in
building the suggested new institution till
the said line of inquiry had been somewhat
further pursued. With the officials of local
authorities who are members of the
C.A.M.W., with the Board of Control whose
duty it is to put pressure upon the local
authorities, this is a matter of immediate
urgency, of getting certain spending resolutions through finance committees, and of
riding off individual obstructionists but too
well known to them.

The function of the Eugenics Society, as
I conceive it, is an utterly different one. It
has expressed its sympathy with the
C.A.M.W. in its struggles, and may well
abstain from expressing any doubts about
all these bricks and mortar, but it should
surely then proceed to the activity its own
tradition demands of it, the formation of
opinion. The Society exists first of all to
think in a clear, consistent, and informed
manner, and secondly, to disseminate these
thoughts. An example may serve to indicate the sort of divergence there must inevitably be between us and the C.A.M.W.
At that Association’s last Annual Conference but one, Mrs. Hume Pinsent, speaking
from the platform on behalf of the Board of
Control, deprecated the advocacy of sterili172

zation (a possible rival of extended institutional accommodation) on the grounds that
it must inevitably result in a great increase
in venereal disease, since men would know
that these sterilized women ran no risk of
offspring. From the point of view of Mrs.
Pinsent’s campaign for more beds to make
possible more segregation it was ‘‘a hit, a
hit, a palpable hit,’’ but as a piece of clear,
consistent, informed thinking, it is perhaps
hardly so brilliant. The threat of a greater
incidence of venereal disease is always a
first-class method of driving reasoning out
of court by substituting terror. When
reason is allowed to skulk back on to the
field, it observes that the kind of man who,
being infected with venereal disease, gratifies himself at the expense of a mentally
deficient woman, is not the kind of man
who troubles much about her having offspring. ‘The instances which might occur
—everything is possible—are reasons, we
submit, for greater efficiency in the campaign for the elimination of venereal disease, not for ‘ bulldosing’ the people who
ought to be thinking clearly, consistently,
and informedly, about sterilization.

An American ‘writer in a fine peroration
to a volume on social services lately asked
whether there was any prospect of man
laying aside his secular mysticism and
applying his intelligence to the elimination
of eliminable hindrances to the progress of
human society. M. Tarde, at least, would
retort by arguing that man is not so much
an incorrigible mystic as an incorrigible
mimic, and that not because he enjoys the
labour of imitation, but because he fears to
be detected doing or being something different from his neighbours. ‘So immense a
change has come over the habits of the
Western peoples in the matter of offspring
that even crude explanations are not out of
court. During a visit to the Continent only
a month ago I was informed by first-class
authorities, speaking of Germany and
Scandinavia, that birth control had now
spread to all classes. It was long since
adopted by the peasantry of France.

May it not fairly be suggested that a contributory factor was a change of attitude

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

among the leaders of society and its progressive imitation by the other social
grades? While the leaders took a mystical
view (that still taken by the Roman Catholic
Church and by the Japanese, to mention two
educated groups), the people followed them.
The leaders gradually became rationalist on
this question, and the people are following
them—at different speeds, the British
always well behind—but following (I can
support this from among my own wageearning acquaintance). 
THE VALUE OF PROPAGANDA

I do not mean that the bulk of individual
couples are figuring out the wisdom or unwisdom of large families. I think they are
doing what they see their ‘ betters’ do. I
am hopeful even about the least cultured
grade. Among them there is a ferocious
tyranny of the street. If a woman diverges
from their code, they mete out punishment
which is usually corporal. When the time
comes that large families are barred by that
code, large families will not happen. Nor is
this only a question of imitation. It is also
one of propaganda. A tuberculous man,
subsisting at the public expense, a decent
fellow, claimed the other day that as he was
unable to serve his country by earning
wages, he had done what little he could by
begetting six children—an obvious result of
propaganda. We are not under any illusion
as to the proportionate part which reason,
or knowledge either, will play in human.
affairs. We apprehend that it is likely to
be very small.

What we are out for is first to make it as
good as we can, and then as:large as we can.
We want to persuade everybody in any class
who dares to think for himself, to think
hard how he, and we all, can secure on this
island a better race. And we have hopes
that the imitative mass, in all classes, will
slowly but surely follow them. We doubt
whether many people will abstain from
mating because there is doubt as to the
soundness of their progeny. We doubt if
they would be wise to do so. We want to
help them in every possible way to exercise
choice as to whether their mating results in
CONTROL OF MENTAL DISEASE

”

any progeny, and if in any, in what
number. We are tempted to hope that a
fashion can be set up of exercising this
choice with a full sense of responsibility,
and that this exercise of choice may spread
through the community.

We foresee a day when it may require
far more courage for a mentally deficient,
tubercular, or syphilitic waterside labourer
and his mate to bring progeny into the
world than for a similarly afflicted pair of
millionaires ; for the simple reason that once
the code of the waterside goes against such
reproduction, as the code of the educated,
so far as they have or obey any, went
against it generations ago, it will be very
largely obeyed.

VOLUNTARY EUGENICS

A friend of mine who has now attained
eminence in the medical profession, was
brought up in a remote village of SouthWestern Ireland. He assures me that the
code of the village was a system of voluntary eugenics. The young people selected
their mates, but none would have dared in
choosing to disregard aptitude for the production of healthy offspring. I venture to
envisage as the goal of the Eugenics Society
not an army of officials, lay and medical, inveigling certain types into mental and
general hospitals and there sterilizing them
by the latest methods; but a population
making the choice for or against parentage,
on grounds, so far as may be, supplied by
this Society, and putting that choice into
effect with all the assistance available,
whether medical or surgical.

Bricks and mortar are, with us, clearly a
side issue. Like the man who bet he could
eat a calf, I must leave ‘‘ These ’ere veal
pasties and start on that there calf ’’—in
this case the Mental Deficiency Report.
Before doing so, the point can perhaps be
best elucidated by a reference to the works
of the late M. Emile Zola.

The exercise of choice in regard to parenthood would of course be an economic revolution on an infinitely vaster scale than it
would be a revolution in regard to mental

173

deficiency. It would bring into industry, on
co-operative lines, the advance in welfare
which the great Turkish sultans accomplished by the method of janissaries—the
selective collection of the amount of rising
generation you require for a particular purpose. Zola believed that what really irked
the French workman was that he could not
give full rein to the procreative instinct
while the capitalist could. By means of his
own particular brand of socialism, Zola
promised the removal of this embargo (cf.
Travail).

We do not believe M. Zola can deliver the
goods along the lines proposed, but we
believe medical science aiding and abetting
eugenics propaganda can deliver incomparably better goods, a consciously progressive
human community.

THE SOCIAL CRITERION OF DEFECT

Now, to correlate these crude and simple
ideas with the Report : Principal Conclusion
No. I (Part III, p. 96) is that ‘‘ the real
criterion of mental deficiency is a social
one.’”’ Here at once is substituted for tests
as per schedule by the school medical officer
a decision by the neighbours, by those who
have to live their life conditioned by an environment very familiar to them, that so-andso is ‘‘ no good ”’ in this environment, that
his or her offspring will probably be similar,
or that the first baby or the first two babies
are ‘‘ no good ”’ and that it is not desirable
there should be any more.

The next findings which arrest our attention occur in Section 5 (Part III, p. 99).
We are told that the ascertained incidence
is twice as high as that ascertained twenty
years ago. ‘‘ The increase is probably due
in the main to greater thoroughness and
improved methods of ascertainment.’’ They
go on (b) to tell us that the incidence is
6.49 per 1,000 in urban and 10.66 in rural
areas, and to add (c) that of all adult defectives receiving public assistance, 75 per
cent. were being relieved by Poor Law
authorities. ‘‘ These facts alone [i.e., the
large proportion of the work being done by
Poor Law authorities], in the Committee’s
174

opinion, render essential a modification of
the statutory provisions relating to the mentally defective if any continuity and unity
of care and control are to be secured .. .”’
{p. 100).

The Committee sat for two years, but it
did not include any officer or member of a
Poor Law authority or any person reputed
to be acquainted with the operation of the
Poor Laws. The Royal Commission on the
Feeble Minded, appointed in 1904, whose
ascertainments afford the basis of comparison upon which all the findings and proposals of this Committee are founded,
included the late Sir Charles Loch, the most
distinguished student of Poor Law matters
then living in England, and who—it is well
known—took a leading part both in the
investigations and in drafting the findings
of the Royal Commission. This difference of
personnel might not be thought worthy of
mention, were it not for the corollaries which
follow upon it, both in the findings and
recommendations of the present Committee.

It is not in the least the intention of this
article to call in question the arithmetic of
the Committee, but merely to submit one
or two minor considerations which could not
have escaped notice had a Poor Law worker
(as, for example, our Mr. E. J. Lidbetter)
been present at their deliberations.

Perhaps the reader will catch the significance of this point best by the use of an
analogy. We live in an age of specialized
plants. In tendering for a contract to manufacture a particular line of goods—to construct a building, a railway, a harbour, etc.
—the competing firms are likely to secure
the contract in proportion as they are in
possession of these up-to-date specialized
plants. This Report is a tender to the
British public, on the part of a group—in
our analogy, ‘‘ firm ’’—who believe they are
in possession of such a plant, and that, in
consequence, they can do the work better
than the firm, or group of firms, who have
for long been doing it. Quite in the manner
of modern business, they not only put forward their qualifications for being given the
contract, but they advise (p. 77) the British
public to engage their Mr. So-and-So, who

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

is unquestionably the most up-to-date
expert, to take charge of the whole
enterprise. |

What are they offering to contract to do?
—To deal with ‘‘ that section of the community which we propose to term the
“social problem’ or ‘ subnormal’ group.
This group comprises approximately the
lowest Io per cent. in the social scale of
most communities.’’ ‘Their reason for coming forward is that they believe mental subnormality to be the principal differentia of
this group. It is quite true that they refer,
from time to time, in the Report, to this
mental subnormality as something known
and specific. They say it is largely due ‘to
‘* germinal variation,’’ although they do not
tell us how they discovered this fact. They
say elsewhere that it is incurable. But let
us for a moment return to their own definition of mental defect. As we saw, “‘ the real
criterion of mental deficiency is a social one
—an incapacity for independent social
adaptation.”’

It would appear, therefore, that this sentence (p. 49)—‘‘ It would appreciably ease
the burden of that other authority (Public
Assistance Authority) if machinery were
available for the ready transfer to the local
M.D. authority of persons whose need for
assistance rose from their being mentally
defective ’’—might be read in the other
order, viz.—‘‘ persons demonstrated to be
mentally defective by their need for assistance.’’ Elsewhere they say, with truth (p.
81), ‘‘ Low mentality and poor environment
form a vicious circle.’’ The contents of the
group in question show, they tell us (p. 80),
‘‘a much larger proportion of insane persons, epileptics, paupers, criminals (especially recidivists), unemployables, habitual
slum dwellers, prostitutes, inebriates, and
other social inefficients, than would a group
of families not containing mental defectives.’”?’ We can only be grateful to the
authors of this Report for the candour with
which they have told us that they are offering to deal with the dregs of human society
—that they believe that these have a common characteristic, and that that characteristic—mental subnormality—is one which
CONTROL OF MENTAL DISEASE

they are specially qualified to deal with,
but that, when pressed to explain what they
mean by ‘‘ mental subnormality,’’ they have
to fall back upon the fact that the clients in
question form the dregs of human society.
The special plant is the mental branch of
medical science. The technicians are doctors
who have specialized in it.

Assuming that they are the best people to
deal with this problem, they complain
bitterly of two things : (1) that the work has
been left for many years to another firm,
or group of firms, namely, the Poor Law
Guardians; and (2) that, notwithstanding
the fact that Parliament passed an Act in
1913, by which it intended to transfer the
work from that firm to their firm, the public
have so far disregarded Parliament as to
transfer only a very small fraction of the
work from that firm—the Poor Law
Guardians—to the new firm, the mental
specialists. It distresses them to think
that the public have left this work in the
hands of so unsuitable a firm, and they say
(p. 47), ‘‘ The whole Poor Law system is
designed for other purposes, and is by its
very nature unsuited to the needs of defectives.’”’ Again (p. 45), they find that a
large number of persons who should have
been under their care ‘‘ were maintained or
supported by the Poor Law Guardians.”’
On p. 40 they tell us that “‘ only 5 per cent.

of the ascertained defectives are in certified

mental deficiency institutions.’’ Yet, ‘* 56
per cent. of the whole number of adults
ascertained are in receipt of financial support from public funds. Of this group, 54
per cent. are assisted by Poor Law authorities; 25 per cent. are in mental hospitals.
Of the 18 per cent. maintained by local
M.D. authorities, nearly half are accommodated in institutions provided by Poor Law
authorities.’”? Thus, we have a very full
and accurate admission of the fact that the
other firm, or firms, have unquestionably
been doing the work, or trying to do the
work, and that the British public have
continued to entrust them with it, despite
the passing of the Mental Deficiency Act,
1913.

They complain (p. 62) ‘‘ that the magni
175

tude of the mental deficiency problem has
been considerably under-estimated in the
past.”’ But we submit for the consideration
of the Committee that there is a reason for
this, and a powerful one. The handling of
this section of the population is so difficult,
so little understood—arouses so much inevitable resentment and chagrin, and is, in
fine, so unpopular—that it has for long been
treated as the Cinderella of the efforts of the
community. For a number of years past it
has been under sentence of abolition, and
in consequence there has been a systematic
and deliberate abstention on the part of the
Government to ascertain and set out in
arithmetical form what, in point of fact, the
authorities entrusted with the work were
doing. ‘The inquirer will readily discover
that, if he wants to know the numbers of any
group that has been dealt with under the
Poor Laws, they are not available.. Public
funds have not been placed at disposal for
making such ascertainments, tabulations,
and records. .

It is not surprising, therefore, that the
numbers in this group were under-estimated
in the past. For political reasons no figures
were kept of the work of the bodies who—
as this new group admit—were doing the
work.

It is quite true that this group has been
dealt with under the Poor Law because the
members of it could not support themselves
or adjust themselves, and not especially
because they were mentally deficient. It is
quite true that progress, even great progress, may be made by saying, ‘‘ Now we
are going to think of these people as mental deficients: we are going to ask a new
firm—the mental specialists of the medical
profession—to try their hand at this task.’’
If the matter is so decided, eugenists will
wish the new firm the best of luck. But we
ask readers to be very careful to observe that
the essential feature of the persons whom
the mental specialists are going to handle is
that they are the persons with whom the
Poor Law administrators have been struggling for a hundred years, and for whom
the Poor Law authorities have built up by
far the greatest part of the services now
176

rendered them, whether in institutions or
in their homes.

We know very well that the public will
regard mental deficiency as something
analogous to tuberculosis or heart disease or
arthritis. They will joyfully deliver those
held to be suffering from it to the medical
profession and think no more about it. They
will not know that upon page after page of
this candid and painstaking Report it is
impossible to be sure whether it is pauperism, dependency, maladjustment that is
being spoken of, or something analogous to
one of the diseases to which we are accustomed in medical classifications.

The new firm are asking to have the contract transferred to them from the old firm,
first because they are specialists, and second
because it will bring the whole of one problem under one control. That reads all right
so long as we are thinking of mental deficiency as one of the diseases. It is by no
means so feasible or satisfactory when we
find that the chief symptom of suitability
for being brought under this one control is,
that the individual is generally to be found
in the care of the Poor Law or prison
authorities !

The case-is made out by speaking very
slightingly of the work of the Poor Law
authorities and alleging that they were
designed for something quite different. It
is easy to slight them, since they had far
the most difficult task of any authority on
this island, and one in which, by its nature,
only a very limited measure of success was
or will ever be attained. As for the ‘‘ argument from design,’’ the contrary is the
truth. Boards of Guardians were designed
to deal with what the Report calls the
‘“‘ social problem group,’’ and during the
last one hundred years they have built up a
great and in many ways and many places
truly wonderful service to do so.

The Report complains, as we saw just
now, that some of the clients meant by Parliament to come to the M.D. authority have
been sent to mental hospitals, but it is
careful to demand that the mental hospitals

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

shall be put under the control of the M.D.
authority !

Before we turn to their proposals for
carrying out the contract they are so
anxious to secure, we would remind our
readers that there is another firm in the
field for this contract. It is widely held in
medical circles that there is a mental factor
in most disease and a mental element in all
treatment ; that it is in consequence undesirable from the point of view of administrative
medicine to set up separate authorities or
departments of authorities to deal with
mental disorder, when, in a few years time,
it will become obvious that such departments
must be reabsorbed in the general health
services under Central Health Committees.
It is an example of a common experience,
viz., that specialization can accomplish
much, but it can be overdone.

PROPOSALS FOR TREATMENT

The reader is invited to draw a distinction
between two aspects of these proposals,
viz: those concerning the treatment to be
given, and those relating to the persons to
give it.

He will find, perhaps to his surprise, that
the recommendations of the Committee make
almost no alteration in the treatment given
to this subnormal group, but a complete,
drastic, and revolutionary change in the
choice of persons to give it. A new set of
people, experts in the treatment of mental
deficiency, are to take over duties which
have been performed for a hundred years,
and are being performed at this moment, by
Poor Law officers. As the ukase has gone
forth, we have no doubt that this transfer
will take place. We are well aware of the
advantages of the new broom, and we have
already said, several times, how much may
conceivably be gained by bringing in a
slightly altered angle of approach, consequent upon the greater emphasis upon a
possible mental defect, and the stimulation
and refreshment of having to cheer one on
in a difficult task, the romantic hypothesis
of ‘* germinal variation.’’

We say ‘‘romantic hypothesis ’’ not
CONTROL OF MENTAL DISEASE

from any wisdom of our own, but entirely
through the guidance afforded to us by the
Report itself, in its extremely able and interesting Section 92 (pp. 80-81). In this
Section there become apparent two things:
(1) the age-long character of the group of
persons who are ‘‘ subject to be dealt with,”’
and (2) the very small addition to the knowledge, practical and theoretical, available for
dealing with them which is afforded by this
hypothesis of mental subnormality. Thus,
we are told, ‘‘ comparatively little has been
done to elucidate how it is related to the
problems of insanity, epilepsy, pauperism,
crime, unemployability, and alcoholism.
Which are causes, and which results, in
this focal group of social problems, it is
impossible to state from the meagre data
collected up to the present ... we have
comparatively little reliable data relating to
the mental endowments and characteristics
of this ‘ social problem ’ group.’’ All this is
very candid and modest. The reader is
asked to observe, however, that, while there
is here an honest disclaimer of any great
expectation of success on the part of the
new firm which is coming forward to undertake this contract, there are apparently
quite sufficient data for taking the contract
away from the great army of men and
women who have given their lives to this
branch of service and are engaged upon it
to-day. The Section ends with the sentence: ‘‘ At the same time it is necessary to
recognise that this (inherent mental limitation) is not the only consideration, and there
are many other social and economic factors
involved.’’ We agree; but we are left wondering why the experts on dealing with the
social and economic factors, namely, the
Poor Law service, have been weighed in the
balance and found so completely wanting as
the proper persons to deal with the group
affected by these factors.

If the Report is so candid and careful to
describe the group with whom it proposes
to wrestle, as that with which the Relieving
Officers are at present struggling, what kind
of personnel do they propose to enlist in
order to render this difficult service in such

177

a greatly improved manner? ‘These are
indicated at various points in Chapter IV
(p. 44), headed ‘‘ Suggested future allocation of responsibility for adult defectives,
and recommendations as to the future provision for their care, training, and control.”’
There is to be ‘‘ unified and expert control
. concentration in the hands of a single
authority, if possible, a single Committee,
for the purposes of the Lunacy and Mental
Deficiency Acts.’? Everything will be
decided by Medical Superintendents of
Mental Hospitals, and the Medical Officers
of the local M.D. authority. But (p. 53),
“the authority will still fail in their effort
if they do not possess on their staff inquiry
officers who have been specially trained for
the work.’? ‘“‘ The use of any Poor Law
Institution is strongly deprecated, except
those which have been specially designed
for the purpose ”’ (p. 68). |
We have already referred to the specially
selected medical expert upon whom the
whole undertaking will pivot (p. 77). We
learn again (p. 60), that ‘‘ It is probable
that the Local Authority would often make
use of the Supervision Officers as guardianship officers, or they might employ some
competent social rescue worker to be guardianship officer to certain types of girls, or
a good Scoutmaster to undertake the guardianship of the higher grade boys.’’ We
will venture, at this point, to offer a hint
to the expert mentioned on page 77. It will,
of course, be necessary for him to put out
in the shop window these new medical
officers and this new type of social worker,
with their special training; and, no doubt,
the C.B.’s and C.B.E.’s will all come their
way. But we would advise him to rise a
great while before dawn, now, at once, before
it is too late, and buy at any figure, inviting
them to come on their own terms, a solid
phalanx of stalwart Relieving Officers, male
and female, who have grown grey and tired
and sad in handling the group under discussion. If he is not quick about it they
will take their pensions and their compensations, and move off to the proximity of the
best golf links. By all means let the boy
178

scouts have the C.B.’s, but let the expert
be sure that the Relieving Officers are near
at hand, ‘‘ standing in the shadow keeping
watch upon their own.”’

FEW NEW SUGGESTIONS

The proposals in the Report, for the
change of personnel, are complete and
definite. We now come to the proposals for
treatment. Here we are _ confronted
abruptly with the difference between a
subject matter which can be removed to a
laboratory, a dissecting room, an operation
theatre, or hospital ward of any kind, and
handled in accordance with the methods of
‘modern science,’’ and all human affairs
which cannot be so treated. To workers
belonging to the world of modern science,
terms really correspond to ascertained recognizable objects ; in fact, words function more
or less as they do in the dictionary.

How different is a word when it emerges
from the dictionary, untouched by sorrow
and unsoiled by sin, from what it is when it
has been at work in the milieu of ordinary
human life, stained and scarred with tears
and curses. This transmigration and transformation of words is amply illustrated in
the pages of this Report. Thus, we find our
very old friends, ‘‘ supervision,’’ ‘‘ guardianship,’’ ‘training,’ ‘‘ employment.’’
It is curious that, when the present writer
once went upon a deputation to the Board
of Control and the word ‘‘ supervision ”’
cropped up, an eminent member of that
Board rapped out with more vigour than
courtesy, “‘ What is the good of supervision ?”’

‘* Supervision,’’ as a dictionary word, is
valueless, we admit. Supervision as carried
out by many human agents is a waste of
money: that we admit. But when one
human being is made responsible for
another, and that a wretched and incompetent one, the former may, with a good
heart and plenty of courage, achieve something. His achievement will probably bear
no relation to ‘‘ modern science ’’; in the
words of the Report, “ little will be known
about it.”? It has, in fact, been done on this

d

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

island almost entirely by Poor Law Guardians and Poor Law Officers, and the Report
bears eloquent testimony to the thanks they
have got for it.

We cannot help feeling that the assumption made by this Committee, none of whom
had Poor Law experience—that the handling of the problem of the dregs of society
by the Poor Law Guardians and their
officers has simply been one long tragic
mistake which could not be expected to
achieve any result, and from which nothing
can be learnt—has prevented their giving
adequate consideration to the great questions
of contraception and sterilization in relation
to the problem.

STERILIZATION AND “SOCIALISATION ”

They start a section (p. 87) on ‘‘ sterilization, segregation, and socialisation.’’ By the
time they get to ‘‘ concluding remarks ”’
(p. 95) they have dropped sterilization, and
merely reiterate that, when their group have
taken over the task from the Poor Law
authorities, ‘‘ the burden which mental deficiency imposes upon the nation will not
only be lightened, but will be far less
costly.”’

We submit that under the Poor Laws a
prodigious amount of toil and thought have
been given to the institutional treatment of
these unfortunates and their ‘ socialisation,’
and, speaking from the standpoint of that
toil, we submit that sterilization should take
its place in the equipment not only of the
community but of the individual himself and
herself, for dealing with the problem. The
Committee have set out admirably the difhculty these people have in playing their part
as citizens. Quite apart from the question
of the supply of socially deficient individuals
in the next generation, we submit that one
of the largest elements in the whole problem
is the tragic failure of these people to keep
decent homes and bring up children well.
We want to give them a chance of a form
of social life not obviously too difficult for
them. We ask for adequate discussion of,
and instruction about, sterilization, as one
of the methods for which we are indebted
CONTROL OF MENTAL DISEASE

to science, to enable us gradually to eliminate from our social fabric the melancholy
flaws so eloquently described by the
Committee.

The proposed treatment is to consist of
“* out-door relief, supervision, guardianship,
training and occupation.’’ All of these are
qualified in the Report by the adjective
‘* proper.’’ The present writer has observed
during a quarter of a century that when the
word ‘“‘ proper ’’ occurs in a document, it
has a definite and invariable connotation.
It means that ‘ the writer is not acquainted
personally with the processes to which he is
referring, but they are suitable ones to
mention in this context, if we may rely upon
the dictionary significance of the words. It
will be the duty of somebody else to apply
them successfully to the material in hand.’
Obviously, the Mental Deficiency experts
are not acquainted with these operations.
They say themselves that they have done
little supervision work since 1913, and
almost no guardianship work. The value of
their supervision work was dealt with by a
member of the Board of Control, whom we
have quoted above.
Unlike the Mental Deficiency experts,
Poor Law Guardians and officers have been
carrying out all these processes for the
enormous majority of the persons requiring
them; for a hundred years, under present
statutes, on this island; they, or their
counterparts, for a hundred ages throughout
the story of the human race.

(P. 54)—‘‘ All possible precautions should
be taken to protect those who are left in the
community from the risk of relationship
with the other sex.’’ We will only comment
with D’Artagnan, ‘‘ That is an order more
easy to give than to execute.’’ A Relieving
Officer with the power of the purse behind
him, an unlimited devotion to his unhappy
clients, a magnetic influence over the rela
179

tives, has many a time worked wonders with
members of the subnormal group; but he
has only been able to do so with a “‘ strict ’’
Board of Guardians behind him. Neither
the present temper of the British public nor
the present attitude of the British politician
of all Parties, affords him the slightest support ; quite the reverse. In the decades in
front of us, the Organizer of the Unemployed will win every time, and the medical
expert (p. 77) ‘‘ will have his work cut out.’’

When it comes to training and occupation
we can be brief. The making of work for
persons who cannot find it for themselves in
the open market is an old, sad, and ridiculous story. It is also a terrible life for the
officers in charge. ‘The attempt to do the
same for persons handicapped by ailments
of one kind or another, is roughly estimated
to cost three times as much as it does to keep
them in idleness. With regard to training,
it 1s curious that, put forward as a panacea
in the Minority Report of 1909, it should
come up smiling in 1929. Between the two
dates lies the huge expenditure on training
the disabled men after the war, the failure
of the vast bulk of which is a by-word. It
is perfectly true that the ordinary work of a
Relieving. Officer and a Poor Law authority,
for the subnormal group, is fitly dissected
into these five parts, outdoor relief, super
vision, guardianship, training, and employ
ment, and it is honest of the Committee to
tell us that they have nothing new to suggest
except a slightly altered point of view, and
an entirely new personnel who will have had
the great advantage of attending certain
courses of lectures.

We conclude where we began. For our
part, we propose to throw our strength into
propaganda, for a community consciously
choosing throughout its ranks to rear up a
selected, and, as we hope, better race.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 3.
