RACE-CROSSING AND GLANDS /
Some Human Hybrids and their Parent Stocks

(Paper read at the ninth meeting, 1930, of the International Federation of Eugenic
Organizations.)

By JON ALFRED MJOEN |

HE earlier displacements of popula
tion, the migrations of which history

relates, usually took place during
long epochs of time. Amongst the greatest
were the migrations of the Arabs, the
Semites, and the Mongols. These wholesale movements of population were of quite
a different character from the Viking raids
to the Mediterranean lands and Northern
France, the Gothic invasion of Italy and
Spain, the Normans’ conquering expeditions to England, the expulsion of the
Huguenots, or the emigration of the
Puritans to the United States, and of the
Walloons to Sweden.

But even the most stupendous invasions
that history records, hardly assumed such
dimensions as the movements of population
we have witnessed in our own days. ‘The
system of control that is called inspection
of passports shows, for example, that the
racial elements of alien origin which in a
three-year period after the War have crossed
the frontier into Central Europe from the
East, number no less than 600,000. The
emigrants from the East settled in Berlin,
Paris, and other large cities (according as
the rate of exchange varied !), and to-day
they form a constantly increasing contingent of Asiatics, Russians, Poles, Galicians,
Greeks, and various others. New York
alone was invaded, in the course of a threeyear period, by a similar contingent of
| foreign racial elements amounting to about
one and a half million.

Nobody who with open eyes has observed
the masses in the great modern cities, Paris,
Berlin, New York, Chicago, will have
failed to be struck by the manner in which
the racial physiognomy of the population is

in process of changing. Clean, open racial
features are becoming more and more rare
in these masses in the slums, which in the
real sense of the word are amorphous. All
unity of form is dissolved, and a hideous
confusion of all possible colours and shapes
from all the races of the earth has taken
its place.

The picture which we see before our eyes
every day, so to speak, on journeys in
Europe, North Africa, and America, raises
a question of importance : What will be the
effect, the final result of this gigantic
blood-mixing? The picture gives an impression of lack of guiding-instinct, lack of
stability and balance. But is this lack of
balance a result of social or biological
causes; and have we any reason to believe
that crossing with foreign races will have a
deleterious effect upon the native stock?

In order to find a reliable answer to this
question and reach a firm basis, we can go
different ways. We can make iments
on plants and animals in order to find out
the somatic changes following race-crossings
in general. We can also make observations
on human material. What we can not do
is to experiment with human material.
But fortunately humans sometimes make
the experiments for us. Not all of these
experiments, though, are of equal value for
such observations.

We find quite a considerable literature
on human race-crossing; but most of it
consists of ‘observations’ made by travellers
and explorers, and very few of these rest on
scientific ground, on measurements, for
instance, of single traits, whose quality can
be expressed numerically. If the measurements of such qualities are to be of any
32

value, we must choose a place where the
two or more parent races are reasonably
distinct in such characters as body-size,
colour of hair, skin, and eyes, or size and
function of the inner organs, lungs, muscular strength, and so on, and, of course, in
such psychic qualities as intelligence. If,
for instance, the stature of a family
group of one race is 1.74 m. (males) or a
little above, and the stature of a family
group of another race is 1.60 m. or
a little less, it would be of immense interest
to see whether the hybrids took after the
taller race or the shorter, whether they fell
between the two, as would be expected, or
whether there was such a disturbance of the
growth factor or factors as to give a wider
range of figures for stature than in either
of the parent races.

CROSSING THE NORDIC AND MONGOL

Such a place is the northern part of
Norway and Sweden, where widely different races are to be found in easily distinguishable groups, and where the conditions are favourable for the study of
race-crossings. Moreover, the social conditions are clear and perspicuous. Here the
two races, the Mongoloid Lapps and the
Nordics have more or less adapted themselves to the same environment. ‘This is
of much importance, as it excludes the
social factor and leaves only the biological.
Both races have gone through the same
process of selection during several thousand
years.

On account of these considerations we
decided to choose Northern Norway (RGros,
Nordland, Finmarken) for our observations
and measurements, and we made in the
course of twenty years several visits from
our laboratory to the Lapp camps. On
these expeditions we measured about 600
Nordics, 600 Lapps and more than 300
hybrids. The result for muscular strength
and volume of lungs is given in Figs. 1a
and rb on pages 34 and 35.

Later on we continued the measurements
in other parts of the country and found
somewhat smaller variation-curves than
those given in Fig. 1a and Fig. 1b.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

DISHARMONIC GROWTH |
The results of these investiga

tween volume of lungs and body-size and
muscular strength and body-size, yet we
found more dishargonies, both physical
and mental, than in the two parent races.
The most surprising discovery was that of
a low mental ability cembined with a comparatively good general appearance.

A further result of our observations is
that the Lapp-Nordic hybrid displays a
long series of disharmonious qualities, more
or less perceptible, more or less important
for life.

We found: Relatively large or small
ears, disproportionate extremities, unusual
length of body in the F, generation,
abnormal range of variation with regard to
such characteristics as lung-volume and
muscular strength (compare Fig. 1a), greater
prevalence of diabetes (compare Fig. 2),
loss of balance, and diminished resistance
to tuberculosis (compare the chart, ‘‘ Mortality from tuberculosis in Norway,’’
Journal of Heredity, Vol. XVII, No. s,
May 1926).

EXPERIMENTS WITH ANIMALS

Observations made on animal crossings
at our laboratory have confirmed our conclusions from human material. We found
the following disharmonies in hybrid
rabbits: Unsymmetrical arrangement of
ears, greater range of variation in length of
ears, abnormal growth and size of body in
the F, generation, derangement of correlative weight of internal organs, as well as
reduced fecundity in later generations.

It may perhaps be objected that it is a
matter of indifference whether a rabbit has
two upright, two pendent, or one upright
and one pendent ear. But it is not the lack
of symmetry of the ears in itself that is of
interest for us. But as a symptom it
interests us in the very highest degree and
arouses our suspicion. is reason to
suppose that similar di i ni
RACE-CROSSING AND GLANDS

emselves also in other and more important
ite and functions. There is no reaso
to assume that the ears form an exception

gans of the two parent races and of the
hybrids seem to confirm this. The work
has not yet been completed, but the results
hitherto atteined show that the ratio between the weights of the various organs is
subject to derangement in the hybrid. In
this respect the hybrid shows a far greater
variation-curve than the pure-bred animal.

It has sometimes been asserted that most
inherited characters in animals and humans
are of a ‘ blending’ nature, and that when
parents differ in a trait, the offspring commonly possess an intermediate degree of it.
It has been asserted that this is true of
stature, weight, and of general mental
powers. In a cross between individuals of
different races—i.e. individuals whose
tdiotypica (genotypes) diverge from each
other beyond a certain degree of variation
—we can imagine several possible combinations of the hereditary qualities in the next
and succeeding generations :

1.—The offspring may display all the
essential characteristics of one of the two
races, that race being ‘ pre-potent ’ over the
other.

2.—The offspring may display all the
characteristics of both races, from the colour
of the eyes to the highest mental functions,
as a homogeneous blend of the physical and
psychic constitution of both parents or both
parent-races.

3-—The offspring may display certain
characteristics from each of the two races,
the large lungs, for instance, of the Nordic
race, the small heart of the Lapp.—‘‘ Size

and function to a certain extent independent
of each other.’’

4.—The offspring may display each
characteristic of both races, in such a way
that every cell, every organ becomes a
mosaic composed of heterogeneous hereditary qualities.

Intermediate figures, which might be

33

interpreted as denoting a ‘ blend,’ we find
in our measurements of psychic traits; and
from a superficial observation it might seem
as if the qualities blend when the characteristics of the offspring lie between those
of the parents. This is the apparent
foundation for the theory of ‘ blending
inheritance.’ But we have begun to doubt
whether the so-called intermediate figures
can be interpreted as a proof that the
parents’ qualities ‘ blend’ in the offspring.

Our observations seem to suggest that
human characteristics do not blend—that
the ‘blend’ is a misunderstanding of a
mosaic inheritance. I feel more and more
convinced that no hybrid qualities in the
deepest meaning of the expression (biochemical and cell-anatomical) are a homogeneous blend of the traits of the
parent-races.

One of the strongest supports of the
assumption that the offspring receives a
homogeneous blend of the parents’ qualities
was thought to have been found in measurement of the head-index (see Journal of
Heredity, Vol. XVII, No. 5, May 1926).
But, as far as I can judge from the latest
literature and from discussions at congresses, H. Bryn, E. Fischer, Davenport,
Frets, and Ruggles Gates have all aban.
doned the idea of a blend—if, indeed, they
ever had it. In this connection it is only
necessary to cite Docent Robert Larsson, of
Lund: ‘ Davenport’s comprehensive investigations of crosses between white and
coloured persons must surely at last have
banished from the world the old views respecting intermediate inheritance amongst
human beings.’’

It is the mosaic heritance which gives
rise to the series of disharmonies in hybrids.
I speak of a ‘“‘ disharmonic ”’ cross in the
narrow sense when the offspring’s adaptability and efficiency show a decrease in comparison with those of the parent stocks, as a
result of special combinations of hereditary
qualities. And in a wider sense I have
introduced the term “‘ disharmonic ”’ for
such crosses as produce unfavourable results
even when compared with only one of the
two parent races.
FIG. 1A.

Volume of Lung.
(Spirometer Barnes)

sroePuree ai

Nordics & Lapps
in North Norway.

38
36
3a
32
23
26
24
22
2000
08
6
4
$2
9000
8
6
4
a

 

iB

 

asseSeres

pe
SRBRELSES Shaper see

Nordics & Lapps
inNorth Norway. "
Nordics & Lapps
in North Norway

Men

 

10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% j 80% 90% 100%

   

160 160
15 iso
140 140
130 130
120 120
110 1a
100 100
90 90
80 80
70 70
60 60
50 50

#1 Nordics & Lapps
91 in North Norway.

 
36

THEZGLANDULAR BASIS OF GROWTH

‘Assuming that the functioning of the
various endocrine glands is dependent on
different genes, it may well be that the
glands in the offspring of parents of dissimilar race are, owing to the new combination of genes, more or less inharmoniously
adapted to each other. There arises a
derangement of the normal correlation,
which may have more or less serious, or
even disastrous, results for the individual
concerned.

As we know, the growth of the body
stands in close relation to the function of
the glands. In the case of functional
anomalies of the hypophysis, the thyroid,
the sexual glands, and probably also of the
thymus gland there arise a number of
physical abnormalities. It is highly probable that the frequently observed exaggerated growth of the hybrid and his
disproportionately large extremities are due
to a glandular disturbance of genetic
origin.

A further argument in support of the
view that the glands are disturbed in the
hybrid lies in the fact that we found a
larger number of diabetics amongst hybrid

FIG. 2.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

types than amongst families of race.
Also, the resistance to tu ulosis seems
to be diminished in the offspring of crosses.
That diabetes must first and foremost be
ascribed to glandular deficiency is now a
known fact; and that disease resistance is
lessened by glandular anomalies is probable. (See Fig. 2.)

HYBRIDS’ TEMPERAMENTAL INSTABILITY

In full agreement with this suggestion of
glandular disturbance is the general opinion of biologists that the human hybrid
shows a typical instability in mental and
moral respects—a want of balance. His
motives and actions are incalculable, his
impulses stronger than his self-control. I
feel more and more convinced that the
inmates of our prisons and asylums are to
a large extent recruited from these types of
mixed race, whose numbers are constantly
rising on account of the increasing intercourse between populations from all parts
of the world.

A special group of individuals which is
causing a great deal of trouble in our
northern countries, Norway and Sweden, is
the Gipsy (tater) group. We know very

Vinderen Laboratorium.

Race-Crossing& Disturbance of the Endocrine Glands.

O Nordic

Nordi
© Lapp - ordic
@ Diabetes

Cretinism
© OU
7@ ©

We now know that diabetes is a glandular lesion.

amongst the half-breeds in Finmark points in the same direction as the
ces.

race-crossing causes glandular distur

~\) Lapp
®
a @Q?

The frequent appearance of this malady
other facts, namely, that

 

The diagrammatic presentation on pp. 34 and 35 of lung-volume and muscular strength in

of unmixed race and in hybrids shows that the ran

of variation for these two characteristics is far

greater in the hybrid than in the man of relatively pure race.
RACE-CROSSING AND GLANDS

aracteristics of unbelanced hybrids. They
ore vagabonds, beggars, loafers, and
criminals. Whole families of this hybrid
population are filling up our prisons and
asylums. .

One hears, of course, of prominent
hybrids—Booker Washington, the American teacher and reformer, was a Mulatto,
and Porfirio Diaz, President of Mexico, was
a Mestizo. But they are exceptions to the
rule, and they are few compared with the
enormous number of human hybrids all
over the world. We find it very often
stated that the famous Swedis ish writer,
August Strindberg, was of very “ mix
ascendency.’’ I do not know how far this
assertion is to be relied upon. But what
would be likely to be the result if we advocated race-crossing on such premisses? If
by deliberate experimental breeding of men
we could produce 10,000 ‘ Strindbeig
blends,’ we should obtain no small contingent with Strindberg’s brutality, his
melancholy, his capriciousness, his violent
temper, his pessimism, his cynicism
towards women (though he married four
times), and all his lack of self-control—and
yet we might be cheated of the expected
types with Strindberg’s creative genius.

Davenport and Steggerda have come to
similar conclusions as regards the variability and disharmony of psychic qualities
in the Mulatto:

‘‘ Disharmonies in the mental sphere
are socially more significant, perhaps,
than those in the physical sphere, and
such disharmonies are apparently common in the adult Brown. Such disharmonies and confusion apparently appear in visualization and reproduction, as
in putting together the parts of the manikin [an ‘ intelligence test ’]. The
proportion of failures of the Browns is
9.6 per cent., as opposed to 3.1 per cent.
in Blacks and 2.1 per cent. in Whites.
In copying of geometric figures 5
cent. of Browns fail completely as compared with 3 per cent. of the Blacks and

37

nil per cent. of the Whites. In the
Army Alpha Test IV (opposites and
similars) 41 per cent. of the Browns got
only 3.7 per cent. or fewer correct, while
only 23 per cent. of the Blacks did so
poorly and none of the Whites. One
gains the geeral im ion that,
though on the average the Browns did
not so badly, there was among them a
greater number of persons than in either
Blacks or Whites who were muddled and
wuzzle-headed. The Blacks may have
low intelligence, but they generally can
use what they have in fairly effective
fashion; but among the Browns there
appear to be an extra 5 per cent. who
seem not to be able to utilize their native
endowment.”’

As regards certain anomalies of the eyes,
Lenz remarks :

“‘It is to be assumed that anomalies
of refraction in the eyes may also arise
through race-crossing. A certain curvature of the vision, may, when occurrii.g
in conjunction with a greater length of
axis, result in slight short-sightedness.’’

The Norwegian anthropologist, Dr.

Halfdan Bryn, sums up his experiences as
follows :

“‘ I have a firm impression that crossing between Lapps and Norwegians is
equally bad for both parties. I have
once in a treatise drawn attention to the
great number of cases of luxatio coxe
congenit@ amongst the hybrid population in Finmark. It has repeatedly been
demonstrated that this illness ‘occurs
with many times greater frequency
amongst hybrids than amongst people of
unmixed race. The explanation naturally suggests itself that this may be due
to the fact that the offspring has inherited the small pelvis of the Lapps
with narrow hip-joint socket (acetabulum), while at the same time inheriting
the Norwegians’ large thigh-bone head
(caput femoris), which accordingly has
not room enough in the small acetabulum.
But this is, of course, only a suggestion.
38

I have hitherto not been able to advance
any proof of the correctness of the sup
ition. But that race-crossing
leads to disharmony is a point on which

I entertain no doubt.’’ (Compare
Fig. 3.)
Fic. 3.

Luxatio coxae congenitae.

 
  

ket
»_sgint sof
Hip Jor Dalam)

(Ae

1 ‘Thigh- -bone head
; (Capit femoris)

The offspring (hybrid) has inherited the small
pelvis of the Lapps with narrow hip-joint socket
(acetabulum), while at the same time inheriting the
Norwegians’ | thigh-bone head (caput femoris),
which accordingly has not room enough in the small
acetabulum. (Bryn.)

SUMMARY

VoLUME oF LunGs. Measurements of
more than 600 Nordics, 600 Lapps, and
more than 300 hybrids (Lapps with Nordic
blood, mostly F, generation) prove without
doubt that these organs do not ‘ blend’ in
the hybrid.

MuscuLaR STRENGTH. Measurements of
muscular strength among the Lapp-Nordic
mixed population have proved that this
trait does not ‘ blend’ in the hybrid.

BoDY-LENGTH AND HETEROSIS. Growth
is dependent on gland-functions. The disturbance in the hybrid is a proof that one or
more glands are more or less out of normal
function.

DIABETES. We now know that diabetes is
due to a glandular anomaly. The frequent
appearance of this malady amongst the
half-breeds points in the same direction—
namely, that race-crossing causes glandular
disturbances.

RESISTANCE To DISEASE.
certain diseases us a characteristic,
strengthened in all probability through
long periods of selection. This resistance

Resistance to

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

seems to be lost in the crossing of races,
owing in all probability to disturbed
functioning of the glands.

Sreninity. On crossing three races
of rabbits at Vinderen Laboratory we
experienced a reduced fecundity after
six or seven generations. In one of the
experiments we got no offspring at all in
the eighth generation. These experiments
need to be confirmed before we can draw
definite conclusions. We are aware of the
fact that this sterility may have other

causes.
The probability of hereditary disharmonies increases with increasing differences

‘in th parental idiotypes.

On account of the above-mentioned facts,
which indicate that the hybrid in psychic
and physical respects may to the
most disastrous disturbances, it must be
admitted that the question of hybridization
is a problem of the very greatest importance.
A problem which not only concerns scientists, but in increasing degree all social
workers—especially statesmen.

In the interest of the individual, as well
as of mankind as a whole, crossing between
widely differing races ought as far as possible to be avoided. At least we risk nothing by acting for the present on the
assumption that crossing between widely
divergent races is disastrous from a genetic
standpoint.

PRACTICAL CONCLUSIONS

The glands play, as we know, a great and
decisive role in the formation of man’s
physical and mental character. The whole
ontogeny of the body down to the minutest
details—formation of teeth, nails, hair,
skin, bones, the secondary sexual ‘characteristics, as well as the psychic development in intellectual and moral respects—all
these are connected with, governed by, and
ionized from the glands. eand this glanddetermined entity reappears in the offspring; its constitution and biochemistry
are based upon heredity. All intellectual
and emotional manifestations of the human
mind are directly or indirectly in contact
with the glands of internal secretion. We
RACE-CROSSING AND GLANDS

have as yet only a faint idea of the ingenious
and ontremely delicately adjusted mechanism that displays its activity in the
endocrine glands, but perhaps some day in
the future we shall have recourse to these
organs in order to find the foundation for,
and the explanation of, the deepest
mysteries of the soul. We are beginning
to understand that love, hatred, perversity,
a-social tendencies, creative force, energy
and weakness of will, and all other forms
of psychic impulses, are incited, regulated,
released, and brought to disappear, all
according to whether the biochemical laboratories called glands are working normally or
are subjected to more or less disturbances.

In the historic moment when the spermcell of the male penetrates the female ovum
and unites its generative substance with
that of the ovum the fate of the individual
is determined. All physical and psychic
qualities, all that combination which we
name the character of the human being, are
in the instant of fecundation established
once for all. What takes place later, devélopment in the mother’s uterus and
development and life in autonomous human
existence, are merely growth and forms of
expression of the primary characteristics.
Two germ-cells which thus unite to form a
new independent living entity are not merely
conveyors of the individual qualities
possessed by the male and female parents,
but rather of the qualities of the two stocks
from which the father and mother are
descended. These general considerations,
with which we are all acquainted, acquire
new importance in the light of what we are
now beginning to learn regarding the
glands and their activity.

The object of race hygiene is to investigate the conditions n for the development and propagation of human
material of high value, and to point out
practical means of achieving these conditions. Here the study of the glandular
functions is coming to occupy a constantly
more extensive and important place. To
ensure the development of well-balanced and
vigorous offspring it is requisite that the
glandular constitution of the two parent

39

stocks can enter into harmonious combination with each other—that is to say, that
the growth-tendencies which meet in the
new individual shall form a uniform whole,
without internal antitheses and  disturbances. The most perfectly attuned
functioning of the glands we find within the
homogeneous parent stocks, within the pure
vace. Perhaps in the future a “‘ race ”’ will
be defined as a group of mankind possessing
in common all physical and psychic fundamentals and whose glandular functions are
faultlessly harmonized. The more dissimilar the two parent stocks which are
brought together through fecundation, the
less perfect will be the harmony, the unity
in the new individual’s physical and mental
formative tendencies (laws of growth). On
this foundation serious objections may be
raised on the part of endocrinologists
against the crossing of widely dissimilar
races, and a careful scrutiny of all cases of
race-crossing may be demanded—a question
which is of practical importance in, for
example, my native land, owing to the
Nordic-Lapp alliances.

Of course, we must be on our guard
against all exaggeration. Race-biology and
its daughter-science, race-hygiene, must
not be mis-used in the service of racial
hatred. We shall not persecute other races,
but only safeguard our own. We shall
love our own race; just as a man loves his
father and mother, not because it is better
than other races, but because it is our race.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Halfdan Bryn: Die Bastarden des nérdlichen
Norwegens. NYT MAGASIN FOR NATURVIDENSKAP,
1921.

C. B. Davenport and Morris Steggerda: Race
Crossing in Jamaica. Carnegie Inst., Washington,
1928.

Fischer, Eugen: Zum Inzuchtsund Bastardierungsproblens beim Menschen. Sitzungsb. d. anthrop.
Gesell in Wien.

Isidor Flodstrém: Zar Frage der Rassenunterschiede innerhalb der schwedischen Bevdlkeriing.
Ymer, 1915.

R. R. Gates: Heredity and Eugenics. Bucxrnics
REVIEW, xii, 1-13, 1920-21. Heredity and Exgenics.
London, Constable, 8278 pp.
40

Hanneson, G.: Kdrpermasse und Kdorperproportionen der Islander. Reykjavik.

Séren Hansen: Uber Kérpergewicht und Kérper
sse. Uber den Index der Schaddelbreite bet den

anen.

Kaarlo Hildén: Some Anthropological Data on
the Inhabitants of Swedish and Finnish Extraction
in Finland. Stockholm, 1921.

J. Vilh. Hultkrantz: Uber die Kérperidnge der
Schweden. Ymer, 1896.

Herman Lundborg: Svenska Folktyper. Stockholm, A. B. Hasse, W. Tullberg, 1919.

H. Lrndborg og J. Runnstrém : TH SwEDIsH
NaTION IN WORD AND Picrurg. A. B. Hasse, W.
Tullberg. Stockholm, 1921.

Jon Alfred Mjéen : Race hygiene. Jacob Dybwads
Forlag. Oslo, 1915.

Mjéen, J. A.: Biological Consequences of Racecrossing. TH JOURNAL OF Herepity (Organ of the
American Genetic Association), Washington, D.C.
Vol. XVII, No. 5, May 1926.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Mijéen, A. Rassenkreusun
voue oD Resse. Heft 2. I. F. Veriag,

finchen,
H. Nilsson-Ehle: Die moderne Erblichheitslebre
and thre Bedeutung fiir die Phlanzenzucht.

StockKreuzungsuntersuchuagen an Hafer

betes Monschen.

1915.
and Weizen. I, » YIQIO0. JAHRESSCHRIVFT DER
UNIverstrit, Land.”
Rolf Nordenstreng : Europas Menschenrassen
and Bevdlkerungen P. A. Noestedt and Séners
Forlag, (Stockho

‘ Bemerkungen 2ur Mwtare treet,
holms. jMxppe. OM eS tologte py Pay

Otto Rosenberg: Genetic Cy
Toe Swspish NATION IN WorD AND PICTURE.
Stockholm, 1921.

Harald Westergaard : Untersuchungen fiber Kédrpergrdsse in Danemark. Muppst. om DANMARKES
ANTRPL. I, 1907-11

F. W. Westerlund : Studien aber die Antropologte
Finlands. opio, 190%, 1904. Helsingfors, 1912,
1913.

—— oe,

 
         

THIRD SERIES.

    
     

1. ARTICLES :—

JOURNAL OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION
AND INTERNATIONAL LAW

VOL. XII. Parr .

FEBRUARY 1931.

CONTENTS :

 

The Nature of a Crime. By Professor Carleton Kemp Allen.

The Imperial Conference of 1930.

Binet.
Bibliography of English Property Law.
Notes on Imperial Constitutional Law.
2. NOTES.

Messrs. MacMILLan & Co.,

 

By Professor Berriedale Keith, D.C.L.
The Buddhist Law of Succession in Burma. By A. E. Rigg, Esq.
Liability in Damages under French Administrative Law, III.
The New Company Law of Holland. By Dr. S. Gargas.
Commercial Trusts in Private International Law.

Recent Developments affecting Diplomatic Privileges and Immunities. By Monsieur Henri T. P.

 
  

By Professor Louis Trotabas.

 

 

By Dr. Max: Rheinstein.

 

  
 

By Professor Berriedale Keith, D.C.L. ~
3. NOTICES OF BOOKS.
Annual Subscription, One Guinea.
SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION, 1 Elm Court, Temple, E.C.4.

i ene

AL communications respecting Advertisements to be sent to
Lrp.,

 

  

 
  

St. Martin’s Street; London, W.C.2.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, Ne. 1.

 

 

 

 
