HOUSING ASOCIAL FAMILIES IN HOLLAND"
By PEARL MOSHINSKY, B.Sc. (Econ.), Ph.D.

(Housing Sub-Committee, Population Investigation Commiitee)

Dutch Housing Progress

O the student of housing, Holland
| presents several interesting features.
The Dutch have grappled with their
housing problems with such energy and
resolve that, despite the unusually high
fertility it still manifests,f the country at
present possesses more available dwellings
than families to be accommodated.
Although the first Dutch housing act was
not introduced until the turn of the twentieth
century (1901), its original terms were so
comprehensive and detailed that, except for
minor alterations and modifications, it has
remained the basis of policy ever since.
From the beginning State financial assistance for the erection of dwellings was
exceptionally generous. Advances could be
made to cover the entire cost of the proposed
building, and a generous period of as much
as fifty years was allowed for repayment. It
was not until after the war, however, that
full advantage was taken of this law. In
1920, after the almost complete cessation
of building activity during the years of
hostilities, the shortage of dwellings was
estimated as between 60,000 and 100,000
out of an existing total of 1,380,000.{ By the
time of the 1930 census, the deficit had
become a surplus of 50,000 dwellings over

* This article consists of one section of a report on
European Housing that the author is preparing for the
Population Investigation Committee. It is hoped that
the complete report will be available shortly.

+ The birth rate of Holland is still sufficiently high to
ensure that the population is reproducing itself. In
1935 the net reproduction rate was 1-102, i.e. every
I,000 women were producing 1,102 future mothers,
compared with 764 in England and 866 in France.

t See Housing Policy in Europe, p. 103. I.L.0. 1930.
The estimate of 60,000 is also given by H. van der Kaa,
General Inspector of Health in The Hague, in his book
Housing Policy in the Netherlands, p. 32. Geneva, 1935.

and above the number of households in the
country.*

Housing Problem Families

This achievement places Holland decidedly
in the forefront of European housing progress. The Dutch however have also been
pioneers in another direction—namely that of
providing accommodation for families whose
habits of living make them undesirable and
unsatisfactory tenants. Sociologically, these
tenants form a heterogeneous collection—
they may be dirty, they may be dipsomaniacs, they may be aggressive and
quarrelsome, or they may merely possess
unpunctual habits in the payment of rent.
Their common quality is that they are
dificult to live with. It may appear
somewhat contradictory that the principle
of segregating people of this character
should first have been widely accepted in a
country with as strong an individualist
tradition as Holland. But from another
point of view it may be regarded merely as
carrying to the extreme the normal practice
of social segregation in a community sharply
stratified by social classes—an equally prominent characteristic of Dutch society. For
example, most housing estates and residential areas serve quite limited sections of the
population, and strenuous objections are
usually raised against any proposal to build
municipal estates near wealthy districts.

The alleged intention of these schemes of
segregation is reformative. Their purpose is
stated as being “‘ to level those families up
by teaching them how to live in a better

*H. van der Kaa, op. cit. This surplus does not
necessarily indicate an equable distribution of supply
between the various social classes. In 1930 there were
still 9-6 per cent. of all dwellings overcrowded (i.e.
more than two to aroom), which implies that there must

still be a shortage of lower-rented dwellings of sufficiently
large size.

171
172

way ... . and to make them well-behaved
families and desirable tenants,’”* or even
just simply “ to teach them to live in a better
home.’’t Occasionally, however, a more
material note is to be detected, and it is
suggested that by this means it is possible
for the municipality to avoid the rapid
deterioration of municipal property by people
who have been accustomed to slum living.

Although colonies for housing “asocial”
families have been in existence in Holland
only for fifteen years or so, the problem
was already being discussed in the immediate
pre-war years, as part of the general question
of re-housing slum tenants. The first colonies
to be formed were accommodated in temporary quarters. For example, as early as 1917,
Amsterdam families who were considered
“ asocial ’” in character were housed in a
disused school, under the supervision of
two pensioned policemen. In the following
years, one or two additional groups were
set up, but again in temporary premises.
The first permanent colony was not erected
until 1923, when 106 houses, called the
“Controle Woningen’”’ were built by The
Hague municipality. The example of The
Hague was soon followed by Amsterdam. In
1924, official support was granted to the
first of the Amsterdam colonies, Zeeburgerdorp, which was built in 1926. The estate
comprised fifty-five concrete houses, each
with living-room, kitchen, W.C., and one
to four bedrooms. In addition, generous
communal facilities were provided, including
a bath-house, laundry, club-rooms, free
health services for all on the estate, and
even a day nursery for children between the
ages of one-and-a-half and five years. All
these amenities were free, with the exception
of the use of the laundry apparatus, for
which a small additional charge was made.
It is interesting to notice the inclusion of
day-nurseries in the scheme, since in Holland
créches are not usually to be found in planned
housing estates. One reason for this is the
generally accepted view that the family

* See recent report, issued by the Housing Department of Amsterdam (mimeographed, undated).

{ Hague Housing and Town Planning Dept. Private

communication.
t See Amsterdam report, op. cit.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

provides the most desirable environment for
the child. Another, arising no doubt out of
the first, is that the special housing law of
Holland (Woningwets) arranges for financial
assistance for housing in the narrow sense
only, and is rarely extended to cover general
communal and social services. The provision
of créches in these special communities is
justified, however, on the grounds that the
child of socially abnormal parents will find a
better environment in a well-equipped nursery than he could possibly obtain in his own
home, and more care and attention can thus
be bestowed upon him during the formative
pre-school years.

To the poor and overworked mothers of
the families inhabiting the colonies these
créches were particularly helpful. Holland
is one of the few European countries where
large families are still frequently to be found.
According to the 1930 census figures, over
half of all families had two or more children,
and over one-third had three or more
children.* Since there is at present a considerable differential fertility between social
classes,f most of the large families occur
in the poorer sections of the community,
from which tenants for the “ asocial ’’ housing groups are drawn. Thus, the number
of children per family in the Amsterdam
groups is given as five, and those in The
Hague Controle Woningen as 4:6.{

Flats or Cottages?

Unlike their Italian counterparts, each dwelling in the Dutch schemes for accommodating
undesirable families consists of a separate
house, which is built as solidly and as well
as ordinary municipal houses. Throughout
Holland the small family house has remained
both the ideal and the prevailing type,
contrary to what might have been expected
in so small a country, where flat building

* These figures apparently refer to children of all
ages, since no age limits are given in the official publications.

+ For a fuller treatment of differential fertility, see .
J. H. van Zanten and T. van den Brink, ‘‘ Population
phenomena in Amsterdam.” Population, vol. II,
Nos. 3 and 4. (1937-8.)

t Privately supplied figures. The average size of the
families in The Hague group shows considerable
fluctuations from year to year, the highest figure being
5°5 for 1927 and the lowest 2-8 for 1935.
HOUSING ASOCIAL FAMILIES IN HOLLAND

would at least have the advantage of
conserving space. Two factors however have
militated against the building of blocks of
flats—in the first place, the difficulty of
providing adequate foundations for largesized buildings in a soil that is frequently
waterlogged, and secondly, the persistence
of the family tradition. In Holland, almost
as much as in England, the house is considered the family “ castle,’ and the care and
attention bestowed upon all housing problems reflect this fact. Although some large
towns, particularly Amsterdam and Rotterdam, have a considerable proportion of their
dwellings in the form of flats, it is still
true to say that throughout the country
the single-family house predominates. Unfortunately, the last available general housing
census was taken in 1919, and it is not easy
to tell whether there has been any considerable alteration in the position since
then. In 1919, flats comprised over ninety
per cent. of all the dwellings in both Amsterdam and Rotterdam, and just under seventy
per cent. in The Hague. But if we exclude
the six largest towns,* ninety-three per
cent. of all dwellings were in the form of
single-family houses while the figure for the
whole country, including the towns, was as
much as seventy-two per cent.t At present,
emphasis continues to be laid on the necessity
for more one-family houses, in discussions of
housing problems. Even in Amsterdam, the
new town plan includes a large number of
dwellings of this type. Since the object of the
special schemes for undesirable families is to
inculcate standards of ‘‘ normal ”’ living, it is
natural for them to have been planned as individual homes rather than as blocks of flats.
Haarlem, and Groningen.

¢ Census data, quoted by H. van der Kaa (op. ci?.).

{ Although in the provision of light and air there is
little difference between Dutch flats and houses, private
gardens are considered an invaluable adjunct to healthy
and happy family life. Van der Kaa thinks that
gardens provide the necessary fresh air and exercise for
children, and in addition form a centre of interest for
adults, and a helpful factor in the fight against alcoholism, immorality, etc. It is not yet usual to find such
amenities as bathrooms or central heating in the lowerrented dwellings, since it is apparently considered more

important to devote the additional cost of these luxuries
to the provision of roomier and separate dwellings.

(op. cit., pp. 22-7.)

173

The “ Controle Woningen ”’ in The Hague

About a year after the Zeeburgerdorp
estate was built, the municipality considered
it so successful that the larger and betterknown colony of Asterdorp was planned and
erected. This consisted of 132 houses, with
individual and communal accommodation
similar to that at Zeeburgerdorp. Neither
of these Amsterdam estates however possess
the rigid classification incorporated in The
Hague “Controle Woningen.”’ Here the 106
dwellings are subdivided into three social
classes as follows :*

Ist class dwellings — 38
2nd class dwellings — 14
3rd class dwellings — 54

Third class tenants were, of course, those
considered most ‘“ asocial’’ in behaviour,
while first-class tenants were the least abnormal, and the degree of control exercised
over each varied accordingly. For this purpose, the colony was built in fan-shaped
formation, with the supervisor’s house in
the middle. The third-class group were
housed in the centre, and had to pass through
the supervisor’s lodge to reach their own
dwellings. They were thus subject to constant supervision. Second-class tenants were
placed towards the outside of the group, and
while they too had to pass the supervisor’s
lodge, they were not under continual surveillance. First-class tenants lived on the
outside, and their dwellings were more
normally set out along two streets. They
could enter their homes independently, and
enjoyed a considerable amount of freedom.
The houses varied in their provision of comfort too; those on the inside (third-class),
for example, were without gardens at all ;
those on the outside possessed individual
plots of the popular type. For all tenants
on the estate a curfew was imposed, and
baths were compulsory (and free) once a
fortnight. The families were subject to
re-classification at intervals, and the lower
categories might work their way through the
various grades to qualify eventually for a
normal municipal dwelling. In the Amsterdam colonies, too, tenants whose social

* These figures are for 1923, when the scheme started.
174

behaviour showed sufficient improvement
would eventually be rewarded by transfer
to an ordinary estate.

Selection and Accommodation of Families

Although there is no legal compulsion for
families to enter these colonies, the determining factor is the absence of any other
dwelling at a suitable rent that the tenant
could afford. Thus, in practice, most people
who inhabit the special dwellings have little
choice in the matter, and once they accept
tenancy they are naturally obliged to conform to the regulations attached. All applicants for municipal houses have to submit
to an examination of their home circumstances, and it is by this means that the
undesirable group are selected. Such families
are then not allowed to inhabit the ordinary
estates until they have been subjected to the
reformative influence of the asocial colonies,
and have shown that they are capable of
improvement. In Amsterdam, each colony
is in charge of a woman inspector who keeps
close social contact with families in her care,
and gives advice when necessary on all
matters connected with housekeeping problems, children’s education, etc. She is also
responsible for the collection of rent, and
reports to the authorities periodically on
home conditions.

The houses provided are built on one
floor only. They contain a varying number
of bedrooms, suitable for families of different
sizes, since under the terms of the Dutch
housing law, each dwelling must contain a
sufficient number of rooms to enable children
of different sexes to sleep in separate bedrooms.* Thus, in addition to living quarters
which may consist of one kitchen-living-room
or a separate kitchen and living-room, up to
four bedrooms are provided, in houses which
are either fully detached or semi-detached.
The following figures of the sizes of houses in
Zeeburgerdorp and Asterdorp convey an
idea of the generous accommodation provided, particularly when compared with the
one-room dwellings built for families of this
type in Italy.

* The original limit was fourteen years, but this was

considered too high, and has since been lowered to
twelve years.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

No. of bedrooms per house*

Ir. 4s
Zeeburgerdorp 3 16 25 12
Asterdorp — 43 35 48
Most housing experts who have visited

the estates agree that they are well-built
and attractively laid out.t

Rents and Subsidies

Financially the schemes are not successful.
They are run at a loss, and both rent and
social services are subsidized by the authorities.t But it is claimed that the cost to the
community would be greater if such families
were not subject to general supervision and
reformative influence, since they include
many fathers who would probably otherwise be in prison, and wives and children who
would be in public institutions or infirmaries.
The rents charged appear to be lower than
those generally prevailing for working-class
dwellings in the same towns. A recent list
of average municipal rents in Amsterdam
ranges from 3:0 florins to 6:50 florins per
week.§ In this list, the rents of the asocial
colonies are given as a minimum of 2°75
florins and a maximum of 3:50 florins, the
average being about 3-25 florins per week.
The mean annual rent for workers’ dwellings
is given by the Amsterdam municipal yearbook as 325 florins per annum (Jan. 1938),
which suggests that the higher figure of
6-50 florins in the municipal list is the more
usual one. This means that the rents of
dwellings in the special colonies are only
slightly more than half the usual figure.
In the Controle Woningen, there are wider
variations, due to the three-fold classification employed. But even here the figure for

* Figures from the Congress Report on Housing for
Special Groups, p. 9 (Holland). Published by International Federation for Housing and Town Planning,
Stockholm, 1909.

+ See for example Elizabeth Denby, Europe re-housed,
1938.

¢ In Amsterdam, for example, the subsidy allowed on
each dwelling is sixty guilders a year, which is ten more
than the present maximum for ordinary municipal
dwellings.

§ Privately supplied by the Nederlandsch Instituut
voor Volkshuisvesting en Stedebouw.
HOUSING ASOCIAL FAMILIES IN HOLLAND

the first-class dwellings is lower than the
average. The scale is as follows :*

Third-class dwellings—3-30 florins per week
Second-class ,, —3-:80_,, ”
First-class » 5°00 _ ,, 9

Consequently, the worker who lives in an
asocial colony and who is in regular employment, pays a lower proportion of his income
in rent than is common in Holland, where
rents for the lower-income groups appear
to be unusually high. The most recent
investigation gives the average figure for the
lowest-income group in Amsterdam (1934-5)
as 25:8 per cent. of income.t Families in the
special colonies however would have.to spend
only about half this proportion if in regular
employment, and even if the family income
were not regular (which is more likely among
the families classed as “‘ problem” cases
than among ordinary workers), the rent
would rarely form a higher percentage of
income than is usual in large towns in
Holland.

Results of Schemes

The effects of these measures on different
families appear to vary considerably. In
Amsterdam, 43 Zeeburgerdorp families and
tor Asterdorp families have been drafted to
ordinary dwellings. Figures are not available of the number who have passed through
the estates, but when we consider that the
former colony consists of 55 houses, and has
existed for thirteen years, and the latter of
132 dwellings built twelve years ago, we
may conclude that either a very small proportion of families qualify for ordinary
dwellings, or that the rate of re-classification

* From article entitled ‘‘ New quarters and the
development of flats in Amsterdam,” filed in the library
of the Housing Centre; undated but recent.

t+ Enquiry conducted by the Bureau van Statistiek,
Amsterdam, into the budgets of 184 families. The
figures were kindly sent to the author by the Director
of the Bureau, Dr. R. Claeys, and are as follows :

Income category
Under 1,400 fl. per annum
I,400-1,900 fl. »

Proportion spent in vent
25°8 per cent.
20°3 %

I,Q00-2,900 16°5 ”
2,900-4,000 » 13°4 4
4,000-6,000 » I2°9 »
6,000-12,000 ” 10:9 ”
12,000 fl. and over ... 1o°r »

175

is slow. In all the colonies it has been found
that a number of families remain for years,
apparently resisting with success all the
beneficent influence of the special housing
facilities. Some of these individuals are
no doubt cases for the psycho-pathologist ;
while others are just mentally backward.
It has been agreed that even for those families
who appear incapable of improvement,
schemes of supervision are worth while,
since it is possible to ensure for them healthy
dwellings and decent environment, which,
in addition to benefiting the people concerned, are considered to possess a wider
social significance.

Recently it has become increasingly difficult to find sufficient people to fill the
colonies. J. L. Flipse, Director of Housing
in Amsterdam, gives the present figures of
occupation as 69 dwellings in Asterdorp out
of a total of 132 and 24 out of 55 in Zeeburgerdorp.* That is, only about fifty per
cent. of the houses are occupied at present,
compared with eighty per cent. in 1933.
Similarly, in the Controle Woningen, 53 out
of a possible 106 were in occupation in
December 1936, while a year later the number
had dropped to 18, compared with 102 in
1924 and ror in 1925.t How can this
decline be explained ? Is it due to a general
improvement in the standard of behaviour
and housing, or to the fact that families
who would previously have been forced to
inhabit the controlled colonies are now able
to find other accommodation ?

Both of these explanations probably contain a measure of truth. The present housing
surplus has undoubtedly meant that many
tenants who would otherwise have been
forced to apply for municipal houses have
found satisfactory accommodation elsewhere,
even though at higher rents. They thereby
avoid the somewhat humiliating investigation into their sociable qualities. At the same
time, with the rapid disappearance of slums,
the kind of social behaviour that is associated
and frequently engendered by them also
disappears. In Holland, large sums of money

* In a letter to the author dated May 1939.
+ Figures supplied privately by the Director of The
Hague Housing and Town Planning Department.
176

have been devoted in recent years to the
abolition of slums,* and clearance is being
carried out in most districts in conformity
with the building development plans that all
communes with more than 10,000 inhabitants
are required to prepare. Thus, since the
“ asocial’’’ category of the population appears to a large extent to have been a product
of unsatisfactory housing conditions, the
improvement in these is itself leading to a
diminution in the size of this special group.
Those who remain “ social problems ’”’ can
hardly be regarded as a group at all. They
are rather a heterogeneous collection of
families, each with its individual peculiarity of behaviour. It does not seem that
the method of dealing with this remainder
by means of special housing facilities and
specially trained housing inspectors is a
particularly satisfactory one, since adequate treatment involves knowledge of a
variety of specialist problems not usually
within the province of a single individual.
It has been found in practice increasingly
difficult to obtain women who will take on
the task of readapting this mixed collection
to a new social environment. These who do
try find the work so exhausting and difficult
that the Amsterdam authorities have been
led to recommend a restriction of their period
of service to five years. Probably the results
would have been more satisfactory if some
of the families still housed in the controlled

* For the purpose of building new dwellings to replace
slums, contributions are made by the State to cover the
deficit in management, in addition to ordinary advances
for building the dwellings. The deficit may not be more
than fifty florins per annum, half of which is borne by
the State, and the other half by the local authority.
The condition of this award is that the number of
dwellings erected must equal those evacuated. From
1925-37, the State contributed 313,277 florins for
11,437 dwellings, under the terms of this special
regulation. In addition a subsidy is given for slum
tenants in rural areas who are owners of their own
dwellings, to make it possible for them to build new
ones. For this purpose, the Treasury makes a lump sum
grant up to a maximum of 300 florins, and requires the
commune to contribute the same amount. Between
1928 and 1937, 65,535 florins have been granted in
respect of 231 dwellings of this type. Altogether,
therefore, the Treasury has been involved in an
expenditure of 378,812 florins since 1925 for slumclearance subsidies. Local authorities have contributed
a similar amount. (Figs. from H. van der Kaa, op. cié.,
and privately.)

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

estates had been placed in the hands of
skilled psychiatrists, for a scientific investigation into the causes of their maladjustment
to be made.

Admittedly, territorial concentration of
“‘ abnormal ”’ families does facilitate detailed
control and direction of the lives and education of children. But the number of children
involved necessarily diminishes with a decrease in the number of families housed, and
the task of supervising them individually
if they were to live in scattered communities
is thus more practicable than formerly. It is
questionable too whether specialized education can make up for the double environmental disability from which these children
suffer. In addition to a somewhat abnormal
home environment, the stigma of being in a
specialized colony must exercise an undesirable influence on the development of
youthful minds. As far as Holland is concerned, however, the whole question will soon
become one of academic importance alone.
Present indications suggest that within a
comparatively short time the asocial estates
will have virtually disappeared. The Director
of Housing in Amsterdam has already announced his intention of proposing that
Asterdorp be closed, and only the smaller
estate retained.* In The Hague, the authorities have almost closed down the Controle
Woningen as a special scheme, and at present
only a dozen or so of the houses are being
used for the purpose for which they were
originally intended. The rest are classed as
ordinary municipal dwellings.

However interesting the Dutch schemes
may have been, therefore, the fact that they
are proving short-lived suggests that they
are no more than a temporary expedient,
suitable to a certain stage in the progress
of re-housing, but now rendered superfluous
by the great advances made during the past
decade.

Summary

Great progress has been made in Holland
in the provision of adequate housing facilities since the beginning of the century,
particularly during the post-war period. In

* Communicated by J. L. Flipse to the author.
HOUSING ASOCIAL FAMILIES IN HOLLAND

addition, experiments in accommodating
‘“‘ special groups”’ have been carried out.
Arrangements for one such group, the
“‘asocial’’ families, are discussed in the preceding article. In essence the scheme consists
of segregating the families, providing them
with adequate accommodation, and subjecting them to varying degrees of supervision.

177

Several schemes are described in detail and
the results assessed. While their educative
influence is admitted, the general rise in
Dutch housing standards has led to a steady
dwindling of the size of the group, and the
families which remain cannot be regarded as
constituting a distinct housing problem as
such.

JOURNAL OF THE
ROYAL STATISTICAL SOCIETY

First Issued in 1838
The annual volume consists at present of four parts, each of which contains two papers read

at Meetings of the Society, with full reports of the discussions thereon ;

also Miscellaneous

statistical articles, Reviews of statistical and economic books, and Notes on matters of
current interest to statisticians.

Principal Contents of Part III, 1939
THE SOCIAL DISTRIBUTION OF UNIVERSITY EDUCATION.

By MAJOR GREENWOOD, F.R.S.

Discussion on JUVENILE DELINQUENCY : opened by

Dr. E. C. RHODES.

Recent Advances in Mathematical Statistics : Bibliography (1937-1938).

By H. O. HARTLEY, Ph.D.

PRICE

Each Part

1 O / Annual Subscription
™ (Post free to any part of Pe World)

41/
Beginning with 1938, the price of each part will be 10/-, and the annual subscription 41/-.
Obtainable through any Bookseller or direct from

THE ROYAL STATISTICAL SOCIETY

4 PORTUGAL STREET, LONDON, W.C.2

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXI, No. 3.
