THE EUGENICS REVIEW

could occur in due course in southern Asia
itself. Although the data are not plentiful or easy
to handle, he has made a very thorough study,
with the aid inter alia of techniques created by
Professor Brass.

Indians in Africa are predominantly urban,
educated and commercial—at least when considered relatively to their country of origin.
Although fertility within marriage is high,
marriage itself takes place later than in Asia,
and consequently the birth rate is not so large.
Such a development would be useful in India as
away of reducing burdensome population growth;
it would achieve this without recourse to forms
of birth control to which the author’s Church
might be opposed. One wonders, however, what
the prospects really are that the 500 millions
in India and Pakistan, mainly rural and
uneducated as they are, will in the forseeable
future adopt the habits of a million or so
persons of their race who live in quite different
circumstances in Africa. In spite of this doubt
about the author’s main reason for writing the
book, his study of this group of people is not
*‘slanted”’ and has a considerable interest of its
own.

P. R. C.

PSYCHOTHERAPY

Axline, Virginia M. Dibs: In Search of Self.
London, 1966. Gollancz. Pp. 186. Price 25s.

“DIBS” IS A sensitive, moving and absorbing
account of the treatment by play therapy of a
highly intelligent five-year-old boy who was
living in such a state of unhappy rejection of
the world around him that his parents and some
of his teachers had assumed him to be mentally
defective or hopelessly schizophrenic.

In school the child had refused to participate
in any activity; he spent much of the time
cowering against a wall, and resisted, often
violently, efforts to get him ready to go home.
His parents, a gifted and intellectual couple, felt
there was nothing which could help him, but
they eventually consented to his going to a
weekly play session of one hour with Miss
Axline at the New York Child Guidance Clinic.
In the play room the only direction given to the
child was that he should decide for himself what

166

he would do. Miss Axline maintained a passive
role, offering neither praise, nor blame, nor
affection. She merely quietly repeated some of
the comments the boy made, or described in a
few simple words the activity in which he had
been engaged.

The story is unfolded through the medium of
the fully recorded weekly sessions which continued from the winter until the summer
vacation. Apart from a brief and rather cool
initial interview with the boy’s mother, there
was for a long time no contact between the
therapist and the parents, but as the boy began to
make headway the mother came of her own
accord to see the therapist and revealed her
own and her husband’s earlier bitter feelings
towards him, and his disturbed early history.

In his unrestricted play he relived many
painful experiences and expressed his hostile
feelings while comforting himself by infantile
activities like sucking a feeding bottle. He also
disclosed his innate ability, his love of order, his
excellent reasoning powers, and his appreciation
of language and of beauty. An independent
assessment of his intelligence made at the end
of his treatment gave him an IQ of 168: by then
he had made a happy adjustment to life at home
and school.

This account, beautifully and faithfully related,
should be read particularly by those who doubt
the profound effects which loneliness and lack
of affection can have on the behaviour of a
young child.

Another case-history with an equally remarkable outcome has recently been reported by
Cyril Williams in the Journal of Developmental
Medicine. The child’s parents were of the
professional class, and his mother had refused
to have any contact with her baby when she
learnt soon after his birth that he was hydrocephalic and blind. At five years, after a series
of changes of placement in institutions and
foster-homes, he was assessed as an idiot,
unable to walk, stand, talk or feed himself.
His hearing was doubtful, and he had unpleasing
mannerisms.

He was admitted to a home for the ineducable
blind, where his condition was considered one
of psychotic withdrawal. He improved dramatically with the stimulation he received there,
REVIEWS

rapidly acquired speech, and his IQ score rose.
At eight he entered a school for the blind, and at
sixteen the Royal Normal College for the Blind.
At eighteen he was a well-poised young man
with considerable charm and good looks, and
wide interests. The remarkable change in mental
and emotional development was due to skilled
teaching, warm interest and affection.

HILDA LEWIS

Aspects of Family Mental Health in Europe.
By various authors. Public Health Papers,
No. 28. Geneva, 1965. WHO. Pp. 124. Price
8s. 6d.

THIS BOOK, CONTAINING papers written by
psychiatrists, therapists and other workers from
a number of European countries, is evidence of
the current widespread interest in the family.

The first paper is a stimulating account by
Dr. H. Hoffmeyer of the work done for the
mother and the family particularly in Scandinavian countries, through family protection
schemes, and specifically in Denmark through
the famous “Mothers’ Aid Centres”. These
centres provide legal, social, medical and
psychiatric services for unmarried as well as
married women. They have a duty to interview
and help women seeking abortion: to provide
contraceptive advice, to supervise adoptions,
to support with financial and other aid overburdened mothers, and to help resolve family
discord. There is much in these schemes which
is relevant to the revision of our own abortion
laws and the Seebohm Committee’s inquiry into
better ways of integrating our local authority
and personal social services.

Among the papers dealing with practical
social welfare, there is an interesting account by
a psychiatrist of the slowly changing situation
in the employment of women in Spain—a
country particularly late in making use of this
reservoir of labour and talent. Various supportive schemes and centres to protect the family
from breakdown have already been found
necessary, although at the same time the
cultural value of widening the women’s horizons
has been recognized.

OF BOOKS

Monsieur A. Isambert describes the development of the well-known “Schools for Parents”
which have been successfully developed in
France since the last war, having been founded
in 1929 as part of a scheme to overcome the
indifference of parents to their children’s sexual
and emotional problems. The school in Paris
at first concentrated on teaching parents about
child development, based on psychoanalytic
principles, but was later drawn into much
broader fields of educational psychology and
sociology. It also provides personal psychological
help for the parents themselves, marriage
guidance, and advice for young people. M.
Isambert enumerates similar organizations in
other European countries, but comments on the
relatively slight interest shown in Britain.

Among other papers dealing with the role of
individual and group psychotherapy in clearing
up family upsets, an account by Drs. Jirina
Knoblochova and Ferdinand Knobloch of the
methods practised at the Psychiatric Department
of the University Polyclinic, Prague, shows how
far such efforts have advanced in Central
Europe.

The British contributions include an account
of the Family Discussion Bureau at the Tavistock
Institute of Human Relations, and of the Child
Therapy Clinic at Hampstead, described by
Mrs. L. Pincus and Dr. Joseph Sandler
respectively. a

HILDA LEWIS

ABORTION

Abortion: An Ethical Discussion. London, 1965.
Church Information Office. Pp. 70. Price 4s. 6d.

THIS REPORT IS the work of a committee set up
by the Board for Social Responsibility of the
Church Assembly of the Church of England,
under the chairmanship of Canon I. T. Ramsey,
Nolloth Professor of the Philosophy of the
Christian Religion at Oxford, the secretary being
the Reverend G. R. Dunstan. It is lucid, impartial,
and thorough, and presents a cogent argument
for a limited reform of the present law, while
stopping short of the proposals made by Lord
Silkin in the Bill which has recently been before
the House of Lords.

167
