THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

HE Annual General Meeting was held
at 69 Eccleston Square, S.W.1, on

| Tuesday, May 28th, 1940, at 5 p.m.,

with the President, Lord Horder, in the Chair.

MINUTES. The minutes of the Annual
General Meeting held on Tuesday, May
16th, 1939, which were contained in the
Annual Report, included in the April issue
of the EUGENICS REVIEW, and had therefore
been circulated to all Fellows and Members
of the Society, were taken as read and signed
as correct.

ANNUAL Report. The Chairman presented the Annual Report, the adoption of
which was proposed by Mr. Bramwell,
seconded by Mr. Binney and carried unanimously.

STATEMENT OF ACCOUNTS AND BALANCE
SHEET. The Honorary Treasurer presented
the Statement of Accounts and Balance
Sheet for the year ended December 3ist,
-1939. These were unanimously adopted.

APPOINTMENT OF HONORARY OFFICERS
AND COUNCIL FOR THE YEAR 1940-1. The
following Resolution, passed by the members of the Emergency Committee at their
meeting held on April 2nd, 1940, was read
by the President :

‘“‘ Since it appears to this meeting that
it is undesirable in present circumstances
to have elections of members of Council,
it is hereby resolved that the procedure

be modified during the current year by the
suspension of the annual election of members of Council and that those members of
Council who have consented shall remain
in office without further election for that
period with the powers vested in them.”

It was therefore agreed that the Honorary
Officers and Council should remain as
appointed at the Annual General Meeting
held on May 16th, 1939, with two exceptions: 1. Owing to the resignation of
Professor Ryle there would be now only
five Vice-Presidents instead of the usual six.
2. The resignation of Sir Mark Grant
Sturgis from the Council; this was received
and accepted last September, to take effect
in May.

The Emergency Committee for the ensuing
year will consist of the following, with power
to co-opt: The Lord Horder, Sir Charles
Arden-Close, Mr. Binney, Mr. Bramwell,
Mr. Chance, The Hon. Mrs. Grant Duff,
Mr. Gun, Mrs. Hubback, Dr. Lewis, Mr.
Martin, Mr. Titmuss.

ELECTION OF AUDITORS FOR THE YEAR
1940-1. It was proposed by Mr. Binney,
seconded by Mr. Gun, and carried unanimously, that the auditors of the Society,
Messrs. West & Drake, be re-elected.

A hearty vote of thanks, proposed by Mr.
Binney, to Lord Horder for his work on
behalf of the Society for the past year was
carried unanimously.

ANNUAL REPORT 1940-41

In this Report, the accounts relate to the
period December 31st, 1939, to December
31st, 1940. The rest of the Report covers
the period from March 31st, 1940, to March
31st, 1941. |

The war and the continued absence on
active service of Dr. Blacker have made the
work of the Socrety difficult during the past

27

year, but in spite of adverse conditions the
Emergency Committee Meetings were regular and well attended. At the October Meeting, however, it was agreed that, in view of
the situation arising out of the war, the work
of the Soctety should be placed on a care and
maintenance basis, and with great regret it
was decided to dispense with the services of
28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Miss Pocock and Miss Dunn, leaving Mrs.
Collyer in charge of the office.

Homes in Canada Service.—Several suggestions were made early in the year about the
possible war-time activities of the Soczety,
and when in June a cablegram was received
from Dr. Hutton, President of the Eugenics
Society of Canada, offering homes in Canada
for the duration of the war to children
selected by the Eugenics Soctety here, it was
unanimously agreed that the offer presented
an opportunity for useful work. A cablegram
of grateful acceptance was despatched, and
to deal with the work a committee was
formed, consisting of Lord Horder, Mr.
C. F. Chance (Chairman), Dr. A. J. Lewis,
Mr. R. M. Titmuss and Miss Pocock (Secretary). Fellows and Members were notified
of the scheme, and within a short time
applications were received on behalf of 41
mothers and 266 children. It did not prove
possible, however, to send more than a
fraction of those who wished to go and for
whom homes were prepared. Three parties
consisting in all of 5 mothers and 23 children left between the beginning of August
and the end of September. All arrived
safely, and judging from their letters are
very happy in their new homes. During the
autumn shipping accommodation became
increasingly difficult to obtain, but there was
always a hope that the situation would
improve after the winter, enabling the Committee to send the remainder of the applicants. Early in February 1941, however, a
letter from Dr. Hutton informed us that the
Government regulations and restrictions in
Canada were so severe that the Eugenics
Society of Canada could no longer carry on
the work and was obliged to “ retire from the
field.”” This left us in a helpless position and,
to our great disappointment and regret, we
have had to do likewise. Dr. Hutton
pointed out that, although the Canadian
Society would be unable to receive and place
any more children under the Homes in
Canada Service, he and the Secretary, Judge
Harkness, would keep in touch with us and
continue to see that those already in Canada
were well cared for.

Eugenics Society of Canada.—We very

much regret to learn that owing to circumstances entirely beyond their control the
Eugenics Society of Canada no longer exists.

Darwin Research Fellowships.—Mr. Pear’s
Report on ‘“ Approach to Marriage’’ was
duly received and submitted to Mr. CarrSaunders and Mr. Titmuss, representing the
Committee. It was agreed that no further
action should be taken.

Problems of Population.—In the Annual
Report of 1939-40 reference was made to
Mr. Glass’s book, which had then been completed but not published. The book has now
appeared and has been very well received.
Thus, taking into account Dr. Leybourne’s
book which appeared last year, two books of
much importance have been published under
the auspices of the Population Investigation
Committee, as well as a considerable number
of special investigations. It was mentioned
in the last report that the Carnegie United
Kingdom Trust had made a grant for the
purpose of assisting an investigation into the
problem of population and housing. During
the present year Dr. Moshinsky has completed a memorandum on housing experiments in foreign countries, and Dr. L. Elsas
has finished his part of an inquiry into the
whole subject of the bearing of population
changes on housing needs. It has been

‘decided to postpone the second part of Dr.

Elsas’s investigation, and he has undertaken
special war work in the meantime. The
inquiry into the demographic problems of
the British Colonial Empire is being continued by Dr. Kuczynski. It was hoped that
the first part of Dr. Kuczynski’s work would
be finished during this year ; but owing to
the growing difficulty of obtaining access to
libraries the work, though proceeding satisfactorily, has been delayed. The delay will
not be of consequence ; the object in aiming
at publication in 1940 was to bring influence
to bear upon the colonial censuses due to be
taken in 1941. Since the taking of these
censuses has been postponed, the fact that,
Dr. Kuczynski’s work will appear later than
planned is unimportant.

Population Policies Commitiee.—In 1940 it
became clear that the Committee could not:
carry on its work, and by Easter all attempts
ANNUAL REPORT 1940-41 29

at further meetings were abandoned for the
time being. Members of the Committee were
absent or unable to attend meetings through
pressure of war-time duties, and it was
generally felt that it would be unwise to
attempt to publish a Report on Population
Policies in the midst of a war, especially
since the Committee was not in a position to
work on the drafts submitted to it by the
Secretary. Mr. Lafitte has now become a
full-time member of the staff of P.E.P.,
where he is working mainly on research into
the social services. This work fits in closely
with research on population policies.

It has been agreed that Mr. Lafitte should
devote one or two days each week to population work, and gradually to issue outlines for
the remaining chapters of the Report. Whenever the Committee is able to resume regular
meetings, these outlines can be discussed.
They can be edited and written up in the
light of war-time developments as soon as
peace is in sight, so that the Report can be
issued as soon as possible after the end of the
war.

Drafts of Chapter I (introductory), Chapter II (causes of the fall in fertility), and
Chapter III (statistical survey of population
trends) were completed in the period when
the Committee still met. Detailed outlines
for Chapter IV (consequences of changes in
size and age-composition of the population),
Chapter V (consequences of differential
fertility) and Chapter VII (principles of a
population policy) have been prepared, but
the Committee has not discussed them.
Many preliminary studies of other subjects
were also written, and from these further
outlines will be elaborated in due course,
beginning with chapters on the provision of
skilled services and on family income.
After a long delay Mr. Lafitte has begun
work on elaborating the outline of Chapter
V into a memorandum on the eugenic aspects
of family allowances, as was promised to the
Society a year ago. The memorandum will,
of course, express his personal opinions only.
He has also used some of the material in the
outline of Chapter IV for an article in the
January 1941 issue of the EUGENICS REVIEW,
again stating his personal opinions.

Education Department.—During the period
between the date of the last Annual Report
and the end of October, Miss Pocock
struggled valiantly to carry on the work of
this department, but the massed daylight
air raids, dislocation of traffic and other
causes led to a serious reduction in the
number of lectures she was able to give.
Quite a number were delivered, however,
and since Miss Pocock’s departure, Mrs.
Grant Duff has addressed five women’s
organizations. Four further lectures have
been promised, and it is hoped that these will
lead to more invitations. The Soczety’s film,
From Generation to Generation, has been out
on loan five times this year.

Family Planning Association.—Advice on
involuntary sterility is available at all the
Association’s Birth Control Clinics. Most of
these, even in the worst-bombed districts,
are still open. The Medical Sub-Committee
continues to examine the value of present
contraceptive methods and to report on
them to the medical profession and other
inquirers, The Association’s work in India
is not much hampered by the war and,
though progress is inevitably slow, ground
is being gained. The Family Planning Association retains its London address for
inquirers, but since June 1940 the main
work of headquarters has been evacuated to
190 Old Christchurch Road, Bournemouth.
The Association is continually used as a
centre of information by public and private
bodies, doctors, scientists, and members of
the public.

Galton Celebration.—Again it was agreed
that a dinner would be out of place during
the war, and an informal luncheon was held
instead at Pinoli’s Restaurant on Monday,
February 17th, 1941. This was attended by
forty-four members and their friends, and
was followed by a discussion on “‘ Eugenics
in War Time,” opened by Lord Horder, who
presided.

Members’ Meetings.—The following have
been held :

April 19th, 1940.—‘‘ The War-time Case
for Family Allowances,” by Mrs. Eva
Hubback, M.A.

June 3rd, 1940.—“‘ The Importance of the
30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Child ’’ (with special reference to the Work
of the National Council for Maternity and
Child Welfare), by Sir Bruce Bruce-Porter,
K.B.E., C.M.G., D.L.

It was decided not to hold further meetings
until the situation improved, but, after the
success of the Galton luncheon, it was agreed
to arrange a series of informal luncheons on
the same lines. The first of these was held
at Pinoli’s Restaurant on March 25th, 1941,
when fifty people were present and heard an
interesting address by Mr. Kenneth Lindsay,
M.P., on ‘‘ New Slants on British Education.”

Finance.—The usual statement of Income
and Expenditure, Balance Sheet and List of
Investments will be found at the end of this
Report, with corresponding figures for the
previous year. It will be seen that last year
there was an excess of expenditure over
income of {233 2s. 5d.

The Soczety has received notification of a
legacy of {100 from the late Mrs. Alec
Tweedie, whose death is recorded elsewhere
in this Report.

Library.—Comparatively few books have
been added to the library during the year,
the total number now being 2,827, an
increase of only thirty-one. The Society is
again indebted to Miss E. Corry for her
valuable services as Honorary Librarian,
and to Miss Lane, Review Secretary, who
has supervised the library during Miss
Corry’s months of absence.

“* Review.’’-—Though it has of necessity been
much reduced in size the REVIEW has been
able to retain its characteristic features and
to maintain its circulation. Throughout the
year 500 copies of each issue have gone to the
American Eugenics Society and 100 copies

each to the Eugenics Societies of Victoria
and Canada, though the recently announced
disbanding of the Canadian Society means
that the ReEviEw will no longer reach
eugenists in that dominion. Particular attention has been paid to the eugenic aspects of
war-time measures and policies and population movements both in this country and, so
far as data can be obtained, in Europe and
the world in general.

Obituary.—We regret to announce the
deaths of the following: Dr. Kenneth
Aikman, Mrs. Anstruther, Mrs. Barrow
Cadbury, Mrs. Leonard Darwin, Mr. T. E.
Lloyd, Mr. Frederick Rathbone, Professor
J. B. Robertson, Mrs. Stebbing, Mrs. Alec
Tweedie, Dr. Douglas White, and Sir Arnold
Wilson. The Consultative Council has also
suffered a loss in the death of Professor
F. A. P. Aveling.

Register of Fellows and Members.—An
analysis is presented of the Soczety’s Register
for the period April Ist, 1940, to March 31st,
IQ4I:

Life
Fellows Fellows Members Total

Total, March 31st,

1940... 7I 234 281 586
Elections, 1940-1 3 16 19
7I 237° «297 += 605
Less
Deceased we 3 4 3 10
Resigned we 14 15 29
Lapsed ... 8 13 2I
Total, March 31st,
I94I... .. 68 21% 266 545
Affiliated Societies 4
