BERG'S “NOMOGENESIS.””"

A CRITICISM OF NATURAL SELECTION.

By Professor E. W. MacBrive, F.R.S.

This remarkable book by a biologist well known for his researches:
in embryology is well worthy of the close attention of pure Darwinian.
evolutionists. It is an attack on the theory that natural selection has.
been the main factor in promoting Evolution: and though Lamarckism
or the view that evolution is due to the reaction of the organism to:
changed environment is accepted as a secondary factor, yet the main
emphasis is laid on supposed ineluctable laws of development grounded
in the sterochemistry of colloids, which force organisms to evolve
in certain directions irrespective altogether of the environment.

The argument against the power of natural selection to produce
evolution is an old one but it is powerfuly stressed. Natural selection is.
a purely negative agent : it weeds out but it does not create : it accounts.
for the elimination of the unfit, but not for the appearance of the fit.
What the belief in natural selection as an efficient agent really implies.
is the constant occurrence of small inheritable variations in all directions. This assumption is directly contradicted by every relevant
experiment devised to test the point. If the conditions are kept constant
selection is powerless to effect progressive change. In a mixture of
strains, one strain alone is left, but within this strain no change can be
effected. This point was first proved by Johannsen in beans, later by
Agar in Crustacea, and finally by Jennings in Paramecium. But the
same thing was proved by Macdowell in Drosophila itself; this, a new
addition to the stock of pure line experiments, is one amongst many
valuable additions to our store of biological knowledge contained in the:
book.

But Berg is not content with these arguments, powerful and conclusive as they are, against natural selection. He adds others which
seem to us to be of doubtful validity. Thus he conceives the most

*Berg, LeoS. Nomogenesis or Evolution determined by Law translated from
the Russian by J. N. Rostovtsow, with an introduction by D’Arcy Wentworth.
Thompson. Pp. xiii+477 (including index) with 33 illustrations. London.
Constable & Co
BERG’S ‘* NOMOGENESIS.”’ 33

frequent instance of natural selection to be the extinction of ‘large
numbers of a species by hunger. He compares this to the procedure of a
farmer who should begin to hit all his domestic animals on the head.
A large number would be killed, but the few that survived would not
be the better for the process but would be weakened. Further, he
says that where an epidemic sweeps through a population and kills off
a large number, the survivors are weakened and are therefore less fit
to survive than before. Now both these statements in our judgment
are travesties of the truth. No species of animal is continually living
on the brink of starvation. At intervals periods of scarcity and privation supervene andthese sweep away all the weaklings, but they certainly
do not incapacitate all the survivors ; for there is evidence to show that
with the recurrence of prosperity the losses of the bad time are overcompensated and lead to an increased growth and abnormal size.
So too with epidemics. Whilst it is true that some survivors which
have suffered severely may be permanently weakened, they are nevertheless immune against subsequent attacks of the epidemic, ‘and the
majority of the survivors which have only had slight attacks are not
only immune but by virtue of ‘‘over compensation’’ stronger than
before; there is further evidence to show that this acquired immunity
is inherited.

There is no doubt that Alfred Russell Wallace was right when he
said that by the action of natural selection wild species of animals are
kept in a condition of abounding health and vitality. A practical
demonstration of this truth was afforded by the experience of the Swiss
in their new national park. In their efforts to preserve the chamois,
they eliminated all the wolves: they then found that the herd became
diseased, but that when a certain proportion of wolves were admitted to
the park the herd regained its health.

But if evolution has really taken place, and if small inheritable
variations in all directions do not occur, how has it been brought about ?
As the late Dr. Bateson forcefully stated it, there are in the last resort
only two alternatives which are left to us, either hereditary changes are
due to chance or they are due to reactions of changed environment.
The first alternative one would hardly regard as scientific—nevertheless it is the one which is adopted by the Morgan school of Mendelian
mutationists. The phrase ‘‘a mutation occurred’’ is supposed to be a
sufficient explanation of any type of evolution whatever! It is
significant that not long before his death Dr. Bateson attended a
scientific meeting at which the reviewer was present and openly stated
his disbelief that the mutations to the study of which he had given his
life had anything to do with evolution at all.

The alternative view that reactions to changes in the environment
which all admit to occur within the lifetime of the individual are
handed on to posterity, then holds the field and is being endorsed by a
continually increasing number of those really competent to judge.
The evidence that evolution has taken place is derived from systematic
zoology, from palaeontology and from embryology. Our leading
systematists in zoology in England and the palaeontologists of both
England and America have declared themselves supporters of the Lamarckian view, and as to embryology the recapitulation of ancestral
34 | EUGENICS REVIEW.

structure which stares us in the face when we study life-histories can
only be explained on the basis of Lamarckism. ,

But Prof. Berg, as we have already stated, though admitting
Lamarckism as a secondary factor, falls back for the main cause of
evolution on mysterious. ‘‘laws of development in a definite direction. ’’
This conception is usually termed ‘‘orthogenesis’’ and is most unjustly
attributed to Eimer. Eimer expressly repudiated the idea that animals.
changed their structure from internal causes irrespective of the action
of the environment on them. All he says is that whilst the environment is the exciting cause the ‘‘kind of change which makes its appearance is conditioned by the nature ofthe animal’ ’—aconclusion whichfew
would deny. Where Eimer differs from Lamarck is that the former
seems to regard variation as the direct result of the impact of the
environment, whereas Lamarck with far more justice regards the
environment as primarily conceived in rousing the animal to fresh
activity and the variation as the result of the exercise of organs by that
activity.

Orthogenesis—in Berg’s sense—is a phantom which seems to
float before the vision of many palaeontologists. They find evidence
of allied stocks simultaneously undergoing evolution in the same direction and because the rocks in which the fossils are embedded do not
allow of an adequate analysis of the environmental changes which were
going on at the same time, these scientists jump to the totally unwarranted conclusion that the evolution was independent of the
environmental change. Where the environmental development can be
deduced from the strata it is seen that organic form changes with it
step by step. The greater part of the book under review is made up
of series of instances of this ‘‘parallel development.’’ Some of these
instances are well known to all zoologists and are adequately explained
as the plastic response of somewhat similar organisms to similar
changes in environment; other instances are crude and unjustifiable
guesses which would be accepted by no British authority, such as the
idea that the notochord in Amphioxus in Cyclostomata and in higher
vertebrates has been independently evolved.

. Berg’s argument in favour of evolution from inner causes alone
seems to be based chiefly on certain observations on Ammonites.
An Ammonite has a shell coiled in one plane,only the terminal portion
of which is occupied by the living animal ; the inner and older portions of
the coil represent a series of habitations in which the same animal
dwelt during the younger stages of its existence. An ammonite shell is
therefore to a certain extent a permanent record cf life history. Now
Berg informs us that the inner coils of certain species shcw characters.
that are permanent in cther species— so that at first sight one would
conclude that the species which showed transitory characters in its.
younger stages was descended from the one in which these characters
were permanent. But according to Berg this latter species appears.
later in geological time than its suppcsed descendants, hence he says,
these transitory characters are a contradiction of the biogenetic law,
and he explains them as ‘‘prophetic rudiments.’’ Our comment on
this is (1) it is rash and unjustifiable to conclude that because a species.
is found in younger strata it did not exist when older strata were
BERG’S ‘‘ NOMOGENESIS.”’ 35

being laid down: Darwin’s convincing arguments in favour of the imperfection of the geological record seem not to have penetrated Berg’s
mind, (2) similar modifications recur in the history of the same stock
when similar conditions reappear, thus an allantoic placenta has been
developed in the Mammals and in certain Scincid lizards: we conclude
that the ammonite showing transitory features in its inner coils has
been derived from an earlier as yet undiscovered one in which these
features were permanent.

Another of Berg’s arguments is that certain structures, apparently
adaptations to well defined habits, occur in animals which do not have
those habits. Thus the flying gurnard Dactylopterus has enlarged
pectoral fins which are extended like parachutes when the animal leaps
out of the water. The allied Prionotus of N. America which lives
on the bottom has also enlarged pectoral fins, but does not leap out of
the water. Therefore Berg concludes that Dactyopterus did not
acquire enlarged fins by the habit of flying. But this conclusion will
not stand a moment’s criticism. An organ which is used more than
customary in any kind of habit will have its growth increased. Anyone who has seen Dactyopterus is struck with the greater size and more
brilliant coloration of its fins as compared with those of allied species,
but the pectoral fins in such short stumpy fish as the gurnards are important organs of balance under water , and so are likely to be enlarged.

It is true that Berg adduces abnormal specimens of river fish such
as tench and roach with elongated pectorals, but these long and bladelike fins are quite different from the flying organs of Dactyopterus and
Exoceetus (the flying herring). The two principal difficulties in the
way of applying the Lamarckian principle to evolution in general are
the phenomena of mimicry on the one hand and the characters of the
neuter insects belonging to the Ants and Termites on the other.

On the question of mimicry Berg has some valuable criticism to
offer. The commonest example adduced is that of the superficial resem blance of some supposedly edible butterflies of the families Pieridae
(whites) and Papilionidae (swallow-tails) to members of families like the
Danaidae which are supposed to be distasteful to birds and so to escape
destruction. But as Berg points out, there is exceedingly little evidence
that ordinary birds attack butterflies at all: one family of birds (the
bee-eaters—Meropidae) forms an exception, but these attack all kinds
of butterflies indiscriminately and indeed show a preference for Danaldae,since these by their habit of flying high are easier to catch.
AIt is obvious that whatever gave rise to mimicry, it was not the selection of ‘‘chance’’ variations that caused one species’ accidently to
resemble another and so escape persecution. It has been shown that
the pigments in a butterfly’s wing are excretory products and a similarity in physiological processes in different species is a far more justifiable explanation of mimicry than natural selection.

With neuter insects Berg does not deal. Obviously no habits or
structures which they acquire during their lives can be passed on to
their posterity by these insects for such a posterity does not exist.
But both soldier and worker castes of insects have inherited their
inborn peculiarities from the perfect insects (king and queen), and it is
a tenable proposition that all these peculiarities were characters of the
86. EUGENICS REVIEW.

ancestral] insect before the caste system was evolved, but that some ofthem
are now not manifested by the perfect insect because this type is now
almost helpless and entirely dependent on the other castes ; the deepseated potencies however are stillthere and canbe called forth inthe imperfect insect by peculiarities of feeding. It is noteworthy that in
most termites the soldier is a degraded female, but in Architermopsis a
primitive form Imms found that the soldier was a modified male.

Like other zoologists who look for other than Lamarckian factors
as causes for evolution Berg has difficulty in dealing with recapitulation. For if the life history really summarises the ancestral history,
then advances in evolution first showed themselves in adult life at the
end of development and gradually made their appearance earlier as
time went on. The deduction that the earlier stages remained unaltered is entirely incompatible with the idea that evolution is due to
sudden and inexplicable germina! jumps such as Morgan’s mutations,
and so Morgan like Berg has recently attacked recapitulation. Berg’s
explanation is very curious. His mysterious evolutionary laws produce an evolution of the race from the simple to the complex, and the
development of the individual necessarily proceeds from the simple
germ to the complex adult, and so.the two series exhibit a broad
parallelism and similarity which is destitute of deeper meaning. One
is tempted to ask whether Berg has ever heard of the notochord, brain
and eye of the Ascidian tadpole which are discarded as the animal
grows older, or of the complex spiral shell of the young Bulla which is
replaced by the simple cap-like one of the adult. Such assertions simply
cause mild astonishment in the mind of the comparative embryologist
at the idea that such ignorance could exist in the mind of anyone professing to be a zoologist. We must deal briefly with Berg’s attitude
to ‘‘mutations.’’ Such phenomena—even if as Berg in agreement
with expert systematists admits, they have nothing to do with evolution—demand an explanation. They were termed ‘‘sports’’ by the
older authors including Darwin, they occur sporadically—they are
monstrous, i.e., they have no relation to habits or function, but they
are strongly inheritable. Berg emphasises as did Dr. Bateson that
such mutations are fertile when crossed with the type, and that the off~
spring exhibit Mendelian segregation and dominance, whereas Linnean
species when crossed are either sterile or if they do ‘produce offspring
these are intermediate in character between the two parents.

The most probable explanation is that sports are due to the weakening of the germ, leading to the slowing down of one or other of the
developmental processes. The result of this is that the harmony of
development is interfered with and distortions of the organs result.
This view which the reviewer has previously set forth in this journal
in extenso in giving an account of the work of Tornier receives support
from some observations recorded by Berg. He notes that Bantams
and Leghorns in extreme old age may acquire the colours of the gamecock which are those of the ancestral Gallus bankiva. Here the process
which in the type rapidly produces the proper pigments, in the sports
only does so later in life. Berg applies the term mutation in the sense
in which it is employed by the palaeontologist Waagen, to signify
the suppositious sudden transformation of an enormous mass of individBERG’S ‘*‘ NOMOGENKESIS.”’ 37

uals into a new species. This theory as explained above,is entirely
inconsistent with the conclusion drawn from the best known fossil
series, by those of the camel and the horse—it ignores the imperfection
of the fossil records and merely revives the earliest and completely
exploded objections to evolution as propounded by Darwin.

To summarise :—Berg’s destructive criticsm of the theory that the
natural selection of fortuitous variations is the cause of evolution is
excellent and convincing, but his attempt to institute in its place a
constructive idea of orthogenesis is exceedingly weak. All his
*“parallel developments’’ are completely explained by the reaction of
similar organisms to similar environmental changes, his ‘‘mutations’’
are misinterpretations due to gaps in the fossil record. But natural
selection is a reality: the fact that the vast majority of the young
perish prematurely cannot be ignored. What then determines survival? The answer is the greater or less development of the one
quality which in every specics varies continuously, and that is viGouR.
It is the vigorous only, as remarked by Kammerer, that respond to
change of environment by changes of structure—what nature preserves
is the most ‘‘bildsam’’—-(modifiable). As to the causes of this variation in vigour we can only speculate. We may note the following
suggestive facts. A sea-urchin which throughout the breeding season
produces eggs from which hatch out vigorous larvae, towards the end of
this period lays eggs which develop slowly and die before reaching
even the stage of the typical larvae. A sea urchin egg can be induced
to develop parthenogenetically: and it has been reared through the
complete development as far as the young sea-urchin by Miss Jordan
Lloyd, but it possesses only half the normal quantity of chromosomes
and is at all stages weak and liable to die. A large proportion of the
spawn of fish which lay pelagic eggs, is said to dic for no assignable
reason. We are thus led to the view that vigour is determined by
efficiency of early nutrition, by the condition of the parent during
the ripening of the egg and the position of the egg in the ovary is also
probably a determining factor in the amount of vigour developed.
