THE NEED FOR WIDESPREAD EUGENIC
REFORM DURING RECONSTRUCTION.

By MAJoR LEONARD DARWIN.

ABOUT a year and a half ago in our REVIEW I placed before the Society
certain arguments in favour of the belief that eugenists shiould look to
quality rather than to quantity in their efforts to promote racial progress.
Reforms of many kinds, moral, social, educational and financial, might
now be introduced which would tend slowly to improve the inborn
qualities of the nation as the generations succeeded each other; and of the
practical measures mentioned on that occasion, perhaps the most
important was the organisation of a strenuous endeavour to persuade the
poor to limit the size of their families with regard to their probable
powers of being able unaided to bring up their children in comfort, whilst
instituting an equally strenuous propagamda in favour of lessening that
limitation of families which is now so frequently practised by those who
could afford to have more children if they would take the well-being
rather than the social status of the family into consideration. The eugenic
arguments in favour of such a propaganda are based on the fact that a
tendency must always exist in a society like ours for the unfit to fall
into the lowest economic strata, and for the more capable to rise into the
ranks of the well-to-do. It is true, no doubt, that if we only look to
inherited wealth, it may be disputable whether any correlation exists
between ability of any kind and the possession of riches acquired by
previous generations; because such riches tend to keep the unfit in the
ranks of the wealthy; a consideration which may, however, be more than
counterbalanced as regards average results by the greater choice in
selection in marriage afforded by the possession of wealth whilst young.
This question may, however, here be left undecided; for it is sufficient
for my purpose if it be admitted that the class which has to rely in a
measure on the State, or in other words on their neighbours, for assisance
in order to meet the cost of rearing their families contains a somewhat
higher proportion of the biologically unfit than does the self-supporting
section of the community; in which case any change in the relative rate
of multiplication of these two groups must in some degree affect the
racial qualities of future generations for good or for evil. The necessity
for taking action in order to insure that those who are living independent
lives shall on the whole multiply relatively more rapidly than the
dependent and parasitic types now seems to me to be even more urgent
than when I then spoke; partly, perhaps, because I have more clearly
perceived certain immediate social advantages which would result from
the size of families being more closely related to the wage-earning
capacities of the parents. Though no one could fail to recognise the
advantages of lessening the distress amongst the poorest strata of society
146 EUGENICS REVIEW.

by reducing the numbers of their progeny, yet it was not to me equally
apparent that an increase in the size of the families of the fit would be
accompanied by immediate social and economic advantages. Any
increase in the fertility of the well-to-do, if insufficient to cause actual
poverty, would both increase the proportion of the well educated in the
ranks of the nation, and also decrease the proportion of those acquiring
large fortunes by inheritance; and the more equal distribution of both
knowledge and wealth thus produced would be highly advantageous.
If we could make the size of families bear a closer relationship to the
probable future incomes of the parents, we should, in fact, produce great
social and great racial benefits.

The main reason for the increase in our desire to see the question
of racial progress adequately considered when peace comes is, however,
the comtinuance of the slaughter of our best types in this terrible war.
The point in connection with this subject which I wish to suggest for
your consideration to-day is that, though in one sense quantity is of far
less importance than quality, yet that the racial harm resulting from this
immense destruction of the more fit cannot possibly be entirely obviated
by measures which would merely result in the prevention of parenthood
amongst that small fraction of the community who may fairly be described
as the grossly unfit, even if accompanied by measures tending to produce
an increase in fertility of another small group at the other end of the
eugenic scale. Such eugenic measures would be highly desirable in
themselves; but unless we can introduce reforms covering as wide a
racial field as that affected by the engines of war of our enemies, we
must look forward to racial deterioration, great or small, as being the
inevitable result of this war. We must not rest satisfied with, as it were,
cutting off a thin slice of decay at the bottom, whilst putting on a no
thicker layer of good material at the top, but we ought at the same
time also to strive to introduce measures having a more widespread
action. There are, moreover, certain theoretical considerations which
point to the conclusion that general measures of reform affecting large
sections of the community, even if they should seem to be but feeble
and partial in their action, might nevertheless under present conditions
produce greater racial effects in certain directions than could be produced
by the more obvious methods of dealing directly with individually
selected groups of the grossly unfit or of the exceptionally fit. My
remarks on these theoretical points should be regarded, no doubt, as
being merely suggestive and made with the purpose of eliciting discussion. If the theoretical considerations which I shall put before you
should not, however, be eventually destroyed by the critiadsm which I
desire to evoke, it may be that they ought to have no inconsiderable
influence in determining the eugenic policy which should be adopted in
certain directions.

Before passing on to discuss this somewhat technical point, I wish,
however, to safeguard myself against attack by erecting defensive works
in certain quarters. It will no doubt be urged that there is no reason
for supposing that those who are capable of earning a sufficient income
THE NEED FOR WIDESPREAD EUGENIC REFORM. 147

to secure their independence are likely to be possessed with innate
qualities above the average, and that we have, therefore, no ground for
assuming that an increase in their progeny would make for racial progress. It should perhaps be noted that eugenists certainly do not assert
that individuals who have acquired great wealth are likely to be
characterised in an exceptional manner by the goodness of their qualities; for wealth is not infrequently won in a most objectionable manner.
Wealth is, however, in my opinion, more often than not quite honestly
acquired, and to bring the dishonest millionaire into this discussion is in
truth merely to cloud the issue. No doubt the scoundrel who swindles his
neighbours or grinds down his employees, besides doing great immediate
harm, is probably possessed with some bad innate qualities which
he may transmit to posterity; but in view of the fact that men of
this type form but a small proportion of the very wealthy class as a
whole, whilst the very wealthy form but a minute proportion of the
whole population, it seems that any increase or decrease in the fertility
of these high-class malefactors would have extremely little effect on the
racial future of the nation. If we are to endeavour to introduce eugenic
reforms having the greatest possible effect, we should, it is suggested,
now devote our main attention to the contrast between the great mass of
self-supporting citizens and that large body of individuals who standing
alone would be incapable of supporting themselves. Tihat this should be
our attitude will become more apparent jf I succeed in proving my case
In regard to the great theoretical importance in racial matters of
measures affecting the bulk of the population as compared with reforms
only affecting extreme types. |
Looking at the mass of the nation, what are the qualities which
differentiate those who succeed in winning an independent livelihood
from those who fail to do so? If economic prospects are to be taken into
consideration in amy degree in regard to parenthood, this is a question
which has to be faced. No doubt many persons fail either as the result
of accidents of various kinds for which they are in no sense responsible,
or on account of what can only be described as exceptionally bad luck;
but in a well ordered community these individuals would be recognised
and would be adequately dealt with without trenching on their rights or
duties as potential parents. Certainly in regard to all those individuals
whose inability to win their way in the world is due to causes other than
unavoidable physical or mental defects, this is a class whose fertility the
eugenist at all events does not wish to lessen. But in addition to either
bad luck or bad surroundings, may not certain good inborn qualities
militate against success in life, and if so, will it not be the unsuccessful
who will possess these good qualities, it will be asked. Generosity uncontrolled by common-sense probably does often produce harmful effects
amongst the very poor; but this can hardly be described as a good combimation of qualities. And moreover, it would be very hard to prove
that generosity, if wisely exercised, is a quality which on the average
and in the long run does material harm to those who possess it. On
the other hand, it will be urged that some bad inmate qualities do make
for success in life. But gmnanted that the wicked do prosper in smal]
148 | EUGENICS REVIEW.

numbers, there seems to me to be no reason to believe that the possession
of any bad quality does pay if we lock to average results. What we
really ought to do is to comcentrate our attention on the great bulk of
society, and to endeavour to realise what are the qualities which most
often make for failure to win an income adequate to maintain a small
family in comfort.

Regarding the question from this broad point of view, first to be
noted amongst the causes of failure are many forms of physical disability, inborn and not caused by surroundings, including ill-health of
many kinds. Then as to mental qualities, the chief opponents to success
besides inferior mental powers are dishonesty, laziness, bad temper,
incapacity to work with others, want of forethought, and a tendency to
drink. Many will hold that nearly all these defects arise entirely from
the results of bad surroundings, and although we believe this to be a
thoroughly distorted view of the facts, yet we are more than willing to
join forces with these social reformers in fighting against the evils of
bad environment. But we ask them in return to admit that the world
woulid be enormously benefited if the qualities which most often drag a
man down to the lowest economic strata of society were to have a less
firm grip on mankind, and to consider whether this would not be the
result of a relative lowering of the fertility of those now found to be
incapable of self-support.

No doubt there are many who will refuse to admit that the qualities,
and more especially the mental qualities, which are associated with good
or ill success are passed on by natural inheritance from generation to
generation in accordance with laws sufficiently well understood to enable
us to base practical proposals thereon. Except in the case of glaring
physical defects, science gives us no warrant for interfering with the
lives of human beings an regard to’ parenthogd, so it is often asserted.
But all knowledge, however it may be acquired, comes within the domain
of science. Conclusions so widely accepted as not to need the services of
the scientific expert for their proof or elucidation generafly form the very
basis on which the whole scientific superstructure ultimately rests, and
swch conclusions are as scientific as those established by means of the
most modern appliances. For example, it is doubtless difficult “to
impress on the mind of those who have not attended to the subject the
full conviction of the force of inheritance which is slowly acquired by
rearing animals, by studying the many treatises which have been
published on the various domestic animals, and by conversation with
breeders ”!; yet, when this full conviction has been acquired, ‘it is none
the less scientific because it has not been directly drawn from the transactions of learned societies. The breeder’s arguments may take the form
of asking “what would be the chance of winning a prize if two inferior
animals were paired together "1; but his knowledge must not be neglected
because he does not express himself in technical scientific phirases.
Further scientific investigation will undoubtedly greatly improve the
breeder’s art; but that art, which is founded on beliefs, proved to be true

1 Variation under Domestication. Darwin 1, pp.446-448.
THE NEED FOR WIDESPREAD EUGENIC REFORM. 149

by centuries of criticism, cannot possibly be neglected on the ground that
it is not scientific. With regard to all animals but man, it is only the
utterly ignorant who would wish to leave the force of natural inheritance
out of account; and science at all events teaches us that man is closely
allied to the rest of the animal creation. .

The first steps in eugenic thought were doubtless founded on ideas
acquired in consequence of the domestication of animals, as may be
proved by reference to certain early classical writings; for breeders
have known for many centuries that, in Galton’s words, “the physical
structure of future generations is a's plastic as clay under ” their control,
no doubt within certain limits.1 The animal breeder’s precepts might
indeed have formed the main basis for the eugenic propaganda but for
two solid objections to this method of advocacy. In the first place all
references to. arguments based on our kinship with other animals are apt
to arouse opposition, for somewhat the same reasons, perhaps, that many
weak-minded persons are annoyed at references to their less prosperous
relations; and even if the allusions often made to the methods of the
stockyard in reply to our arguments are silly and unconvincing, yet it is
best 1f possible to avoid placing a weapon in the enemy’s hands. Then
again—and this is a far more important point—it is obvious that differences between men and the lower animals do exist which make the
domestication of animals a dangerous guide as regards eugenic reform.
No doubt nearly all well-educated persons now believe in the fact of
organic evolution; and, once this is admitted, the lessons learnt by a
study of animal life cannot be passed by a's being wholly irrelevant to
humian affairs. But however freely this conclusion may be accepted, it
mikes it none the less certain that the moral obligations thrown on men
create an undeniable distinction between them and all other animals,
and that these obligations absolutely preclude the adoption of many of
the methods of the stockyard in human affairs. No eugenist recommends
either compulsory marriage or the murder of the unfit, and it is this fact
which creates that wide gap which we all know must separate the methods
of the breeder of animals from the methods of eugenic reform.

Although the presence of a barrier may be obvious to us all, yet it
often happens that until the impediment is examined in all its details,
we cannot judge to what extent it ought to be permitted to stand in the
way of our progress. Even at the risk of arousing certain susceptibilities, a few more words concerning the lessons which may or may not be
learnt from animal life seem necessary. A prize bull during the course
of his life may have as many as two hundred offspring; and if each one
of his progeny were to owe, say, £5 of its value to its parentage, then we
see that on this account the bull would be worth ‘£1,000, less the cost of
his maintenance. We value a bull in fact mainly on account of that
probable excess in the value of his progeny which is due to his exceptional physical merits. On the other hand, in considering the value to
the world of a man of exceptional qualities, we as a rule look only at
the beneficial effects which he may produce on the moral, mental and

* Memories of My Life. Galton, p. 312.
150. EUGENICS REVIEW. |

physical environment of his neighbours and of posterity. Even if a man
should excel most of his contemporaries by but little in character or
ability, yet that small excess might be of great value to mankind, because
of the enormous numbers of persons who might in consequence be beneficially affected. The prize bull and the prize man both owe their value
to their superiority over their contemporaries; but as in the one case
attention is often only focussed on the direct physical influence on the
progeny, and in the other case generally only on the indirect mental
influence on others, it follows that men and animals may be, in fact,
valued by very different standards.

Whilst fully admitting that distinctions between human and animal
values do exist, and whilst fully recognising the reasons why men of
exceptionally valuable qualities will be needed in the coming generations,
yet eugenists feel that these facts merely strengthen their desire to take
such steps as will tend to secure to posterity the benefits to be derived
from the influences of great men. Our descendants will be, like ourselves, the product of the then existing environment when acting on the
inborn natures of the human raw material exposed to its influences; and
as we can do but very little to affect the environment of the human race
in the distant future, our main effort must now be to transmit to
posterity such a stream of human raw material as will be most likely in
good surroundings to give rise to the greatest number of great men and
to the least number of bad men. And the question is, what steps can
we now take so as best to insure this result?

Here it is necessary to enter on the more theoretical and speculative
parts of my argument. In doing so, let us in the first place imagine any
group of individuals to be divided into classes in accordance with the
measurements of their inborn qualities; that is, in accordance with the
measurements of the qualities which they would have displayed had they
all been brought up in exactly similar surroundings. To use an educational simile, let it be assumed that the individual at the top of the list
is given seven miarks to the good, whilst the individual at the bottom is
awarded seven bad marks, zero representing the mean or average individual, these marks being awarded in accordance with their physical
measurements. Both theoretical considerations and practical investigations indicate that if, in these circumstances, we were to compare the top
class, including all those receiving between five and seven marks to the
good (and therefore averaging approximately six marks) with a lower
class including those with between one and three marks to the good (and
therefore approximately averaging two marks), it would be found that
this lower class was goo times as numerous as the top class.!_ If we were
considering the qualities which lead to success in life, the top class would
include all men who could, according to Galton, be fairly described as
“eminent,” whilst those in the lower class might perhaps be fairly
grouped under the title of “useful citizens.” We see, therefore, that the

1 Galton’s Hereditary Genius, p. 30. I have for simplicity neglected his
very small top and bottom classes X and x. Marks at examinations are probably

given more in accordance with the rarity of the type than with the measurements,
and the use of the word ‘‘ marks” is, therefore, not here altogether happy.
THE NEED FOR WIDESPREAD EUGENIC REFORM. ISI

eminent man is goo times as rare a being as is the useful citizen, whilst
his good qualities, if they could be physically measured, would be seen
to be only three times as great; and what we want to know in regard to
eugenic questions is whether we ought in such a case to look to the figure
of goo, representing the relative rarity of the two types of individuals,
or to the figure of 3, representing the relative measurements of their
qualities, or, if not, by what other methods of comparison ought we to
be guided? In any thorough investigation of the various problems connected with parenthood thus presented for consideration, much debatable
ground would have to be covered. Differences of opinion have no doubt
arisen between the adherents of the statistical and Mendelian methods of
enquiry; but as my confident belief is that when the whole truth is known,
neither party will have to completely abandon any of their fundamental
tenets, it will be on the assumption that this is the case that these difficult questions will here be briefly discussed.

In the present state of our knowledge it may be safely assumed that
certain qualities will characterise every individual springing from a germ
containing a certain heritable ingredient; or, in Mendelian phraseology,
we know that certain characters are dependent on a single dominant
factor and are inherited accordingly. Since no other individuals besides
those endowed with this ingredient or dominant factor can display the
quality in question, it follows that if all the individuals thus characterised
were to be exterminated, then there would be no reason to suppose that
any persons possessing the quality in question would ever appear on
earth again; whereas if the fertility of the individuals proved by their
qualities to be the carriers of this dominant factor were to be increased,
the number of persons thus characterised would consequently be increased
in future generations. In fact in cases like brachydactyly and other
peculiarities, mostly of a pathological character, which are known to be
due to the presence of a single dominant factor, there can be no doubts
as to the theoretical aspects of the eugenic problems concerning parenthood. We need not consider whether the ailment is rare or frequent; for
all that has to be decided, in the case of bad qualities for example, is
whether the defect in question is sufficiently injurious to justify either the
actual prevention of parenthood or the demand for that self-sacrifice
which is necessary in the case of the voluntary renunciation of parenthood. The desired end can certainly be attained, and it is only a question whether it is worth the cost of attaining it. Then as to a character
which is only displayed when an individual fails to receive a certain
ingredient from both parents, that is in the case of a quality dependent
on a single recessive Mendelian factor, the same considerations are
generally applicable. Here, however, the beneficial results obtainable
from interfering with parenthood would be far slower in making their
appearance; because the recessive factot may be present in an individual
without its being possible to detect its presence by his qualities. A harmful recessive factor can be slowly reduced in numbers by selective breeding, and all that can be done is to persevere in that process. In the case
of qualities dependent on a single factor, or on a very small number of
152 EUGENICS REVIEW.

factors, the line of demarcation between those who certainly possess the
quality in question and those who do not or may not do so, is generally
well marked, and all theoretical problems concerning selective breeding
are in these cases as simple as possible. |

If we turn our attention to the complex qualities which lead to success
in life, however that success may be measured, this simplicity entirely
vanishes. Every shade of mental capacity exists between that possessed
by a born leader of men on the one hand, and that possessed by a man who
fails in all he attempts or who attempts nothing, on the other; the genius
rarely gives rise to a genius amongst his immediate descendants; and great
achievements always seem to require a combination of several qualities, including reasoning power, concentration of mind, energy, faculty of observation, etc., each of which may be found without the others being present.
From all this we judge that success in life can never be due to the presence
either of any one or of but few Mendelian factors. Another reason for
supposing that we are here dealing with a more or less fortuitous combination of a considerable number of independent factors is that it can
be proved that where such conditions exist, the individuals composing a
population, if arranged in accordance with the measurements of the
character or quality in question, would be distributed about a mean according to the well-known law of error; a distribution which generally coincides
fairly closely with that actually existing amongst human beings whatever
may be the test of capacity by which they are arranged. Where a large
number of factors are involved, as in the case of economic success, the
Mendelian method of investigation fails, and we are driven in such cases to
rely wholly on the statistical method of enquiry. Now statistical enquiries
have established the fact that when, for example, the relative excess above
the mean in any quality of two individuals is as 3 to 1, then this same ratio
will continue to exist between the average qualities of their descendants,
other things being equal; the reason being that the same proportional regression to the mean will take place in both cases. In other words, if as has
been seen, the eminent man has qualities measuring three times as much
as those possessed by the useful citizen, the dose of good qualities, so to
speak, which the eminent man will pass on to posterity will be three
times as big by measurement as that passed on by the useful citizen.

We must not, however, remain satisfied with merely estimating the
relative magnitudes of the natural legacies which will be left to posterity
in the shape of their progeny by persons of different grades of qualities,
but we must also consider how these legacies will be distributed amongst
the populations of the future. In the case of domestic animals the
progeny of selected individuals may be kept apart, and if no interbreeding with inferior types is then permitted, the selected good stock
will be kept as far as possible in all its purity. But with man selective
breedin¢ of this kind does not take place, and there is, therefore, a constant tendency for marriages uncontrolled by such selective influences to
produce a uniform distribution of these transmitted qualities throughout
a nation. From various causes differences in average abilities doubtless
do arise within a nation between different groups; but it will be a first
approximation to the truth to assume that the good qualities left as a
THE NEED FOR WIDESPREAD EUGENIC REFORM. 153

legacy to the nation by men of eminence will in a few generations be
spread nearly uniformly over the whole surface of the nation.

Now, if it be true that the value? to the nation of the future of each
descendant of an eminent man is on an average three times as great as
that of the descendant of the useful citizen, we must also remember that
it is equally true that these good citizens are goo times as numerous as
are the men of eminence. The good inheritance of all the men of
eminence added together would make but an imperceptibly thin layer if
spread uniformly over the whole surface of the nation of the future;
whilst the collective effect of the inheritance of the good citizens of today, if it could be separately estimated, would be seen to have a marked
effect on posterity. If any eugenic tendency were to be brought into
operation which would have the effect of increasing the fertility of only
one out of every three hundred selected at random of the useful citizen
class, yet in order to produce a like beneficial influence on posterity by
affecting persons of the eminent class, such a tendency would have to
affect every single individual in that class. We thus see that a widespread campaign directed towards increasing the rate of multiplication
of the great mass of those who are above the average in qualities held
to be desirable, or of diminishing the fertility of the possessors of qualities
held to be undesirable, might have a considerably greater beneficial
effect in regard to the average qualities of the nation of the future than
could result from any attempt to focus attention in regard to parenthood
on the rare and exceptional individuals at either end of the scale of merit.

In regard to immediate social results, it is doubtless widely recognised that the bulk of our efforts should be directed towards reforms intended to affect the great mass of society; and the foregoing considerations
raise the question whether the same rule should not also guide us in
regard to reforms aiming at racial improvements. Those who attach.
great importance to the value to the world of men of genius will not,
however, readily perceive that their wish for the appearance of more
great lights in future generations might also be best met by general
measures affecting the fertility of the great mass of the nation rather than
by efforts to deal with selected individuals, a point which may perhaps
be roughly illustrated in the following manner. Imagine a dozen boxes
each filled with an equal number of black and white balls, and imagine
one ball being selected from each box by chance. Now it is easy to see
that the probability of thus selecting a dozen white balls and no single
black ball would be exceedingly small. But this is about the same
probability as that of an infant selected by chance out of a whole nation
growing up to become a person of eminence; and, moreover, if or in so
far as it is true that the appearance of a man of eminence is due to the
chance collection in one individual out of a homogeneous group of
parents of all the necessary Mendelian factors, the reason why so few
persons of eminence are born is also thus in a manner illustrated. It
‘is true that such a selection of a group of balls from boxes illustrates in
@ most inadequate manner the grouping together of Mendelian factors in

1 As to the legitimacy of here introducing the idea of value, see note at
the end of the paper.
154 EUGENICS REVIEW.

a single germ; for the presence of recessive factors, which might have
been indicated by black balls in some way rendered invisible by their
association with white balls, has been in no way represented. But if the
proportion of the white balls in each of the boxes were to be increased,
we do see that it is obvious that the chance of drawing nothing but white
balls in a chance selection from all the boxes would thus also be increased; and in spite of the inaccuracy of the analogy it may thus be
made more apparent why a rise in the future in the average qualities of
mankind would result in an increase in the number of men of the type
which would now be classed as eminent then making their appearance.
Assuming no selective influences to be at work, the formation of a new
generation may be likened to the selected balls being thrown back pellmel] into the boxes and another chance selection of balls being then made
from them. We have seen that in exceedingly few cases would nothing
but white balls be drawn, and consequently, even though those selected
were al] white, their return to the boxes would change the proportion of
white and black therein but very little; just as it seems likely that if the
racial effect on future generations of the progeny of eminent men could
be separately estimatéd, it would be seen that these effects_were very
minute, and also that ultimately the production of men of genius would
thus be rendered only very slightly more probable. The drawing from
the boxes of groups consisting for example of say seven white and five
black balls would be a frequent event, and if the frequency of this event
were by some magical process to be proportionately increased, the return
of these groups would make a material effect on the proportion of black
and white balls in the boxes, and consequently of the chance of nothing
but white balls being obtained at a subsequent drawing; and in this way
it may be seen why it is likely that even a moderate increase in the
fertility of the great mass of useful citizens would not only be the best
means of raising the level of mankind in the future, but that it would
also increase the proportion of men of genius in the ranks of posterity.

A tacit assumption has been made in the foregoing argument which
may be open to criticism, namely, that each one of the Mendelian factors
which are necessary in combination for the production of a man of
eminence, would, if appearing alone, give rise to a desirable quality; for
if this law did not generally hold good, that is, if any one of these
factors necessary as the ingredients of genius were by itself to give rise
to an undesirable quality, then it would follow that such a necessary
factor would be in a measure eliminated by any general raising of the
human standard, and that men of genius might in consequence appear
less often, not more often in future generations. All the qualities which
can be separately distinguished as being constantly possessed by great
men, such as energy, perseverance, concentration, memory, width of outlook, etc., would, however, unquestionably be useful standing alone;
and it seems therefore a highly probable assumption that each of the
ingredients of genius would, if appearing as a'separate quality, as a rule
be held to be desirable. The fact, if it be a fact, that men of great
ability often have weak constitutions has no doubt frequently been brought
forward as if it presented a serious obstacle in the path of eugenic.
THE NEED FOR WIDESPREAD EUGENIC REFORM. 155

reform. The greatest leaders in war and in commerce, however, have
generally been exceptionally healthy; whilst as regards the ill-health of
the literary or scientific genius, it may be partly or wholly explicable
without reference to any correlation between innate mental and physical
qualities. Poor constitutions often make young people devote themselves
to intellectual pursuits in. preference to outdoor exercises; and the
chances of a man of exceptional innate intellectual capacity making his
mark in the world are consequently somewhat increased if he is blessed
with a certain degree of physical ill-health. There is, I believe, a period
in the life of many individuals when their ambitions might be satisfied in
many different ways; and good health will often lead to that satisfaction
being obtained on paths leading to no enduring fame. When the youth
of a nation are all keenly aroused in a certain direction, then there will
appear one of those apparently inexplicable outbursts of genius in that
direction; whilst at other times many mute inglorious Miltons will be
found not only behind the plough, but also in society and in the hunting
field. That a certain connection should exist between genius and illhealth need cause but little surprise, neither should it lead us to doubt
that widespread racial progress will generally be accompanied by a
greater output of great men.

It nevertheless may be a fact that great sensitiveness, to mental
impressions is apt to be to a certain extent associated with over-sensitiveness to physical influences, in which case other considerations have to be
held in view. It is certain that the men of the most supreme genius have
left but very few. descendants behind them; and this want of fertility on
their part may have been due to correlated inherent physical defects.
But if any such relationship does exist between inherent good mental
qualities and inherent physical inferiority, we here find little reason for
holding that the best way of now increasing the number of men of
ability destined to appear in future generations would be to concentrate
our attention on increasing the fertility of the men of ability of to-day.
Those who believe that genius and ill-health are correlated and who
attach enormous importance to the effect of men of genius on the world,
should consider whether the logical conclusion of their premises would
not be a demand for an endeavour to lower the average health of the
nation. The value to the community of good health is, however, so
enormous that very few would hesitate in order to secure it to face a
highly disputable probability of a diminution in the number of men of
genius to appear in the future. And in support of this view, may I have
the temerity to suggest that the influence of these rare beings has often
been exaggerated? We have all noticed the ease with which the place
of some wholly “indispensable” person is usually filled on his retirement; and this is but one illustration of the general law that we look
too much to the relative rarity of the different grades of human beings
and too little to their relative measurements. When forced to select
from a lower and wider grade of human beings, we accept the necessary
lowering of standard very reluctantly, partly because we do not perceive how slight may be the lowering necessary to open out this wider
156 | EUGENICS REVIEW.

field. It is no doubt questionable to what extent the average marks, as
I have somewhat inappropriately called them, awarded to the different
grades really represent relative capacities or values, even though they are
correct as indications of relative physical measurements. But it may be
worth noting that the divergence between relative marks or measurements
and relative rarity increases rapidly as we approach the extremes of fitness
or unfitness.) When comparing a class of human beings receiving on the
average two marks to the good with a top class receiving on the average six
marks to the good, we have seen that though the marks given to the top
class are three times as many as those given to the lower class, yet that
the relative rarity of these abler individuals as compared with their more
mediocre companions is as goo to 1. But if we were to compare this same
lower class with a smaller top class, containing persons winning on an
average not 6 but 64 marks to the good, we should find that the relative
rarity had risen to about 30,000 to 1; and it is this relative rarity which
mainly impresses itself on our minds and influences us. The next best
men to the men of genius, though decidedly inferior, may not be nearly
as far behind him as we are inclined to believe: In any case a possible
correlation between ill-health and ability, if it exists, seems to afford no
justification whatever for concentrating our attention on cases of exceptional ability in matters of eugenic reform.

In this discussion only the extreme types at one end of the scale,
namely, the extremely fit, have thus far been considered; though. it is
possible that the principles suggested for consideration might be just as
important in their application to the extremely unfit. The following
purely hypothetical illustration may perhaps be permissible merely for
the sake of making this possibility more apparent. According to the
information available, insanity has been increasing in recent years in
England and still more in Ireland; whilst it is well known that a
generation or two ago there was a great amount of emigration from both
islands, though more from Ireland. This increase of insanity may be in
truth but a statistical increase; or, in other words, it may be of such a
nature as to give no real indication of either a deterioration in environment or a decline in inherent qualities. But it is, on the other hand,
possible that it may be partly due to the better types having left these
islands in considerable numbers, to a consequent general lowering of the
average, and to the resulting increase in the frequency with which certain
Mendelian factors necessary to give rise to the insane diathesis have been
brought together. Should this be even a partially correct illustration of
the methods of inheritance frequently found in operation, then not only
insanity but many other gross defects would be made to appear less
frequently by reforms producing a general rise in human standards.

In the foregoing contrast between the effects of eugenic reforms
intended to cover wide fields and those only affecting extreme types, I
have endeavoured to represent this topic as being a subject for discussion
rather than as one about which there can be no doubts; and this for two
reasons. In the first place, before a final decision could be reached the
questions involved would need a’ more searching analysis, and one
THE NEED FOR WIDESPREAD EUGENIC REFORM. 157

probably comprising more mathematical reasoning than has here been
attempted. Then, again, I regret to find myself somewhat at variance
with the views advocated by Sir Francis Galton, if I understand them
aright; for in his Huxley lecture especially he strongly insisted on the
advantages to be gained by endeavouring to increase the fertility of the
highest types. In regard to measures dealing with small numbers, it no
doubt seems indisputable that these few should be selected with the
greatest care from those at the top; and Galton proved that this is even
more true than general considerations would lead one to believe, especially if the end to be gained is the production of great men in the mext
generation. If it were right and practicable to keep selected human stock
as pure as animal stock and thus to create a race of super-men, then
Galton’s argument would be unanswerable; though even on that supposition he did not, as it seems to me, weigh with sufficient care the ultimate
advantages of, as it were, adding to the population at the top as compared with a general raising of the level of the whole population. If by
means of reforms applicable to great numbers, all mankind could be
raised one class in the scale of merit, or if all the figures in Galton’s
tables could be pushed one column to the right,? not only would the
numbers in the existing higher classes be greatly increased, but the
beneficial change would be equally apparent in every grade. Had
Galton not assumed the existence of perfect assortive mating for the
purpose of making his argument more clear, had he at all events made
the more accurate assumption that marriages are in no way selective,
and had more been then known concerning Mendelism, he might have
been led to attach less importance to looking mainly to a selected few.
Then, again, he did not consider whether the methods which would
“produce the greatest number of great men in the mext generation were.
also those likely to produce the same result in the generations of the
more distant future. Even if we are looking only to the output of men
of genius, we ought to consider how to produce the race most likely as
the result of its inborn qualities to be productive in this respect; and, if
there is to be no enforced selective mating, does it not appear probable
that wide measures of eugenic reform, including large numbers within
their nets, would in the end do more for mankind than any attempt to
deal’ with individually selected groups?‘ This is the question here submitted for your consideration.

The conclusions reached during or suggested by this enquiry may be
summed up as follows: Except in regard to the cases (feeble-mindedness
probably included) where human qualities are dependent on single or
but few Mendelian factors, general measures affecting large numbers
seem to be at present more likely to be effective in promoting racial
progress than are any endeavours to promote or restrict the fertility of
extreme types. If a wide field of eugenic action is to be covered, we
must seek for some easily recognised line of demarcation between the
types of individuals whose rates of multiplication ought to be increased
and those amongst whom parenthood should be diminished or prohibited.

1 Essays in Eugenics. Galton, p. 14.
158 | EUGENICS REVIEW. .

The boundary here suggested for consideration is that between those who
have succeeded in winning an independent existence and those who have
failed to do so. It is true that this boundary will remain ill-defined until
a definite meaning has been attached to the word “independent,” and
that no such definition has been here attempted. No hesitation will,
however, be felt, in the case of large numbers of individuals, in deciding
to which of these two classes they should be assigned, and here will be
the best field for all our eugenic efforts for some time to come; for it
will be in regard to these unquestionable types that there will be most
need for taking action. The adoption of any such rule would no doubt
result in action being sometimes taken which would be held to be unjust
could all the facts be known; but a regard for our own safety makes us
approve the rule that the captain whd has lost his ship in doubtful circumstances shall be deprived of his command, and in like manner our
regard for the welfare of posterity justifies in doubtful cases the application of genetal rules which may inflict some unmerited suffering on a
limited number of individuals. To what extent failure to win an independent livelihood is correlated with inferior inborn qualities, and to
what extent with inferior environment, will probably ever remain an
insoluble problem; but as success in life is certainly promoted by both
good surroundings and good inborn qualities, it follows that heredity:
must count for something in selecting out the failures from the successes; and even if natural inheritance should count for but little, which
we deny, but which certain social reformers believe, this would merely
mean that eugenic reform would be slow in its action, and not that it
would be without any racial results. The main argument in favour of
establishing this line of demarcation between the fields of positive and
negative eugenics, that is in favour of endeavouring to reduce the size
of families where poverty forbids an economically independent existence, and of increasing the fertility of the well-to-do is that, as regards
immediate results, a more uniform distribution of wealth and culture
would thus be produced, and that, as regards ultimate results, those
inborn qualities which facilitate success in life would thus be made to
appear in greater measure in future generations and in this way our
descendants would be made on the whole more prosperous than ourselves. The sterilisation of the grossly unfit, as advocated in America,
and the encouragement of the fertility of the exceptionally fit by the
endowment of a specially selected few, are measures, in so far as
condemned, only to be condemned on ethical or practical grounds,
and if we should find our range of commendable action thus
limited in regard to these extreme types, consolation may be
found in the view here suggested for consideration, namely,
that eugenic measures affecting the bulk of the population may
well have greater beneficial racial effects both as regards the
raising of the average standards of mankind and as to the production
of men of genius or great ability in the future. In fact what I have
wished to point out is that though we should certainly follow the lead
of the best breeders in invariably striving to keep the whole of their
stock up to a high general level, yet since selective mating and breeding
THE NEED FOR WIDESPREAD EUGENIC REFORM. 159

only from highly selected male animals cannot be imitated in human
affairs, animal analogies must not prevent us from looking mainly to the
great bulk of the nation in regard to all questions connected with parenthood. These theoretical considerations in fact confirm us in our determination to push on with wide-reaching eugenic measures affecting large
numbers ; and these measures should include the inculcation of the ideal of
parental responsibility, in which aim the obligation to obtain health certificates before marriage and the better enforcement of allowances to mothers
from illegitimate fathers would be likely to be of great use; the transfer of
wealth from non-parents to parents within each economic group by
changes in the assessment of income tax and death duties; the lessening
of the apprehensions of parents as to the welfare of their children by
further aids to secondary education; the rigid enforcement of laws against
overcrowding and insanitary dwellings zf combined with some method
available in suitable cases for preventing parenthood amongst young
couples proved to be permanently incapable of living a decent
life unaided; the prohibition of the immigration of undesirable
aliens; the availability of adequate housing accommodation at economic
rents; and the lessening of the fertility of certain classes, such as
criminals, habitual drunkards and unemployables. Reforms such as these
would not only make the whole rank and file of the future more
prosperous, but as the result of such wide-acting measures, more leaders
of all grades would be made to appear in the future to lead the nation
onwards in the path of progress.

NoteE.—The following table, based on that given in Galton’s ‘‘ Hereditary
Genius,”? may be of interest in connection with these theoretical speculations :—

CLASSIFICATION ACCORDING TO Natural Girts. No AssoRTIVE MATING.
I. 2. 3 4: 5
Grades “‘marks” or Products of Cols. | Relative values Ratio of total
average measure-| Number in each |! & 2+ indicating | of offspring of of Col, 3 ms

re, PER] million of Dope esata |erademndotsn | Sgures tn
mean. ° progeny of grade | above or below. ol. 4:
or class.
4 256,791 128, 395 596,439 Onein 10
14 161,279 241,918 468,044 +5 1.3
23 63,563. 158,907 226,126 5 2.6
34 15,696 54,936 67,219 9 9.0
4% 2,423 10,903 12,283 ¥ 49.0
53 233 1281 1,380 1» + 432.0
64 14 gI 99 »» 6025.0
over 7 I 8 8 (?)

a ennercmmenmeme an sete fn psn | | er tern

Total 500,000 596,439 _ —_
160 EUGENICS REVIEW.

The contrast here mainly to be held in view is that between methods of
promoting racial progress dependent upon general legislation affecting the
fertility of whole classes indiscriminately, and efforts to affect the fertility of a
number of individuals, selected because of their individual merits or demerits;
the qualities desired being assumed to be distributed according to the normal
law of error.

It has been assumed that all qualities are measured by physical measurements, just as height is measured by feet and inches. If no assortive mating
takes place, all inherited qualities dependent on a considerable number
of uncorrelated factors are constantly being gradually distributed
throughout the whole community as the generations succeed each other; and the
distribution of qualities is constantly being brought back to the normal distribution in spite of any selection that may be taking place. The ultimate effect of
selection is in these circumstances merely to raise or lower the average of the
physical measurements of the community. The figures in column 3, therefore,
give a correct: indication of the relative effects, which would be produced by
selection in the different grades, on the average physical measurements of
posterity.

Such physical measurements do not, however, necessarily represent the
relative value to mankind of the individuals measured; just as the relative value
of a race-horse who wins by a neck and that of the losers in the race is not
measured by their relative speeds. This latter is, however, hardly a happy
illustration; for it is value in utility and not value in exchange that should be
here held in view. The discordance between the numerical grading as shown in
column 1 and the relative average values of the individuals classified is especially
noticeable in regard to mental qualities; the underlying reason being that the
physical giant does not by his presence affect the physical growth of his neighbours, whilst the mental giant may add greatly to the mental equipment of
millions of other human beings.

We have seen that, in the absence of assortive mating, selection may increase

the average of the physical measurements of the communjty without ultimately
affecting the numerical distribution of the grades. But if so the average value
of the individuals composing the community will certainly increase with some
relationship to, though not necessarily proportionately with, the increase in
these physical measurements. Thus in these circumstances the figures in
column 3 do give a correct indication of the relative benefit or injury to the race
in the distant future of now increasing or decreasing the progeny in the different
grades.
“Where there is assortive mating this conclusion may no longer hold good;
because selection may then bring about a change between the proportion of the
numbers in the different grades. Intermarriage may no longer keep re-establishing a normal distribution. If those near the top of the scale in mental attributes
are vastly more valuable than is indicated by their numerical grading, then an
increase in the numbers in these top classes would be beneficial even if the
average of the numbers in column 3 were to remain unaltered, the average
measurements of those in the lower classes being diminished. But as we know
that normal distribution is as a fact, approximately maintained, we may avoid
this difficulty and yet obtain a first approximation to the truth by assuming that
no assortive mating takes place.

It may be worth noting that it is probably only in regard to those very near
the top of the scale that the grading gives a very incorrect idea of relative
values; for it is only such as these who have a widespread influence on others.
This discordance is, moreover, far less in the case of those near the bottom of
the scale; for the giants of iniquity and ignorance do not as a rule actually
destroy human knowledge in a manner in the least degree comparable to the
way in which men of genius add to it. It was for this reason presumably that
‘Galton held that it was more important to increase the fertility of the very fit
than to decrease the fertility of the very unfit. Lastly it may be noted that
since the redistribution of qualities by intermarriage is only slowly affected, the
immediate results of increasing the fertility of the higher grades would be
somewhat greater than that indicated by the above table, even in the absence of
assortive mating.

The following are the conclusions arrived at, assuming assortive mating to
be non-existent :—If any measure were to be adopted which would only affect
THE NEED FOR WIDESPREAD EUGENIC REFORM. 161

the fertility of a definite number of individuals, these persons, as has already
been remarked, certainly should be chosen from amongst those as near as
possible to the top or bottom of the scale, as the case may be, in order to

produce the greatest racial results. This is even more necessary if assortive
mating does exist.

If any measure were to be adopted which would only affect all those above
a given standard of merit (or a definite proportion thereof selected at random)
then in order to produce the greatest results, the line of demarcation between
the affected and the unaffected should be the mean; or, in other words, general
measures tending to increase the fertility of all alike should be applied to all
above the average and to none below it.

If mankind could be sorted out into classes as set forth in the above table,
and if a measure were to be introduced which would tend to affect the fertility
of all the individuals of only ome such class, then it will be seen that the
greatest result to posterity would be produced if the one class affected was that
averaging 14 marks.

If a choice had to be made between a measure affecting q@/2 individuals
above or below a certain standard, and a measure affecting a certain definite
proportion selected at random of all the individuals either above or below the
mean, the problem becomes very complex. Let the standard selected be, for
example, all those in and above grade s4, in which case, as we see, this specially
selected group would number 248 per million, or about 12,000 in 50,000,000. The
last column indicates that, none below the mean being affected, the value of the
progeny of this selected group would be zy of the total value of the progeny of
all above the mean; and it follows that if one in 432 of all above the mean
(1,200 per million, or 60,000 per 50,000,000) were affected as regards fertility to
the same extent as the selected group, then the racial results on posterity would
be identical. Which is the more probable, that the best 12,000 could be specially
selected and all influenced in regard to fertility, or that 60,000 out of the
25,000,000 above the mean could thus be affected by general legislation?

Many considerations have to be held in view in considering this point. In
the first place the relative practicability of the two schemes must not be overlooked. To tax the whole population in order to endow a comparatively small
number with a view to encouraging parenthood would arouse keen opposition ; because the mass taxed would be in no way immediately and directly benefited.
On the other hand, certain general legislation, such as taxing the unmarried
for the benefit of parents, would be less resented. The segregation of small
numbers of the selected unfit can, no doubt, be advocated and defended on the
grounds of the direct benefits thus at once conferred on society. Assuming the
prejudices against selection to be overcome, any attempt to select out all the individuals belonging to these top classes would nevertheless certainly fail for several reasons. The methods of selection would inevitably be faulty ; for many good and bad
qualities would be wholly ignored, and, even if there were no actual jobbery
or favouritism—a highly improbable supposition—decisions would frequently be
erroneous. Prizes would be, as it were, given for success in many different
subjects; but this would not necessarily affect the ultimate racial results. The
qualities deciding the choice would in many cases depend largely on questions
of environment, and many would be accepted belonging to lower natural classes,
and many in the top classes would be overlooked. Moreover, even if rightly
selected, the fertility of only a small proportion of those chosen would actually
be influenced. For example, taking the case of the award of a monetary grant
to selected individuals on marriage, then some would marry and be sterile, whilst
others would produce no more progeny (or even possibly fewer progeny) than if
no such stimulus to marriage had been forthcoming. Even if the whole award
were made to be dependent on the number of children appearing, this would be
no guarantee that it was only given on account of children appearing because
of the award. If an actual increase of progeny were only to be produced in
one case out of five awards, or if the efficiency of the process were thus
decreased fivefold, then 60,000 would have to be selected in order to affect the
fertility of 12,000 persons; and what we have to consider in the foregoing
example, when considering ultimate effects, is which would be the more difficult,
selecting these 60,000 out of the total population of 50,000,000, or introducing
general legislation which would have the effect of actually increasing the
fertility of 60,000 individuals out of the 25,000,000 above the mean, or more
162 EUGENICS REVIEW.

accurately affecting one in 432 of those above mediocrity. The choice is certainly doubtful; but the smaller the number of those individually selected, the
more surely would general legislation become the more effective method of
producing enduring racial improvement.

Possibly the following are the most import@nt conclusions to be adduced
from this method of regarding these questions. If reliance were to be placed
on the selection of individuals for exceptional treatment, attention should not
only be paid to the individual merits of both the parties, but great weight
should be attached to the merits of near relatives; for in that way the probable
value of each additional offspring would be greatly increased, although it is true
that the numbers selected might thus be greatly decreased. Then as to general
legislation intended to affect all above the mean, the maximum effect (if it did
not occur at either end of the scale) would be produced in or somewhere above
(but not necessarily much above) the 14 marks class; or, in other words, great
attention should be paid to increasing the fertility of the large class of decidedly
superior citizens, whilst any decrease in the fertjlity of the equally large class
of decidedly inferior citizens would be equally beneficial to posterity as regards
racial effects. To decrease the fertility of this large somewhat inferior class
would be difficult; but we do thus see what great racial damage may be done
by the indiscriminate promotion of parenthood. Lastly, it is to be noted that
these two methods of seeking racial progress can be simultaneously adopted.
