RACE AND POLITICS
By PROFESSOR H. J. FLEURE, De.

logical ideas for political ends which

is doing so much. harm to scientific
repute in some countries has called forth a
welcome protest from three British authors
in an eminently readable work,* endeavouring “‘to bring together the chief scientific
facts now available on the subject of ‘ race’
in man—in other words, the genetic differences between human groups—and to present
them in the light of established scientific
principles.” They remark that “often a
nation is a society united by a common error
as to its origin and a common aversion to its
neighbours ’’!

Perhaps it were better to say aversion to
its neighbours and its minorities, and here
the sadistic treatment of the Jewish minority
in Germany is the worst case in point. It
is also astonishingly ill-advised, as the rulers
of the country had an unparalleled opportunity for making their position and prestige
secure had they made their treatment of
minorities an example that might have given
them grounds for claiming good treatment
for German minorities in other lands. Such
wisdom would also have strengthened their
plea for a share of the responsibilities that the
white man carries in relation to intertropical
lands.

The authors’ statement about European
peoples attempts to be fair, and fully realizes
that we are all of rather mixed ancestry ;
indeed, it carries the discussion of the problems involved as far as is possible in a small
book designed for the general reader. While
there is no very serious difficulty in discriminating between the more typical representatives of the major groups of mankind,
whether we call them species, sub-species or
races, this does not imply that there is no
difficulty about a reasonable definition of

, | ‘HE disastrous twisting of anthropo
* Huxley, Julian, Haddon, A. C., and Carr-Saunders,
A.M. We Europeans. London, 1935. Jonathan Cape.
Pp. 299. Price 8s. 6d.

the major groups. Dr. Haddon has often
suggested that hair is a better basis of
classification than the common one of colour.
It is probably wisest to use hair character
(kinky, wavy, lank) as the basis of classification of main groups, after setting aside
certain groups that appear to include
survivors of early drifts of mankind, which
retain characteristics of great interest from
an evolutionary standpoint.

When we come to the smaller groups
within the three large ones there are difficulties. Men have moved and mixed again
and again. What is the result? Some say
that mixture is so intimate as to give racial
homogeneity of an old-established population without marriage-barriers. If so, then a
graph of the variations of each of the most
conspicuous characters—head form, stature,
nose form, colouring and so on—is as much
as we could hope to get. In following this
method we should be describing peoples in
terms of an average that would usually
be an average for a political area or national
group. We could easily drift in this way into an idea of physical diversities between
nations which would be exaggerated.

The outstanding fact of direct observation
is that in each nation we find tall and short,
dark and fair, long heads and broad heads,
and, in spite of centuries of intermarriage,
they show little if any tendency to settle
down to an average. Bundles of physical
characters are apparently very frequently
handed down through the generations and ©
our so-called racial names such as, in Europe,
Nordic, Alpine, Mediterranean and others,
are convenient designations of such bundles
of characters, most of them with a long
history behind them, though we should be
careful not to assume too lightly that there
ever was a group that was entirely and
purely Nordic or Alpine or Mediterranean.
In studying a population we should therefore
try to see how physical characters are

319
320

bundled together in different persons, at the
same time fully realizing that even a person
with a very large bundle of, let us say, Nordic
or Mediterranean characters may have had in
his ancestry people who showed Alpine and
other traits. This means that we are dealing
with something different from the contrasts
between the typical representatives of the
three great groups, the wavy-, kinky- and
lank-haired peoples of the world, in which
cases long descent can be traced without
intermixture outside the great group.

It is the Nordic bundle of characters that
has been most called into discussions of a
political character. When we are dealing with
a tall, long-legged, spare-built, blue-eyed,
fair-haired, narrow-nosed, long-faced man
with regular features and a cranial index under about 77 -5 (ora cephalic index under 78 - 5)
we are on firm ground, and there are indications that the upper limit of value of the
cephalic index might be raised a little. We
can, however, only with some difficulty
make an effective line between this bundle

and another that the Swedes call East.

Baltic, in which the index is higher, the nose
is different, the face less regular and, perhaps, the colouring less blonde and the
stature lower.

The Nordic bundle of characters is most
characteristically handed down in_ the
Swedish and Norwegian populations, where
it is so prevalent as to set the tone. Any
attempt, and all such attempts are hazardous,
to draw conclusions about mental and moral
features associated with particular characters
should therefore take most serious note of
features noticeable among Norwegians and
Swedes, both in their homelands and in lands
to which they may emigrate.

That these populations show valuable
mental and moral qualities will be widely
admitted. How far they are to be considered
as inherently associated with certain physical
characters, and how far they express results
of environmental influences, remains to be
seen ; we are far from being able to make a
statement here.

It is at any rate clear that sadism is not
a character any observer would associate
with those populations, neither is that

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

mental fatigue which makes men relapse into
acceptance of authoritarian decisions more
often than is inevitable.

Outside Sweden and Norway there are
sprinklings of the Nordic bundle in various
European lands, a good deal in the British
Isles, a relatively moderate amount in Germany, where the cephalic index is so generally
too high and the face so generally suggests
either the Alpine or the so-called East Baltic or
some other bundle. France, Hungary, Poland
and Russia and so on all show examples of
this bundle of characters too, and it could no
doubt be traced farther still. The fancy that
cephalic index is modified by various habits
of nursing may be dismissed as unsupported
by evidence; artificial deformations are
practised in certain lands, but the means
taken are much more severe.

Of the contributions to the social life and
intellectual achievements of the various
peoples which have been made by persons
carrying the Nordic bundle of physical
characters little that is profitable can be said.
Pictures and photographs of past and present
leaders in British and German life at any
rate bring out the great contributions of other
elements. In the case of Germany neither
Luther nor Kant nor Bismarck was Nordic ;
none of the trio, Hitler, Goebbels, Goering,
now in power, can be put into that class, and
that class seems not to have contributed to
the intellectuality which was such a feature
of Germany until recently in the same proportion as did the varied Jewish elements.

What is such a strange feature of so many
of those who idealize the Nordic type is that
they diverge more and more from the
methods so characteristic of Swedish and
Norwegian dealings, and seem to copy the
ideas that have found favour in postrevolutionary Russia. The ravings of Houston Stewart Chamberlain have brought a
sad harvest.

A special note of appreciation of the chapter on “ Europe Overseas’’ by Professor
Carr-Saunders must be added. It deals with
many problems affecting emigration policies,
and draws attention to the large non-Nordic
element that went to the original building
up of the United States of America.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVII, No. 4.
