168 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Tredgold, Dr. A. F., M.R.C.S.Eng. Mental Deficiency (Amentia). 2nd
Edition. London.  Balligre, Tindall and Cox; 1914; price

12s. 6d.; pp. 491.

THIS is the second edition of a work which, since its first appearance in
1908, has been steadily winning its way as the best book on its subject in
the English language. It covers the territory it professes to deal with in
as complete a way as our present knowledge permits. It treats the subject not only in detail but in a large scientific spirit. It takes into account
the pathological, statistical, sociological and eugenic aspects of mental
deficiency arising from birth or shortly afterwards. There are few subjects which are of more importance to the science of eugenics than a study
of the mental deficiencies of human beings. If we could arrive at a
correct knowledge of their nature and causation many of the problems of
that science would be solved thereby. Dr. Tredgold, after discussing
the factors of causation, arrives at the conclusion that the large majority
of cases of early mental defect are due to germinal impairment, in fact
from eighty to ninety per cent. are thus caused. He shows that this
impairment is liable to be transmitted from generation to generation, the
actual conditions in ancestry being not necessarily amentia, but possibly
insanity, epilepsy, and what is now commonly called the “ neuropathic
diathesis,” that is a lowered stability of general brain working and
less resistiveness to disease, which causes social inefficiency and
places its subjects to a greater or less degree among the “unfit.” He
advances evidence to show that the birth-rate among the neuropathic is
decidedly higher than in the healthy community in the proportion of
seven children of each marriage to four and a half. The recent statistics
of the general fall in the birth-rate give this fact a great social significance. The unfit are thereby manifestly increased. If this cannot be
arrested by the means suggested by Dr. Tredgold in his twenty-first
chapter, or otherwise, it means in succeeding generations a gradual
lessening of national and social efficiency. Natural selection, too, is
gradually, in all civilised countries, being more and more affected by
artificial selection. Dr. Tredgold takes the view that environmental
effects of certain kinds may become heritable.

In this second edition Dr. Tredgold explains the nature of mental
deficiency and of the germ defects which underlie amentia more fully than
in the first edition. He has re-written the chapters on psychology, moral
deficiency, sociology, and diagnosis. He has brought his statistics up
to date from all sorts of reliable sources. Though the book is intended
primarily for the medical profession, yet its importance and its
interest is almost equally great to the eugenist, the psychologist, and the
politician who has some strain of science in his ideas. At the present
time, when vast and far-reaching schemes of social reform are being
carried out or contemplated by Parliament, many of the facts in such a
book should be known to every legislator and public man.

To understand the social significance of such a book as this, one has
to realise the conditions, hereditary and environmental, that are necessary
for the production of a normal man or woman. A reasonably good
ancestry, which means a germplasm of normal capacity, an environment of average suitability for the perfecting of the plasm and a normal
capacity for the all-important process of development, are absolutely
necessary for any nation to advance in civilisation. When we consider
the extraordinary complexity of the human brain, its susceptibility to
every influence, mental and bodily, to which it is subjected and its innate
power of development from a mere mass of undifferentiated cells to the
most highly integrated, the most reactive, and the most dominating of
all the organic structures in nature, we are able to realise in a measure
the importance of suitable sexual mating, of good nutriment, and of a
REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 169

scientific education for the future of the world. The difference between a
good human brain and a bad one is that between light and darkness, but
there is a steady gradation from the one into the other in structure and
quality in every community. When we consider the yet undiscovered
nature of mind and its relationship to organisation and the complexity of
the social organisation in a civilised nation, the eugenist may well be discouraged, but this is not the attitude of modern science. We consider
that no earnest student of eugenics can afford to neglect or to be ignorant
of the main facts and conclusions of Dr. Tredgold’s treatise. If we were
to refer to one tithe of the relevant facts in that book or to dilate on their
eugenic significance we should pass altogether beyond the limits of a
review. Take, for example, one genealogical study referred to by Dr.
Tredgold. Joseph “Nam” lived in the mountains of Massachusetts about
1760. He had eight children—“ Some of the descendants of whom were
prosperous, but the majority sank into the lowest social grade and are
now living under the most wretched conditions. Of 784 descendants
who have been traced it was found that 88 per cent. of females and
go per cent. of males were excessively addicted to alcohol; 180 were
illegitimate. There were 232 licentious women and 199 licentious men,
as contrasted with 155 chaste women and 83 chaste men; there were
19 epileptics, 24 insane, of whom seven have been in custodial care;
three in a girls’ home; 15 in an orphan asylum, and 40 in State prisons.”
Think of such a biological and social problem as this multiplied by the
thousand and you have an example of what the eugenist of the future has
to investigate, explain and antagonise!
T. S. CLOUSTON.

Barnett, Mary G. Young Delinquents: A Study of Reformatory and

Industrial Schools. London. Methuen and Co.; price 3s. 6d. net;

PP. 222, xiv.
THE purpose of this book is to give such an account of our reformatory
and industrial schools, and of their inmates, as will interest and inform the
general public. Miss Barnett’s information is derived from frequent
attendances at Children’s Courts and visits to many of the schools; she
has also made herself acquainted with much of the literature and reports
on the subject. The result is a book which should certainly be of use to
those who wish for information regarding juvenile delinquents and the
great strides which have been made in our treatment of this class during
the past fifty years. Perhaps nothing brings this home so clearly as the
statements that in 1833 a boy of nine years was sentenced to death (but not
executed) for stealing 2d. of paint; whilst two boys of fifteen years were
transported for seven years for stealing a pair of boots. Miss Barnett
traces the gradual change brought about since that time, largely due to the
work of Lord Shaftesbury and Miss Mary Carpenter, up to the Children
Act of 1908. She gives a useful account of our present system of institutional treatment for juvenile offenders, together with many particulars
regarding organisation, management, staffing, methods of treatment and
results; whilst her final chapter contains a brief synopsis of the recent
report of the Departmental Committee on Reformatory Schools. We think
that Miss Barnett is a little out of her depth when she makes the statement
that “country dwellers, from an early age, are witnesses of the works of
Nature, and therefore their subconscious mind is imbued with a spirit of
reverence.” Nor are we quite convinced that “a child with adenoids, or
even with decayed teeth, may have a perverted moral sense which will be
corrected by proper medical treatment.” But in spite of these and a few
other generalisations which would have been better omitted, the book is
still one which we can recommend to those who wish to obtain some knowledge of this class and of the working of these schools.

A. F. TREDGOLD.
