DANISH EXPERIENCES IN NEGATIVE EUGENICS

choose such words as authoritarian or dictatorial; we should select, rather, the
epithet ‘‘naive.’’ The desire for wealth, for
power, fot social status and honours—nearly
all the motives which, throughout history,
have contributed to political strife—have
apparently beccme extinct. In Kantsaywhere. there are no rival political parties,
no pressure groups, no caucuses, no intrigue. What had become of these disturbing yet formative movements ? Apparently
the citizens had become as oblivious of them
as Galton had been during the whole of his
life. They had shed them much as a snake
sheds its outgrown skin.

Galton’s “ Kantsaywhere”’ is projected
into a distant and visionary future when

181

scientific methods (expressed in anthropometric procedures) have not only been
statistically validated but publicly recognized and universally accepted. The Senate
of Kantsaywhere constitutes an oligarchy ;
but the powers with which it is invested and
which it freely exercises are no more regarded by the country’s imaginary inhabitants as dictatorial than are the powers today wielded by an examining board so
regarded by the candidates who sit for the
examination which it arbitrates. The man
who is ploughed may be disappointed ; he
may even feel bitterly aggrieved ; but he
does not, if he is sane, regard himself as a
victim of Fascism or as the slave of a
dictatorship.

DANISH EXPERIENCES IN NEGATIVE
EUGENICS, 1929-45°*
By TAGE KEMP

University Institute for Human Genetics, Copenhagen

lated the principles of eugenics, the

possibilities. of putting these principles
into practice were only slight, for but very
little was yet known about human heredity.
Long before a ‘scientific foundation for
eugenic theories had been provided, however,
they were taken up by others, often with
more enthusiasm than wisdom.

Eugenics soon spread to other countries,
often under new names and, in some degree,
with changes in content. In Denmark the
term ‘ hereditary hygiene ”’ is now usually
employed. In Germany, where eugenic ideas
were introduced in the early ‘nineties, the

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on November 19th, 1946.

| N 1883, when Francis Galton first formu
designation adopted was “‘ race hygiene ’’—a
concept which later was to be so grossly
abused in the Third Reich. More recently
the term “ eugenics” has been attached to
any application of biology to social hygiene
in the widest sense of the term.

During the first epoch of eugenics towards
the end of the past century and in the
beginning of this century, however, the whole
subject was markedly speculative, for at that
time the study of heredity, which was to
form the scientific foundation of eugenics,
was still in its infancy. Indeed, this essential
basis of eugenics did not exist until the
second and third decades of this century.

A distinction has been made between
quantitative and qualitative eugenics, the
182

former being subdivided into positive and
negative eugenics.

The practice of positive eugenics, however,
has met with almost insurmountable difficulties. Supermen cannot be produced artificially, for marriage and the breeding of
children cannot be enforced compulsorily.
It may be that attempts to carry out eugenic
aims indirectly have not been altogether unsuccessful, but it cannot be said that what
has so far been gained in this way represents a significant advance for humanity.

As to negative eugenic measures the matter
stands quite differently. Medical research
into heredity has made it possible td apply
these, and this development has been
favoured by political developments in the
between-war years. In the dictator countries,
where considerations of state unconditionally
overrode any rights of the individual,
and where nationalism was. rampant,
eugenic policies were looked upon as a means
by which the nation might assert itself in
competition with other nations and races.
In démocratic countries there has been a
growing feeling that society must make
living conditions tolerable for everybody, and
this has necessitated the employment of
certain eugenic measures.

The most important negative pugenie
measures are sterilization, interruption of
pregnancy, prohibition of marriage, marriage
advice combined with instruction on contraception, and finally segregation of the individual in hospitals or other institutions.

It is usually stated that the first sterilization for eugenic purposes was performed in an
American prison in 1899. Legislation concerning sterilization has existed ina fewstates
of the U.S.A. since 1907, and since that time
at least 30,000 sterilizing operations have been
performed, in the U.S.A. and a few Canadian
provinces, about one-half of the operations
being performed in California, where through
a number of years about 100 sterilizations
were performed yearly per 1,000,000 inhabitants. In Europe sterilization laws have been
in force since 1928 (in Canton Vaud in
Switzerland). In Denmark the first sterilization law came into force in 1929, in Norway
in 1934, in Germany also in 1934, in Sweden

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in 1935 (revised in 1941), in Finland in 1935
and in Estonia in 1937 (probably abolished
after the Russian occupation of the country).
In Holland and England similar laws have
been contemplated, but not adopted so far.

As to eugenic control of marriage and
interruption of pregnancy, the laws differ
considerably in various countries, on which
account this legislation outside Denmark
will not be mentioned further here.

* In some countries special clinics have been
instituted with a view to giving matrimonial
advice on eugenics, and information on contraception is usually given at the same time.
In Denmark eugenic matrimonial advice is
given to a not inconsiderable extent by
general practitioners as well as by specialists. Obviously the possibilities in this field
gradually increase with the increasing development of medical research in heredity.

It is also of eugenic importance that
patients with hereditary diseases should
stay for a considerable length of time in
hospitals or institutions, or be submitted to
the control implied by public care. This
results in a shorter or longer segregation or
separation of such individuals, which naturally lowers their chances of propagation.
Thus the hospital or institutional treatment,
public care and compulsory notification of
the feeble-minded, epileptic, deaf, blind and
crippled are of eugenic importance.

Finally, the abolition of areas of inbreeding, where recessive hereditary diseases:
prevail, may be of eugenic significance. If
such an inbred group is scattered about the
population, as happens relatively often now
-adays through improvements in the means

of communication, their respective hereditary diseases will disappear. On the other
hand, the tendency to such diseases will be
more widespread, and in the course of time
this may involve a certain risk.

It is sometimes stated that the main purpose of eugenics is to spare society a good
deal of expense. This, of course, is a great
mistake. Negative eugenic measures are of
an entirely medical character, aiming at the
prevention of disease and misfortune. Like
other preventive measures they mean a
saving to the public in the long run, as the
DANISH EXPERIENCES IN NEGATIVE EUGENICS

diseases would have cost society far more
than the amount expended on their prevention.

_ In Denmark several negative eugenic or
heredo-hygienic laws have been passed during
the past fifteen. years. Thus, in 1929, Denmark was the first European country to
adopt eugenic sterilization as a medico-legal
measure, while in 1934-5 fresh laws were

passed concerning this operation. Further, |

the Danish marriage law includes certain
prohibitions against a union wherein there
is a not inconsiderable risk of transmitting
various serious mental affections or epilepsy
to the offspring. Finally, a law which was
enforced on October Ist, 1939, established
certain rules concerning the interruption of
pregnancy on eugenic grounds.

The first Danish law on sterilization and
castration was adopted in 1929 and was
replaced on May 11th, 1935, by a new law on
access to sterilization and castration. Section 1 of this law lays down that after due
application a person may be sterilized if such
a procedure is indicated for social reasons,
and furthermore (1) with regard to mentally
normal individuals that particular indications are present, especially a risk of a predisposition being inherited by the off
spring ; and (2) concerning mentally abnor- 
mal individuals who are not feeble-minded
it must also be regarded as a benefit to the
person concerned that he is incapacitated
from propagation. The application for sterilization, which is made to the Department of
Justice, must, among other things, be accompanied by a medical certificate giving
adequate reasons for sterilization. The
Department of Justice has in every case to
ask the advice of the Medico-legal Council.
The law of May 16th, 1934, which is concerned with the feeble-minded, also includes
directions on sterilization. According to
section 5, such persons may be sterilized
when there are social reasons against their
having offspring—e.g., when they are judged
to be so defective as to be incapable of
adequately providing for or educating their
children. Application for sterilization is made
to the Department of Social Affairs ; decisions
have in every case to be made by a special

183

board comprising a judge from the Supreme
Court as chairman, a psychiatrist and a
person experienced in sociology (at present
one of the mayors of the City of Copenhagen).
In doubtful cases the Director of the Institute for Human Genetics is consulted.

TABLE 1

‘Tota, NUMBER OF LEGAL STERILIZATIONS IN
DENMARK, 1929-45 (ESTIMATED)

 

 

 

Women Men Tota
1929-34 wee wee 88 20 108
1935-39 975 405 1,380
1940-45 — 1,510 610 2,120
Total, 1929-45 bmi 2,573 1,035 3,608
Castrations (sexual
abnormals resp. a few about (I ora

sexual criminals) 400 few boys)

Table 1 shows the total number of persons
legally sterilized in Denmark from 1929 to
1945. The figures are approximate, but do
not differ essentially from the true ones ;
they are estimated from the publications of
Smith & Bruun and Sand* and on the yearly
reports from the Danish Medico-legal Council
and information given by the Departments
of Justice and Social Affairs. |

TABLE 2

LEGALLY STERILIZED PATIENTS (FEEBLE-MINDED
EXCEPTED) IN DENMARK, 1929-45 (ESTIMATED)

 

Women Men _ Total
1929-34 wee eee 4 I 5
1935-39 wee Oe 150 30 180
1940-45 510 110 620
Total, 1929-45 664 T4I | 805

Table 2 shows the number of sterilized
persons who are not feeble-minded. These.
patients suffered from various diseases or
were hereditarily tainted. Some of the most
common conditions in question were: |

Mental inferiority (dullards), epilepsy,
psychopathy, schizophrenia, manic depressive psychosis, other mental diseases, psychoses and nervous disorders in pregnancy,
malformations, blindness ‘or eye diseases,
deaf-mutism, internal diseases (hemophilia,
diabetes, etc.), nervous diseases (muscular
dystrophy, Friedreich’s ataxia, myotonia),
etc.

*Knud Sand, Ugeskrift for Lager, 1935, Pp. 25.
Nordisk Medicin, 1940, p. 779. J. C. Smith & A.
Bruun, Socialt Tidsskrift, 1939, p. 371.
184

TABLE 3

LEGALLY STERILIZED FEEBLE-MINDED PATIENTS IN
DENMARK, 1929-45 (ESTIMATED)

 

 

 

Women Men Total

1929-34 we wee 84 19 103
1935-39 825 375 1,200
1940-45 1,000 500 1,500
Total, 1929-45 1,909 894 2,803
The Danish population, 1924: 3,389,000; 1944:
3,998,000. Children born alive, 1924: 73,836; 1944:

90,639.

Table 3 shows the approximate number of
feeble-minded patients sterilized in Denmark
from 1929 to 1945. During recent years
nearly 300 feeble-minded have been sterilized. Twenty years ago about 74,000 children were born in Denmark ; if one estimates
that 1 per cent of these children were hereditarily feeble-minded they would total 740,
and about one-third to one-half of these
children have since been sterilized.

These figures give rise to various considerations. The first and most important
question is: Have some, or even one, of the
3,500 been operated upon with insufficient
indications for sterilization? To this the
only answer is that so far nothing of the kind
has been proved. The risk of its happening
is very Slight, for every case is considered by
several mutually independent medical experts and boards, each of which possesses
some particular expert knowledge. But,
indeed, any human institution may fail
occasionally, and a wrong decision may
sometimes have been made. The principle
for the responsible authorities must, however, always be rather to sterilize too few
than too many.

The next question is: Is it correct to
reckon that on the whole all those who ought
to be sterilized actually are submitted to this
treatment ? It is difficult to give any answer
to this question until the genetic registration,
which will be mentioned later, has been
carried through.

Then one might ask : Is it to be expected
that within a surveyable future these sterilizations will bring about a distinct decrease
in the incidence of hereditary diseases,
especially in the frequency of mental deficiency in Denmark? As mental deficiency is
largely inherited as a recessive character that

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tan be transmitted through healthy carriers,
it might be expected to take many generations to bring about a distinct reduction in
the total number of mental defectives. But
as the mental defectives usually select their
mates from among other oligophrenics, we
may take a somewhat more optimistic view

of this question than if they mixed freely
with the rest of the population. If the somewhat less than 3,000 mental defectives
sterilized in the period 1929-45 had not been

_ Sterilized they would have had over 5,000

children, of which one-third to one-half
would have been feeble-minded. And among
their descendants in later generations there
would be many more mental defectives.

In the card index of the Institute for
Human Genetics in Copenhagen there are
numerous records of feeble-minded persons
born about the middle of the past century
who among their descendants in three
generations have scores of mental defectives.
There is every reason to assume that the
2,600 sterilized mental defectives within the
next 100 years might have had several times
10,000 feeble-minded descendants, from
whom posterity is now freed.

The Danish law on abortion mentioned
above lays down in section 1, sub-section 1,
point 3, that a pregnant woman may have
her pregnancy interrupted when there is an
obvious risk of the child being liable to inherit insanity, other severe mental disturbances, epilepsy or serious and incurable
physical illness.

Whether the conditions mentioned in this
law be present in each individual case has
to be decided by the physician concerned,
i.e. the private physician of the woman in
question or the physician attached to a
mothers’ aid institution, in consultation with
another authorized physician, who is often
chief of the surgical or gynecological clinic
where the operation is to be performed. It
is often necessary first to refer the woman to
some special expert or to have her admitted
to a psychiatric or other non-surgical department.

During the six years since the enforcement
of the above-mentioned law, the University
DANISH EXPERIENCES IN NEGATIVE EUGENICS

Institute for Human Genetics, Copenhagen,
has received 623 inquiries from physicians
as to whether eugenic indications for interruption of pregnancy are present in given

cases.* These inquiries came from the
sources indicated in Table 4.
TABLE 4

INQUIRIES WITH RESPECT TO EUGENIC ABORTION

Cases per cent
hospitals .» 313 ie.in 50°3
mothers’ aid institutions | -» 155 ” 24°9
other institutions eee wee 27 » 4°3
praetising physicians ... .-. 128 » 20°5

Jn the first couple of years after the
enforcement of the law the number of such
inquiries was small, but has increased year
by year.

These inquiries may be classified according to the diseases which it was feared that
the expected child might inherit—as shown
in Table 5.

TABLE 5

CLASSIFICATION OF CONDITION FOR WHICH EUGENIC
ABORTION WAS CONSIDERED

Cases per cent
Physical malformations .. ZI Le.in 4114
Deaf-mutism or ear lesions ... 21 3°4
Blindness or eye lesions .. 19 3°0
Lesions of internal organs 37 » 5°9
Nervous diseases an ... 66 - 10°6
Oligophrenia won 105 ” 16°9
Psychopathy ... es .. O4 15°!
Psychosis vs 66 » 10°6
Alccholism and Jor criminality 32 » 5°1
Various other lesions ... . ro » 1°6
Combined eugenic indications — 102 » 16°4

On studying the individual entries in this
tabulation we: find that the most frequent
lesion under the first heading—* physical
malformation ’’—is harelip and cleft palate,
and the next are spina bifida and chrondrodystrophy. This group further comprises a
large number of other malformations—e.g.
spontaneous amputations, ectrodactylism,
congenital defects of the radius and ulna,
club-foot, congenital dislocation of the hip,
Crouzon’s disease and anencephaly.

Among the ear lesions that may be the
cause of eugenic interruption of pregnancy
by far the most frequent is the sporadic
recessive deaf-mutism ; the next are labyrinthine deafness and otosclerosis.

* See Kemp, T. (1946) Acta Psychiatrica, p. 417.

185

Among the eye lesions furnishing an indication for induction of abortion, mention is
to be made of aniridia, retinitis pigmentosa
and cataract.

Among the diseases of internal organs the
most frequent are hemophilia and diabetes,
then various diseases of the blood, tumours
and allergic affections.

In no less than fifty-two cases the
question about eugenic indications for interruption of pregnancy was prompted by the
fear that the expected child might suffer:
from epilepsy.

Other nervous diseases are far more infrequent, the most common being muscular
dystrophy, ‘Huntington’s chorea and Friedreich’s ataxia.

Among the forms of oligophrenia are
mental inferiority, feeble-mindedness, Mongoloid idiocy, tuberous or diffuse sclerosis.

The second largest group is made up of
cases of psychopathy often associated with
criminality, alcoholism, anti-social behaviour,
etc.

Among the psychoses proper, nearly onehalf is made up of schizophrenia, the other
half of manic depressive psychosis or mental
depression.

As was to be expected, multiple indications
were encountered in a large percentage of the
cases, often with several affections—as, for
instance, physical malformation together
with epilepsy, oligophrenia or other mental
lesions. Such cases of multiple disability may
be very difficult to judge, as no general rule
can be laid down concerning them. Every
case has to be submitted to individual expert
consideration.

Thus in Denmark negative eugenics has
been practised to a not inconsiderable extent.
But there are many difficulties and problems.

Experience shows that the patients themselves as well as their relatives are nearly
always able to understand the expediency of
eugenic operations or precautions, and hence
they make no objections to them. Still, it is
obvious that measures which interfere so
radically with the fate and most intimate
life of human individuals may arouse some
friction or conflict of views. The physicians
186

and other authorities dealing with eugenic
cases are always most considerate and
thorough in their investigations, and the
guiding principle is always that too few

eugenic operations are preferable to too

many.
'An important aid to the carrying through
of eugenic measures is the establishment of

‘a eugenic registration, comprising a register

or card index covering all the patients in the
country who are afflicted with any serious
hereditary affection—and also. their families.
Similar registers have been made in small
districts in other countries. But I do not
think that an attempt has ever been made
to cover an entire country. Since 1938,

- however, in the Institute for Human Genetics,
a eugenic card index of this kind has been

kept up, covering the whole of Denmark.
Here we try as far as possible to obtain
information about all the persons suffering
from any serious hereditary disease or
defect—and about their families too. If ina
given case the question of a eugenic operation is raised, the card index may furnish
information about the person, or persons, in
question and their families. It will thus, in
many cases, be much easier to reach a
decision.

It is not possible to predict with certainty
what results may be attained by negative

eugenic measures. They can never lead to a

complete eradication of morbid tendencies in
the population. For one thing, new hereditary diseases arise through mutation ; and,
furthermore, it would be impracticable to
track down all recessive tendencies. Finally,
many dominant affections show varying
manifestations, and cannot always be
detected in the carriers, or a hereditary ill
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ness may in one generation appear in such a
mild form as to give insufficient indications
for sterilization, while in the next generation
it may assume a more serious character.
There is also the possibility that a hereditary
disease may not manifest itself before the
, patient has had several children, whe may
very well have inherited the lesion. And,
naturally, many practical conditions and
human considerations may in various ways
obstruct a consistent and radical carrying
out of eugenic measures. |

Somebody may ask: Are the eugenic
measures employed as effectively as possible,
or, on the other hand, are they not sometimes
employed in cases where they are not really
needed ? Is the combating of the hereditary diseases going on in a haphazard way, without any definite plan, or is it carried on
purposefully and systematically ? These
questions cannot be answered properly without eugenic registration, for without that we
are working in the dark. A more thorough
centralization of eugenic measures is also
required in place of our present procedure.

An essential prerequisite for effective
eugenics is the co-operation of the public
health service, social care and the administration of justice that has largely been
established in Denmark, though legislation
and public administration in these fields may
sometimes function rather heavily.

In conclusion it may just be mentioned
that to carry through heredo-hygienic or
eugenic measures successfully general practitioners must be fully acquainted with recent
results of research in medical genetics. It is
also necessary for the population in general
to have some knowledge and understanding
of eugenic principles.

;
