STERILIZATION IN SWEDEN
By PROFESSOR DR. NILS VON HOFSTEN

(Member of the Government Commission)

by the Swedish Parliament in 1934
: and came into force on January Ist,
1935. This law governs only the sterilization
‘of persons suffering from insanity, feeblemindedness or other mental disorders, who
‘by reason of such condition are permanently
inhibited from giving a valid consent to this
proceeding. Such persons may be sterilized
‘without their consent if the assumption is
established that they will not in the future
‘be able to look after their children or that
they might transmit to offspring by heredity
i ental disease or defect. The law recognizes
social, as well as eugenic, grounds for
sterilization. In practice, the lack of capacity
to give a valid consent to sterilization plays
the major part ; for persons who by reason of
Mlisease or defect are thus incapacitated may
De taken to be permanently incapable of
parental responsibility.

A STERILIZATION law was accepted

Principles of Swedish Sterilization Law

P The intention of the law as outlined by
Ahe Minister of Justice prevents the statute
arom being interpreted as permitting the use
pt compulsion.* In principle, only voluntary
sterilization may be undertaken, despite the
) act that certain persons may be sterilized
without their consent when suffering from
egal incapacity.
Thus, the Swedish sterilization law is
Btrictly limited. Voluntary sterilization of
bersons who can give legal consent is outside
e scope of the law. This does not mean that
bach sterilizations are not allowed. On the
e ntrary, since the Act came into force,
plying on the above-mentioned intention,
2 position is now accepted that voluntary
Merilization is allowed on adequate grounds.

 
  
  
   
  
 

ek * A report of the Commission of Population, includi recommendations for a law on voluntary sterilizaen, was submitted to the Ministry of Justice in
ttober 1936. This report has been published in
Pockholm.

It occurs without legal procedure. Control
exists only through the obligation on the
surgeon performing the operation to report
thereon to the Ministry of Health. From this
point of view, it appears that Sweden stands
in a unique position among those countries
which have legislation or contemplate legislation on this matter.

Another point of difference is that in
Sweden sterilization of the feeble-minded
does not depend on examination by a central
board, but may be carried out when two consulting physicians agree on the condition.
In other cases, falling within the law, the
consent of the Ministry of Health must be
obtained.

The Preliminary Investigations

Before the law came into force, considerable anxiety was expressed in regard to
voluntary sterilization. Parliament regarded
as of some importance the arguments adduced
for the introduction of regulations thereon,
and in passing the measure asked for further
investigation of these points. The Swedish
Population Commission, to which I belong,
was instructed to carry out these investigations in 1935. For this purpose, a committee
was meanwhile set up, consisting of Professor
H. Niulsson-Ehle, Medical Director, Dr.
Torsten Sjoegren, and myself.

The Committee came early to the conclusion that the Swedish law contains some
obvious defects. Of these, the most important is the above-mentioned omission of
regulations in regard to voluntary sterilization. I see nothing to prevent my mentioning
at once that we regarded decisions of this
character as highly desirable. On the one
hand, it is clear that when no regulations
exist, there is a danger of ill-advised operations without examination by specialists in
the supposed condition, where the decision
is left entirely to individual physicians. A

a 257
258

further point of view is equally important.
The present law, being as has been said
strictly limited, fails to deal with the most
important group of cases for sterilization,
both on eugenic and social grounds—namely,
the higher grades of the feeble-minded ; at
present, only idiots and low-grade imbeciles
fall within the provisions. Of greater importance are cases of retardation or mild
mental defect, cases of which it cannot be
said that they are incapable of consent. In
particular, sterilization is desirable for the
category which show not only retardation
but strong asocial traits, among which are
lack of sexual inhibitions. The fertility of
this group is admittedly high, although exact
statistical data are wanting. A reduction of
this fertility by sterilization would be of
importance both from the eugenic and the
social point of view. The extent of 1mprovement in the genetical composition of the
population by sterilization will not be dealt
with here. If results are to be obtained, it
will certainly be of critical importance to
include as widely as possible the abovementioned group, which is hardly touched
by sterilization at present. The law has,
without doubt, produced some good effects,
though it must be admitted that these are
smaller than was generally anticipated ; this
is undoubtedly owing to the exemption of
this category.

Legislative Posstbilities

To remedy the situation, two courses can
be envisaged. One is to tighten up the law
now obtaining for operations without consent by removing the condition that the
patient is incapable of valid agreement ; the
feeble-minded should certainly be eligible
without this condition. Such extension
ought not to arouse misgivings, for the
individuals under consideration are intellectually so near to those which now are included that they may be treated on the same
footing. Indeed, the concept of legal incapacity may to a considerable degree be
regarded as a fiction. This possibility has
been seriously considered by the Committee.

The second part of this desirable objective
may be attained by regulation of voluntary

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

 
  
   
  
   
    
  
   
    
  
  
   
  
  

sterilization. As matters stand, only ag
ligible number of the mentally retagj
have the operation, and under suitable eng
ments a great increase would take pi
within this category. :

Comparison with Denmark

Without anticipating the results of ¢
findings of our Committee on these ty
methods, I will merely add the interesty
point of view on this question which I q
countered on a recent tour in Denmark §
consultation with several of the more prong
nent experts there. I got an excel
impression of the splendidly organized ca
of the feeble-minded, including their regi
tration and guardianship, and collaboratiq
between the institutions and the Sterilizg
tion Commission. Operations on the feeblg
minded are there put on a plane which giv@
the widest possible extension of the law
According to the Danish enactments, retard@j
and asocial individuals fall for the most pag
in the same group as the feeble-minded -#
there being a special law for these case
distinct from the sterilization law. The d ifthe
culties would be much greater in Sweden ag
there is not the same basis on which ia
organize treatment of the feeble-minded§
This probably makes it advisable to follow;
another course than that adopted by thel x
Danes. :
Views of Investigation Comm«uttee

It is permissible to give a general summary ;
of the views of our Committee :

1. We would extend voluntary strertiaat oan’
to the mentally disordered and the mentally’
subnormal (including sufferers from mental
diseases, psychopathic conditions and every
grade of mild mental defect) as soon as such
persons show tendencies of incompetence in
the upbringing of children.

2. Eugenic indications should be recognized not only in these cases, but as covering
a widely extended group, namely wherever
there is danger of the transmission of mental
or physical disease, deformity or subnoymality to posterity. Moreover, persons of
whom there is a high probability that,
STERILIZATION IN SWEDEN

though themselves normal, they may be
carriers of such disastrous heredity, should
have the right to sterilization.

3. Mere social dependency should, in our
view, not be admissible for sterilization.
Cases, however, exist in which social inadequacy and other conditions occurring
together justify sterilization. These other
conditions would be medical or eugenic,
but taken by themselves not sufficiently
strong to justify the operation. We have
here to do with socio-medical or socioeugenical indications. It seems to us important that such cases should be included.
This is not the place to consider the formula
required.

It will be grasped from the above that we
consider a want of economic capacity to
bring up children as a suitable reason under
certain conditions for voluntary sterilization. Whoever harbours doubts of this
principle should realize that on the average
the persons whose sterilization would thus
be promoted and made possible compose a
body of human material whose procreation
is neither socially nor eugenically valuable.
One inescapable condition in the view of
the Committee is that for all sterilizations
not based on purely medical indications,
authorization by a central board must be
forthcoming. Such decisions resemble in
some degree the proposal of the English
Departmental Committee on Sterilization,
though at some points they would go beyond
it. The principles, if not the formulation,
are akin to those of the Danish law. The
German sterilization law admits of a form of
compulsion incompatible with Swedish legal
conceptions, while it admits of voluntary
sterilization with undue restriction.

Stertlizations in 1935

I give now data on the operations in
Sweden during 1935. The total is 287. This
‘figure includes operations performed on
‘medical grounds. When these are deducted,
the total falls to 229. The cases may be
-subdivided as follows :

259
Stertlization under the law of 1934
Feeble-minded, with consent of
the medical authority ++» 331 a8
without such consent... wee 95
Insane... wes . 7
Other mental disorders ... I
Total 136
Voluntary stertlizations as reported
Purely medical cases _... 56
Other cases (overlapping somewhat with
the above) . wes . I00
Total . 156

In the last-mentioned hundred cases,
while about twenty had adequate medical
indications, the rest were partly medical but
partly influenced by other conditions. It
may be well to consider these hundred in
detail.

The non-medical indications fall into two
main categories, namely, eugenic and social;
that is, on the one hand, incapacity to bring
up children, and, on the other, a condition of
social dependency which would be rendered
more grave by the birth of further children.
True epilepsy in what follows is regarded as
both eugenic and medical. Eugenic grounds
occur in not less than seventy-five cases if,
without going into the particular determining factor of each case, the positive
danger of disease or deficiency in offspring is
accepted ; in more than sixty, these reasons
alone would have justified action. Medical
reasons hold in fifty-nine cases and social
grounds in seventy-two. The greatest interest attaches to the diversity in type of the
series :

Cases
Purely eugenic grounds ... oD
Medical and eugenic grounds we 25
Social and eugenic grounds wee 35
Social, medical and eugenic grounds 12
Social and medical grounds ... I9
Social or indeterminate grounds... 5

In the last two categories, several cases
occurred which would probably not have
2600

been accepted for sterilization without additional grounds had there been legal regulations in force. The distinction of these types
is, of course, schematic and open to several
sources of error. A further survey follows
of the eugenic reasons which are, in part, also
medical or social.

Cases
Mental disease wee wee ... %I2
Psychopathics ... 22
Mental deficiency (retardation) ... 30
Epilepsy __.... 10
Hereditary progressive muscular
atrophy... wee wee ... 1

Total... wes wes FS

The line between psychopathic conditions

Each Number of

AND SOCIETY

Edited by Pryns Hopkins, with whom are associated
William Stephenson and Alexander Farquharson

SCIENCE

considers one human problem from a variety of aspects, among which the genetic
approach is regularly included. It appears three times a year. The topic which the
October-January number so discusses is internationalism. Prof. Ernst Jackh, director
of the New Commonwealth Institute, has written the leader.
Doctors C. M. Fillmore and Adrian Stephen and Messrs. C. A. Mace, J. C. Trevor
and R. Herdman Pender then follow with a series of contributions at once readable

and authoritative.

; SL a a

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

 
 
   

and mental disorder is somewhat arbitng
depression being reckoned with the lag
Mental deficiency embraces amentia, chi
feeble-mindedness, rather than what |
characterized as intellectual retardation. 4
few cases are included with pronounced ax
social tendencies, which in all probabilj
entail a certain intellectual failure. 3
I cannot here discuss in detail cases 4
which sterilization was not granted, as thi
do not fall under the present Swedish lag
Here would belong fourteen antisocy
women who had between them fifty-nig
children. This throws a clear light on t§
present position of the sterilization proble
in Sweden in so far as it emphasizes 4
importance of regulations for the operatiag
beyond those included in the present law. ¥

   
 
   
 
   
 
   
   
 

:

nent

Bis:

bd ~*
om:

et tpg 1,8 yew gt ted:
- fe gl Bre 9 tat a
ri aa avers ide gtd f
ve ee ee

te
hehehe!
aaa

ee a, NS OP

. x
ema eee ee een meena nein
4 eM bbe a ae, 7

Prof. H. J. Fleure,

Subscribe now, at 10s. for six numbers, or send for a free sample copy to

THE MERCURY PRESS
BUSH HOUSE, LONDON, W.C.2

ad

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIX, No. 4.
