‘THE UNITED NATIONS ORGANIZATIONS
AND THE WORLD POPULATION .PROBLEM*

By KARL EVANG, M.D., F.R.S.M. Hon., F.A.P.H.A., F.R.S.D. Hon.

Director-General, Norwegian Public Health Service

international importance are at present, in one way or another, dealt with
by the countries of the world in the United
Nations and its specialized agencies. The
discussions and comments, the recommendations, resolutions and regulations adopted
by these official, governmental bodies, and
the reports of expert committees—composed of members with outstanding knowledge and experience in the fields concerned
—-are already indispensable to any government which wishes to keep up with developments in the various fields, and reap the
benefit of modern knowledge and administrative practice for its own country.
~It is therefore of interest to survey the
situation regarding the extent to which the
U.N. and its specialized agencies have, so far,
tackled the population problem. Although
there is still a pronounced tendency to
dodge at least certain aspects of this problem,
the years which have passed since the
United Nations was created have brought
more and more responsible governments
and scientists to realize that the population
problem has at least five important aspects
of world-wide importance, demanding international discussion and action:
1. Political.
Economic.
Social.
Health.
‘Cultural.

Piesemetinat all problems of broad

we SP

| will try very briefly to survey the
position of the United Nations and its
specialized agencies as regards population
problems. |

* A Paper read at the ‘Fourth International Conference on Planned Parenthood, Stockholm, August,
(17th, 1953.

F.A.O. and World Food Resources

F.A.O. (The Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations) has
among its objectives the assessment of the
amount of food needed for the growing
population of the world, and the promotion
of production, conservation and distribution.
of this food.. Both at Hot Springs in 1943
and during the first years of the existence
of F.A.O. an optimistic note was sounded,
although the picture which presented itself
both in 1943 and after the war was very
dark indeed, showing that food production
was far short of even the minimum requirement for the population existing at that
time. It was generally felt by agriculturists
and technologists that, by co-ordinated
efforts by the member States of F.A.O., a
rapid increase of food production. would be
possible. F.A.O. was at that time under no
illusion as regards the requirements. The
prognosis showed that by the year 1960, as _
compared with pre-war supplies, the world |
would need about 60 million more tons of
cereals, 30 million more tons of meat, 250

million more tons of vegetables and fruit, and

35 million more gallons of milk. There ws
no flinching from this gigantic task. F.A.O.
was confident that untilled land could be
brought under cultivation, production intensified, soil erosion stopped and the output
of fisheries increased. During these first years
of the life of F.A.O. there was on the whole
little talk of growth of populations. One
might say that the population question was
only looming in the background, throwing
perhaps a shadow of doubt over the enthusiasm:' and optimism.

Time will not permit me to follow the
gradual change, but some quotations from

247
248 ' THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the report of the Sixth session of the Conference* of F.A.O. (November r19th—
December 6th, 1951) will show how the
outlook had been changed during these few
years.

‘The Conference was gravely concerned by
the fact that food production over large areas
of the world was not keeping pace with the
growth of population ; that progress generally
remained slowest in the major food-deficient

_ and seriously underfed nations of the world and
that the expansion planned over the next two
years, even if fully achieved, would be insufficient

- to remedy this situation.

‘« The most important area presenting the most
urgent problem is the Far East where the population of nearly 1,250 million is increasing at the
rate of 12 million people a year. Here the
agricultural pattern ‘concentrates on quantity

' rather than quality, yet production constantly
hovers between levels of basic subsistence and
famine.”

The Conference goes on to express its
especial concern over the production of
cereals. It points to the fact that in Latin
America increasing food production can
barely keep pace with the rapidly growing
population, and that in the Far East, even
if the 1952-53 objecttves could be reached,
cereal production per person would still be
8 per cent below pre-war. In the Second
World Food Survey, produced by the Secretariat of F.A.O., published in November
1952, the Director-General of F.A.O., MR.
Norris: E. Dopp, states:

“The new information gives no ground for

complacency. The average food supply per
person over large areas of the world, five years

after the war was over, was still lower than .

“before the war. The proportion of the world’s
population with inadequate food supplies has
grown appreciably larger...

. The whole demographical picture, though
still ‘imperfectly understood and interpreted,
adds a note of urgency to the task of expanding
world food production.”’

Even more outspoken was the deputydirector-general of F.A.O., SiR HERBERT
BROADLY, in his opening address to the
Fifth World Health Assembly in May
1952. He said:

c¢

. We are both technical bodies and we are
both concerned with human needs. Your busi
* The “‘ Conference ’’ of F.A.O. is the meeting of the
representatives of all member States. —

ness is to see that the people of the world are

healthy ; ours is the task of seeing that they are
adequately fed, clothed and housed. But the

more successful you are in reaching your goal,

the more difficult F.A.O.’s task becomes. We

do want to pay tribute to the great achievements

that have marked the first few years of W.H.O.’s

existence. The span of human life is being

extended, infant mortality has immensely fallen.
and thousands upon thousands of human beings
are coming out of the shadow of disease, misery.
and incapacity into the sunshine of healthy

energetic lives. But more mouths demand more

food....

“We must recognize that at the moment the
world is just not responding to F.A.O.’s challenge. It is not producing sufficient food even to
maintain for its increasing population the
amount which the fewer, shorter-lived, lesshealthy millions had for each individual before the
war ...5othe time has really come for this drive
to increase food production to become a reality,
and if it does not, then we are faced with fearfal
consequences. At the moment there are two
schools of thought busily preaching their doctrines on this problem. There are those who see
no hope of ever adequately feeding the world’s
increasing millions, and their solution is a reduction in the millions, substituting education and
a limitation of families for those desperate
remedies that operated in the past, of war and
the great killing diseases ; and the other school—
the enthusiasts and the optimists—who see no
limit to the quantity of food that the world can
produce. Weil, it is quite true that technical
knowledge exists today which, if it were applied,
could result in an immense increase in world.
food production ; but the political, social, and
economic difficulties are also immense. In many
countries antiquated systems of land tenure are
an enormous handicap to the application of the
new agricultural technology, and ignorance too,
on the part of so many millions, is a giant in
the path, and disease has sapped human effort
and initiative in this field. But.all our agencies
together are beginning work on these problems.

‘The United Nations and F.A.O. are at work on

the field of land reform. UNESCO is beginning |
to lighten the darkness of human ignorance, and.
W.H.O., we are happy to record, is eliminating
the killing diseases. So we can hope in the
successful outcome of our joint efforts, but we
cannot yet have confidence that success will be
achieved in time. We are marching rapidly into
a future full of promise but equally lively with
menace, and that is why there is no simple or
quick solution to the problems which W.H.O,’s’
successes and the efforts of the health organizations
of our national countries are posing to the world.
“Where birth-rates continue.to advance, as is
the case in many countries—and not only in the
under-developed countries—where death-rates.
UNITED NATIONS AND WORLD POPULATION

and human mortality are being halved, where
the expectation of life is gaining another five,
ten, fifteen years, we cannot just sit back and
let Nature take its course. If we do, Nature’s
course will be a very desperate one. It is only
through international action, which this assembly
represents and which our agencies are endeavouring to carry out, that wise solutions can be
achieved. Otherwise, the growing populations
of those countries which are at present exporting
food will consume their own existing output, and
the food-importing countries of Western Europe

_ will in turn be faced with the dangers of shortage
and famine.”

It must be made perfectly clear, however,
that the two last statements partly quoted
above are given by staff members of F.A.O.
No such statement by a member of the
F.A.O. staff, however prominent, can of
course be attributed to F.A.O. as an organization. The parts I quote from the Report
of the Sixth Conference, on the other hand,
can be taken as an expression of the attitude
of F.A.O. towards the problem at that time.

To sum up, therefore, it may be said that
F.A.O. as an organization has gradually
changed its attitude from a most optimistic
one as regards the possibility of increasing
food production more rapidly than population growth, to a much more reserved attitude coloured by stronger and stronger
realization of the fact that populations in
the world are growing much faster than the
increase in the production of food.

In spite of this, F.A.O. as an international
organization has made no resolution or
observation regarding the problem of overpopulation in the world, but has limited
itself to drawing the attention to the discrepancy between the world’s population
and its available food. The attitude of
F.A.O. towards the United Nations World
Population Conference will be mentioned
later.

W.H.O. and Demography .
As far as the World Health Organization
is concerned it has, so far, mainly taken an
interest in the demographic aspects of
population problems and especially in vital
statistics. Excellent results have been
achieved, in improving mortality statistics
in many countries, and also in several other

249

aspects. In 1948 the First World Health
Assembly agreed that the collaboration
with the United Nations on population
questions, which had been started by the
Interim Commission in 1946, should be
continued and developed. This was again
emphasized by the Executive Board and by
the Third World Health Assembly in 1950.
The Regional Committee of W.H.O. for
South-East Asia in September 1950 passed
a resolution recommending the Regional
Director, in co-operation with the other
international agencies dealing with this
problem, to obtain from member States in
the region all possible demographic data
which would thereafter be circulated to
member governments for any action which
they may deem necessary. The Executive
Board of the World Health Organization at
its Eighth session again emphasized the
importance of co-ordinated efforts between
the World Health Organization and the
Population Commission of the United
Nations and added a very important point
requesting the Director-General : “. . .within
the limit of budgetary resources to carry
out studies of the health aspect of the
problem.”’ This is the first time that
W.H.O., as an organization, publicly recognized its task to study the health aspect of
the population problem. Further, it was
decided that W.H.O. should participate in
the World Population Conference.

As part of this slow but encouraging
development, the Government of India .
made a constructive move in 1951, asking
W.H.O.—with the aid of W.H.O. Technical
Assistance—for a one-year study in family
planning as a means of population control.
The request for aid, however, was conditional upon the experiment being restricted
to a method of family planning based on the
“ safe period ”’ of infertility in a woman, the
so-called “‘rhythm method.’ W.H.O., in
meeting the request of the Indian Government for aid and accepting the condition

_laid down, engaged as an expert consultant

Dr. Abraham Stone, of New York.
Regardless of what view one takes on the

applicability of the “‘ rhythm method,” the

Indian Government is, to my mind, to be.
250

congratulated upon its initiative. These
study projects should be completed so that
once and for all the discussion as to whether
or not the “ rhythm method ”’ is applicable
in a so-called under-developed country may
be brought to a definite conclusion.

At the Fifth World Health Assembly in
1952, when the preparations for the World
- Population Conference were well under way,
it was felt by myself and others that the
contribution of W.H.O. would be more
valuable if the organization collected some
material and studied the problem from that
aspect for which the World Health Organization had itself declared its responsibility—
the health aspect. The Norwegian delegation at the Fifth Health Assembly, therefore, put forward a resolution inviting the
Director-General to “ establish an expert
committee to examine and report on the
health aspect of this problem.” This
proposal was supported by the delegates
from Ceylon, India, Mexico, the Philippines,
Sweden and Yugoslavia, who felt that the
setting-up of an expert committee was the
best way in which W.H.O. could prepare for
the World Population Conference, and,
above all, that it was the only way of providing the necessary technical information
for India and other countries which might
approach W.H.O. for advice and guidance.*

A counter-proposal was suggested by the

delegates of Belgium, Italy and Lebanon,
inviting the Assembly to resolve “ that
from the purely medical standpoint population problems do not require any particular
attention on the part of W.H.O. at the
present time.”’
supported by the delegates of Austria,
Puerto Rico, France, Ireland, Japan, Portugal and Spain. They felt that the problem
of over-population is a local one which
should be dealt with by the government of
the country concerned, that it was an
economic and not a medical problem which
should be solved by economic measures,
that what was needed was to increase

* It should be noted, of course, that W.H.O. can in no
way limit the full freedom and sovereignty of any
country. Only the national governments which ask for
services will get them.

This joint proposal was

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

production and not to limit births, that
family planning would result in an ageing
population and a decrease of productivity,
that the duty of physicians was to preserve
life and not to stand in its way, and finally
that if W.H.O. were to deal with these
problems it would tacitly recognize the
principle according to which the State is
authorized to intervene to facilitate family
planning,* a principle which is not universally recognized. The delegates of Panama
and the United States of America also
expressed the fear that W.H.O. might meet.
with criticism if it took up this problem.

What happened at the Fifth World
Health Assembly demonstrated the surprising fact that, even in a technical body
like W.H.O., it is impossible at the present
time to discuss the health aspects of the
population problem on a purely technical
basis. A number of the delegates showed
great emotion, and certain delegates even
threatened the withdrawal of their countries
from the World Health Organization if
W.H.O. tackled the health aspects of the
population problem. It is no secret that
the Roman Catholic group of countries was
very active in collecting support for the
view that W.H.O.- should not touch this
problem. As the discussion showed that
there was unfortunately no possibility at all
of passing any resolution of a constructive
and positive character, all proposals were.
withdrawn and no action taken. The
World Health Organization was nevertheless bitterly attacked in the leading paper
of the Vatican, L’Osservatore Romano.t

I.L.0. and UNESCO

Of the other specialized agencies, I.L.O..
and UNESCO are directly concerned with
matters which are closely related to certain
aspects of the population problems. I.L.O.
is, first and foremost, interested in the |
influence of changes in populations on
the standard of living generally and on the
question of employment specifically, and,

* It should be noted that the Norwegian proposal did
not mention family planning, but used the much wider
term : Health aspects of the population problem.

+A.XCII-Num. 134, June 8th, 1952.
UNITED NATIONS AND WORLD POPULATION

further, in the migration of populations.
UNESCO—which has on the whole shown
an open and liberal. attitude regarding
several controversial subjects—must of
course take population trends into consideration in planning its programme of fundamental education and cultural and scientific
progress.

Population Commission
_As far as the UNITED NATIONS itself is
concerned, the Economic and Social Council
of the United Nations, as long ago as
October 1946, established a population
commission with the following terms of
reference :

‘‘The Population Commission shall arrange for

studies and advise the Council on:

(2) Population changes, the factors associated
with such changes, and the policies designed
to influence these factors ;

(b) Inter-relationships of economic and social
conditions and population trends ;

(c) Migratory movements of population and
factors associated with such movements.

(qd) Any other population problems on which
the principal or subsidiary organs of the
United Nations or the specialized agencies
may seek advice.”’ .

This Population Commission met twice
in 1947, and since then has held one session
every year. The Commission has dealt with
a number of important topics such as
demographic methods, population estimates
and forecasts, trends in mortality and

fertility, demographic aspects of ageing, of ©

labour supply and employment and unemployment, and of technical assistance.
Studies have been started to trace the
inter-relationship of population trends and
economic and social factors, size of population of trust territories, surveys on demographic legislation, etc. Itgoes without saying
that many of the projects of the Population
Commission are long-term ones involving
exact planning and the cumbersome collection of basic data before analyses can be
undertaken. Vital statistics, too, are in many
countries at such a primitive stage that
reliable and extensive data are not available.
The Population Commission has been working intimately with the specialized agencies,
especially the W.H.O. and I.L.O. The

251

Population Commission therefore is an
important part of the machinery of the
United Nations. The material which is
gradually being compiled and analysed is
already an indispensable source of information for all interested in population problems. The Commission has, so far, limited
itself mainly to the collection and tabula
tion of data, and has avoided some of the

more controversial aspects of the population
problem. The same holds true for the
Economic and Social Council itself.

To UNESCO goes the credit for having
taken initiative in the matter. The representatives of UNESCO proposed to the Population Commission of the United Nations
at its third session in 1948 that a conference
on world demographic problems be convened in 1950 or 1951. The last conference
of this nature was held in 1937 under the
auspices of the INTERNATIONAL UNION FOR
THE SCIENTIFIC STUDIES OF POPULATION,
a non-governmental organization. The
Population Commission of the United
Nations at that time felt that it was not
advisable to hold such a conference until
the principal results of the various censuses
which were to be taken in or around 1950
were available.

At its Sixth session (1951) the Population
Commission considered a proposal by the
International Union for the Scientific Study
of Population that a world population conference be called by the United Nations. It
was felt by this international non-governmental organization that it would be an
advantage if such a conference could be
convened under the auspices of the United
Nations itself. Finally the Economic and
Social Council of the United Nations in
resolution 435 (XIV), June toth, 1952,
approved the “ holding in 1954 under the
auspices of the United Nations of a world
population conference of experts in close
collaboration with the International Union
for the Scientific Study of Population and
interested specialized agencies.”’ The Council decided that the “‘ conference shall be
devoted solely to the exchange of ideas and
experience on population matters among
experts in the fields concerned.” The
252

Secretary-General was requested “‘ to invite
in their individual capacity, experts nominated by (a) governments, (b) non-governmental scientific organizations concerned
and (c) interested specialized agencies, and,
in addition, to invite a small number of
experts with a scientific interest in population questions. In carrying out this
provision, the Secretary-General shall determine, with the advice of the Preparatory
Committee, the number of experts to be
invited in each of the categories mentioned.’’

Before this decision was taken by the
Economic and Social Council, the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, following the
decision of the Economic and Social Council
in its resolution 389/C (XIII), had consulted
with various specialized agencies and nongovernmental organizations as to the sponsorship, scope, emphasis, size and possible
financing of such a conference and had also
addressed “‘ an enquiry to governments in
order to ascertain their views with respect
to holding such a conference and the date,
agenda and the composition of the conference if it is to be held.”

Of the specialized agencies, W.H.O.,
UNESCO, F.A.O. and I.L.O. expressed
interest in and support of the proposed
conference :

The Director-General of W.H.O. wrote,

. I should like you to know that I believe
that this 1s a most important subject.”
Subsequently, the Executive Board of
W.H.O. adopted the following resolution :

“The Executive Board having noted the
report of the Director-General on the proposed
population conference,

(1) Endorses the Director General’s reply to the
questionnaire sent out by the United Nations
Department of Social Affairs which indicated
W.H.O.’s desire to participate in the conference ;

(2) Emphasizes the desirability of holding the
conference no sooner than early 1954 so that
figures from 1950 and 1951 censuses will be avail
-able, and

(3) Requests the Director-General to proceed
with the necessary planning for participation in
this conference, in co-operation with the United
Nationsand otherinterested specialized agencies.”’

The Director-General of UNESCO, in a
document submitted to the UNESCO Execu
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tive Board by which it was subsequently
endorsed, stated that

‘““In the view of the Director-General, the
world population situation is a matter of the
utmost importance, closely related to UNESCO’s
work in fundamental education and_ social
science. The results of such a population conference would be of interest to UNESCO, which

- should participate in it.”’

The Assistant-Director-General of the
I.L.O. replied that :

“The work of the International Labour
Organization is closely affected by many aspects
of population problems and policies. A world
population conference would be useful in furthering our knowledge in this field... .”’

The Director-General of the F.A.O. pointed
out that F.A.O. is much interested in the
whole question of population, particularly
from the point of view of the needs of the
increasing world population for food, shelter
and clothing, and from that of employment:
Opportunities on farms, in forests, and in
non-agricultural occupations. He stated
that all these matters are of very direct
concern to F.A.O. in the fields of nutrition,
agriculture, forestry, and agricultural economics, for which they are responsible.

Up till June 3rd, 1952, answers had been
received from thirty-three governments. Of
these thirty-three countries, thirty approved
in principle the convening of a World
Population Conference. Only three countries
did not answer, or gave other answers. A large
majority of counties preferred the sponsorship of the United Nations in collaboration
with interested specialized agencies and nongovernmental organizations. To the question
‘“‘Should the conference be primarily a scientific discussion of experts with the purpose of
finding solutions for the current population
problems for the world?” thirty countries,
answered “‘ yes’

It has therefore been decided that the
world population conference under the
auspices of the United Nations will meet for
nine working days during the first half of
September 4954. The International Union
for the Scientific Study of Population, the
International Labour Office, the Food and
UNITED NATIONS AND WORLD POPULATION

Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the United Nations Educational
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the
World Health Organization and the International Bank for Reconstruction Development will collaborate with -the United
Nations in. organizing the conference. A
preparatory committee has been established
in accordance with the resolution of the

Economic and Social Council to assist the

Secretary-General in formulating an agenda
and in making the necessary arrangements
before the conference. This preparatory
committee consists of seventeen members,
representatives of the United Nations, of
collaborating organizations and of some
internationally recognized population experts
serving in their individual capacities.

The first meeting of the preparatory
committee was held in Geneva in November
1952, the second meeting in Rome in
September 1953. The preliminary list of
topics for discussion at the Conference will,
of course, be studied with great interest. The
list as well as the composition of the preparatory committee can be found in documents
E/CONF.13/INF.1. July 24th, 1952, published by the United Nations Economic and
Social Council.

Looking into the tentative lists of topics
to be discussed at the Conference, one is
struck with the very wide scope: Mortality
and fertility trends with special attention to
areas of lower death-rates and of higher
death-rates, international migration, prospects for future population changes, variations in age composition, population in
relation to national resources and agricultural
‘development, in relation to capital formation, investments and employment, social
aspects of population changes, methods of
demographic measurement and_ analysis,
relation of population changes to distribution of genetic factors, legislation, admini‘strative programmes and services relevant to
population, etc.

Conclusion

- It is obviously impossible to. plan or
execute a food policy—as F.A.O. is trying to
do—nationally or internationally—without

253

taking into full consideration the population
aspects. To make ends meet, it is as necessary
to consider methods for control of the
number of mouths to feed as to consider
methods for production of food for those
mouths. Nevertheless, F.A.O. has so far
dodged these problems and has limited itself
mainly to pointing out the more and more
striking discrepancy between the rapidly
growing population and the tragic lagging
behind- in food production.

It is impossible to plan or execute a health
policy—as W.H.O. is trying to do—without
regard to the health aspects of the population
problem, including such questions as hereditary disease, congenital non-hereditary disease, fertility, hygiene of childbirth, planned
parenthood, abortion, etc. There is also
little sense in saving millions of lives through
combating deadly diseases and improving
environmental sanitation, if the survivors
are to die from hunger, or live the miserable
life of under-nutrition or mal-nutrition.
Death control must be balanced by birth control.
Nevertheless, the World Health Organization
has also, so far, dodged the problem and
limited itself mainly to dealing with vital
statistics and a passive recording of the
development in population growth. In a
similar way, UNESCO and I.L.O. have so far
only expressed their interest in various
aspects of the population problem, but have
not faced the problems squarely.

Finally, it is impossible to plan or execute
an active and positive programme for Peace
and security in this world withodut taking
fully into consideration the unique and
unprecedented situation in which the world
at large and most countries find themselves
through the extremely rapid growth of
populations in the last 150 to 200 years. It
still does not seem to be generally realized
that this explosive growth of population,
which, since 1650, has produced an eightfold increase in the number of Europeans and
their migratory descendants overseas, and
trebled the population of the rest of the
world, is one of the fundamental factors—
perhaps the most important single one—
contributing to the present picture of the
world with its economic, social, and, as a
254

"consequence, political and military tension.
_ Nevertheless, the United Nations itself
‘and its Economic and Social Council have so

far mainly limited themselves to the purely

demographic aspects of the population
problem.

It is now high time to make the ostrich lift
its head from the sand and face facts. All
efforts must therefore now be concentrated
on making the First World Population

THE EUGENICS REVIEW oe

_

XN

Conference in 1954 a success, and on counteracting those forces which will again, undoubtedly, make every effort to dodge and
smokescreen one of the basic problems of our.
day, and even more of the future.
Collection.of data is essential, but the time
has now come when the peoples of the world

‘rightly ask for conclusions to be drawn from

the overwhelming evidence, and action to be
taken accordingly.

 

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION AND

INTERNATIONAL LAW - - ?

Founded in 1894

President: Professor H. C. GUTTERIDGE, Q.C., LL.D.
Chairman of the Executive Committee: The Rt. Hon. Lord Justice DENNING

Editors: Professor F. H. LAWSON, D.C.L.

‘Jj. E. S. FAWCETT, D.S.C.

Honorary Secretary: E. H. WALL, T.D.
_ Honorary Treasurer: JOHN COHEN

Annual Subscription :

THIRTY SHILLINGS for U.K. subscribers

INTERNATIONAL AND COMPARATIVE LAW QUARTERLY. Articles, Notes,{Notices of Books, etc.

Address :

«

NUFFIELD LODGE, REGENT’S PARK, LONDON, N.W.I

IN THE JANUARY 1954 NUMBER OF

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

Edited by Warder C. Allee, University of Florida

EFFECTS OF OZONE ON ORGANISMS. By ARTHUR Cc. "Giese and ELEANOR CHRISTENSEN, Stanford University.

MANIFESTATIONS OF VITAMIN By (CARNITINE) DEFICIENCY IN THE LARVAE OF THE MESLWOBM TENEBRIO MOLITOR. By L. G. FRAENKEL and PeH-I Cuanc, University of Illinois.

DE-SEMINATION OF FERTILIZED DROSOPHILA MELANOGASTER FEMALES. By Renzo E. Scossirout, Tistieato, di Genetica,

Universita Pavia, Italy.

MATE-KILLING IN PARAMECIUM AURELIA, VARIETY 8. By R. W. Siecgt, University of Indiana and University of Penmsplvania.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY i is published quarterly in January, April, July and October
Subscription $10 per volume. Single copies $3. Canadian postage 20c. Foreign postage 50c.

‘THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS, 5750 Ellis:

 

Avenue,

CHICAGO

~ Bugenies Review, Vol. XLV, No. 4
