The Nucleus in Relation to Heredity.”

By PrRoFESssoR DAME HELEN GwWYNNE-VAUGHAN, D.B.E., LL.D., D.Sc.

One of the most remarkable phenomena of biology is the similarity
of the nuclear structures and their history throughout the animal and
vegetable kingdoms; there are innumerable minor differences, but the
close resemblance in nuclear organisation, the close resemblance of the
chromosomes, and the close resemblance of the germ cells and corresponding products in nearly every form of plant and animal life, is so
striking that great importance must be attached to it. It would
probably be accurate to say that, with the exception of certain protozoa, bacteria and blue-green alge, all living organisms are built up
of cells with the same essential characters. These characters, moreover, are so distinctive that they form a strong argument in favour of a
common origin, and they suggest a common method of inheritance.

Let us take as an example the nuclear history of the Broad Bean,
which I examined a few years ago and found particularly clear in many
of its details.

As the telophase, or last stage of nuclear division, approaches in
the somatic cell of a root, stem or leaf, the fourteen chromosomes
collect at the end of the spindle (fig. 1) shorten and thicken (fig. 2),
and comes into contact with another. The formation of the
nuclear membrane begins and, as the nuclear vacuole enlarges, the
mass of chromosomes loosens out, and they are found to adhere to their neighbours (fig. 3), both laterally and end to end, and to show fission
or vacuolisation at irregular intervals (fig. 4). It must be remembered that the chromatin material is not solid, but of a relatively
viscid, or semi-fluid consistency and capable of considerable change
of form. . The cross connections lengthen, the fission becomes more
marked, and, by the time that the resting nucleus reaches its full size,
the chromatin has become spread just inside the nuclear membrane as
an irregular network. (fig. 5).

The condition now reached may be permanent, or, after a longer
or shorter interval, the nucleus may again prepare for division. The
first sign of change is the breaking down of the cross connections
(fig. 6), with the formation of a thread or series of threads (figs. 7, 8),
which consists of the chromosomes of the last telophase, freed from one
another laterally but, in many cases, still attached end to end.

As development proceeds, the thread breaks up transversely into
chromosomes (fig. 9), their number is the same as in the preceding
telophase, and there is good evidence for their identity ; peculiarities
of size or shape reappear, and, in many organisms, they can be seen,
both at this stage and in the telophase, to be assorted in duplicate
pairs. The longitudinal fission, which was initiated in the previous
telophase and which has persisted through the resting stages, can be
identified both in the thread and in the chromosomes, though it may

* An address given to the Eugenics Education Society on April 17th, 1928.
THE NUCLEUS IN RELATION TO HEREDITY. 403

be obscured from time to time as the chromosomes shorten and thicken.
In some organisms the fission has not been recognised in the telophase,
and is seen now for the first time.

Delicate strands of cytoplasm next invade the nuclear area and
constitute the spindle, about the circumference of which the chromosomes become arranged; they are attached, in the bean. by one longitudinally split end while the other stands out at right angles tothe
long axis of the spindle (fig. 10). The two longitudina! halves of the
chromosome next move apart, beginning at the end in contact with the
spindle (figs. 11, 12), and are soon complctely separated; they pass to
opposite poles of the spindle as daughter chromosomes (fig. 13), and
the stage is again reached which was shown in figure 1.

In the somatic celis of a species sexually reproduced there 1s
an cven number of chromosomes, and the number is constant for the
species, fourteen in the bean, thirty-two in man, 100 or more in certain ferns, and two only in the round worm of the horse. At the initiation of che life history of each new individual, fusion of two nuclei
takes place, the paternal and maternal chromosomes becoming mingled
in a single nucleus, and yei the chromosome number is not increased
with every succeeding generation. but remains unalte-ed, It is obvious, therefore, that. somewhere in the life-history, the characteristic
number, doubled in fertilisation, must be reduced by half. This
reduction is achieved in the two nuclear divisions immediately preceding the formation of the germ-cells in animals, and at a rather
earlier stage in plants. It thus occurs that, in animalJs, the germcells alone possess the reduced number of chromosomes, but, in plants,
such structures as the prothalli of ferns or the pollen grains of seed
plants are also in this condition, and vegetative and nuclear divisions
take place in which the reduced number of chromosomes is visible. The
term haploid is conveniently used for the nucleus with the reduced
number of chromosomes, the term diploid for that with the double
number.

In the bean, where we have already examined the somatic diploid
divisions, reduction takes place in the pollen-sac and ovule of the
flower. The first sign that something unusual is about to occur is the
separation of the chromatin network from the nuclear membrane
along the inside of which it is spread (figs. 14, 15), and its contraction
into a dense knot or ball (fig. 16). When, after a longer or snorter
period, it begins to loosen out, the emerging loops and strands of chromatin are scen to be arranged in pairs, joined end to end or lying side
by side (fig. 17), while, infavourable cases, the longitudinal fission of
the previous telephase can be identified as in the chromatin thread of a
soniatic division.

Gradually the thread becomes extended through the whole nuclear
area (fig. 18) and the longitudinal fission becomes easier to recognise ;
then a second contraction sets in, the thread shortens and thickens
(fig. 19), and breaks up into short, thick chromosomes; these are
invariably arranged in pairs, recalling the pairs observed in somatic
divisions, but with a much closer relation between the members of the
pair, which lie in contact or are twisted together (fig. 20), instead of
being distributed at random through the nuclear vacuole. Each pair
 

EXPLANATION OF FIGURES.

1—13 Broad Bean, somatic divisions.
14 » >», resting somatic nucleus.
15—25 55 »» reducing divisions.
 

29

3 young pollen grains from a group of 4.
each showing a resting nucleus, division in nucleus of pollen
grain; in fig. 27 note the 7 longitudanaily split chromosomes.
somatic nucleus, showing 4 pair of chromosomes.
diagram to show crossing over of chromosomes.
406 EUGENICS REVIEW.

consists of four parts, the two associated chromosomes, each longitudinally split into two.

In this condition the pairs become arranged on the spindle (fig..
21), and the subsequent stages separate not the logitudinaliy split
halves of each chromosome, as in a somatic division, but the whole
chromosomes which have been associated in pairs (figs. 22, 28, 24); in
the bean each pole of the spindle shows, therefore, not fourteen daughter
chromosomes as seen in fig. 1, but seven chromosomes, one from each
of the seven pairs, in each of which the logitudinal fission still persists,
giving the chromosome a V-form.

Almost before the daughter nuclei have been formed, a second.
division supervenes, and on the second spindle the longitudinal fission
of the chromosomes is completed (fig. 25) and seven rod-shaped daughter
chromosomes pass to each pole. In this way four nuclei are produced
(fig .26) in each of which the chromosome number is half what it was in the
somatic cells. The process suggests that, just as an ordinary division
is about to begin, some appropriate impulse induces the first contraction, knotting up the chromatin mass and bringing the members of
each pair of chromosomes into closer contact; they emerge from the
knot in association, and so remain till they separate on the spindle of
the first reducing division, leaving the separation of the daughter
chromosomes, formed by longitudinal fission, to be completed on the
second.

In animals the immediate products of the reducing division: are
the nuclei of four spermatozoa, or of the egg and its three polar bodies;
in plants a varying number of ordinary divisions intervenes between
reduction and the formation of the germ-cells. In the pollen grain
of the bean for example, two further nuclear divisions take place
before the male nuclei are formed, in each of these divisions seven
chromosomes only are to be seen (figs. 27, 28), and whereas, in divisions
in the root. stem, or leaf, chromosomes occur in duplicate pairs, here
a single set only is present; this is well shown in such a plant as
Galtonia, where the pairs are easier to identify than in the bean.
Anothe point of special interest in Galtonia is the way in which some
of the chromosomes are lobed, a condition which may also be observed
in the bean (figs. 1, 13), though less often.

But perhaps the best of all examples of paired, somatic chromosomes is that cause celebre of cytological investigation, the fruit fly,
Drosophila, the recent study of which, both from the genetic and cytological points of view, we owe to Professor Morgan of Columbia University and his pupils.

The somatic chromosomes of Drosophila fall into four well-marked
pairs (fig. 29), two long, one medium, and one very short; in each of
the sexual nuclei there are only four single chromosomes, one member
of each of the four above-mentioned pairs. When two sexual nuclei
unite, a complete set of pairs is once more provided. Thus each individual bean, or fruit-fly , or man inherits two complete sets of chromosomes, one set from the paternal and one from the maternal side, the
zygote possesses a double outfit of whatever characters the chromosomes may carry, and each gamete only a single set. This is exactly
what the Mendelian hypothesis requires, and it would be surprising
THE NUCLEUS IN RELATION TO HEREDITY. 407

indeed if the two groups of facts, those derived from cytological observation, and those from Mendelian experiment, did not bear some
relation.

One of the main difficulties has been the fact that the number
of characters inherited from one parent is often in excess of the number
of chromosomes in the nucleus of the germ cell. Recent work has
shown, however, that apparently unrelated characters are frequently
grouped together, so that, for example, long pollen and purple colour
are inherited in association in sweet peas, and gold feathers and
femaleness are carried by the same germ-cell in Sebright Bantams.
This phenomenon was _ first studied by Messrs. Bateson
and Punnett and is known as ‘‘couplings’‘ in this country and as
‘‘linkage’’ in America. The number of characters grouped together
may be considerable, and in no case has the number of groups been
found to be larger than the haploid number of chromosomes in the
germ-cells of the organism in question. Coupling is not absolute,
and, if sufficiently extensive breeding experiments are carried out,
occasional cases will be found when the usual groups are broken up
and an alternative grouping is formed, thus, among 6,952 sweet peas,
6,169 were found to have the usual coupling of purple colour and long
pollen or the alternative coupling of red colour and round pollen, due
to the absence of both, while, in 783, purple colour was associated with
round pollen or red colour with long. The new association, moreover,
was just as intimate and as apt to be inherited as the original grouping
had been. | 
The fruit-fly, Drosophila, breeds very rapidly and readily, and
possesses a great number of easily recognisable characters inherited on

endelian lines. These characters are coupled or linked together in
groups; there is one minute group of three characters, there is one
medium group which includes the sex-character, and there are two
larger groups, each including a considerable variety of characters.
The four groups correspond both in size and number with the four
chromosomes, already referred to, which are found in the germ-cells
of the fruit fly. In this case, as in the sweet pea, dissociation occurs ;
some characters being much more readily dissociated—or some linkages more readily broken—than others; and it is remarkable that in
Drosophila dissociation only takes place in connection with the
inheritance of characters through the female.

In the early stages of the reducing division in the immature egg
of Drosophila, though not in the mother-cell of the sperm, the chromosomes of each pair are observed to be twisted together (fig. 30, a, c, f, ),
a very common condition which is well known in other animals and
plants (fig. 20, 21). It has been suggested that, while entangled in
this way, the chromosomes sometimes break at the point where they
cross one another, and that the upper part of one becomes attached to
the lower portion of the other (fig. 830, b, d,). If the two intertwined
chromosomes carry the characters A, B, C, and D, and a, b, c and
d, respectively, then a break and re-attachment occurring between A
and B, would produce the groupings A, b, c, d, and a, B, C, D,
instead of the usual arrangement. Breaks and re-attachments at other
points would produce A, B, c,d; A, B,C, d, and other corresponding
408 EUGENICS REVIEW.

arrangements, and a double break would produce A, b, c, D, as shown
in figure 30, g.:Since A and B are nearer together, it is more likely that
they will remain in association than A and C. Professor Morgan and
his pupils have studied linkage and dissociation from this point of view,
and have been able to prepare a map of each chromosome or linakge
group showing those characters which are most closely associated as
nearest together. Both the facts of heredity and the details of
chromosome structure and behaviour suggest a similar possibility in
other animals and plants and the segmented chromosomies in figures 1
and 13 may indicate cases in which dissociation can readily occur.

Many characteristics depend for their manifestation on the interaction of two or more hereditary characters. This is the case with
colour, both in animals and plants, with the walnut comb in fowls and
with many other physical peculiarities; it is probably very often the
case with mental characteristics.

Interacting characters may be associated in the same chromosome
or they may be independently inherited. In favourable circumstances, such as the crossing over described in the chromosomes in
Drosophlia, an old linkage may be broken down or a fresh one established.

It seems, then, that recent studies on the physical basis of inheritance suggest that there may be created afresh from time to time com
binations of characters so linked as to form a new and valuable element
in inheritance
