PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES &© NEUROTIC
| TRAITS IN NORMAL TWIN
SCHOOLCHILDREN

A Study in Psychiatric Genetics”

By JAMES SHIELDS, B.A.
(Genetics Unit, Institute of Psychiatry, Maudsley Hospital, $.E.5)

of same-sexed twins, 36 being of the

‘‘identical”’ kind, 26fraternal. They are
fairly representative South London schoolchildren aged 12-15. The investigation,
carried out from Dr. Eliot Slater’s Genetics
Unit at the Institute of Psychiatry, was
‘based primarily on life histories of the twins
obtained from the parents. This information
was supplemented by reports from the
schools. and by interviews with the twins
themselves. Most of the pairs also came up
to the Maudsley Hospital for psychological
testing as part of the independent research

To: subjects of the research are 62 pairs

programme of the Psychology Department.

under Dr. Eysenck. (At the end of this
paper an attempt is made to relate the test
results'and the histories.) We, in the Genetics
Unit, were interested mainly in similarities
and differences in personality between the
twins, and in how many of them showed to a
greater or lesser degree the kind of nervous
symptoms and behaviour difficulties that
bring some children to child guidance or
other clinics for help. We wished to compare
the two kinds of pairs in these respects.
Take, for example, cases where one of the
twins had a nervous symptom, say bedwetting. Was the “identical ’’ twin of an
enuretic more likely to suffer from the same
trouble than the ‘“‘non-identical’’ twin?
Where the twins differed in symptoms or in
severity, did the history suggest any likely

* This paper reports an investigation, the results of
which have already been presented in abbreviated form
in a communication to the 9th International Congress
of Genetics at Bellagio in August 1953 and at a members’
meeting of the Eugenics Society in October 1953. The

author is greatly indebted to the Eugenics Society for
a grant which enabled him to attend the Congress.

213

reason for this? Now the principal reason
for studying twins is a genetical one. This
research can therefore be looked upon as an
experiment in fertilizing social and clinical
child psychiatry on the one hand with
genetics on the other, and in consequence it
may perhaps be of some relevance to positive
eugenics.

Twin Research

Twins are a fascinating study in themselves, but their main value from the scientific point of view is the light they can throw
on the age-old problem of heredity and
environment and the interaction between
them. Like seed and soil both these are
essential, but their relative importance varies
greatly from condition to condition. The
effects of a head injury, for example, are
clearly due almost entirely to the environ-—
ment. In characteristics such as the colour
of the eyes, differences between people are
due almost entirely to differences in their
genetical make-up. Twin studies have
limitations all of which it is not proposed to
discuss now, but they remain one of the few
and one of the best methods available for
investigating the relative importance of
heredity and environment in any human
characteristic and especially in psychiatry.

The theory on which twin research is based
assumes that twins are in no essential respect
different from singly born persons so far as
the subject studied is concerned. More will
be said about this later on. There are held

to be two kinds of twin pairs. The first are

those derived from one fertilized egg-cell.
These are the so-called “‘ identical ”’ pairs and
are here referred to as uniovular (U). They

.
214

are alike in having the same genes and must
among other things be of the same sex.
Differences between them must be due to
differences in environment from the time of
conception onwards. They offer an unparalleled opportunity of investigating the effect
of environmental influences, while heredity
is held under control. The second kind of
twins are those derived from two separate
ova, fertilized by two different spermatozoa.
These are known as fraternal or binovular
(B) twins. They are like ordinary brothers
or sisters who happen to have arrived at the
same time. They are as likely to be of different sexes as of the same sex. They will, on
average, have only about half their genes in
common, and so differences between them
will be due not only to the effects of environment but also to those of heredity.

_ From a comparison of the two sorts of
twins we gain an appreciation of the effect
of genetical differences between persons
brought up in similar environments. [If it is
wished to eliminate the effect of sex differences, we can compare a series of U pairs
with one of same-sexed B pairs drawn from
the same population. If the average resemblance between members of the U pairs
is markedly greater than that of the B’s then
there is a strong case for the view that a
person’s genes make a big difference in determining whether he shows the characteristic
in question or not. For example, studies have
been made of twins where one of them is
mentally deficient. Here the second twin
has been found likewise to be defective in
about go per cent of the U pairs, but in only
about 10 per cent of the B’s.* This suggests
that most kinds of mental defect are genetically determined. With schizophrenia the
findings in twins are somewhat similar.
Although a higher proportion of uniovular
twin partners remain normal than is the case
with mentally defective twins, the difference
between the two kinds of twins is still very
marked—the concordance rates being about
76 per cent for U’s and 14 per cent for B’s.f
B twins are hardly—if at all—more often

* Smith, 1930.
}~ Slater and Shields, 1953.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

both schizophrenic than area pair of ordinary
brothers and sisters. With criminal twins,
however, the situation is different. In one
study, that of Kranz (1936), only 66 per cent
of the U twins both had a criminal record,
while as many as 54 per cent of the B’s were
also concordant in this respect. This suggests
that environmental factors are very much
more important in criminality than they are
in either mental defect or schizophrenia.
Even with criminality, however, some importance must be allowed to genetical factors
through their effect on the personality.

It is sometimes objected that B pairs are
not treated so much alike as U’s and that the
environments of the two kinds of twins are
therefore not comparable. Later it will be
shown why this objection is not considered
an entirely valid one. In any case the
environment is open to investigation in each
individual case. One of the practical limitations of twin research, in so far as it aims at
sorting out the most important environmental influences, is not that the environments are too different to be comparable,
but that twins with major differences in
upbringing and early environment are so
rarely to be found. One could hardly find
individuals subjected to more similar environments than are twins. Both kinds are born
into the same home at the same time with
all that this implies. They are more alike
in these respects than pairs of singly born
brothers and sisters who arrive at different
stages in the development of the home and
the family.

It can only be held that any alleged
difference-of environment between U and B
twins is of serious importance if it can be
shown that ordinary sibs are less alike in the
characteristics in question than are B twins.

Previous Work .

There have been numerous single case
studies of twins where one or both of them
have had a psychiatric illness. Systematic,
non-selected twin investigations are of greater
scientific value. Up to now these have
concerned themselves principally with the
psychoses and with criminal behaviour, and
these studies have been reviewed in Slater’s
PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

recent M.R.C. monograph.* Neurotic illness
and psychopathic personality have received
much less attention from twin investigators
and other geneticists. Table 1 shows the
crude results of twin studies in this field.

215

however, that U twins can differ quite
considerably in degree of social or psychiatric
abnormality, and further, that in certain
social environments B pairs can develop very
similar troubles. On the less startling varia
TABLE r
UNSELECTED SERIES OF Non-PsycuotTic Twin PAIRS

| .
‘ ‘ Same-sexed Opposite-sexed
Untovular pairs Binovular pairs Binovular pairs

7

 

|
Author

 

 

Condition studied (Country) Year
Adult crime Lange | 1929
(Germany)
» > vee Lee Lae Stumpfl | 1936
(Germany)
” » Kranz 1936
(Germany)
» ' Borgstroem | 1939
(Finland)
, , Rosanoff et al.) 1934
(U.S.A.)
Juvenile Delinquency ... bee oy | 4
Behaviour Disorder in Children » >
Institutional Re-education of
Juveniles with personality Kranz 1937 |
abnormality (Germany)
Childhood Maladjustment Kent 1949
(U.S.A.)
Hysteria ... Stumpfl 1937
(Germany)
Psychopathy and Neurosis Slater 1953
(England)

The German studies of criminals, particularly
that of Kranz, show in a striking way how
alike were the abnormal] personalities of
U twins where either one or both were persistent offenders. Violence in one twin was
generally matched by violence in the other.
Both might be confidence tricksters of a

similar type or both suffer, at different times

and independently, from some compulsive
sexual deviation. B twins, where both had a
criminal record, did not resemble one another
so much either in type of crime or in personality make-up. Kallman (1952) studied 40 U
‘pairs where one was a homosexua]. The
twin partner was likewise homosexual in
every case. The binovular pairs were often
very different from one another in this
respect. These findings suggest that gross
personality abnormalities are often genetically determined. Slater’s own study shows,

" * Slater and Shields, 1953.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Con- Dis- Con- Dis- Con- Discordant | cordant | cordant | cordant | cordant | cordant
10 3 | 3 | 15 — ~—
II 7 7 12 2 * 26
20 II 23 20 7 | 43

3 I 2 3 2 8
25 12 5 23 I 31
39 3 20 5 | 8 32
41 6 26 34 | 8 21

7 4 o 3 2 6

7 Oo 4 2 2 | I

3 6 | 0 9 — —

2 6 | 4 25 I ! 13

 

tions in personality even less genetical work
has been done. |

The findings of Rosanoff and his associates
on a large series of twins, which included not
only adult and juvenile delinquents but also
young children with behaviour disorders who
had not come before the courts, are relevant
to the present study and show some similarity
to those of Stumpfl and Kranz. Unfortunately Rosanoff’s fuller I941 account of
these twins is not available. From his earlier
report (1934) and from the author’s abstract
of the later one (1941), he appears to stress
the importance of heredity and of birth
injury perhaps more than his findings warrant. This seems to be the case particularly
with juvenile delinquency. In all his groups
the same-sexed B twins were much more
alike in their behaviour than both the
opposite-sexed pairs and pairs of singly born
sibs, which surely might be regarded as
216

evidence of the importance of environmental
factors of a social kind. As Rosanoff himself
points out, criminality in the female is in our
society much rarer than in the male. Nevertheless the U twins in his youngest agegroup were, for whatever reason, very much
more alike than the B’s. Twenty-one out
of 25 U male partners were likewise considered to have a behaviour disorder, and
20 out of the 22 females. Of the same-sexed
B pairs only 13 out of 23 males were concordant in this respect, and 13 out of 37
females. In only eight out of 21 opposite-sex
pairs were both members similarly affected.
Rosanoff’s earlier paper has been criticized
for his lack of clinical description and _ his
later one for an arbitrary classification of
each child as either having or not having a
behaviour disorder.

Descriptive clinical studies of the minor
psychiatric disorders of childhood have never
been adequately made on twin material.
However, Kranz (1937) studied a series of
16 U and 22 B twins from correctional and
re-educational institutions in Lower Silesia.
He found that the younger twins in his
series suffered mostly from reactive conditions associated with poor environments. He
considered that the older twins more often
had predominantly endogenous conditions
such as mental defect and character disorders. The members of the older U pairs
were very much alike psychologically, but
less alike in social behaviour. Out of eleven U
pairs in the older group, both members had
required institutional treatment in seven
cases, and one member only in four cases.

Edith Kent (1949) reports a study of
maladjusted twins. Her material consists of
16 pairs, In seven of which both twins and
in nine of which one twin only had been
referred to the Jewish Board of Guardians’
Child Guidance Centre in New York. Her
research is based on records only. Diagnosis
of ovularity is doubtful and information
about the twins that were not seen at the
clinic extremely scanty. The investigation
was made “ to challenge the assumption that
twins reared in the same household are
exposed to the same emotional environment.’ The evidence she gives for her own

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

assumption to the contrary is not very
convincing. The home backgrounds of the
twins were generally psychologically disturbing ones for small children. Only three
of the twins were regarded as completely
normal. These were all members of B pairs.

There is clearly scope for further twin
work in all these fields as well as in normal
psychology, so that the role of the genetical
factor and how it is modified may be
appraised.

Psychological studies of normal twins have
included some interesting reports of twins
brought up apart or subjected to different
methods of training. Many are devoted to
the psychological aspects of being a twin,
rather than to genetical investigation. The
genetical studies consist mostly of studies of
schoolchildren (because of their availability),
and some are based on samples much smaller
even than the present one. They have been made from many points of view, such as
graphology, eidetic imagery, facial expression and others. They include the examination of school reports, questionnaires, and
performance on specific psychological tests
of intelligence or personality. Some of these
have been reviewed by Eysenck,* and there
is a very full account in Italian in Gedda’s
book (1951). The results are sometimes conflicting or indecisive, but the majority show
a greater degree of resemblance between
U than between B twins in the particular
aspect of psychology studied. For example,
studies of personality as assessed in terms of
Klages’ characterology by Lottig (1931)
and by Kohn (1935) show U twins frequently

to be alike and B twins frequently different

in all but the more superficial aspects of
personality. Lassen (1931), who studied 226
pairs, found that teachers’ ratings of social
and moral characteristics gave very much
higher correlations between U than B twin
pairs.

In- order to avoid the unreliability of
ratings and the lack of validity of single
tests, Eysenck and Prell (1951) used a battery
of objective personality tests of different
kinds on a series of schoolchildren similar to
the present one and factor-analysed the
a * Eysenck and Prell, 1951.
PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

_ results. They used the scores of a sample of
child guidance patients as a criterion for
“neuroticism ’’ or degree of emotional
stability. Dr. Eysenck (1951) has reported
his results to the Eugenics Society. He and
-Prell found that U twins resemble each other
very closely in degree of neuroticism, much
more closely than B twins. Correlation coefficients were -851 and -217 respectively.
They conclude that the concept of neuroticism derived from factor analysis is not a
statistical artefact but a biological unit and
that neurotic predisposition is to a large
extent hereditarily determined. It seems
that more could be learnt that might be of
benefit both to clinical workers and to
statistical psychologists by a combined
clinical and psychometric investigation of
the same series of subjects. For example, it
would be interesting to see what kind of
psychological or social problems have been
shown by children who score high on the
factor of neuroticism, and equally interesting
to see what are the social and clinical characteristics of people who lie at the extreme of
the stable end of the scale. It may be pointed
out that to say there is a high correlation
between U twins in degree of neuroticism as
measured by Eysenck’s tests is not quite the
same as saying that if one of a pair of identical twins has a neurotic breakdown the
second twin will probably follow suit.

So far as I know, no attempt has until now
been made to carry out on an unselected
sample of normal twin schoolchildren an
investigation of psychiatric adjustment in
the widest sense, based mainly on the casehistories of the twins. Such an investigation
may lack scientific precision and be all too
liable’to human error. Its main value would
seem to lie in the fact that it is an attempt
to apply genetical science to personality
adjustment, assessed in a way which has
been found useful in child guidance practice.
Studies relating genetics to general human
problems at this level of complexity and
urgency have a part to play alongside other
methods of human genetical research of a
more limited but scientific kind, such as the
investigation of rare psychological abnormalities and population genetics. Even more

217

important, perhaps, is the interesting light
they can throw on psychological and social
problems themselves.

Ascertainment and Selection

In any scientific study of twins it is of the
greatest importance to see that the selection
of the twins is not biased in any way which
would prejudice the results. In some countries this is done by inspecting birth records
to make certain that all twins of a specified
population are included in the investigation.
Ascertainment of twins by means of birth
registrations is impracticable in this country.
Twins are not recorded as such, and from the
way the records are arranged at the central
offices it would be an almost impossible task.
to pick out all the twins born in a certain
locality. Tracing the whereabouts of any
twins found would involve enlisting the help
of other authorities such as the schools, and
so the search for twins by examining birth
records would defeat its own ends.

In the present study the headmasters and
headmistresses of all secondary schools in certain South London boroughs were asked by
Mr. H. A. T. Child, Chief Educational
Psychologist of the L.C.C., to supply him
with the names of any one in their school in
the 12-15 age group who was one of “ likesexed ’’ twins. It was from Mr. Child that
we received the names of our twins, and to
him and the schools concerned we are most
grateful. Our thanks are also due to the
L.C.C. Education Authority for kindly permitting us to study London schoolchildren.

The investigation was restricted to twins
in the 12-15 age group because many of the

psychological tests would have been unreli
able if applied to younger children. Further,
it has the advantage of bringing the period
of observation for neurotic traits up to early
adolescence. If older twins could have been.
obtained, the information about early years
would have been correspondingly less reliable. Many twin investigations based on
small numbers can be criticized on the
ground that the age range is too wide.

In all, we received over an eight-month
period the names of 102 pairs of twins from
four adjacent South London areas. There
218

were 48 male and 54 female pairs. Fortyseven were probably uniovular, 49 probably
binovular and six of doubtful ovularity. (In
the case of pairs not seen personally, ovularity was assessed from information supplied
by the schools.)

The parents of most of the twins notified
were then approached by letter and their
voluntary co-operation in the project sought.
The order of approaching and investigating
the twins was decided in collaboration with
the Psychology Department. The psychologists required an equal number of U and B
pairs for testing, each group equally divided
by sex; their series consists of 52 pairs.
Apart from these requirements, the twins
were approached as they were notified.
When these 52 pairs had been obtained, no
further twins were approached, but histories
were taken from those pairs, mostly U girls,
who had already expressed willingness to
co-operate but who were not required by the
psychologists. Their series includes one pair
on whom a psychiatric history could not be
obtained.

Table 2 shows the main reasons why all
the pairs were not investigated. Of the

TABLE 2
EXTENT OF INVESTIGATION OF Twin Pairs NOTIFIED

Sex Probable Ovularity

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total |; Males | Females || Uni.}| Bin ?
Not investigated
Not approached... 8 3 5 2 3 3
Refused
co-operation... Io 3 7 I 8 |;
Left schoo ees 13 8 5 i 6 5 2
_ No replies as 9 a 2 | 2 7 oO
|
_ Total 40 21 Ig |} IX 23 6
Investigated 62 27 35. | | 36 26 o
— TP |
Tota. ... || 102 48 54 {| 47 | 49 | 6

 

eight pairs that were not approached, the
twins were discovered to be too young for
testing in five cases; in one case one of the
twins was at a school for the educationally
subnormal; in another the twins were
Italian-speaking; and one pair was notified
after it had been decided to terminate the
investigation. In 13 pairs testing was
prevented by one or both of the twins leaving
schoo]. The “no replies ’’ include one pair
where it was later learned that one of the
twins was in hospital with chorea; in the

~ have been.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

other cases no further enquiries were made.
In nine cases we were refused permission to
test the twins, and in one to obtain a history.
This was sometimes because a parent disapproved, more often because the children
did not like the idea. It is interesting that
binovulars objected more often than uniovulars, who are presumably more used to
receiving attention on account of being twins
and often take pleasure in it.

Table 3 shows the distribution of the 62
pairs investigated, by age, sex and ovularity.

TABLE 3
AGE, SEX AND OVULARITY OF TWIN Pairs INVESTIGATED

 

 

Age (years) ... ae 12 13 I4 15 All ages
Uniovular male . 2. 4 5 2 3
Uniovular female ... 5 8 6 4 23
Binovular male se I 8 5 oO | 14
Binovular female ... 1* 3 5 3 12
Total we | - 9 23 | 21 9 | 62

* Actually a. 11 10/12 on testing.

Forty-four of them were aged 13 or 14.
Thirty-five were girls, 27 boys ; 36 uniovular,
26 binovular. There is thus an excess of
U girls. (At birth same-sexed B pairs are
more numerous than U’s in the approximate
ratio of 11:9.) At each stage in the investigation B pairs had dropped out. Of the
pairs originally notified where the twins
were at different schools, twelve were B
pairs, only one was U. In nine of these

cases both twins were at different schools

in the area covered by the research, but

in only four of these were both twins

reported by the schools as they should
Thus it is possible that a few

B pairs were missed entirely in this way.
Further, as we have seen, a higher proportion
of U’s than of B’s was investigated because |

of the planning of the research and the
greater co- operation of the U’s.
It is not considered that this excess of U

cided?

twins is a serious drawback. The material ;
is probably sufficiently representative psychi
atrically.
it is biased in any way in favour of psychiatrically similar pairs or of neurotic or otherwise unstable twins. It is worth noting that,
where the reasons for refusal to co-operate
were known, these were often because of
some minor psychiatric abnormality. Thus

There is no reason to believe that PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

in one pair the twins are reported as being
dull and suspicious. In another, one of the
twins has many anxieties and could not be
persuaded that he would not be ‘‘sent away”’
if he came up to hospital.

Educational Data, Social Class

It may be of interest to note here that 23
of the 124 twins investigated were receiving
a grammar school education, 19 were in
technical or “ central ’’ schools and 82 were
in secondary modern schools. The members
of one U pair and eleven B pairs were having
different types of secondary education. Of
the twins at the same schools twelve U and
seven B were (or had been) in different
classes. The U twins were sometimes in
different classes, not so much because of any
marked difference between them in scholastic
ability, but to avoid their being mistaken by
the teachers or to encourage them to develop
individually. |

The occupations of the twins’ fathers have
been classified according to the Registrar
General’s Social Classes. None of the
families belong to Class I, eight belong to
Class II, 33 to Class III, nine to Class IV
and twelve to Class V.

Ovularity Diagnosis

Obviously it is very important in any
research on twins to do all one can to ensure
that a correct diagnosis of ovularity is made.
Evidence regarding the birth of twins and
the number of placente is generally uncertain and, as a number of authorities have
pointed out (Essen-Moller, 1941; Price,
1950; Curtius, Lassen, Waardenburg and
others, quoted by Gedda, 1951), it is unreliable as a means of deciding whether twins
are derived from one ovum or not. Price
considers that about a quarter of all uniovular twins are dichorionic, and occasionally a
pair which is clearly binovular is reported
as having shared one placenta. Ovularity
diagnosis is normally made by the Siemens
similarity method, and this was the means
employed in the present research. According
to this method the twins are compared as to
their resemblance in a number of physical
characteristics which are influenced largely,

219

if not entirely, by heredity. A difference
between twins in any of the blood groups,
for example, can be taken as proof that they
are not uniovular, as twins with the same
genes would have to have the same blood
groups. In the same way, a distinct difference in ability to taste phenyl-thiocarbamide
(PTC) as bitter, a difference of more
than 3 in. in height, a distinct difference
in hair colour or iris pigmentation, or a
marked difference in features or build, can
be taken, in the absence of any pathological
condition, as excluding uniovularity. Where
there is no decisive difference, then the
greater the number of similarities the
greater is the probability that the twins are
uniovular. In practice it is found that twins
compared in this way soon sort themselves
out into two clear groups, the “‘ identicals,’’
showing marked resemblance in all sorts of
small details and frequently so alike that it
is difficult to tell them apart, and the
“ fraternals,’’ whose general resemblance is
about that of a pair of ordinary brothers or
sisters. When one compares side by side
twins who are neither very young, nor very
old, nor very ill, it is generally not difficult
to reach a reliable conclusion. Such a comparison was possible with all our pairs, and
was generally made independently by the
psychologists and the writer. In only two
cases, seen early on, was there any-serious
doubt as to whether the twins were uniovular
or not, and in these cases blood groups,
which are a most valuable scientific check,
decided the matter. |

In 54 pairs in all, full blood-groupings were
very kindly done for us on eight or nine
independent systems and their subgroups*
by Dr. R. R. Race or Dr. Ruth Sanger of
the M.R.C. Blood Group Research Unit at
the Lister Institute.t Twenty-one of these
pairs differed in at least one group, thus

* Antisera used: anti-A, -B, -A,; anti-M, -N, -S,
and (sometimes) anti-s; anti-P; anti-C, -c, -C¥, -D,
-E, (sometimes) -e ; anti-Lu?; anti-K ; anti-Le@, -Le> ;
anti-F’y@ ; and (sometimes) anti-/f?.

+ I am particularly indebted to Mr. P. Chappell of
the Clinical Pathology Laboratory, Maudsley Hospital,
who took nearly all the blood samples, sometimes calling
on the parents of the twins in the evening for this
purpose.
220

confirming binovularity. (Seven pairs differed in two groups, seven in three groups,
five in four groups and two in five groups.)
Of the 33 others who had the same groups
31 differed in no way that would exclude
uniovularity, while the remaining two were
clearly binovular (see descriptions in Table
4). Race and Sanger (1950) have shown how
to calculate from a knowledge of the blood
groups of the parents the probability that
same-sexed twins with the same blood groups
are binovular. This estimate of probability
does not take other similarities or differences
into account.
twins had the same blood groups, including
the two pairs classified as binovular, the
parents agreed to have blood samples taken
too,* and the probability of binovularity
was calculated by Dr. Race and Dr. Sanger
according to the above method. The results
are shown in Table 4. It was in no case

TABLE 4

TWIN PAIRS WITH THE SAME BLOOD Groups: BLOOD GROUPS OF
PARENTS ALSO DONE

Probability of |
binovularity from
kag ieee of sex
and vious Rennes

22° a6 I
12-7% 2
|
|

Ovularity as classified on
all available information.
emarks

Number
of pairs
(Total = 16)

 

 

Binovular. Bingen, (One twin, bas aukorn twin has auburn
hair, the other black; marked
difference in eye colour, features
and build ; 2 stone, 14 Ib. difference in weight. )

Untovular.
6:8% I

6 Umtovular. (In one of these pairs
0/ only “one parent was_ blood3°54 7 grouped.)

1 Binovular, (One twin tastes PTC
as bitter, the other as ‘‘ just
water”; 84 in. difference in
height ; differences in build, colouring and features. )

3 Umovular.
I Umiovular. (Blood groups of an neldex

sister also taken into considera
1-8%
— 09%

tion.)
I Umiovular.

 

0°45%

necessary on learning the blood groups to
reverse an opinion previously reached on
clinical grounds. It is considered justifiable
to include in the series eight female pairs
(5 U and 3 B) where the twins would not
agree to blood samples being taken, but of
whose ovularity there is no reasonable doubt.

Fingerprints of the twins were taken, but

* The parents of five binovular pairs with different

blood groups were also tested in order to obtain additional family data on blood groups.

In 16 of the cases where the .

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

these were not considered when deciding
ovularity. Mr. W. L. B. Nixon of our Unit
is using these in a special study of fingerprints and their value in discriminating
between the two kinds of twins.

Physical Differences

Even with uniovular twins there are of
course physical differences. There are slight
differences in height which are often associated with a corresponding difference in
weight ; and one of the twins frequently
appears just a little fuller in the face or
healthier looking. Sometimes a birthmark
or difference in moles serves to distinguish
them fairly easily ; in others there is just a
difference in “ expression,’’ or to outsiders
no detectable difference at all. Mothers do
not like to admit they make mistakes (see
Burlingham, 1952) and they probably do so
less frequently than anyone else, but even
mothers will sometimes say they have
bathed or smacked the wrong one by mistake. A difference in handedness is fairly
common among twirts of both sorts. In
eleven out of 36 (30-6 per cent) of our
uniovulars and eight out of 26 (30-8 per cent)
of our binovulars one of them was left-handed
and the other right-handed. One B pair and
possibly one U pair were both left-handed.
Differences in health varied considerably
from case to case, but were more marked in
the B pairs.

In two U pairs interesting physical differences were. observed. In a pair of U boys
one twin had a congenital malformation of
the fourth and fifth toes of his right foot,
both toes being abnormally short. His left
foot was normal, as were both feet of the
other twin. In a twelve-year-old girl pair
one twin weighed 9g st. 1 Ib., the other 7 st.
10 lb. Both were plump and awkward, one
much more so than the other. However 7 B
pairs showed a greater difference in weight
than this pair.

It may be of interest to give some brief
account of the present differences in height
and weight between the twins in our series.
Tables 5 and 6 give an idea of the distribution
of these differences for U and B pairs.
However at birth differences between U
PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

twins in weight (as reported by the parents)
were not smaller than those between B

TABLE 5
PRESENT DIFFERENCES BETWEEN TWINS IN HEIGHT

1 in. — |

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Less than 1 in. 2 in. —
U pairs ... was 26 (73%) 10)=— (28%) oO {o%)
’ B pairs ... we 9 (35%) 6 (23%) Ir (43%)
TABLE 6
PRESENT DIFFERENCES BETWEEN TwIns IN WEIGHT
Under 2 Ib. 2 Ib. — 8 Ib. —
U pairs ... a 14 (39%) 20 (56%) 2 (6%)
Bpairs 000... 2 (8%) | 11 (42%) 13 (50%)
| : |
TABLE 7
REPORTED DIFFERENCES BETWEEN TWINS IN BIRTH WEIGHT
Under $ Ib. 4 Ib. — | 1 lb. —
U pairs... ... | 13 (38%) | 9 (27%) | 12 (35%)
B pairs ... wee 15 (60%) 5 (20%) 5 (20%)

 

No information for 2 U and 1 B pairs.

TABLE 8
REPORTED PREMATURITY OF BIRTH

Premature, ? by

Not how much, or | Premature by

 

 

 

 

premature premature by |3 weeks or more
less than 3 why
U pairs ... bee 13 (41%) 9 (28%) ' ro (31%)
B pairs ... 12 (56%) | 7 (28%) | 4 (16%)
No information for 4 U and 1 B pairs.
twins. On the contrary they were more

frequently greater, as Table 7 shows. This
was noted by Dahlberg (1926) and is presumably due to features peculiar to monochorionic pregnancy. Further, the U twins
were reported as being more frequently
prematurely born than the B twins (Table 8).
Karn’s data (1953) show that pairs of the
same sex have a shorter gestation time than
opposite-sexed pairs.

Secondary sex development is another
character which, though largely genetically
determined, shows slight variations in uniovular twins. For the female pairs information regarding menstruation is available
for 20 U and eleven B pairs. In three U and
one B it had commenced in one member of
the pair only ; in eleven U and six B pairs it
had started in both. In four U pairs the
periods had started within a few weeks of
each other in the two twins. The greatest
difference reported for the U’s is six months
(three cases). In only two B cases was there

221

a difference as small as this, and with
four B pairs there are differences of a year
or over in onset of menstruation.

When considering psychological differences between U twins, it is helpful to
bear in mind the extent of these physical
differences.

Maternal Age, Size of Family

A further point of interest is the higher age
of the mother at the birth of binovular twins.
This has been noticed by Waterhouse (1950)
and Stocks (1952) who compared same-sexed
and opposite-sexed twin births. Our data is

given in Table g. Of the 33 pairs born when

the mother was under 30, 27 were U. Of the
29 pairs born when the mother was 30 or
over, 20 were B. y? (Yates) is 14:3 and very
highly significant.

As a consequence of this the binovular
twins came from slightly larger families and
had a higher proportion of older sibs than did
the uniovular twins (Table Io).

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE: 9
AGE oF MoTHER AT BIRTH OF Twins
_ Age |
Ovularity 0°" =) | 20-24 | 25-29 | 30-34 | 35-39 | 40- Total Mean
of twins age
oe
Uniovular Io | 17 7 2 oO 36 27°25
Binovular er 3 | 3 Ir 8 I | 26 | 31°85
TABLE 10

NUMBER OF OTHER CHILDREN Born TO MOTHER (INCL. MISCARRIAGES
AND OTHER TwINs): RELATIVE PLACE OF TWINS IN FAMILY

Other
children
Ovularity
of twins

 

Younger Older
O01 234 5 6 6+/Total Mean, than than —

 

 

 

twins twins
U (36 families) ..., 9 7746300 72 2:00 . 38 . 34
B (26 families)...} 46740122 7o 2°69 16 54

 

 

Other Twins in the Family

In this sample the fréquency of twinning
was increased in the siblings of the binovular
twins. Four of their mothers’ 66 other
pregnancies were twin births—one oppositesexed pair, and three same-sexed pairs of
which one was certainly and two were probably.also binovular. The mothers of the
U twins had 71 other pregnancies including
only one other pair of twins, which on clinical
and serological grounds was also uniovular.
The frequency and type of twinning among
the parents of the twins is shown overleaf.
222

This appears also to be increased. In Great
Britain, one out of 83 births is a twin birth.

Parents of U Twins

Fathers—2/36 were themselves twins

(twin partners: 1 ? U, 1 stillborn)
Mothers—z2/36 were themselves twins

(twin partners: 1 ? U, 1 female d. inf.)

Parents of B Twins ~

Fathers—1 /26 was a twin
(twin partner female)
Mothers—none were twins

The occurrence of twins in the sibships of
the parents and elsewhere in the family was
reported more frequently on the maternal

side (42 cases) than on the paternal side (21 .

cases) ; this was true for the families of both
U and B twins.

Psychiatric Investigation
The principal source of information about

the twins was the parents. In 37 cases both ©

parents were seen, in 20 cases the mother
only, and in five cases the father only. Interviews were in the homes of 54 of the families,
the other interviews being at the Maudsley
Hospital. The principal interview was rarely
of less than one hour’s duration and often
longer. In 35 cases there was more than one
interview ; the second one generally took
place either when the parents came up for
blood grouping or if they had asked to be
told how the twins had got on in the psychological testing. As already stated, the
parents’ information was considered in conjunction with reports from the schools, both
as to academic performance and character,
and along with my personal impression of
the twins on interview. For the purpose of
this report, the results of the psychological
tests were not considered although the twins’
reaction to these was sometimes taken into
account. The majority of the children seem
to have enjoyed their day at the hospital.
The interviews with the parents were
carried out as far as possible on lines that
might have been followed at a child guidance
clinic except, of course, that the focus was
on research, not therapy. Most parents
seemed genuinely interested in talking about
their twins and some had problems to discuss.
The parents of the uniovular pairs were on

‘twins ;

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the whole the more willing informants, perhaps because they were more used to receiving attention on account of their twins. The

‘parents were encouraged so far as possible

to tell their story in their own words, but an
attempt was made to cover the following

_ points: Social environment including war
time evacuation history; health and _ personality of the parents and of any other
brothers or sisters ; family relationships, in
particular the relationship between the
birth and early development ;
physical health, and education. Personality
similarities and differences were elicited by
enquiring whether the twins were alike in
their ways, and by discussing such topics as
food, sleep, money, clothes, discipline, interests, ambitions and social life. Neurotic
traits and behaviour disorders such as the
following were enquired about: Excessive
thumb-sucking, nail biting, enuresis, food
fads, sleep disturbances, stammering, nervous
mannerisms, fears, marked shyness, sensitivity or aggressiveness, truancy, delinquency,
disturbed personal relationships. | Where
symptoms such as these occurred the history
sometimes suggested their psychopathology,
but the research was not, of course, designed
especially to investigate this.

It was only rarely felt that the severity of
psychiatric maladjustment was exaggerated
by the mothers. It is more likely that the
reported incidence of these traits is an
underestimate. This seems to be the case,
for example, with aggressive disorders in
early childhood and with sexual difficulties
in adolescence. The quantity and quality of
the information obtained naturally varied
from case to case, though the data obtained
about one twin was always comparable in
these respects to that relating to his twin
partner. In most cases it is felt that a fairly
reliable picture of the children was obtained.

Frequency and Severity of Psychiatric
Disorder
We may. now proceed to the principal
findings. First we will consider the extent
and severity of psychiatric abnormality in its
widest sense, as found in the sample. Small
though it is, the material may give some
PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

indication ‘of the frequency of minor childhood psychiatric disorders in the general
population. This is a point of relevance to
both genetics and social psychiatry, and one
which has never been adequately studied.
On it depends the genetical and psychiatric
significance which can be attributed to these
troubles and also the planning of psychiatric
Services, both educational and therapeutic.

TABLE 11

SEVERITY OF PsycCHIATRIC MALADJUSTMENT : NUMBER OF INDIVIDUALS
IN EACH OF Four GROUPS

| war | Bing f

 

 

 

 

 

 

Degree of Severity Uniovular Binovular Total
Male Female | Male Female
(1) Moderately severe 14 Io 7 Ir | 7 | 42
nae OS 3 |
(2) Mild aw — 4 12 |
pee |
1

 

 

5 | 4 25
8

TT

sit Neurotic traits Neurotic traits ... 35

 

 

(4) | (4) Well-adjusted ... -adjusted ... i 22

 

 

Total

     

 

| zy

Table 11 shows the number of individuals
grouped as to severity on a four-point scale
and divided according to sex and ovularity.
We are justified in taking each twin singly,
as the twins were not selected by reason of
one or the other of them being abnormal.
However, the sampling error will be greater
than if we were dealing with a series of
unrelated persons. In Group 1 of the scale
(““ moderately severe ’’) are those individuals
who at one time or another have been disturbed to a degree that might have ‘warranted
referral to some social agency. In Group 2
we have those who have suffered from a
definite psychiatric or behaviour disorder
of a similar kind, but milder or more transitory than those included in the first group.
Groups I and 2 together may conveniently,
if rather arbitrarily, be regarded as
‘neurotic’ in a wide sense of the term.
Group 3 comprises persons who are within
normal limits but have neurotic traits. The
fourth group are the well-adjusted in whom
no neurotic traits of significance were elicited.
The four groups should be regarded as
merging into one another.

A few examples may be given of the sort
of case included in each of the four groups.

In Group 1 are four children who appeared”

before a juvenile court because of a conduct

three.

- 223

disorder ; also all those who were taken to a
child guidance clinic or to a hospital on
account of nervous symptoms, with the
exception of one or two where the trouble
seemed to be one of maternal anxiety. Cases
of enuresis after the age of eight were always
included. There is a boy who is extremely
resentful and unhappy-looking, who adopts
a “‘don’t care’’ attitude with frequent
shrugs of the shoulders and who is in trouble
at home on account of aggressive behaviour.
Another example is a pair of girls who used
to have frequent night terrors and are now,
at 13, only just ceasing to wet the bed. In
Group 2 there is a girl of good personality
who developed a facial tic which cleared up
when some difficulties at school had been
dealt with; and another girl who since
adolescence has been difficult at home and
who at school is obstinately not working,
perhaps because she feels she can never be
as good as her twin sister. Group 3 includes
the person who might, in lay terms, be
described as a little highly-strung—the somewhat anxious or hysterical personality who
has shown no real abnormality. Also included in this group are one or two children
who made a somewhat odd impression but
who appeared to be fairly well adjusted. For
example, there was a pair of girls who were
extremely quiet and rather awkward. The
fourth group includes among others a girl
of Jow-average intelligence who is placid,
capable and sociable. There is also a selfcontained but quite averagely mischievous
boy who is probably of university scholarship
level and has athletic and artistic abilities
besides ; he has shown no neurotic traits.
Low intelligence was not taken into
account in assessing severity unless it was
accompanied by personality or social difficulties. But the age at which a symptom
occurred was given due weight. Thus
phobias at the age of twelve were regarded
more seriously than phobias at the age of
These ratings are of course personal
ones, but it is hoped they are consistent, and
they are based on all the information available. Other observers might disagree in
placing some of the children by one point on
the scale, but there would probably be few
224

cases where there would be a much wider
disagreement.

Of the 124 individuals 42 are in Group I,
the most severely disturbed group, 25 are
in Group 2, 35 in Group 3, and 22 in Group 4,
the least neurotic group (Table 11). The
boys appear in the most severe group much
more frequently than the girls, as the percentages of Table 12 show. This is in

.TABLE 12

SEVERITY OF MALADJUSTMENT ACCORDING TO SEX AND OVULARITY :
PERCENTAGES

Percentage of Individuals

Degree of Severity |

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Uniovular | Binovular
; Males Females (72) | (52)
(54) (7o) ‘Percentages corrected
or sex differences)
(1) Moderately severe 46 24 38 | 34
(2) Mild | 17 | 23 21 18
(3) Neurotic traits wee 24 31 23 33
(4) Well-adjusted ... 13 | 21 19 16
Totals... 100 | 99 IOI IOI

accordance with the observation that in our
culture boys are more troublesome than
girls. Of 985 children seen at the Maudsley
Hospital Children’s Out-patient Department between 1949 and 1951, 62 per cent
were boys. As the total figures of Table
11 stand, there are slightly more B than U
twins in the most severe group—36 per cent
as against 33 per cent. But since there is an
excess of girls among the U twins in our
sample, some correction is necessary before
we can accept this comparison of U and B
twins for severity. This is most easily done
as follows. It will be seen from Table rr
that in Severity Group 1 there are 14 out of
26 (54 per cent) U boys and ten out of 46
(22 per cent) U girls. The mean of these
two percentages is 38 per cent. Similarly
there are eleven out of 28 (39 per cent) B
males and seven out of 24 (29 per cent) B
females, the mean of the percentages being
34. We proceed in the same way with Severity Groups 2, 3 and 4 to obtain the corrected
percentages given in the second part of
Table 12. It will be seen that there
are now slightly more U than B twins in
Groups 1 and 2. The differences are slight
and do not justify our saying that one kind
of twin is likely to be more neurotic than the
other. If we deal with the figures relating to
sex In the same way, correcting them for any

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

supposed differences due to ovularity, we.
find that the percentages of Table 12 are
practically unaltered. ,
These findings suggest that childhood
psychiatric disorders are of frequent occurrence. Over half the children observed fall
into the so-called “‘ neurotic ’’ Groups I and 2.
In nearly half the families (47 per cent)
either one or both of the twins had at some
time in their lives suffered from a disorder
as severe as that of many children who are,
in fact, referred for psychiatric investigation.

The Commonest Troubles

This material is not well suited to an
accurate analysis of the relative frequency
with which all the various behaviour difficulties and nervous troubles of childhood occur.
However it may be of some interest to note
the most frequently mentioned complaints
for each sex. The figures relate to the
number of families in which one or both of
the twins are reported as showing the trouble
in question. These are to be regarded as
minimum figures.

The most frequent single symptom in both
sexes was niail-biting (eleven male and
twelve female). Then came, for the males,
enuresis (ten), school problems of all kinds
(ten), food fads (eight), night terrors (seven),
adolescent emotional reactions (six) ; and for
the females, hysterical attention-seeking or °
display (ten), fears, worries or other anxiety
symptoms (nine), over-dependency (eight),
adolescent reactions of rebelliousness or
sensitivity (six), enuresis (six). After these
the most frequently mentioned symptoms
were marked shyness, marked resentment or
jealousy, overactivity, headaches and other
psychosomatic symptoms such as blushing,
fainting and vomiting.

Are Twins Different from the Singly Born ?

We must now consider the possibility that
twins as such are particularly liable to
psychiatric disorders. If this were the case
it might partly explain the high incidence of
maladjustment reported. :

First, may I point out a danger into which
many people fall? Twins are in themselves
somewhat unusual. If they show any unusual
PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS .

characteristic it is tempting to jump to the
conclusion that this is because they are twins.
For example, one parent asked if her boys
were late in talking because they were twins,
another whether they talked too much
because they were twins. I may say for what
it is worth that I do not recall any parent
attributing nervous symptoms to the fact of
twinship. Some psychiatric colleagues are
inclined to do the same sort of things and to
attribute troubles such as a dyslexia or an
anxiety state occurring in one or both of a
pair entirely or very largely to difficulties in
the inter-twin or parent-twin relationship.
I may fall into the same error myself in
attributing differences between a pair of
twins to the relationship between them
rather than to any other cause.

Some indication of the answer to this
question can be obtained by finding out
whether twins are in fact referred for psychia
tric treatment more often than one would.

expect. In Slater’s recent monograph it ‘is
reported that the standing population of the
L.C.C. mental hospitals. in 1936 did not
contain a higher percentage of twins than the
percentage of twins born. Table 13 shows
that if we examine referrals to hospitals
where less severe psychiatric disorders are
treated we likewise do not find an excess of
twins. The figures in the table for the
Children’s Department and for Adult Outpatients at the Maudsley Hospital relate to
discharges over a three-year period, .19401951, those of Belmont Hospital, Sutton,

statistics on twin births.

born twins.

a8

(adult in-patients) to admissions between .
November t950 and July 1953. At both
these hospitals systematic enquiries are
made as to twinship.* The percentage of
twins in this combined material (2-18 per
cent) is in close agreement with national
If anything, the
twins reported are fewer than might have
been expected. Over a period of ten and a
half years, the statistics of the RegistrarGeneral show (according to Waterhouse,
1950) that on average 12-12 per 1,000
maternities are twin maternities, le. 2°39
per cent of all persons in this country are
It can further be seen from
Table 13 that the proportion of male to
female patients among twins and among all

admissions is very similar (55-8 and 54:8 per

cent males respectively).

Next let us consider whether U twins are
more likely to have a psychiatric illness than
are B twins. This might be considered
possible because of the greater pre-natal and.
neo-natal risks they run, or because. of
psychological difficulties inherent in being a:
twin which might be presumed to be greater
in the case of the uniovulars. Again the
evidence. is against the hypothesis. In
systematic studies of mentally ill twins in.
the United States and in Germany no excess
of U twins has been found. In Kallman’s.

* I am indebted to Dr. C. P. Blacker and Mrs. M.
Perkins, and also to Mr. A. T. Gore (L.C.C. Public
Health Dept.) for the Maudsley figures ; and to Dr. L.
Minski, Dr. Maxwell Jones, Mrs. F. Taylor and Nurse
L. Keeling for their help at Belmont. :

TABLE 13
NUMBER OF TwINns IN A PREDOMINANTLY Non-PsycHOTIC PSYCHIATRIC POPULATION

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

All Patients * Twins | Sex of Twin Partner Expected |
| ——__—__--—| Twins as —— percentage
Hospital + |percentage Oppo-. o
- | Fe- of all Same | site "| Not | uniovular
. Males | males| Total Males males Total| patients as from |Known| Pairs
| patient | patient (Weinberg)
Maudsley Children’s . ' |
Dept. (I.P. and O.P.) 780 | 489} 1,269] 23 30) 2°37 16 12 2 14°3
Maudsley * ois
Adult O.P.D. | 2,751 | 2,558 | 5,309 561 55 | I11 | 2:09 65 33 13 32°7
Belmont
(In-patients) | 2,088 | 1,630 | 3,718 | 46 | 37 83 2°23 43 27 13 22°9
Total 5,019 | 4,677 | 10,296 | 125 | 99 [. 224 | 2°18 | 124 | 72 | 28 26°5

* Excluding 171 Maudsley out-patients where it is not known whether patient was a twin.
2260

(1946) large series of schizophrenic twins the
proportion of uniovulars was according to
expectation. However, studies by Conrad
(1936) and Juda (1939) on epilepsy and
mental defect respectively show a significant
increase in the proportion of B twins which
is rather difficult to explain. According to
Weinberg’s formula the expected number of
uniovular pairs is the total number of pairs
less twice the number of opposite-sexed
pairs. Applying this formula (uncorrected
for the small excess of males) to the Maudsley
and Belmont twins, where the sex of the
twin partner is known, we would expect
26°5 per cent of the pairs to be uniovular.
From G.R.O. statistics, Waterhouse (loc. cit.)
has calculated that 28°6 per cent of all twin
pairs born are uniovular. The two figures
are in close agreement.

Thus we are justified in saying that one
of the assumptions underlying twin research
is correct. Twins of both kinds are different
from other people in no way that fundamentally affects the subject being studied.

The only possible exceptions to this are in
the fields of intelligence and speech development. So far as intelligence is concerned,
Mehrotra and Maxwell (1949) showed from
data obtained in the Scottish Mental Survey
that the average I.Q. of twins from all sizes of
family was very slightly lower than that of
non-twins ; and twins in special schools for
the defective in Germany were found to be
in excess by Gudden (1934), FrischeisenKohler (1936) and Juda (1939).
Schiller (1937) investigated this point in
Stuttgart and found that 204 twin-pairs
from the ordinary schools were on average
quite as intelligent as the non-twins in the
same schools. Newman (1942), from his wide
experience in the United States, likewise
considers this to be the case. Day (1932)
and Davis (1941) consider twins to be
retarded in speech development compared
with the singly-born. Any tendencies of
these kinds are probably only slight and are
of little relevance to the present. study. So
far as could be judged, our twins do not
appear to be unduly retarded in intelligence
or speech development.

This is not to say that having a brother or

However.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

sister of exactly the same age and perhaps
almost a double of oneself does not colour
the personality in any way. But just how
being a twin affects a person varies considerably from case to case, depending among
other things on how the situation is handled
by the parents, on the relative size, health
and intelligence of the twin partner and on
the innate personality make-up of the person
concerned. The dependencies and jealousies
that sometimes occur in the twin situation
can have a pathoplastic effect on the psychiatric illness of a twin, but their effect is likely
to be pathogenic only in a predisposed person. Being a twin may be of much the same
kind of importance as being an only child
or being the eldest or the youngest of a:
family.

Wartime Influences

Another factor which might have tended
to increase the incidence of neurotic traits
in these twins is that they were born between
1937 and 1940, and so frequently had their
early years disturbed by evacuation, the
absence of fathers in the forces or by bombing. It is difficult to say just how much or
how little importance should be attributed
to the stresses of wartime in predisposing
children to neurotic symptoms later on.

Significance of the Frequency of Psychiatric

Disorder

If we accept the figures given in Table 12
aS a very rough approximation to the frequency of neurotic and behaviour disorders
of childhood in the general population, then.
it is clear we cannot regard these generally
as being seriously abnormal conditions ; they
are too common. Though their causes are
different, the frequency of moderately severe
physical and psychiatric disorders in children
are probably not very different. Probably
over a third of all children suffer (or at any
rate not so many years ago used to suffer)
from a moderately severe physical illness,
such as an acute attack of one of: the childhood infections involving an anxious stay in
hospital, or a milder chronic or recurrent
complaint involving a good deal of medical
attention or absence from school. However,
the line between what can be regarded as
PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS |

pathological and what normal is even less
clearly defined in mental health than it is
in the case of physical health. A more convenient way of regarding these psychological
conditions and their severity is as representing different degrees of normal variation in
psychological adjustment. It would be
unrealistic to look upon them either as being
due to some pathological gene, or as symptoms of a dynamic process which, unless
treated by deep psychotherapy, will lead to
severe or chronic mental ill-health in later
life. Evidence as to their often solely incidental nature was seen in Slater’s series of
twins (Joc. cit.). Here the U twin who had
the more neurotic traits in childhood did not
tend to be the more abnormal in later life.

That psychiatric troubles are widespread
not only in children but also in adults has
been indicated by a number of workers,
among them Russell Fraser and his collaborators (1947), who found in a large sample of
light and medium factory workers of both
sexes that over 25 per cent of all sickness
absence was due to neurosis. Ten per cent of
the workers examined had suffered from
disabling neurosis during the six months
under review and a further 20 per cent of
them from minor forms of neurosis.

This is not the place to attempt to discuss
all the implications for social and preventive
psychiatry of these findings: the figures
need confirmation, and there are important
administrative and therapeutic considerations. :

Certainly our present psychiatric services
in most areas are not large enough to cope
with the latent demand for help ; and many
of the problems could no doubt be dealt with
without referral to child guidance clinics as
we know them today. In 1948 Blacker
suggested a combination of two kinds of
psychiatric service for children : Child guidance centres under the education authority
for educational and minor psychiatric problems, and child psychiatric clinics attached
to adult psychiatric clinics for children who
need more intensive treatment than the
centres would provide. For three of the
former he considered that one of the latter
might be required. In his suggested service

227

for a population of a million (which would
include 200,000 schoolchildren) Blacker
reckoned on an estimate of between I and 2
per cent of schoolchildren as requiring child
guidance referral in a year, and he thought
about ten child guidance centres would be
required to meet this demand. An expansion
of general medical and social services, together with .an increased psychiatric awareness on their part, would enable them to
prevent or alleviate even more of these
children’s and parents’ psychological problems than they already do at present.

Nevertheless a certain amount of emotional
discomfort and social difficulty is probably an
inevitable accompaniment of learning to
grow up in society. These symptoms of
maladjustment cannot be reduced to a minimum just by “ treating ”’ individual children
and “ advising ”’ individual parents. Society
itself must also adjust itself to the varying
needs of its children.

Perhaps some of the variability of children’s needs and the problems they create is
due to genetical differences between them.

Intra-pair Differences in Severity

We now turn, therefore, to a comparison
of the two members of a twin pair as to the
severity of psychological disturbance. Table
14 shows in how many cases the twins belong
to the same severity group and in how many
they differ by one, two or three points on the
four-point scale. Sixty-nine per cent of the U
pairs belong to the same group while only 31
per cent of the B pairs do so. Table 15 shows

TABLE 14

INTRA-PAIR DIFFERENCES IN
SEVERITY: COMPARISON OF U
AND B Pairs

TABLE 15

MEMBERS OF TwIN Pairs:
CONCORDANCE/DISCORDANCE FOR
‘* NEUROSIS ”

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Severity: .
Number of points; U  B Severity Group U B
on scale by which |pairs pairs pairs pairs

twins differ . |

Differ by No. 25 8 Both ror 2 No. | 17 9
o points Percent, 69 jr (‘‘neurotic’’) Percent| 47 95
Differ by No. 6 41 Both 3or4 No. 13 8
1 point Percent! 17 42 (‘‘normal’’) Percent] 36 gr
Differ by No. | 5 One I or2 5 9
2points Percent} 8 19 one gor 4J Percent! 37 95

Differ by No. 2 2 ant ’’)

3 points Percent} 6 8 |

a Total No. 36026 Total No. 36 =. 26
Percent! roo 100 | Percent} roo sor
228

concordance as to “ neurosis,’ as defined
above. Only 17 per cent of the U twins were
discordant in this respect, that is, one being
neurotic, the other not ; 35 per cent of the
B pairs were discordant. Examination of
the case histories shows that this discordance
can be due to a variety of environmental
factors. However, these, though of the
greatest importance, do not entirely explain
the difference between the two kinds of
twins. The findings suggest that genetical
factors influence the threshold at -which
symptoms show themselves in response to
stress.

Some Probable Causes of Differences in

‘Severity Between Uniovular Twins

A few examples may now be given of
uniovular pairs where the members show
differing degrees of psychiatric disturbance.
These illustrate the apparent effect of some
environmental influences which in childhood
can affect one twin and not the other, among
them differences in birth weight or difficulty
in birth, differences in physical health,
dominance and submissiveness in the twin
relationship, parental discrimination against
one of the twins, separation of one twin
from home, and differences in school career.
A statistica] analysis of some of these and
other factors is attempted in a later section.

First, there is a pair of 14-year-old U boys,
Peter and Paul, where one is in the most
severe, the other in the least severe group.
At birth Peter, who is in Severity Group I,
was the lighter of the two and weighed only
24 lb. He had to be reared in an incubator
at first and is said to have had treatment for
some blood disorder. In infancy he had
asthma. From the age of six months he
used to bang his head on the side of his cot
at night for several months. He hada curious
crablike crawl, unlike Paul. At 18 months
he developed a severe squint for which he
had an operation a few years ago—his mother
says he nearly lost the sight of one eye. At
three, he had frequent nightmares and
screaming attacks at night. At four, he had
what his mother calls a “ convulsion fit.”

At seven she sought the advice of a consult
ant psychiatrist because Peter was so “ shy,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

nervy and whining ”’ and was not doing well
at school. Paul has had none of these symptoms ; but both boys have been nail-biters,
mother treating them for this with bitter
aloes. (She herself was a severe naiJ-biter
in childhood, and feels strongly about the
habit.) Peter used to be in a lower class than
Paul at school but has nearly caught up
with him now; both are of good average
intelligence. While Peter leans on Paul
intellectually, he is the more boisterous and
talkative in company. There is a close
relationship between the boys. Both seem
well-adjusted now ; but Peter has fainted
twice recently, and he is a little more irritable
and slapdash in personality. Perhaps the
fact that it was only Peter who showed fairly
severe symptoms.in his earlier years can be
attributed ultimately to his weaker physical
condition at birth. Some of his symptoms
suggest an organic factor.

In a pair of uniovular girls we see a
possible consequence of one of the twins
having a more difficult birth, though this has
resulted in no very severe symptoms in this
case. Iris had a difficult birth; she was
“black and blue’”’ when born and weighed
less than Doris. As a baby she cried a lot
more. The twins had the same childhood
illnesses but Iris got them more severely.
Doris, the bigger child, became the dominant
partner. The cumulative effect of these and
perhaps other factors has resulted here. in
these twins being rather less alike than most
of our so-called identical pairs. Though both
are in a dancing troupe they are not so alike
in manner that they can successfully do a
twin act together. Iris is lacking in confidence and has a nervous blink when talking
to people. She has been placed in Severity
Group 3, Doris in Group 4. |

A somewhat similar personality difference
is that between Susan and Shirley, of whom
the latter is over-reliant on her twin and
afraid of doing things on her own. But here
there is no known environmental factor which
is likely to have caused this difference between the twins other than that of the twin
relationship itself. This is the only case’
where a dominant-submissive twin relationship by itself has resulted in the twins being
PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

placed in different severity groups, Shirley
in 3, Susan in 4. Nowhere in this series does
the inter-twin relationship appear to be the
decisive factor in making one of the twins
neurotic ; but it does seem to cause slight
differences in personality.

In only two of the 36 uniovular pairs has
a marked parental preference for one of the
twins been obvious, and in each case this has
had an effect on their psychological development. In one pair the mother talks of
“my Clem’ but never of ‘‘ my Winston.”
Winston is said to possess all the worst
characteristics of his father. The result is
frequent scenes at home between Winston
and his mother. He has also stolen articles
from home. He is described as “‘ very deep ”’ ;
he “‘ overstudies ’’ and he is much preoccupied with religion and with art. Clem had
poor health since babyhood. The effect of
this, together with mother’s psychological
make-up, has here been the favouring of the
weak twin and the rejection of the other.
Winston is in Severity Group 1, Clem in 3.
Clem had night terrors when very small and
now like Winston is regarded at school as
being nervous and easily cast down; but
he seems hardly disturbed enough: to be
placed in Group 2.

The second of these cases of parental discrimination is a pair of girls whom I saw at
home being treated very differently by their
mother. ‘‘ Come in, don’t be shy,” she said
to Norah ; “‘ Can’t you see we’re busy ? ”’ to
Nancy. Relatives have remarked to her that
she always complains of the one twin, never
of the other. Nancy, as the alleged ring
leader, comes in for more than her fair share °

of blame and is the focus of the restrictive
parents’ anxieties. Her behaviour has become more difficult and the attitude of both
parents has hardened even more in consequence. Nancy is an unhappy-looking,
resentful girl, who has untidily cut off her
curls after persuading mother to allow her
to have a perm, and who seeks admission to
hospital on the slightest pretext just for the
thrill of it. Norah is a much more normal
personality, although she has been caught
stealing along with her twin and an older
girl and has some minor hysterical traits.

229

These cases of parental discrimination are
the exceptions. Quite often the twins appear
to have been treated very much as a single
unit. In other cases the mother seems to
stress differences between them in an effort
to give each a distinct personality. Or she
may carry over feelings she had about the
twins when they were babies. More than one
mother referred without thinking to “ the
little one ’’ when there was no longer any
difference between the twins in size. Differences such as these appear not to affect a
mother’s fundamental attitude to her twins
and they have no appreciable effect, unless
perhaps to encourage one twin to be the
more responsible of the pair.

Cases of one twin being closer to mother,
the other twin closer to father, are comparatively rare, and this also seems to have
little or no dynamic effect on the personality.
In one pair the boy who was father’s special
charge when a baby asks father ‘more
questions today, but these boys are otherwise strikingly alike in character and personality. In another pair one girl supports
Oxford in the Boat Race like father, the other
Cambridge like mother; but here the
identification with different parents ceases.

In none of our pairs were the twins brought
up in different homes. But some had separations from. home at an early age when this
might possibly be thought to involve a risk
of disturbing the mother-child relationship
and in this way of forming an “ affectionless
personality.’’ In most instances where only
one of a pair of uniovular twins was in
hospital for a short period at an early age,
the separation experience does not appear to
have led to any major difference in their
personalities. But emotional reactions to
early hospital experiences such as described
by Bowlby (1951) were mentioned a few
times. For example when Bill had his tonsils
out at three, he fretted in hospital. He would
not speak to his parents when they visited,
but hugged possessively any toys they
brought him. On return home he would not
let his mother out of his sight for a week or
two. However it was Bill who was the first
to give up thumb-sucking a little later, and
both he and John continued to wet and soil
230

themselves by day until the age of six or
seven. At 13 they are very similar personalities, their behaviour at school and at home
being distinctive in precisely the same ways.
In another pair, Charlie, who had less breastfeeding than his twin David, was in hospital
for four months at two and a half and would
not recognize his mother on return. It
might be thought that he had the poorer
start in life. The twins are alike in being
very shy with adults, but there are differences. However, it is not Charlie who is
described as “‘ rougher in his ways and more
of a lone wolf,’ but David.

Nevertheless there is one case where
separation and readjustment difficulties were
perhaps the most important factor causing
differences between the twins. At six,
Derek fractured his femur and was seven
months in hospital. On his discharge the
family had been billeted in someone else’s
home and Derek showed behaviour problems
such as jealousy with which the mother had
difficulty in dealing. Since then Derek has
been the more demanding of the twins and
the one who is less able to control his feelings.
It was only he who at twelve, when another
addition to the family was expected, began
to wet the bed frequently ; and two years
later he still does so nearly every other
night. Derek and his twin Patrick are alike
in most of their ways; and at ten both
truanted from school for a month. But
Derek is the only one to have suffered from
enuresis. _

In two pairs slight differences between U
twins in intellectual performance at school
seem to have resulted in the less bright one
showing anxiety symptoms. In another case
one of the twins, in addition to being the
less intelligent, was bullied at school and it
was possibly this that led to a psychogenic
loss of weight. It is reported in a later
section that the less well adjusted twin
tended to be the less intelligent of the pair.

Thus we see that a number of environmental factors, both physical and psychological, generally interacting with one
another, can even within a family cause
differences in the degree of psychiatric disturbance shown by the members of a pair of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

U twins. However, as was seen in Table 14,
they do not always do so. In about twothirds of the U’s the twins were in the same
severity group, while this was the case with
about only one-third of the B’s.

It might be argued that this difference is
due to the fact that B’s are more frequently
subjected to different stresses. This may be
partly true. However it is difficult to sort
out the importance of genetical differences
between B pairs in robustness, temperament
and intelligence in predisposing them to
these stresses. Fhe interviews with the
parents did not suggest that rejection of
one twin in favour of the other was any more
frequent in the B group. So far as parental
discrimination 1s concerned, an observation
which most impressed me was the insistence
by mothers that they made no difference
between their B twins. This must often have
been untrue; for the twins had different
needs and made different demands on their
parents. But it does indicate a strong social
pressure on parents to give twins “the
same of everything.’’ To risk a paradoxical
generalization, the parents of U twins make.
a special effort to treat their twins differently,
those of B twins to treat them the same.

The Family Environments Compared

The importance of environmental causes of
neurotic behaviour can be seen even more
clearly if we compare the family backgrounds
of the twins from a psychiatric point of
view (Table 16). In rating the families as
poor, greatest weight was given to those
factors which in child psychiatry are con
‘ sidered likely to have a disturbing effect on

a child’s emotional development. Thus a
broken home life in early years involving,
say, a stay of two years in a residential
nursery was regarded as poor from a
psychiatric point of view. Much quarrelling
between the parents was likewise taken into
account, and so were the more marked cases
of parental rejection, over-protection or
spoiling, over-anxiety, over-restrictiveness,
lack of discipline and inconsistent discipline.
If both parents were somewhat unstable this
was considered worse than if only one was
unstable. Low socio-economic status did not
PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

necessarily imply a poor psychological
environment. I did my best to avoid rating
an environment as poor because I knew it
contained a maladjusted child.

Of the environments 27 per cent were
rated as belonging to the group labelled
“good,” 24 per cent as “‘ moderate,’’ 31 per
cent as ‘‘ poor’’ and 18 per cent as “‘ bad,”
that is as having the worst sort of environment from a. psychological point of view.
Table 16 shows clearly how the worst homes
produce the greatest number of disturbed
children and the fewest without neurotic
traits ; and the best homes, vice versa. This
analysis does not exclude the possibility that
some of the children were abnormal because
of the genes they obtained from abnormal
parents rather than because of the psychological attitudes of the parents; but not all
fathers or mothers with neurotic traits were
regarded ipso facto as bad parents, and
some of the worst environments were
attributable to fortuitous circumstances of
wartime.

TABLE 16
RELATION BETWEEN PSYCHIATRIC ENVIRONMENT AND SEVERITY

Individuals

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Psychiatric — —— 1
Environment |, Number Per cent | Severity Group

|? 2 3 4

Bad ... sad 22 18 Poy 5 4 2 I
Poor ... ‘ 38 3I 14 9 13 2
Moderate 30 24 | Ir 6 9 4
Good | 34 27 , 2 6 II 15
Total ... | 124 100 | 42 25 35 22

This is further evidence for the importance
of environmental factors in determining
the presence or severity of psychiatric
disturbance in childhood.

Qualitative Concordance

We now turn to the kind of disturbance.
Are U pairs more alike in this respect than
B pairs? In Table 17 each pair has been
classified as to qualitative concordance, again
on a four-point scale. As completely concordant (C) I have rated all pairs who are
strikingly alike both in their outstanding
psychiatric characteristics and in all other
important details. Essentially concordant
(C’) includes pairs who are alike in their
most distinctive symptoms or (in the case
of the symptom-free) in most personality

231

traits, but who differ in details. Partially
concordant (P) are those pairs whose chief
symptoms are different, but who have some
important characteristic in common; and

 

 

 

 

TABLE 17
’ QUALITATIVE CONCORDANCE
; (2) G)
Pairs where
| both twins | Where both
| are ‘‘neu- | twins are in
Qualitative Concordance | All pairs rotic,’’ i.e. | the Same
in Severity Severity
' (Groups I or 2 Group
__ ‘ |
OU | B U B | U B
C Completely = No. 33 | oO 6 oO 12, o
concordant Per cent | 36 o | 35 o 48 0
C’ Essentially No. i 12 3 8 I 10 I
concordant Per cent | 33 12 47 1 40 3
P Partially . No. 1 5 5 3 3 3 2
concordant Per cent 14 19 18 | 33 12 | 25
: No. 6 | 18° o}] 5 o 5
D Discordant Per cent | 17, | 69 o | 56 o 63
Total | 36 | 26 17 | 9 25 |; 8

 

discordant (D) those whose symptoms or
personalities are quite different in all essential respects. The first part of the table
shows there is a very marked difference
between the two kinds of twins in this
respect. No B pair was so alike that it could~
be placed in group “C” showing almost
photographic similarity ; over two-thirds of
them fall into the discordant group. By
contrast over a third of the U pairs are
completely concordant and only one-sixth
of them are discordant. A similar result is
reached if one takes only those pairs where
both members are in Severity Groups I or 2,
that is to say, pairs which could be regarded
as concordant for “‘ neurosis.’”’ Here five out
of nine B pairs showed quite different kinds
of reaction, while all the U pairs showed at
least some similarity (see the second part of |
Table 17). And the same is true if we apply
this analysis only to pairs (whether “ neurotic ’’ or not) who have been placed in the
same group for severity (third part of the
table).

With U pairs where there is a difference
in degree of concordance there is often an
underlying basic similarity which may possibly be genetically determined. There is,
for example, a pair of boys where only one
has shown head-shaking movements, has
been preoccupied with fears of death, and
tends to be over-conscientious about some
232
things. His symptoms may be regarded as
obsessional. But both twins are hyper
kinetic, have a manneristic cough and a
slight blinking tic, and are liable to fear the
worst if accidentally separated from one
another. These twins have many good
qualities and there appeared to be nothing
very much wrong in the environment ; so
the outlook is probably good. However it is
interesting that the father has obsessional
traits of a different kind, and it might be
considered that the twins had inherited much
of their psychiatric constitution from him.
Another U case where one can perhaps see
the possible genetical transmission of personality traits is that of Nigel and Ronald,
although here circumstances have been
against the boys. Owing to the ill-health of
the mother and to the father being in the
Forces, the twins had to leave their home for
an institution on six separate occasions
between the ages of 18 months and six and a
half years. During this time they were for
two years in a residential nursery. There is
probably a good deal of neurotic pressure
on the boys at home. No serious difficulties
are reported from their earlier years. They

are said to have been very adaptable and,

being twins, to have come in for a lot of
special attention. Their outstanding personality characteristics are their extreme liveliness and their engaging inquisitiveness, but
they have always presented a disciplinary
problem. They have been excluded from a
scout troop, referred to a child guidance
clinic on account of stealing and until
recently have been described at school as
“lacking in social consciousness.’’ One of
them has in addition had moody spells and
the other hypnagogic hallucinations. An
interesting point is that the mother is a
cyclothymic personality who describes herself as “
down in the dumps,” and who has suffered
from a depressive illness. It seems possible
that the twins have inherited her psychiatric
constitution. The twins have a brother who
is only 15 months older. He went through
much the same experiences’ at much the
same age ; but he has turned out a different
sort of boy, quiet, determined, serious, more

always either up in the heights or
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

like father. It is noteworthy that during his
formative years he was separated from father,
as often were the twins from mother, so that

these personality differences are unlikely to.

have arisen through psychological identification with different parents.

U twins can show similar symptoms in’
different contexts or at different times. Thus
there is a pair of girls where one was described as obstinate, lazy and .disobliging at
school ; and these are practically the same
complaints that the mother makes, particularly of the other twin’s attitude at home.
These girls’ behaviour can probably be.
explained by their upbringing and by the.
relationship between them : they hate being
twins. Again, there is a pair of girls where
one has a fear of pulling the lavatory chain,
the other a fear of being locked in. :

- Another example is that of Brian and Bob. .
These are good-looking, friendly lads who
excel at boxing and dancing. The main.
personality difference between them is that.
Bob loves manual work, while Brian hates
getting his hands dirty. Both have an
ambition to succeed in engineering; but.
whereas Bob is trying his hardest to get
experience in an engineering workshop, :
Brian is concentrating on his mathematics,.
and by dint of hard work he has improved
himself considerably in this subject. Both
these boys are overdependent on the good.
opinion of men. Bob is leaving school at the’
earliest opportunity because the headmaster

_to whom he was closely attached is retiring.

Brian has a special respect for the maths.
teacher, of whom he used to be afraid.

Further, both boys are lable to spells of.
insecurity and lack of confidence. Brian
went through a bad patch of this at eleven
when changing schools. He was then taken.
to the doctor because he cried so easily and
had begun to stammer and to bite his nails"
badly. At 14 Bob is going through a similar
phase. He is losing confidence in his boxing
ability, and he too complains of biting his.
nails badly. Both bays were enuretic and
were taken to a clinic for this when they
were nine. Brian was more severe in this
respect. At present it is Brian who appears

- to be the slightly better adjusted.
PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS—

In contrast to these similarities in U twins,
the B pairs include some where both twins
are neurotic or difficult, but who show quite
different symptoms in response to similar
stresses or as the expression of very different
personality traits.

Among these there is a pair where the one
twin, Denis, at 14, is still enuretic and sucks
his thumb. In personality he is quiet, selfcontained and conforming. He has recently
had an experience of religious conversion.
His twin brother, Drummond, is quick and

restless, makes fun of Denis’s religious inter- .

ests and has always been difficult to manage
at home on account of his tempers. At nine
he stole a large sum of money which his
mother had saved up for a holiday, and at
present he is suspected of taking an elder
brother’s cigarettes and ‘distributing them
among his friends to gain popularity. He
likes to amuse himself at the pin-tables and
is said to have a ‘‘ mania for gambling.”
The family situation here is a difficult one,
but the twins have reacted to it in different
ways. | |

Then there is a pair of B girls, Jean and
Betty, where one of them, Jean, is fidgety,
always on the go and a nail-biter. She
enjoys cycling round the streets. She makes
friends quickly, but often changes them.
She is a quick, impulsive worker and overestimates her abilities. Between eight and
nine she was a frequent sleep-walker. She
has very much a mind of her own and needs
careful handling on this account. Jean has
always been different from her twin. As a
baby Jean would smile at everyone, Betty
at noone. Betty kept a dummy till four,
used to lisp, blushes easily and is very shy.
She has difficulty in making friends, particularly with boys, and has one special girl
friend only, with whom she spends nearly all
her time indoors. Compared with Jean she
is an awkward, untidy girl. She cannot ride
a bicycle. She works slowly and painstakingly and underestimates her performance.
Here again personality differences, of a kind
I have never come across in U twins, lead ina
B pair to quite different kinds of problems.

Thus, in this qualitative analysis of
symptoms the difference between the two

233

kinds of twins was much greater than that
found in the quantitative analysis of severity
of disturbance. However, so-called ‘‘ identical ’’ twins are by no means replicas of one
another psychologically. More impressive
than their degree of resemblance are the very
much greater differences in kind which are
fairly frequently found between members of
B pairs ; and it is this difference in behaviour
between the two sorts of twins which is the
most impressive evidence for the importance
of genetical factors.

 

F1GURE I
PsYCHOLOGICAL RESEMBLANCE BETWEEN TwINns
QUANTITATIVE QUALITATIVE.
CONCORDANCE CONCORDANCE, —
UB U B

PAIRS

aretet trace!
PSS
OSI
RRR RG

PERCENTAGE

 

BOTH TWINS

 

eK

z COMPLETELY |

6 3 NORMAL CON CORDANT

9 ESSENTIALLY

Zz By BOTH TWINS CONCORDANT

$ PLE ROT Fe PARTIALLY
CONCORDANT

DISCORDANT

CJ FOR NEUROSIS

DISCORDANT C |

‘(Data from Tables 15 and 17.) The columns on the

left show that identical (U) twins are only a little
more alike than fraternal (B) twins as regards the
presence or absence of neurosis or behaviour disorder :
environmental factors are very important here. The
columns on the right show that identical twins are
very much more alike than fraternals in type of
neurotic symptom and personality: here constitutional factors are of great importance.

The Effects of Close Attachment Between
Twins
It might be thought that theclose similarity
between uniovular twins in personality and
234

symptoms could be due to the close relationship that often exists between them. In the
pair with nervous mannerisms described
above, one twin was seen unwittingly to copy
the other in clearing his throat. But this
does not explain everything ; for, as already
shown, very similar symptoms can present
themselves in the two twins at different
times or in different contexts. Further,
there are some B pairs who are very close
friends and quite alike physically, but who
show different symptoms ; and there are U
pairs who quarrel frequently or who go about
separately, but nevertheless have strikingly
similar personalities or neurotic traits. The
following two examples illustrate the point.

‘Tom and Jack are a B pair who have a
-very strong mutual attachment, who go
about everywhere together and who share
hobbies of bird-watching and _ puppetmaking. Yet Jack is a tough, somewhat
restless and noisy boy who is apt to throw a
temper if he can’t get his way, while Tom is
quiet and more girlish. He has missed schooling because of headaches, is a fussy eater, is
liable to nervous fears, thinking, for example,
that he had appendicitis after his mother had
it; and until eleven he was occasionally
enuretic.

Fred and Jim are a U pair. These boys are
in different classes at the same school but
their teacher has never seen them together
out of class. In spite of having no very close
relationship they are alike in their resentful,
disgruntled attitude to life, their lack of
sociability and their mannerisms. Fred’s
aggressiveness has become more marked
recently (Severity Group 1). Jim is a little
quieter. With him, a mannerism which they
both share of speaking out of the side of the
mouth and hardly opening it has become
more pronounced. He is placed in Severity
Group 2 because of his abnormal personality.
As the differences between them are small
and ones of degree only I have classed them
as completely concordant in quality.

We may throw a little more light on the
argument, frequently put forward by those
who deny the importance of heredity in
psychology, to the effect that any greater
similarity in U twins compared with B twins

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

is due to the fact that the former are more
closely attached and identified with one
another than the latter, by giving quantitative expression to the degree of attachment
and relating this to the degree of similarity
in symptomatology. I have attempted to do
this by allotting each pair of twins to one
of three groups : (1) Very closely attached to
one another ; (2) only moderately attached ;
(3) very independent or antagonistic. This
classification is somewhat rough and ready
and does not do full justice to the many
different facets of the twin relationship—
dependence and independence, competition
and collaboration, jealousy, companionship
and so on—to differences between the twins
in the degree of mutual attachment, or to
the changes which occur in the relationship
leading in most cases to a gradual lessening
of the tie. But if there is any tendency for
the “‘ inseparable ’”’ kind of twins to be more
alike than the others it should show up in
the analysis.
TABLE 18

DEGREE OF ATTACHMENT BETWEEN TWINS:
PERCENTAGES, BY SEX AND OVULARITY

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Uniovular pairs|Binovular pairs Total
Attachment Male Female | Male Female ; ;
(13) | (23) (14) (12) Uni | Bin
ene: ore | ee |
Very close ... 54 44 21 8 47 | 15
Moderate 38 35 50 50 36 | 50
Very independent or
antagonistic . 22 29 42 | 17 : 35
Total ... | 100 IOI | x00 100 100 100

 

 

Table.18 shows that U twins of both sexes
are much more often closely attached to one
another than are B twins. This is what other
observers, among them von Bracken (1934)
and Lehtovaara (1938), have found. The
table also shows that. in this sample girl
twins, whether U or B, were rather more
likely to be antagonistic to one another than
boys. This finding is contrary to that of
Lehtovaara who found the attachment
quotient for girls to be higher than that of
boy twins, and it is perhaps a little surprising.
However, if we examine the “‘ very closely
attached ’’ U pairs more carefully we find
that the extremely close relationships with
strong mutual dependency are rather more
frequent among girls than boys. The latter
are possibly better able to retain a strong
PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

sympathy for one another and still become
independent of one another ; the girls are
more often described as frequently arguing
and quarrelling. Perhaps we may say tentatively that U girls are at this age more likely
than U boys to show extreme types of relationship.

Now, if the closeness of the relationship is
related dynamically to concordance in symptoms, independently of ovularity, then the
tendency should show itself in the U and B
twins separately. Table 19, where the
material is broken down in this way, shows
that this is not generally the case. If it were

TABLE 19

RELATION BETWEEN CLOSENESS OF ATTACHMENT AND QUALITATIVE
CONCORDANCE FOR U anp B Patrs SEPARATELY

Qualitative Concordance

Uniovular Pairs

cep pi|Tlc ¢ PD

Degree of Attachment

 

Binovular Pairs
\

 

 

Observed | 9 4 #1 3417/0 0 2 2
-Very close
' attachment
? Expected ; 6:1 5:7 2:4 2:8] 17] o
Observed | 3 4 3 34/13/00 rr 3 94143
Moderate
attachment
Expected | 4-7 4°3 1:8 2:2] 13
Observed | 1 4 #1 =O 6
Very independent
or antagonistic
Expected | 2:2 2-0 0-8 1-o/] 6

Total

 

 

'13 12 5 #426 ! 36

we should, for example, have expected the
six discordant U cases to appear mostly in
the least closely attached column and some
at least of the very closely attached B pairs

to appear as essentially concordant. In

general, allowing for the smallness of numbers, it may be said that the figures running
across the tables for the different degrees
of attachment are in approximately the same
ratio to one another as the figures in the
totals for C, C’, P and D. This can be seen
by comparing the observed figures with
those expected on this assumption. The
only possible exception is that there may be
a tendency for U twins who are not very
closely attached to show that striking similarity in symptoms, which was sometimes seen,
less frequently than those who are bosom

companions. But beyond this we cannot say, ©

according to this analysis, that similarity in
psychiatric state is a function of the attach
235

ment between the twins: it seems to be
related rather to the degree of genetical
resemblance and to the common social
environment..The close attachment between
twins is quite as likely to be brought about
by their sharing the same tastes, interests
and habits as the other way round.

Burlingham (1952) has suggested that in
early childhood uniovular twins who feel
themselves rejected by their parents—in
particular those brought up in an institutional environment—are thereby driven
closer together psychologically. This may
be so in individual cases, but it is not borne
out in general so far as our information goes.
The U pairs who were brought up in residential nurseries during wartime did not grow
more attached to one another than those
who appear to have enjoyed a happy, stable
home life. |

The close relationship often reported
between twins, in fact as well as in fiction,
is part of a growing relationship which like
other human relationships has its ups and
downs, its positive and negative elements.
In general twins become more independent
of one another as they grow up. It is possible
that the way in which this weaning process
from the twin is carried out may have a
bearing on later psychiatric adjustment, but
this is not a hypothesis which can be tested
on the present material. There are, of course,
stories of twins pining for one another when
separated at school or through illness. In
other cases a parent insists that the twins
shall go about together when they no longer
wish to do so. With some pairs one could
see the twins themselves making attempts,
unsuccessfully at first, to do things independently.

Many uniovular pairs claimed they decided things mutually. In one pair this
mutual decision was a long-drawn-out affair,
both girls being slow and indecisive thinkers
like their mother. Asked at lunch in the
hospital whether they wanted soup, they
conferred together, partly in whispers, partly
in gestures, and at length they made up their
minds—of course they had to have the same ;
and it was the same again when it came to
deciding which meat course they would have.
2360

In the matter of clothes, nearly all U twin

girls were dressed alike and many of the
U twin boys wore the same coloured shirts
and ties. This was less often so with the
B twins, though they were sometimes encouraged to dress alike on the day they came to
the hospital. So far as the U’s are concerned,
it was generally the case, at least originally,
that the twins had wanted to be dressed
alike. They insisted on having everything
the same. One pair even thought it would
look silly if they were dressed differently—
‘everyone would stare at them! But by
adolescence some had begun to want different
kinds of clothes, and there were a few who
had a struggle to get their own way over this.

Leadership in the Twin Situation

Of. perhaps greater psychiatric relevance
than the effects of attachment between
twins is the polarity which is liable to occur
within a pair where, for example, one
becomes the leader, the other the follower.
‘This can be related to psychiatric differences.
In Slater’s series of psychotic and neurotic
twins it was noted that in the schizophrenic
group the less dominant of the pair tended
to be the more handicapped, m that it was
he who fell ill or, if both twins were schizophrenic, was likely to be the more severely
affected. In the psychopathic and neurotic
group it was the dominant twin who, being
more aggressive and extraverted, was the
more likely to suffer from some of these
disorders, |

In the present material, one twin might
speak up for his partner as well as for himself. Sometimes one might look at her sister
for support before answering. In one pair
of 14-year-old U girls a marked order of
precedence was noticeable. When collected
from school to come to the hospital Susan
was the first to board the bus and she chose
a seat near the window ; Shirley sat next to
her. When changing buses Shirley stood by
to let Susan out first, and the same procedure
repeated itself on the next bus, and again
when entering the hospital. It is reported

that Shirley has less initiative and is rather

afraid of doing things on her own. She is
more self-conscious. Recently, unlike Susan,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

she did not want to go to stay with an aunt

for a holiday. However, Susan had not been
away many days when Shirley decided she

missed her so-much that she must go and

join her. She is more attached to Susan than

Susan is to her, and is very upset if Susan

goes off to school without her. She feels a

compulsion to be with her twin which she

cannot resist even when she wants to. Never-.
theless this polarity does not extend to every

field in the ’same way. It was the submissive

Shirley who was the more communicative
when the twins were seen on their own.

Both Gedda and von Bracken have referred
to two different functions which. are not .
always carried out by the same twin, that
of responsibility for dealing with the outside
world, or foreign minister, so to speak, and
that of guide within the twin pair, making
decisions or perhaps acting as the conscience

of the pair. In one of our pairs the twins did .

perhaps divide roles rather in this way. One.
would speak up more in company, while the
other was more concerned that they should
be well turned out, and would smarten up :
her sister if she thought it necessary. However they said they decided things mutually. .

Sometimes one twin will make use of the
other. With Nigel and Ronald, Nigel says_
he will think of things first, but Ronald is
the more likely to do them, though he may
do so under the former’s supervision. For

example, Nigel decided they should go to the
woods. He is not very good at climbing
‘trees and, seeing a rook’s nest, he asked

Ronald to climb up for him and bring it
down—which he did. On their way home
from the hospital it was Nigel who organised ©
where they should sit on the bus, putting |
Ronald on the seat behind, while he sat with
the psychologist. Nigel is taller by ? in. and .
is proud of this. He does not like being |
mistaken for Ronald, but Ronald does not
object to being taken for his bigger twin.
brother. Generally speaking, twins do not.
mind being mistaken for one another so.
much as being called indiscriminately “‘ twinnies.”” The wrong name is better than none
at all. The natural desire to be someone in one’s own right probably encourages the.
development of differences between twins. _
PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

With the U twins, minor personality
differences, such as those in degree of energy
or initiative, were sometimes matched by
corresponding differences in symptom. Thus
with Gillian ahd Jennifer, a U pair of nearly
15, it is Jennifer who is the bigger, the more
robust and, until recently when they began
to go their own ways, the leader of the two.
The home is a restrictive one and not very
happy. Both twins are liable under minor
stress to show emotional reactions of an
hysterical kind. With Jennifer these take a
more aggressive and openly resentful form,
while Gillian is more likely to have outbursts
of crying or a tremor of the hands.

The examples given so far of the division
of roles in the twin situation are the more
extreme ones. Here is a more typical case
and an example of a well-adjusted pair for a
change. Donald and Duncan, a stable, highly
intelligent U pair, have always got on
excellently together. They decide things
mutually “as if by telepathy.’ Donald is
thought to be the leader as he is the more
active. In early years he used to take the
initiative while Duncan would be content
to take advantage of Donal]d’s energy. A
photograph of the twins aged about two,
showing Duncan sitting on, and Donald
pushing, a toy horse bears this out. A year
or two later Donald was nicknamed “‘ Do-itmyself ’’ and Duncan ‘“ Why-is-it?’”’ Duncan continued to carry his teddy-bear
around with him longer than Donald. The
psycho-analysts tell us that the fantasy of
having a twin is a fairly common one,
Perhaps Duncan had the fantasy of having
a triplet ! The twins have a strong sympathy
for one another. If one is in danger the other
““ seems to know instinctively and helps him
out.’ There is also a great deal of competition
between them : “‘ they vie with one another.”
Duncan won’t be outdone. Aged ten, Donald
did a daring climb over the roof, and Duncan
had to do the same. However they do not
rely on one another at school and for some
years they have made separate friends. They
are regarded by themselves and others as
alike in most respects, but the small differences between them may date back to
Donald’s greater initiative in early years.

237
Donald’s drawings are in a rougher, bolder
style, while Duncan pays great attention to
detail. In character Donald is described as
the more rugged, Duncan as the more
gentlemanly.. . The parents think that
Donald will be a good leader, Duncan an
administrator.

This division of roles is not always permanent and does not always occur. Some twins
switch roles fairly frequently ; with others
one will take the lead up to a certain age,
when there may occur a fairly permanent
change-over. The reasons for this, as also
for the original division of role, are not always
clear. With some pairs the leader was the
heavier at birth and has always been a little
taller, but a difference in physical development is not always related in this way to a
difference in degree of initiative. This is
discussed further below.

B twins are, as already reported, not so
closely attached to one another. They more
often have different interests and develop
independently. Being a twin is likely to have
a different meaning for them, and spontaneous division or sharing of tasks does not
occur in quite the same ways as with the U
pairs. The B twin relationship is more like
that of ordinary brothers and sisters and
shows about as much variation. Sometimes
one of the twins is more mature both physically and mentally and treats the partner as a
younger brother or sister, humouring him or
bullying him or protecting him, as the case
may be. Minor jealousies between B girls
were relatively common. They were the
group that least liked being compared with
one another. There is an instance of considerable unhappiness in one of them who, after
finally succeeding in obtaining admission to
grammar school with her twin, found herself
unfavourably compared.with her in appear
ance and in scholastic ability.

Other Similarities and Differences § in
Personality
A twin pair has been likened to a society in
miniature. From the above description of
some of the different relationships which can
develop in this twin society, we can now go

on to consider personality differences between
238

them of a kind which it would be more
difficult to regard as being solely the result
of their social interaction.

It seems that members of a U pair can
differ from one another by chance in almost
any way. These differences are generally
small and ones of degree only. They seldom
differ in many ways at once and in their
outstanding characteristics, whatever these
may be, they are likely to be very similar,
at least up to the age of early adolescence.
It is possible, however, that these minor
differences may sometimes become of crucial
importance to their adjustment as_ the
circumstances of their lives change. Differences may relate, for example, to such
spheres as anxiety, irritability or sensitivity.

Once or twice the parents suggested in
their histories that one of a pair of identical
boys was more girlish than his twin brother,
or that one of a girl pair was more of a tomboy. This was the case with Derek and
Patrick, referred to earlier, where Derek was
enuretic and somewhat unstable. Patrick is
described as being fonder of girls’ company.
He grows his nails excessively long, is fond
of cooking and likes making clothes for his
sister’s dolls—‘‘ He should have been a girl,”
his mother says. He is also the more interested of the two in religion. But with U
twins differences such as these are generally
submerged by much greater similarities, and
this was the case with these two, both being
young for their years, talkative, irresponsible,
messy and surprisingly interested in medical
details.

It would be risky to single out any features
of. the personality as being more genetically
determined than others, for it seems likely
that all traits are modifiable by the environment and twins share very similar environments. Nevertheless, it might be worth
mentioning tentatively that the characteris
tics in which normal U twins resemble one’

another most seem to be maturity, emotional
responsiveness and motility.

B twins of course often show family resemblances in these and other traits ; but it is
not unusual to find one of the pair near one
extreme of temperament, the other nearer
the opposite one. Thus one might be slow,

- watching the television ”’

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the other quick, one excitable, the other
placid, one soft-hearted, the other hardhearted, one extraverted, the other an
introvert ; or one a greedy eater, the other
fussy, one a heavy sleeper, thé other a restless one, and so forth. Moreover they are
liable to show differences in physique, in
intellect and in maturity. In one 14-year-old
pair, the boys might have been taken for
16 and 12. Hence it is not surprising that
binovulars often make a very different total
impression on their surroundings. For example, there was one pair of twins who
‘were nicknamed “‘ The Terror ’’ and “ The
Professor.’’ Needless to say, they were
binovulars.

One further example may be given, that —
of Geoffrey and George. When they first
went to school, some teachers could not telt
‘““ who’s who,” but they have grown less alike
and are clearly binovular (blood groups
different). They have always been different
in temperament. George: is described .as
slow, easy-going, ‘‘comfortable,’’ cannot be
rushed, loves his bed, rather self-conscious.
Geoff is restless, energetic, ‘‘a tease’, “‘ cannot sit still for a moment except when he is
; he is rather vain
and he takes a greater interest in money than .
George. The twins have different eating and
sleeping habits. Geoff is a good deal more
intelligent and attends a different school.
The boys can co-operate with one another and get on quite well. In physical tussles |
George wins (he is a little bigger) ; Geoff gets
his own back by teasing. Both are very.
healthy. There is no obvious parental discrimination between them of an unfair kind.

The Genetical Explanation for these Differ
ences the Most Likely One

The most likely explanation for this
marked difference between the two kinds of
twins is a genetical one. In a number of |
cases differences in the behaviour of B twins
were noted very early on, one twin being,
for example, a more demanding baby, the
other placid and conforming. Even where °
differences become apparent only in the middle years of childhood, this does not
necessarily mean that environmental factors
PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

are responsible. The genes are likely to
influence mental and emotional maturation
just as they do physical development, and
indeed they continue to play an important
part throughout the whole of life. In some
cases initial genetical differences between B
twins are made larger by the environment—
and one must always think of the interaction
of heredity and environment ; but in other
cases the effect of the cultural and educational environment may well be to make
twins grow more alike than they would if
they were able to give free rein to their own
inclinations and impulses. In any case it
would be far-fetched to try to explain the
frequent qualitative personality differences
between B twins and the marked similarities
between U’s by factors in the family environment alone.

Let us for a moment (at the risk of some
repetition) see what the psychodynamic
theory in its extreme form would entail,
denying as it does any importance to genetical factors in causing differences in personality and attributing these mostly to the
subtleties of the mother-child relationship in
the earliest years of life. This theory would
imply the existence of large and systematic
differences in the behaviour of the mothers of
U twins on the one hand and those of samesexed B twins on the other—most U pairs
would have to be treated very much the
same, and most B pairs treated very differently from one another by their mothers.
Now twins’ mothers are generally unsophisticated about there being two genetically
distinct sorts of same-sexed twins, so any
difference in the mothers’ behaviour would
have to be based on differences in physical
resemblance between the two sorts of twins
in their earliest years. In fact, these physical
differences are not so marked then as they
are later on. Many B twins are very much
alike in early childhood and some U twins
are actually less alike as babies than later.
As reported, they differ quite as much in
birth weight as do B twins and sometimes
one has had an advantage over the other in
intrauterine life, making for a difference in
strength between them at birth.

The extreme environmentalist theory

239

would further imply that those B twins who
are physically the most alike in infancy and
early childhood would be the ones who are
most alike psychologically in later life; but
this is not the case.

Now it seems that the way a mother
handles her children is determined very
largely by the sort of person she is, by her
experiences in life and by the marital and
social situation with which she is faced. She
will probably have a fairly consistent attitude towards children in general. The
importance of factors such as these, which
are the same for both members of a twin pair,
whether U or B, make it unlikely that the
mother will adopt radically different attitudes towards the members of a B pair and
to them only. We have seen how marked
parental favouritism can occur, but found it
to be the exception and to be no more frequent in B thanin U pairs. Inso far as social
pressures influence the mother’s behaviour,
these are not likely to encourage her to treat
binovulars very differently from one another.
And concerning identical pairs, Dorothy
Burlingham (1952) has suggested that the
mother makes a special effort to regard them
as different so that she may be able to love
them as two separate individuals. (As
already mentioned, I noticed what was
perhaps a similar tendency for some of my
informants to overstress the differences
between U twins.) Maternal attitudes alone
do not therefore offer a sufficient explanation
of twin differences.

Nor can these be explained simply by a
tendency for U twins to identify with one
another. A tendency to “ polarization ”’ is
likely to be just as important, as we have
seen. And if U twins identify with one
another, why not B twins too?

Thus the extreme psychodynamic theory
sounds implausible and does not seem to be
borne out by such facts as are available.
Children make demands as well as parents,
and here inborn constitutional differences
between them must be taken into account.

In so far as binovular twins are treated
differently. from one another and more
differently than uniovular twins, this is likely
to be due, not so much to causes outside
240

the twins as to innate differences in the
needs of the binovular twins themselves,
manifested by different patterns of behaviour.
It is difficult to see how such small and often
unimportant differences in their environments that B twins obtain for themselves in
childhood can be reckoned as an external
environmental factor sufficient to explain
the greater part of the considerable differ
ences in psychological resemblance between

U and B twins.

Relation of Symptom to Personality

From this discussion of personality similarities and differences between twins we can
return to the question of neurotic symptoms.
There appears to be a very close relationship
between personality characteristics and type
of problem. This was illustrated above in
the cases of the discordant B twins Denis
and Drummond, Jean and Betty.

Many of the behaviour problems of childhood are simply the results of personalities
in action. The restless, impulsive person is
liable to have different troubles from the
shy, anxious one. Further, it is often a
somewhat arbitrary matter, or one determined entirely by social circumstances,
whether or not we regard people of the more
extreme temperaments as showing a neurotic
or behaviour disorder.

While this relation of symptom to personality is true in the main for reactions of an
anxious, dependent or aggressive kind, it is
not so applicable to the more specific kind
of symptom such as stealing, enuresis, sleep
disturbances, food fads or tics. Obviously
parental handling and other cultural influences must be taken into account too, along
with chance factors which influence individual psychopathology. However, tics
(which are generally discordant even in U
pairs) seem to be related to an over-conscientious type of personality ; and food fads
perhaps to an anxious restlessness.

In so far as genetical factors play a part
in determining the type of reaction they
probably do so through their influence on the
physical basis of personality. In the case of
enuresis it is possible that the influence of
the genes is more direct. "While most of the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

enuretics in our series had other nervous
symptoms, either mild or fairly severe, these
were as likely to be of one kind as another.
Their social and family circumstances,
though inclined to be unfavourable, were
also of very different kinds. A family history
of enuresis was not enquired about systematically ; nevertheless the mother of one
enuretic volunteered the information that
she had suffered acutely from the same complaint until adolescence, and the father of»
another is occasionally enuretic in adult life.
In 1933 Hubert noted the frequent occurrence
of enuresis in the family history of enuretics.
Petrovsky (1934) and Frary (1935) go so far
as to claim recessive inheritance for the
condition. It is therefore possible that
further investigation might confirm heredity
to be one of the factors entering into the
complex etiology of this psychosomatic
symptom. Heredity is certainly not a sufficient cause by itself. Two out of six U pairs
were discordant for enuresis. But of the ten
B pairs where one member had the complaint
rather surprisingly all ten twin partners
were free of it. (Twelve of the 20 enuretic
individuals were boys. Only four out of the
20 could be regarded as comparatively mild
cases.)

Juvenile delinquency (when not merely a
symptom of gross personality disorder) is
probably less influenced by the innate personality than any of the other conditions
examined here, except negatively in so far as
certain character traits such as extreme’
timidity might militate against it. In the
few instances we have of stealing, of being
out of control and of actual trouble with the
law or imminent danger of this, both the
twins were rather similarly affected, whether
they were U or B pairs. We have four U
and two B. There is also a probably binovular pair who, because they are too young,
fall just outside our series, where both twins
are on probation. Five of these seven pairs
are male. In the six pairs investigated,
parent-child relationships were clearly disturbed in three cases ; in two others there
was a very unsettling evacuation history and
in one of these criminal influences in the
environment besides ; while in the remaining
PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

pair, who were members of a very large
family, there was probably considerable lack
of parental supervision. |

Concordance and Discordance in Symptoms

A detailed examination of concordance or
discordance of individual neurotic symptoms
and behaviour disorders in the two kinds of
twins was attempted but found to be unprofitable, especially so far as the minor

symptoms were concerned. The number of 
cases falling into the four groups (U and B,
each divided into concordant and discordant), especially concordant binovulars, are
very small for most symptoms. Information
is not always reliable. It is also difficult to
decide what to call neurotic, and how to
classify symptoms. For most symptoms
uniovulars were perhaps rather more often
concordant than discordant. Buinovulars
were only rarely concordant and frequently
discordant.

Ignoring the minor neurotic traits, the
following are the-more severe symptoms or
syndromes for which uniovulars were concordant: Enuresis (four), habit spasm or
mannerisms (four); delinquency (three) ;
adolescent rebelliousness (three) ; marked
resentment (two) ; marked shyness or unsociability (two) ; emotional reactions (two) ; and
one each of the following : Epilepsy, reading
disability, night terrors, sleep-walking, phobias. Less sévere reactions which were concordant in U pairs were : Over-activity, restlessness, inability to concentrate (four) ;
quiet, subdued, shy (three) ; anxious, insecure (three).

B pairs were only rarely concordant. One
pair were both borderline defectives, one pair
both had a reading disability, two pairs both
showed rather similar emotional reactions
(frequent crying and over-dependency) and
in two male pairs the boys were either
delinquent or out of control.

The principal U discordances in psychiatric
states have all been mentioned. They also
differed in a number of other minor or
incidental symptoms: An over-breathing fit
when in a temper, nail biting “or picking
(three cases), nightmares, travel sickness,
blinking habit (two cases), lisping, stammer
241

ing (two cases, both mild and occurring in
the left-handed twin only), anxiety reaction
due to hospitalization (two cases).

The binovulars differed in all these
respects ; also in obsessional traits, food fads,
over-activity, headaches and in other ways
too many to mention. |

Statistical Analysis of the Case Histories

An attempt has been made to interrelate
some variables of a physical, psychological
or environmental kind. Wherever possible
the following points were noted : Which twin
was the first-born, had the more difficult
birth, had a lower birth weight, was behind
the other twin in early physical development; is the shorter now, the lighter in
weight, of the more asthenic build ; is less
developed sexually ; has had more illness ;
is the less aggressive, is habitually submissive
to his twin ; is less well-adjusted psychiatrically ; is left-handed (his twin being righthanded). Information was not always available for all these items. They were then
paired with one another. The following
pairings appeared to be of greatest interest.

Intelligence and Severity. There was a
close relationship between intelligence, as
assessed mainly on performance at school,
and mental health. The twin who was rated
as the more severely disturbed psychiatrically was less intelligent than his twin partner
in 47 out of 62 pairs. This ratio of 47 to 15
is significantly different statistically from
that of 31 to 31 which would be expected if:
there were no relationship between the
variables. x? (Yates) with 1 D.F.=15;5,
p<o-oo1. The same tendency showed itself
equally clearly in the U and the B pairs.
Taking only those pairs where the difference
between the twins both in intelligence and
in severity was a fairly marked one, 15 out.
of 17 pairs showed the tendency.

This finding can in a few cases be explained
by the method of assessing one twin as the
more severe of the pair, whereby, if the
difference between the twins in neurotic
traits was negligible and the difference in
scholastic ability clear and consistent, the
less intelligent twin was classed as the less
well-adjusted. This was much more likely
242

to occur with U pairs than with B’s. Here
the twins have the same innate intellectual
ability, and it can justifiably be argued that
the twin who is making less good use of his
intelligence is the less well-adjusted. In a
few cases it seemed that the slightly better
performance of one twin at school had led
to the other showing symptoms of anxiety
or resentment, or to his giving up trying to
compete with his twin. In nearly all cases,
however, intelligence was not taken into
account in assessing severity.

From this, two suggestions arise, which
may both be true: (1) That those who are
less able to cope with intellectual problems
are for the same basic reason less able to
cope with emotional ones, and (2) that
emotional maladjustment lowers the level
of intellectual efficiency. Slater (1953) found
that the less intelligent of a pair of B twins
was the more likely to suffer from a neurotic
or psychopathic state. That in the present
series the tendency was as marked in U pairs
as in B pairs may perhaps be explained,
either by the greater number of pairs
observed, or by the fact that we are here
dealing with children and that in one’s
schooldays small differences in intelligence
are likely to appear of greater importance
than they do later on. Eysenck (1952) reports
that, of tests which discriminate between
neurotic and normal soldiers, those of intelligence are among the most successful, neurotics on average having a lower score than
“normals.

Clinically it is interesting to note the kind
of case which did not show the above tendency. The U cases where the more intelligent
twin was also the more neurotic were nearly
all ones where the slightly more intelligent
was rather more conscientious and anxious
to please his elders. He did a little better at
school and was liable to show more minor
anxieties. There were three B and one U
pairs where the more intelligent member
suffered from emotional difficulties associated
with adolescence ; the weaker and less intelligent twin had in these cases been the more
protected at home.

Birth Difficulty. This is a factor which
has been-greatly stressed by Rosanoff in his

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

studies of twins (see above). In ten of our
pairs one only of the twins is reported as
having had a difficult birth. In eight out of
ten this was the twin who is now lighter in
weight and in seven out of ten the twin who
is the less intelligent. Of seven of these pairs
where it could be said that one of the twins
was habitually submissive to the other, this
was the twin who had the birth difficulty in
six cases. Similarly in six out of seven cases
the twin with the more asthenic build
had the difficult birth. For the other items
investigated the differences were less marked,
but generally favoured the twin who did not
have the birth difficulty. The figures are not
startling. They do little more than suggest
that a difficult birth can be a handicap.

Birth Weight. It may be that the U twin
with the heavier birth weight has before
birth gained an advantage at the expense of
his twin, due to the tendency for their
placental circulations to anastomose, as
described by Price (1950). In 28 cases the
lighter U twin at birth is also the lighter now,
and the same tendency was shown to a lesser
extent by the B twins. There was also a.
tendency for the U twin with lower birth
weight to be submissive to his partner ; this
is discussed below. But there was no significant tendency for. the twin with the lower
birth weight to have more physical illness
later, to be the less intelligent or more disturbed psychologically, or to be the less
aggressive personality.

Poor Health and Lack of Aggressiveness.
Some Swedish psychiatrists stress the effect
which a debilitating illness can have on the
constitution. According to them, a severe
attack of one of the common infectious illnesses of childhood can lead to a lasting
diminution of energy and an_ increased
liability to symptoms of a psychasthenic
kind. This state they designate as hypophrenia. To test whether such a concept has
much general relevance or not, we have
wherever possible noted which member of.
our twin pairs has had more illness and seen
whether or, not this is the one who also has
the less aggressive personality. Out of 42
pairs where a reasonably reliable rating on
both these points was possible, the twin with
PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

the poorer health was the less aggressive in
23 cases, the more aggressive in 19. There
was no difference between the U and B
pairs in this respect. This lends little support
to the hypothesis of hypophrenia. If we take
only those pairs where the difference on both
variables is marked the number is very small.
However, in six cases the twin with more
illness was the less aggressive, in two cases
the more aggressive. Four of these eight
pairs were uniovular. In one pair, one of the
boys had meningitis at two and a half; one
of a pair of girls had a wasting disease
followed by bronchial trouble in infancy ;
and in another female pair, one member had
severe gastro-enteritis, chicken-pox and
pneumonia all before the age of one year.
In each of these three cases, the twin who
was ill is the one who has less energy. In
the fourth U case, one twin, Peter (see
above), had troubles of an organic kind,
including a fit, and he is more irritable than
his twin. This is what might be expected in
the light of the association between epilepsy
and irritability.

Sex Development. Secondary sexual development showed no obvious relationships of
interest with the other items investigated,
except perhaps with intelligence. The more
sexually developed twin was also the more
intelligent of the pair in 21 out of the 31
cases (mostly girls) for which information
was available.

Handedness. The number of pairs where
one twin was left-handed and the other righthanded was rather small (19, including two
doubtful cases). The left-handed twin was
shorter in 13 out of I9 cases, had the lower
-birth weight in eleven out of 18, was less
intelligent in twelve out of I9, was more
severely disturbed in twelve out of 19, was
submissive to his twin partner in ten out of
twelve, and was less aggressive in nine out
of 17. There was no difference between
U and B twins in these respects. It is therefore possible that left-handedness is a slight
handicap.

Leadership. It would be of interest if this
analysis could throw light on the causes of
one of the twins becoming the habitual

243

leader of the pair. In 42 pairs a rating on
dominance-submissiveness was attempted.
In the remaining 20 pairs the twins were
either too independent or else did not
divide roles consistently in this way. We
have already noted that in the cases where
one twin had a greater birth difficulty
than the other this was the twin who was
submissive in six cases and dominant in one.
The other factors which appeared most
closely related to leadership in the twin
relationship were: Lighter birth weight, in
U twins only (submissive 20, dominant seven
— y?2 significant at 0-02 level); behind
twin in early development, U and B combined (submissive twelve, dominant five) ;
less intelligent, U and B combined (submissive 25, dominant 17) ; left-handed (submissive ten, dominant two). Other variables
such as birth order, present size, health and
psychiatric adjustment showed almost no
difference between the submissive and the
dominant members of the pairs. In so far as
this analysis tells us anything it seems to be
that, in cases where a habitual dominance of
one twin occurs, this relationship is established almost as soon as the twins begin to
take notice of one another, and that it is then
likely that the more robust will take the
lead.

If the material had been larger, it is
possible that a statistical analysis on the
above lines would have been more informative. The concept of psychiatric maladjustment is too heterogeneous for it to show any
relationships of general significance. However the analysis might be regarded as
bearing out some of the interpretations we
have placed on individual case-histories.

Comparison of Findings with Psychological

Test Results 
Many practical details of the research were
carried out in collaboration with two colleagues in the Psychology Department, Mr.
Duncan Blewett and Mr. Hugh McLeod, who
were working under the direction of Dr.
H. J. Eysenck. It will be of interest to
compare their findings with those based on
the histories.

Blewett was interested firstly in the
244

measurement and inheritance of intelligence.
From his test scores he isolated a factor of
intelligence, derived principally from Thurstone’s ‘“‘ Primary Mental Abilities’ test,
which gave a correlation of 0.76 between
uniovular twins and 0-44 between binovular
twins, thus indicating that intelligence is to a
considerable extent an inherited ability.
That Blewett’s factor of intelligence agrees
closely with general ability at school is seen
in the fact that the twin with the higher
factor score in intelligence was the one who,
according to the histories, did better at
school in 48 pairs out of 52.

Blewett was also interested in ‘“ neuroticism.”’ He hoped, with a different series of
tests purporting to measure emotional instability, to repeat the experiment of Eysenck
and Prell described above. However,
Blewett’s tests did not all intercorrelate with
one another in the directions expected and
he could not identify any of the factors
obtained in his analysis as being ‘ neuroticism.”’ A factor, defined by tests such as
body-sway, self-rating in neuroticism and
certain scores on the Rorschach test, did not
give evidence of hereditary determination*
and showed only a random relationship to
our own rating of severity of maladjustment.
The twin with the higher factor score was
rated as the more maladjusted of the pair in
24 cases, the less maladjusted in 28 cases.
Children with a high factor score did not
appear from the histories to be any more
neurotic than children with a low score. Nor
did any of the individual tests in this battery
show any obvious relationship with the
clinical findings.

McLeod was concerned with the measurement and inheritance of an “ extraversionintroversion ’’’ factor, thought of in terms
somewhat akin to those of Jung. He claims
to have identified such a factor, the factor
scores for which were derived from five tests,
including the Rorschach (M%) and tests
of autonomic nervous function and _ sociometry. Intracorrelation for factor score
was 0-77 for uniovular and 0-03 for binovular
twins. McLeod, therefore, concludes that

* Intra-correlation for factor scores: ,~U = + o-19,

rB = —o-r8.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

“extraversion-introversion’”’ is largely inherited. An independent attempt was made
by the writer to relate the twins clinically in
degree of introversion, but no great reliability
or validity is claimed for these ratings. In
33 pairs the twin who was regarded as the
more introverted had the more introverted
factor score ; in 19 pairs the reverse was the
case (Yates’ x? of 3:25 does not reach significance at the 5 per cent level). But of the
I3 pairs who, according to the rating scale,
differed most, the more introverted member
had the more introverted factor score in
eleven cases. Approaching the material
from difference in factor score, it so happens
that the pairs with the greatest difference in
factor score were the binovular twins, Betty
and Jean, and Denis and Drummond, who
have already been given as illustrations of
the extent of temperamental differences
sometimes found between twins, and the
differences were in the expected direction,
Denis and Betty both being near the introverted end of the scale. In five out of six
pairs whose scores differed by 20 points or
more, clinical and psychometric results were
again in the same direction. A correlation
coefficient was calculated between “ introversion ’’ ratings on a four-point scale and factor
scores. The result was r=+0:25.

The above findings suggest that the
psychological tests and the somewhat rough
and ready ratings of “ extraversion-introversion’’ may be attempts at measuring the
same thing, which are most successful at the
extreme ends of the continuum. However
the individual test scores from which the
factor score was derived did not by themselves show any obvious clinical relationship.

To Dr. Eysenck and my colleagues in the
Psychology Department I am most grateful
for their practical co-operation and for their
kindness in allowing me access to their test
results.

Conclusions

This brings to an end the present survey of
personality differences and minor psychiatric
maladjustment in the two sorts of twins.
The sample (to repeat) was a small but
PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

fairly representative one of normal London
secondary-school children.

It is not considered that twins as such are
especially liable to psychiatric disorder.
From the frequency with which nervous
troubles and behaviour disorders were
reported, some of them minor, some of them
pretty troublesome, we are led to the conclusion that in our culture probably all of

us can, and most of us in. fact do, during’

childhood, suffer from some symptoms of
these kinds: they are something in the
nature of emotional growing-pains.

The dependence of their severity, and often
their presence, on the environment was seen
firstly in the fact that twins of identical
genetical make-up did not always both suffer
from the same complaint in the same degree.
The individual case-histories suggested
reasons for this, and illustrations of some of
these have been given.

The effect of environmental influences was
seen perhaps even more clearly in the close
relationship between a family and social
environment assessed as poor from the
psychiatric point of view and the presence
of abnormal traits in the child. Poor
environments of this kind were not uncommon. We should not therefore attribute the
rarer mental abnormalities solely to parental
lack, disharmony in the home or morbid
parental attitudes of the kinds sometimes
encountered in this sample.

That the external environment alone does
not entirely explain the degree of psychiatric
disturbance was seen in the significantly
closer resemblance between U twins than B
twins in this respect. It would seem that for
genetical reasons some people are more
vulnerable than others to the minor stresses
of life. Conversely genetical reasons might in
part explain why some people do not break
down in circumstances of extreme difficulty.

A difference between the two sorts of
twins was seen even more clearly when we
compared their resemblance in kind of
symptom and in outstanding personality
characteristics. Identical twins, though far
from being replicas of one another psychologically, generally showed a very close
similarity in these respects which can be

‘attachment between the twins.

245

attributed ultimately to their genetical
similarity. Fraternal twins, on the other
hand, could show quite different types of
reaction. These differences were often related
to the differences between them in temperamental characteristics. Some illustrations
of the kind of personality differences found
in U and B twins were given and discussed.
The contrast between them in these respects
was difficult to explain plausibly by external environmental factors alone, such as the
way mothers treat twins. Nor was similarity
in psychological state related to closeness of :
Genetical
differences, therefore, probably do much to
explain differences in behaviour between _
people brought up in the same family.

It is suggested that the genes most often
influence neurotic behaviour through their
effect on the physical basis of personality.
With some psychosomatic symptoms genic
action may be more direct ; but, in general,
disorders such as juvenile delinquency, which
are not closely related to type of personality,
are likely to be determined by the genes to a
lesser extent than those disorders which are
so related.

It seems then that any explanation of
human behaviour which neglects the genetical factor is likely to be a partial one. A
realization of this does not imply a fatalistic
or authoritarian attitude. Further research.
on genetical lines should, on the contrary,
lead to a better understanding of the nature
of individual differences and to a more
rational, successful and humane way of
dealing with their social implications.

In conclusion, it only remains for me to
thank Dr. Eliot Slater and Mr. W. L. B.
Nixon of the Genetics Unit for much valuable
assistance and all those others who have
helped in this research in various ways,
including the 124 twins and their parents for
their willing participation in a project from
which they had nothing to gain.

REFERENCES .
1. Blacker, C. P. (1948). Neurosis and the Mental
Health Service. Oxford Medical. Publications.

2. Blewett, D. (1953). An experimental study of the
inheritance of neuroticism and intelligence. Ph.D.
Thesis, University of London Library.
246

3.
_inellen Zwillingen.”’

Io.

II.

12.
13.
4.

15.
16.

17.

18.

19.
20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

26.

27.

. Bowlby, J.
. Bracken, H. v. (1934).
. Burlingham, D. (1952).

. Conrad, K. (1935-6).

. Davis, E. A. (1941).

Borgstroem, C. A. (1939). ‘‘ Eine Serie von KrimArch. Rass. u. ges. Biol., 33,
334-343. .
(1951). Maternal Cave and Mental
Health. Geneva : World Health Organization.
“Mutual Intimacy in
Character and Personality, 2, 293-309.
Twins : a Study of Three
Pairs of Identical Twins. London : Imago Publishing Co.

Twins.”’

‘“ Erbanlage und Epilepsie.”’
Zeitschy. ges. Neurol. Psychiat., 153, 271-326;
155, 254-297 and 509-542.

. Dahlberg, G. (1926). Twin Births and Twins from a

Hereditary Point of View. Stockholm.

* Linguistic Skill in Twins,
Singletons with Siblings, and Only Children.” Inst.
Child Welfare Monogr. Series 14. University of
Minnesota Press. .
Day, E. J. (1932). ‘‘ The Development of Language
in Twins: a Comparison of Twins and Single
Children.”” Child Development, 3, 179-199.
Essen-MOller, E. (1941). ‘‘ Empirische Ahnlichkeitsdiagnose bei Zwillingen.’”’ Hereditas, 27, 1-50.
Eysenck, H. J., (1951). ‘‘ Neuroticism in Twitis.”’
Eugen. Rev., 43, 79-82. .
Eysenck, H. J. (1952). The, Scientific Study of
Personality. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Eysenck, H. J., and Prell, D. B. (1951). ‘‘ The
Inheritance of Neuroticism: an Experimental
Study.”” J. Ment. Sci., 98, 441-465.

Frary, L. G. (1935). ‘‘ Enuresis, a Genetic Study.”
Amer. J. Dis. of Children, 49, 557-578.
*Frischeisen-K6hler, I. (1936). ‘‘ Zwillinge in den
Familien von Hilfsschiilern.”’ Zettschr. f. menschl.
Vererb. u. Konstitutionslehre, 20, 1-8.

Fraser, R., e¢ al. (1947). The Incidence of Neurosis
among Factory Workers. (M.R.C. Industrial Health
Research Board Report No. 90.) London : H.M.S.O.
Gedda, L. (1951). Studio dei Gemelli. Rome:
Edizioni Orizzonte Medico. .

*Gudden, H. (1934). Avch. Rass. u. ges. Biol., 28.
Hubert, W. H. de B. (1933). ‘‘ Aetiology of Nocturnal
Enuresis.”” Lancet, 1, 1281-1283.

Juda, A. (1939). ‘‘ Neue psychiatrisch-genealogische Untersuchungen an Hilfsschulzwillingen und
ihren Familien: I. Die Zwillingsprobanden und ihre
Partner.”’ Zeitschy. ges. Neurol. Psychiat., 166,
365-452.

Kallmann, F. J. (1946). ‘‘ The Genetic Theory of
Schizophrenia.”’ Amer. J. Psychiat., 103, 309-322.
Kallmann, F. J. (1952). ‘‘ Twin and Sibship Study
of Overt Male Homosexuality.” Amer. J. hum.
Genet., 4, 136-146.

Karn, M. N. (1953). ‘“‘ Data of Twin Births occurring
in Two English Metropolitan Hospitals.’ Acta
genet. med, et gemell., 2, 152-163.

. Kent, E. (1949). “ A study of maladjusted twins.”

Smith College Studies in Social Work, 19, 63-77.

Kranz, H. (1936).. Lebensschicksale krimineller
Zwillinge. Berlin: Springerverlag.

Kranz, H. (1937). ‘‘ Untersuchungen an Zwillingen

THE EUGENICS REVIEW oe

28.
29.

30.
31.
32.

33
34.

3536.

3738.

39
40.
41.
42.

43.

44.
45.
46.

47
—

in Firsorgeerziehungsanstalten.”’ Zettschr. f.
Induki. u. Abstam. Vererbungslehre, 73, 508-512.
*Kohn, W. (1935). ‘““Die Vererbung des Charakters.”
Arch. Rass. u. ges. Biol., 29.

Lange, J. (1929). Verbrechen als Schicksal, Studien
an krimmellen Zwillingen. Leipzig : Thieme.
*Lassen, M.-T. (1931). ‘“‘ Zur Frage der Vererbung
sozialer und sittlicher Charakteranlagen.’’ Arch.
Rass. u. ges. Biol., 25, 268-278.
Lehtovaara, A. (1938). Psychologische Zwillingsuntersuchungen. Helsinki: Annales Academize
Scientiarum Fennice, B 39.

McLeod, H. (1954). An experimental study of the
inheritance of introversion-extraversion. Ph.D. Thesis (submitted to the Universitv of London).
Mehrotra, S. N. and Maxwell, J. (1949). ‘‘ The
Intelligence of Twins: a Comparative Study of
Eleven-year-old Twins.”’ Population Studies, 3,
295-302.

Newman, H. H. (1942). Twins and Super-Twins.
London: Hutchinson’s Scientific and Technical
Publications. .
Petrovsky, S. G. (1934). ‘“‘ Heredity in enuresis
nocturna.’’ Sovetsk. Psykhonevrol., 1, 10-17.
Price, B. (1950). ‘‘ Primary Biases in Twin Studies.”
Amer. J. hum. Genet., 2, 293-352.
Race, R. R., and Sanger, R. (1950). Blood Groups in
Man. Oxford: Blackwell’s Scientific Publications.
Rosanoff, A. J., Handy, L. M., and Rosanoff, I. A.
(1934). “‘ Criminality and Delinquency in Twins.”
J. crim. Law and Criminal., 24, 923-934.
*Rosanoff, A. J., Handy, L. M., and Plesset, I: R.
(1941). ‘‘ The etiology of child behaviour difficulties, juvenile delinquency and adult criminality,
with special reference to their occurrence in twins.” |
Psychiat. Monogr., 1, 187: Sacramento, Cal.,.
Dept. of Institutions.

Idem (1941). Authors’ Abstract of the preceding.
Amey. J]. Psychiat., 97, 1479.

*Schiller, M. (1937). “‘Zwillingsprobleme dargestellt
auf Grund von Untersuchungen an Stuttgarter Zwillingen.”’ Zettschr. f. menschl. Vererbungslehre, 20,
284-337. :
Slater, E., and Shields, J. (1953). Psychotic and
Neurotic Ilinesses in Twins. M.R.C. Special Report
Series 278. London: H.M.S.O.

Smith, J. C. (1930). ‘‘ Das Ursachenverhaltnis des
Schwachsinns beleuchtet durch Untersuchungen’
an Zwillingen.’’ Zettschr. ges. Neurol. Psychiat.,
125, 678-692.

Stocks, P. (1952). ‘‘ Recent Statistics of Multiple
Births in England and Wales.’’ Acta genet. med. et
gemell., 1, 8-13. |
Stumpfl, F. (1936).
dargestelit am Lebenslauf von Zwillingen.
Thieme.

Stumpfi, F. (1937).
pathischen Zwillingen.”’
Psychiat., 158, 480-482.
Waterhouse, J. A. H. (1950). ‘‘ Twinning in
Twin Pedigrees.”’ Brit. J. Soc. Med., 4, 197-216. 
Die Urspringe des Verbrechens
Leipzig :

“ Untersuchungen an psychoZeitschr. ges. Neurol.

* Quoted by Gedda ; not personally verified.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLV, No. 4_
