THE INHERITANCE OF CERTAIN HUMAN
ABNORMALITIES

By A. M. Gossaceg, M.D.

THE main object of the Eugenics Education Society is, I conclude,
to try and improve the human race by selective breeding. The
methods from which success may be expected are two: (I) encouragement of breeding from the fit, and (2) prevention of the
propagation of the unfit. Both of these depend on the wellrecognised resemblance of children to their parents and both
require a complete and accurate knowledge of the laws of
Heredity.

Offspring resemble their parents but they also differ from them.
The differences may be small and are then commonly known
as continuous variations, or very marked, when they are called
discontinuous variations or mutations. Experience with animals
has shown that improvement may be achieved by selection of
the continuous variations for breeding. For instance, we may
expect to raise the standard of height by breeding only from
exceptionally tall people. The advance to be made by this
method is, however, only limited, for while the children of very
tall parents tend to be taller than the average they are usually
less tall than their parents, that is to say, that there is always a
tendency for return to the mean, and to establishand maintain
a tall race, selection would have to be very severe and to continue very severe. The advance would be merely in the average
height of the individuals and would not progress beyond a
certain point, while there would be subsequent difficulty in
keeping the average up to the point gained.

Some improvement might be reasonably hoped for in the
general average of a race by the encouragement of the breeding
148 EUGENICS REVIEW A. M. Gossage:

of the fit, and probably much more improvement by the prevention of the propagation of the unfit, but after acknowledging this
one is at once met with the practical difficulty of adequately
defining who are the fit and the unfit. Success in life affords a
rough dividing line, and one may regard the fit as those who are
capable of maintaining themselves and supporting and educating
their offspring. These, the prudent and thrifty, are discouraged
by the modern state from begetting children. They are taxed
on marriage, the joint income to support two persons being
regarded as the income of only one for taxation purposes, whereas
if they satisfied their natural inclinations by living in illicit concubinage their incomes would be regarded as separate and
possibly each exempt from taxation. Further, each additional
child means to this class an added burden, and limits the educational and other opportunities of its brothers and sisters. Thus
the natural affection of the parents for their offspring becomes a
potent argument for limiting their number.

The other class, the poor and the thriftless, from their nature
are not likely to be influenced by considerations such as these:
an additional child or two makes little difference to their poverty,
and education, being a matter for the state, causes no anxiety.
While encouragement might help to bring about an increase in
the offspring of the fit, something stronger than discouragement
is required to limit the propagation of the unfit. Prevention,
the taking away from any two persons the most natural of all
their rights—that of having children if they so desire—is a grave
measure which requires very strong reasons for its justification.
In face of such a proposition our classification of fit and unfit
breaks down, for poverty may be combined with many of the
qualities that are desirable in a race. To warrant such a drastic
measure the parental defects must be very evident, and the exact
extent to which they are handed down to the next generation
must be very clearly known. The results to be expected from
the selection of the smaller continuous variations are certainly
not sufficiently marked to warrant such an extensive interference
with the liberty of the individual. It is the purpose of this
paper to enquire whether the known facts about the inheritance
of the larger discontinuous variations are such as to entitle the
INHERITANCE OF CERTAIN HUMAN ABNORMALITIES I49

community to forcibly prevent certain of the unfit from leaving
any progeny.

While in the smaller continuous variations the child tends
to blend the characteristics of its two parents, the inheritance of
the more marked discontinuous variations is usually particulate
and the condition is handed down unchanged from parent to
child, or is not transmitted at all. In animals and plants this
mode of inheritance has been found to follow certain laws. It is
not proposed here to enter into the wide and controversial
subject of the theoretical deduction from the facts discovered by
Mendel’s methods with regard to inheritance and evolution, but
merely to point out that if these laws hold in animals and plants,
then from the study of certain human abnormalities we know that
they also,hold in human beings, and for the purposes of this paper
may be accepted. Particular attributes may be supposed to be
represented by factors, there being a factor for the presence and
another for the absence of each attribute. In these pairs of
factors one is commonly dominant, 7.e., whenever it is existent in
an individual that individual shows the presence or absence of
the associated attribute, and the other factor is said to be
recessive. Since human abnormalities are rare, in the vast
majority of cases the individual who shows any particular
abnormality is derived from an abnormal parent and a normal
one, 7.¢., has in his composition both the factor for presence and
the factor for absence of the abnormality. Usually the factor for
presence is a dominant, and hence any individual who carries it
exhibits the abnormality in a patent condition. Such an
abnormal person marrying with a normal one should theoretically
pass on the condition to half his children, the other half being
normal. His abnormal children should again transmit the
abnormality to half their offspring, while the descendants of the
normal children with normal mates should all be normal.
Numerous examples of this form of inheritance can be found in
human beings. Since human families are small and children are
born one at'a time at long intervals exact correspondence in numbers with expectation cannot be looked for, but if sufficient families
are taken the results come out fairly accurately. For instance,

with an abnormal horny condition of the palms and soles the
3
150 EUGENICS REVIEW A. M. Gossage :

children of the affected were 238 abnormal and 188 normal,
which is a fair approximation to the expected equality. Pure
dominants would be expected to appear if two affected individuals
married, and all the children of pure dominants, even with a
normal mate should be affected. So far only one example of
such a marriage is known in human beings—that of two individuals with web-fingers and toes. Two of the children of this
marriage had with normal mates families of four and six respectively, every one of whom were affected, and so these two persons
were presumably pure dominants.

The prevention of the occurrence of such abnormalities
should be an easy affair: all that would be required would be to
prevent. the affected persons from having children. Most of
these abnormalities, however, do not affect the general health
nor interfere with the capacity of the individual to earn a living.
Still some may lead to early death and so render the state liable
for the support of their offspring, or to chronic ill-health. For
instance, this is liable to happen in the condition known as
Angioneurotic Gidema, where the affected persons are liable to
sudden swellings on the skin, or in the throat or elsewhere. None
of the abnormalities can be said to be an advantage and some
probably interfere with the earning of a livelihood, ¢.g., the clawhand deformity, but their rarity renders them of insufficient
importance to warrant restriction of personal liberty.

In other classes of abnormalities a further difficulty is introduced by the fact that the dominance is not complete. Here,
although an affected person has nearly half his children with a
normal mate abnormal and half normal, yet a few of the apparently normal children are liable to transmit the abnormality. As
an example one may point to the condition known as Diabetes
Insipidus, in which there is an excessive secretion of urine and
hence in which abnormal quantities of fluid have to be taken by
the mouth. Such an abnormality could only be stamped out
with certainty by preventing not only the abnormal but also the
normal members of the family from breeding.

A similar, but still greater difficulty would be experienced
in tackling the very important sex-limited abnormalities such as
Hemophilia or Pseudohypertrophic Muscular Paralysis. HzmoINHERITANCE OF CERTAIN HUMAN ABNORMALITIES I51I

philia causes the death of most of its exhibitors by the uncontrollable bleeding which results from slight injuries, while
Pseudohypertrophic Muscular Paralysis causes such marked
deformity that most of its unfortunate victims are incapacitated
either for work or for propagating their kind by the time they
reach adult life. These are both such terrible afflictions that
there is ample justification for stringent measures to save mankind from their ravages. If they were handed down directly
from parent to child they would obviously very soon die out, but
unhappily it is the males only who suffer, while some of the
apparently normal females carry the condition in a latent form
and transmit to some of their male children, and through some
of their daughters to some of their grandsons and so on. At
first sight it almost looks as if there were a special provision for
the preservation of these noxious scourges of humanity, especially
as the women of bleeder families have an unusually large number
of children. The supposition of any such special provision of
nature is, however, negatived by the fact that exactly the same
mode of inheritance prevails in the harmless condition of colourblindness. While these two first conditions are sufficiently
horrible to warrant special measures for their extermination, the
measures required would have to be of such severity that I can
imagine no legislature consenting to them. Every woman
belonging to an affected family would have to be forcibly prevented from having children, although she herself was perfectly
healthy and quite normal in every way, and although only about
half of the total number of these women would be expected to
have abnormal children. The only possible way of telling
whether any female member of these families was free from the
family taint would be by her having a large number of normal
descendants.

The practical bearing of this discussion of the modes of
inheritance of human abnormalities may not seem to be great,
but it illustrates the extreme importance of having exact knowledge about the heredity of any condition about which it is
proposed to legislate. I have already emphasised the difficulty
of defining the unfit, and when one tries to classify them one.
finds that there is only one class which at all approaches to
152 EUGENICS REVIEW A. M. Gossage :

definiteness and offers any hope for the application of Eugenic
methods. This is the condition which is known as FeebleMindedness. There is a considerable body of evidence that this
condition is directly inherited from ‘parent to child, and its
general aspect suggests that it behaves as a Mendelian dominant.
Since the feeble-minded supply a very large proportion of the
drunkards, the criminals, the paupers and the prostitutes it
would be an obvious advantage to society to have no more of
them, and the employment of strong measures to attain this end
would be fully justified. On closer investigation, however, we
find that our knowledge of the feeble-minded is too vague to
permit us to advocate the segregation of this class from a Eugenic
point of view. We do not yet know what proportion of feebleminded persons have had one or more feeble-minded parents,
nor how many of them have been born from completely healthy
progenitors. Again, we do not yet know what proportion of
feeble-minded children are to be expected from the union of a
feeble-minded person with a normal mate. The most careful
family records, those collected by Tredgold, show that the
feeble-minded have in the majority of cases a “ neuropathic
inheritance,” that is to say, that alcoholism, epilepsy and insanity
are common in their ancestors, but the records do not show
whether these ancestors were alcoholic, epileptic or insane
because they were themselves congenitally feeble-minded, though
this is not improbable. It would be hopeless to suggest that the
insane, the epileptic and the alcoholic must all be prevented from
breeding so as to eliminate the feeble-minded. Many individuals
have already had offspring before they could be included in these
classes, and have often been themselves worthy citizens, who
come of healthy stocks and leave desirable children.

In conclusion one must emphasise that at present the scope
for the employment of Eugenic methods is small, though much
can be done in the way of education and in the acquisition of
more exact knowledge. There is hope that by Eugenic methods
we may be able to get rid of the greater proportion of the feeble.
minded members of our community, but at present our knowledge is insufficient to justify the segregation of this class merely
for the benefit of future generations. Fortunately such segregaINHERITANCE OF CERTAIN HUMAN ABNORMALITIES 153

tion is warranted by other arguments. The.feeble-minded are
better and happier when kept under proper control in institutions
and since the majority of them are a constant public menace and
expense, being incapable of supporting themselves and often
becoming criminals and prostitutes, society is amply justified
in permanently depriving them of their liberty. We may hope,
that, after the Government have fulfilled their promise of taking
proper care of this class, the next generation will see a great
diminution in the number of incapable degenerates.
