WORLD POPULATION CONFERENCE 1954

_ A

 

A general view of the inaugural meeting of the World Population Conference in the
| F.A.O. Building at Rome.

204
THE WORLD POPULATION CONFERENCE
1954
By PETER R. COX, FIA., E.S.S.

-——[

PRELIMINARY account of the ConAne held under the auspices of the

United Nations Organization in September last year has already been given in
the ‘REvIEW.* Members of the Soczety will
thus be aware that a considerable number
of participants from all parts of the world
attended in Rome, that there were thirtyone meetings spread over eleven days and
that the mass of papers and other documents
presented was very voluminous.
also know that the Conference was arranged
in order that demographers could exchange
views on topics in which they have a special
interest. Individual experts were nominated
by national Governments and by various
societies of which the principal was the

International Union for the Scientific Study

of Population, not as official representatives
with negotiating or voting powers but as
persons who could impart useful knowledge
and at the same time learn something from
their fellows. The aim of the organizers was
to bring them together, formally in the
meetings and informally in the intervals
between the meetings, and in this modest
aim they can be said to have achieved a
considerable success. Political and other
differences were not pressed to the point
of acrimony, and a scientific spirit prevailed.
As a result there should be a raising of the
general standard of demographic work all
over the world, particularly in the lessdeveloped countries.

Subjects Discussed

The field of population studies spreads
extensively, including as it does subjects
ranging from narrow technical exercises to
the broadest questions affecting the welfare
of the whole human race, though it does
not incorporate, as some journalists seemed

* 46, 139.

They will

to think, the agricultural and biological.
problems of food production. It can be
subdivided into various sections, and those
who drew up the programme very sensibly
decided to separate two main groups of
topics, which might briefly be characterized
by the words “ happenings ”’ and ‘‘ methods.”
The principal contents of each of these
groups may be briefly classified under eight
heads as follows:
Happenings

Mortality trends

Fertility trends

Migratory movements |

Distribution of population

Prospects for future population

Ageing and its consequences

Social aspects of demographic changes

Population in relation to resources

Methods
Concepts and definitions
Evaluation of the quality of demographic
statistics
Techniques of measurement
Legislation and ad ministration
Genetic factors
Intelligence and fertility
Actuarial and other studies
Recruitment and training

No one delegate could attend all the
meetings, for the two types of material were
discussed simultaneously in different halls.
Few could claim to be sufficiently expert in
all fields of demographic inquiry to be able
to give a comprehensive account of all that
took place. Not many had the time to
read or the luggage accommodation to take
away copies of all the four hundred papers
that were made available, in the main,
only during the course of the Conference,
and not before its start. It is not proposed,
therefore, to attempt in this note to describe
every written contribution or the complete
history of the debates ; all that is possible
is to give a few salient impressions of the
events of the fortnight, describe some of

205
206

the striking facts observable from among
the mass ofstatistical data analysed and
outline some of the trends of thought on
demographic matters that were revealed.

Special Documents _

Before passing to the etait of the official
programme, mention may be made of one
or two of the volumes and pamphlets that
were specially prepared for issue to the
delegates. First, there was a_ historical
account, by the Institut National. d’Etudes
Démographiques, of past international meetings on population subjects of all kinds,
including the World Conferences held in
1927, 1931, 1935 and 1937. This volume
of forty pages contains a formidable list of
congresses but gives little more than the
bare facts of their existence. What one
would like to know would be their principal
effects and their achievements. To analyse
these is, however, hardly possible. They
cannot be measured from the papers and
discussions of the time but must be scattered
indistinguishably throughout the subsequent
work of the participants and their pupils,
finding their expression also, perhaps, in
legislation and in an improved scope of
published data. No doubt the same will be
true of the 1954 Conference and, for this
reason as well as those previously given,
the account now submitted cannot tell the
whole story of the assembly.

The second special document to be
mentioned is a provisional edition of a
Multilingual Demographic Dictionary ; this
consists at present of an English, a French
and a Spanish volume, each being a translation of the other. The principal contents
are eight chapters of text in which series
of definitions are given linking the many
words used in the study of population. The
words are numbered and underlined and are
gathered together elsewhere in an index.
Comments have been invited on the dictionary. After certain improvements have
been made, it should be of great value in
unravelling the subtle differences of thought
and usage that exist between one country
and another, and so in helping to promote
international understanding in demographic

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

work. One example of differing meaning that
became apparent in Rome was the word
‘“ malthusian.’’ In England it is thought of
as relating to the historical figure of Malthus
and his theories, including such well-known
features as his “ratios ’’ and advocacy of
moral restraint. In France the word is used
to describe, among other things, the populations of Western countries that limit births—in contrast to those of other countries where
fertility is largely unrestricted. In Russia it
has a serious moral, anti-Marxist flavour.

The third and last of the special documents
referred to here gives a Summary Chapter
of the long-awaited Report on the Family
Census of Great Britain in 1946. . Any
detailed review of the Summary Chapter
would be inappropriate until the complete
Report and Statistical Tables have been
issued. These have been promised, in two
volumes, for a date before the end of 1954.
It may be said, however, that a clear account
of the developments in family size in this
country during the past forty years has
been presented and that some new information on differential fertility and birth
spacing is available. It is concluded by the
authors, Professors Glass and Grebenik,
that the spread of the small family pattern
throughout the community has reached a
period of stability, and that although there
may have been some upturn in fertility
since World War II, “nothing so _ far
visible in the statistics foreshadows a
major departure from that pattern in the
near future.’’

Trends in Fertility, Mortality and Migration _

The material before the Conference
brought out clearly the exceptional differences in demographic, social and economic
characteristics that exist between countries
of higher fertility. In India, in spite of a
widespread desire for family planning and a
rising average age at marriage, fertility
may even increase because of such factors
as improved vitality, an easing of the ban
on remarriages and a reduction in the
length of the period after the birth of each
child during which abstinence is practised.
In Japan the birth rate has suddenly declined
THE WORLD POPULATION CONFERENCE, 1954

from 33 per thousand in 1949 to 21 per
thousand in 1953, largely owing to the
legalization of abortions by an Act passed in
1948. Representatives from Eastern Europe
spoke proudly of rising birth rates in their
countries in the last few years but did not
say to what extent these were merely the
effect of a recovery from the devastation of
war. In Brazil social factors are important
and there is a wide urban-rural difference
in fertility. The control of malaria in Ceylon,
British Guiana, Mauritius and Venezuela
has been accompanied by some increase in
birth rates.

For regions of lower fertility much of the
discussion turned on internal differentials
and their trends, but no very clear picture
emerged. Indeed, two representatives from
the U.S.A. registered disagreement on
whether or not there had been a reduction
in the differences in their country between
the fertility rates of various categories of
population in recent years. The gap between
occupational groups and types of commune
may have widened a little in France but on
the whole there has been no pronounced
movement together or apart of the birth
rates among the social classes in Western
Europe. Some speakers tried to predict
future developments by reference to the
results of inquiries in which women were
asked to say what family size they wanted or
thought to be ideal, but other delegates
were critical of the value of such investigations. This was one example of the refreshingly independent attitude adopted by
demographers on certain topics in Rome;
it is just this sort of attitude that provokes
a reconsideration of standard methods and
is likely to bring about improvements in
knowledge and technique. It seems probable
that the discussions on fertility and family
size generally will have an important
influence on the drafting of the questions
to be included in the census schedules at
several forthcoming enumerations.

In his rapporteur’s survey of downward

mortality trends in areas of lower death |

rates, the American actuary Mr. Mortimer
Spiegelman drew attention to a _ general
lessening of the rate of decline with advance

207

in age and also a more rapid fall for women
than for men. Differences between countries
have diminished but there has been no
substantial change in their relative vitality.
Mr. Spiegelman was taken to task by
M. Sauvy for not mentioning in his summary
a communication by M. Ledermann, of Paris,
concerning the relation between cancer
and alcohol. The startling part of this
communication was introduced at a late
stage as an appendix giving a brief preliminary account of a study of 3,500 files
of cancer cases including details of tobacco
and alcohol consumption. It claimed not
only to verify the findings of investigations
in Britain and U.S.A. as to the relationship
between smoking and lung cancer but to
discover a similar relationship between heavy
drinking and tumours of some sites, and the
author asseverated further that the risks
attributable to each of these habits separately
were powerfully increased when the habits
were combined. The tally of “ discoveries ”’
seems a long one for such a small-scale
inquiry but a fuller account of methods
and results will be awaited with interest.
Anextensive investigation, still in progress,
of social and biological factors in infant
mortality in England and Wales was
described by Dr. Morris and Messrs. Heady
and Daly. Notwithstanding the sharp fall in
the incidence of death and the levelling of
the living standards of the social classes
during recent years, their relative positions
with regard to the incidence of death in early
life have remained unchanged; much the
Same was shown by Dr. Logan to be true
for adult ages. It is unfortunate that other
Western countries are not able to produce
occupational mortality analyses of a quality
comparable to those in Great Britain,
although it must be admitted that the
vitality of their populations shows marked
improvement without the aid of these
studies. So
A comparison made by Dr. Pascua,
Director-Consultant on Health Statistics;
to the World Health Organization, of the
death rates of 1952 with those of the later
nineteen-thirties in parts of the world where
mortality is high and yet measurable. with
208

reasonable accuracy showed some rapid
changes. The number of recorded deaths
per thousand population has been approximately halved in Mauritius, Costa Rica,
British Honduras, Ceylon, Singapore and
Malta, and considerably reduced in Mexico,
Chile, Ecuador and India. The index used
is very crude and the detailed figures may
be open to question, but expectations of
life have increased and there can be little
doubt of the power of the development that
has occurred mainly as the result of the
control of malaria and other diseases.

Migratory movements were discussed from
the point of view both of the countries who
supply the emigrants and of the receiving
nations. A communication from the Registrar-General for Scotland gave the facts
about recent departures from his country,
which have approximately offset the natural
increase of the population. An occupational
analysis of male emigrants in 1953 showed
that the country was losing an unduly high
proportion of the professional and managerial
class and also of engineers, builders and
carpenters ; it would thus appear that past
traditions are being maintained.

The Population Division of the United
Nations presented a background survey
of intercontinental movement since 1945,
showing that this has been largely confined
to emigration from Europe to America and
Oceania. The effect of outward flows of this
kind on the age-structures and economic
situations of the countries concerned, and in
particular their réle in alleviating population
pressure, were discussed. One delegate
emphatically warned the Conference, however, that population pressure was only
“a state of mind,” and it certainly does not
seem that migration can provide a solution
of present world problems to the satisfaction
of everyone.

Technical Matters

The first of the methodological meetings
was concerned with evaluations of the
quality of demographic statistics, and this
was an appropriate beginning. Published
data are rarely perfect and frequently
deficient, and comparisons of two sets of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

statistics are bedevilled by differences of
definition. The experts disagreed on the
question of whether or not there should be
more standardization in the form and content
of census and registration particulars ; this
is not so simple a matter as might appear at
first sight, for the data are not normally
collected purely for demographic purposes
and reflect customs and social structures
that differ from one country to another.

Under the heading “Techniques of
Measurement and Analysis’ three subjects
were discussed, two of which were concerned
with fertility and the third, somewhat
incompatibly, with economic density. Difficulties rather than achievements were
stressed in relation to the study of economic
density and also the assessment of fertility
in places where registration of births is
incomplete or non-existent; no secret was
made of the fact that much remains to be
done in these fields. In the analysis of
fertility generally, and especially in disturbed periods—the third subject taken—
there is little trouble due to the absence of
data; the problem arises rather from the
multiplicity of possible methods of analysis
and the difficulty of determining which is
the most effective among them.

A record number of papers—nearly forty
in all—was submitted to the meeting on
“ Concepts:and Definitions in Demographic
Statistics,” reflecting the high proportion
of delegates who were officials whose business
it is to define population closely with regard,
for instance, to marital status or occupational activity and to distinguish between
the numbers of people present in an area on
the day of a census and the numbers who
normally live there. Some of the smaller

‘countries, such as Holland and Sweden,

have maintained in recent years continuous
registers of population, on strict accounting
rules, covering all births, deaths and migration; it is interesting to learn that while these
registers have many uses and potentialities
they sometimes run into difficulties and that
censuses are still necessary as a check on
their working.

Another of the technical meetings was
devoted to an examination of the relationship
THE WORLD POPULATION CONFERENCE, 1954

between demographic research and_ the
formulation of population policy. Dr.
Douglas of Scotland argued that, in spite
of family allowances and other welfare
schemes, children from larger families are
still handicapped in Great Britain in many
ways, and advocated further studies of family
expenditure so as to determine how to
remove the handicaps. M. Bourgeois-Pichat,
of France, suggested more specifically that
family allowances should not consist of a
flat sum per child but should be varied in
amount to correspond broadly with the size
of the financial burdens falling on the parents
from time to time. The French contributors
gave an interesting account of the activities
and
d’Etudes Démographiques in Paris, a unique
organization which to some extent includes
within its scope both the promotion of
demographic research and the formulation
of population policy, and they tend to see in
the enhanced birth rate in France since the
war a practical justification of the labours
of the policy-makers.

Population Projections

It was intended that a further three-hour
session should be devoted to discussions on
methods of making population projections,
but im fact much of the time was very
properly given to a witty appraisal of the
value of projections generally and to an
assessment of whether they are worth while
making at all. An analysis by Mr. Myers,
Chief Actuary to the Social Security Administration in Washington, showed where and to
what extent technical exercises of this kind
made at various times within the last twenty
years have been unsuccessful in representing
the actual populations of today in various
European countries and in the U.S.A. In
spite of this lack of success, attributed in
part by Mr. Hajnal-Konyi as being due to
“the failure of human history to repeat
itself,’’ it was considered that projections
are likely to continue to be demanded by the
public, and something of a battle of wills
may be waged between experts and laymen.
The experts, knowing that the chances of
complete success of a single projection are

influence of the Institut National

209

small, will give ranges of alternative projections and warnings about the difficulties
of assessing the prospects; most laymen will
try to select only one projection as their
guide, ignoring the ranges and the warnings.
The point was well made that the very
existence of forecasts is liable to influence
public action and so to falsify the forecasts
themselves.

A similar tone of caution and scepticism
about population projections was heard at
the following meeting, when the subject
had changed from methods of calculation
to the prospects revealed by the application
of the methods. The Population Division
of the United Nations had put in two substantial contributions dealing ambitiously
with the past and future population of the
world andits continents and giving projections |
for every country at quinary points of time
from 1950 to 1980. These were poorly
received, little being said in their favour
and criticism going as far in one instance as
the expression of the opinion that the projections should never have been made.
Certainly, the figures given for the United
Kingdom, supposedly based on. “‘ medium ”’
assumptions, were surprising, showing as
they did an expected rise of no less than
17 per cent in the total population, from
just over 50 million to nearly 60 million,
between 1950 and 1980. This advance is
very much more “‘optimistic’’ than in even
the most extreme of the sixteen projections
prepared under the auspices of the Royal
Commission on Population.

Recruitment and Training

A number of qualitative influences were
discussed such as genetic factors and the
relationship between intelligence and fertility; some reference was made to these
subjects in the last issue of the REVIEW.
The technical side of the meetings was then
brought to a close with an _ interesting
session on methods of recruitment and
training of demographers. This had two
main facets: the normal procedure, and the
satisfaction of the special temporary needs of

“Latin American and other countries with

demographic programmes ahead of the
210

‘supply of skilled personnel necessary to them.

The second facet has so far largely been a
matter of rapid training courses generously
provided in the U.S.A. and these have raised
unusual problems that have been effectively
dealt with by Dr. Jaffe there. Consideration
of the normal procedure involves a reassessment of the concept of a demographer and
of his place in the academic system. He is
often grouped with the economists and
perhaps still more often with the social
scientists. Some delegates considered, however, that the time had come for the demographer to become independent of these
associated subjects. Actuarial representatives emphasized the beneficial effects for
population studies of their professional
training.

It was somewhat surprising to hear the
Russian delegate, Mr. Pisarev, describing
an Academy in Moscow where statistics
and demography are taught on a large scale;
many of those present had not realized the
extent of the attention being paid to these
subjects in the U.S.S.R. In the U.S.A,,
Mr. Eason is making a special study of the
population of Russia and receives a fair
amount of statistical information from that
country for the purpose. Other American
delegates are currently keeping a watch on
demographic developments in all the continents. These activities are no doubt a
reflection as much of the political situation
to-day as of the heightened interest in world
affairs prompted by the existence of
the United Nations Organization. Indeed,
M. Sauvy went so far as to suggest that
the continuation of the post-war boom in
births in thé U.S.A. was attributable, at
least in part, to rivalry with Russia.

Populations and Resources

Comparisons of consumers and consumption are far from being the matter of simple
arithmetic that they are sometimes suggested
to be. Resources are of many different kinds,
and were in fact considered at three meetings
devoted respectively to non-biological elements (such as minerals and manufactures),
agricultural products, and finance (capital
formation, investment and employment).

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The demand and also the productive capacity
of the population are influenced by its agedistribution, and this aspect occupied two
sessions of which the second was devoted
to the problems of old age. Finally another
three-hour period was taken up with investigations of the interrelations between population, economic development and _ social
change, a complex field on which the United
Nations Organization has recently produced
a voluminous report.

There were some amusing exchanges when
the question of ageing was before the Conference, and lively occasions such as these
stand out in the memory ina fortnight -of
prepared speeches of set length. Some
representatives had been seeking to establish
a difference between actual age and what
they called “ physiological age,’’ in order
to make the point, for instance, that on

attaining the age of sixty-five some men are

ready for retirement and others still fit for
work. Many of the older delegates showed a
close personal interest in the matter; Professor Hersch, the President of the Conference, spoke of a man having several ages
for different faculties and in particular
justly claimed that he himself had a mental
age far younger: than his bodily appearance
would suggest. Pére Vallon emphasized that
whatever the theoretical concepts might be
there was only one age that was capable of
being measured accurately, and therefore
only one that was really useful in
demography.

While ageing is almost inevitable in
Western countries the total size of the
population everywhere is capable of being
controlled in the long run through the
restriction of births. Differences of opinion
were expressed not only in the method by
which control should be attempted but also
on the need for such control, and it was
noticeable that the views of the representatives varied very much according to the
situations of their countries. India and
Japan with their pressing problems are
interested in birth-restriction, but Russia
with its great potentialities for development

“could see little virtue in matching the

population to the available resources. Mr.
THE WORLD POPULATION CONFERENCE, 1954

Ryabushkin put forward the superficially

attractive idea that the population does not.

exist for the production but the production
for the population, and that whatever the
population happened to be the aim should
be to provide adequately for it.

The prospects for the future production
of energy and materials to meet the expanding needs of growing populations seem
reasonably bright; none of the participants
foresaw immediate obstacles to the achievement of substantial improvements in the
next twenty-five years. It was pointed
out, however, that the difficult probléms
were regional rather than global in nature;
conventional sources of energy are insufficient
for densely settled areas with low standards
of living, and although the development of
international trade should help greatly it is
unlikely to provide the whole solution. There
will thus have to be an intense search for
cheaper energy resources and _ cheaper
materials if there are to be rapid rises in
living levels in these areas.

Expectations for an improved agricultural

production were similarly rated as hopeful, ~

provided that the necessary capital resources
could be found for the development of poor
soils. The finding of the capital is likely to be
the serious problem, again regional in
character; its solution will involve some
degree of sharing between the richer and
poorer countries.

Conclusion

In conformity with its generally cautious,
scientific approach to problems of population,
and in. accordance with the decision not to
pass any resolutions, the Conference did not
deeply commit itself to any particular
view about prospects or desirable aims for
the future. If some of those present were
not entirely satisfied with this indefiniteness,
at least no one went away from Rome with

2IT

strong antagonistic feelings. Delegates will
remember most, perhaps, three things—
the criticisms that were made not only of
outmoded concepts but also of immature
new ideas, the tolerant and helpful attitude
shown towards nations that have not yet
properly developed their demographic tools,
and the emphasis placed on the need for
more research in all fields. They may also
have noticed that some subjects were conspicuous by their absence from the discussions—for instance, population mathematics and the measurement of rates of
reproduction. Although theoretical
approaches were not altogether overlooked,
on the whole there was an invigorating
return to reliance on practical investigation,
in comparison with the nineteen-thirties.
One delegate did, however, express disappointment that the historical approach to
demography found no part in the programme.

Although the organization of the Conference was successful, a few lessons may
have been learnt by those in charge and some
knowledge gained which may be put to
use on a subsequent occasion: meetings
varied considerably in effectiveness; the
attempts to sectionalize subjects were not
always a success ; speeches were too often
read from documents prepared in advance
and had to be fitted to a procrustean bed of
five minutes’ length which was too long
for some and not long enough for others ;
the total duration of the Conference was
greater than it need have been. These were
not very grave faults and it was more important that the pervading spirit was one of
honest inquiry. Memories will remain of
the high seriousness of the French representatives, the humour and modesty of the
Americans, the friendly attitude of the
delegates from the British Dominions and
Colonies, and of the helpful exchanges that
were possible with them all.

‘Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVI, No. 4
