DEMOGRAPHY—SCIENCE AND
ADMINISTRATION

By R. R. KUCZYNSKI

1. The Beginnings of Demography

) NTIL ten years ago the word
| ‘demography ”’ was rarely used in

this country. Population experts,
it is true, had attended the International
Congresses for Hygiene and Demography,
and they studied the Apergus démographiques
published by the International Statistical
Institute, but the Concise Oxford Dictionary
still defined demography as “ statistics of
births, diseases, &c., illustrating condition of
communities,’ while demography, as is
evident from the word itself, aims primarily
at a description of the population, using, of
course, if available, censuses, birth, marriage,

death, and migration statistics, and occa- .

sionally also statistics of diseases. However,
in recent years ‘‘ demography ’”’ has been
used more frequently and more correctly,
and the University of London even appointed (in 1938) a Reader in Demography.

Demography, like every other science, has
to do with methods and with results. A
few scholars have been interested only in
the. development of methods by which the
basic data may be correctly interpreted, and
the demographer owes much to those pure
mathematicians. Among demographers, who
are all, of course, interested in interpreting
results, a certain number have contributed
to the development of methods.

The first man who ever made a demographic study was the London haberdasher
John Graunt. His little book Natural and
Political Observations upon the Bills of
Mortality, published in 1662, was a remarkable achievement. His basic material consisted of the weekly London “ Bills of
Mortality ’’ which showed baptisms by sex
and burials by sex, age, and cause of death.
He compiled all available Bills and analysed
the content of his tables, which covered
many decades, most thoroughly and with a

12

vast amount of common sense. He even
went so far as to construct a life table for
London. This life table, of course, was most
primitive and inaccurate—about as inaccurate, I should say, as the recent official
life tables for India or for Lagos. His motive
for ‘‘ deducing so many abstruse, and unexpected inferences out of these poor
despised Bills of Mortality ’’ was that “ the
Art of Governing, and the true Polstiques,
is how to preserve the Subject in Peace, and
Plenty.” | When Graunt published his
pamphlet he had not the faintest idea that
he had created a new science. Demographic
data, he thought, could be useful only to.
the Administration. “‘ There seems to be
good reason, why the Magistrate should
himself take notice of the numbers of
Burials, and Christnings, viz. to see, whether
the City increase or decrease in people ;
whether it increase proportionably with the
rest of the Nation ; whether it be grown big
enough, or too big, &c. But why the same
should be made known to the People, otherwise then to please them as with a curiosity, I see not.’ |

Graunt lived in an enlightened period.
The great importance of his work was at once
recognized both by the State and by Science.
His name appears in the original list of
Fellows of the Royal Society, which received
its charter in 1662, and Sprat, in his History
of the Society, speaks of “the Recommendation which the King himself was
pleased to make, of the judicious Author of
the Observations on the Bills of Mortality:
In whose Election, it was so far from being
a Prejudice, that he was a Shop-keeper of
London ; that his Majesty gave this particular Charge to his Society, that if they
found any more such Tradesmen, they
should be sure to admit them all, SEH
any more ado.’”?
DEMOGRAPHY—SCIENCE AND ADMINISTRATION © 13

_ The original list of Fellows contained also
the name of Sir William Petty, who wrote
Essays tn Political Arithmetick.and other
demographic studies.4 An able disciple of
his friend Graunt, he was both more know-ledgeable and more brilliant, but his contribution to the development of methods
was not important. Edmund Halley, on
the other hand, who joined the Society a
few decades later, was hardly interested in
demography as such, and his whole demographic work covers only eighteen printed
pages. His great contribution was the
discovery (in 1692) of a most ingenious
method of constructing a life table. He was
not sufficiently explicit as to his data and
the use he made of them, and his method
has, therefore, been very often misunderstood. Many of his successors in various
countries committed grave errors in trying
to apply it, while others introduced slight
improvements. But in a general way it
may be said that Halley’s method was for
about 175 years the usual device for constructing life tables.

2. Science and Administration

England was the cradle of lomographey,
and in the two centuries following the
publication of Graunt’s Observations England’s contribution to the new science was
equal to that of any other country. But
the position has since changed. If a list
_ were made of the hundred best demographers
‘who set out on their careers during the last
hundred years, it would be very difficult to
-find five Englishmen to include in it. ©

The causes of this stagnation in English
demography can be easily discerned. In the
first place, the number of people engaged in
demographic research (full time or part
time) is probably smaller now in relation
to the population than it was fifty or a
hundred years ago. On the Continent their
number has increased by leaps and bounds.
In England there is one Registrar-General’s
Office. On the Continent there are, apart
from a Central Statistical Office for each
country, numerous State and municipal
statistical offices. Moreover, in the RegistrarGeneral’s Office priority is given to all

matters dealing with registration ; ‘in the
continental statistical offices population
statistics are not at such a disadvantage. A
Registrar-General is rightly chosen according
to his qualifications to function in this
capacity, and he may never have dealt with
population statistics before his appointment.
On the Continent a civil servant becomes
director of a statistical office after having
worked for many years either in the same or
another statistical office, and it is inconceivable that he be appointed without having
had experience in population statistics. It
may be argued that the Registrar-General.
has demographic assistants who are in charge:
of this section of his office’s work. But
experience shows that this offers no solution
of the problem. The Registrar-General
George Graham, in 1879, concluded his last
annual report by saying: ‘‘ Lastly, I must

express to Dr. Farr, whom in 1842 I had the

good fortune to find here presiding over the
Statistical Branch, my grateful acknowledgment of the important services he has
ever since continually rendered. He is
acknowledged throughout Europe, _ the

_ United States, East Indies and the Colonies

as one of the first statists of the day. To his
scientific researches and reports I attribute
any reputation that may have accrued to
the General Register Office of England and
Wales from the time he accepted office in
this Department.’ All this was perfectly
true. Dr. Farr, in the Statistical Branch,
made the best use of the basic data he got
from the Registration Branch. But his efforts
to improve,those data failed. The birth
registration “form introduced in 1837, when.
the Registrar-General’s Office was created,
was quite defective. From a demographic
viewpoint it was much less satisfactory than,
for example, the birth registration form
introduced in Sweden in 1775. Dr. Farr
became early aware of that. In his report
for 1842 he wrote : .
. no provision has yet been made for deter-mining the simplest fundamental facts—the
foundation of all reasoning on the subject—such .
as... the ages of mothers of children ...
Upon many of these points the greatest ignorance
prevails, writers on population depending on rough
approximations derived from scanty, imperfect,
14 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and often erroneous data, because the censuses and
registers of Europe have not yet been taken and
abstracted upon a comprehensive, well-considered
plan.’ ,

He made similar complaints over and over
again. In his report for 1867 he said:

Two grave defects in the registers of the United
Kingdom deprive them of much of their utility as
pedigrees, and as records of facts for the solution
of the great problems of population. Neither the
age of mothers at the births of each of their children, nor the order of birth, is recorded ; so that
the number of children borne by women at different
ages, and in the course of their lives, cannot be
ascertained. This defect was supplied in the first
schedule of the Scotch Act, but the important
parts of the schedule were unfortunately discontinued after 1855.8

It is pathetic to read in the Congress
reports of the International Statistical Institute the appeals which Dr. Farr made
for the registration of the mother’s age in
all countries keeping birth records.® His
appeals were not altogether in vain. By
1921 England was practically the only
civilized country where this question was
not asked. The birth schedule of 1837
remained unchanged until 1938, when Parliament insisted on its reform. If Dr. Farr
had been Registrar-General—and it was the
great disappointment of his life that he was
never promoted to this position—the basic
demographic data for many decades would
have been as ample in England as in the
British Dominions, the United States,
France, Germany, Austria, Italy, the Scandimavian countries, etc., etc. As he was
second in command his country derived only
very limited benefits from the last prominent
demographer it has produced. That he
accomplished as much as he did was due to
the fact that he was not only competent
but also obsessed by an urge for research
and a deep interest in demography. None
of his successors combined these qualities.

Another cause of the deterioration of
British demography is the lack of contact
between administration and science. On the
Continent many directors of statistical
offices are at the same time university
teachers ; they sometimes hold seminars in
their office and teach the students the whole
process of statistical technique. It is quite

usual for such students, after they have
terminated their university studies, to be
appointed assistants and later directors of
municipal or other statistical offices, and to
become in their turn university teachers.
Nothing of the kind exists in this country.
The scholar interested in population problems usually knows very little of the
technique of statistical administration ; he
cannot appraise the technical difficulties and
the cost of carrying out the proposals which
he may suggest to the administration ; he
cannot effectively answer the arguments of
the civil servant. The administration, on
the other hand, focuses its attention on its
immediate needs and is, asa rule, reluctant
to acknowledge specific legitimate needs of
the demographic scholar. This, of course,’
does not affect the pure mathematician
interested in methods but not in results.
As a consequence thereof, the foreign reader
of a review such as the Journal of the Royal

- Statistical Society must be struck by the

high standard of the purely mathematical |
contributions dealing with a fictitious population, and by the scarcity of demographic
papers. The barrier between administration
and science deters the British scholar from
demographic research ; another deterrent is
the low standard of the official vital statistics, |
compelling him to resort to foreign statistics
which are difficult to understand without
a knowledge of foreign conditions and foreign
languages. The general level of demographic doctors’ theses submitted to English
universities is high, but a demographic
study of the authors would probably reveal
that comparatively few are born in this

country.

3. English Census Statistics

Censuses have been taken regularly every
ten years from 1801 up to 1931. These
censuses furnish valuable information to
demographers, sociologists, economists, geographers, and administrators. I shall deal
here only with those data which are of special
interest to the demographer. They refer to
the sex and age composition. of the population, to marital condition, and to fertility, :
The sex was ascertained from the first
DEMOGRAPHY—SCIENCE AND ADMINISTRATION E5

census onwards. The ages of the population
were obtained in 1821 and again from 1841
onwards. The marital condition was asked
for the first time in 1851, and thereafter at
each subsequent census. Questions relating
to fertility were put only in ro1I.

_ At the early censuses the omission of
persons was apparently frequent, but from
1841 on the censuses in England have
probably been as complete as in any other
country. This does not mean that the
omissions are altogether negligible. There
is, for example, a tendency everywhere to

leave out young infants, and this tendency

is strengthened in England by the habit of
delaying the registration of births. Thus
the General Report on the 1921 census
states : |

It may be observed that the population always
comprises a large number of newly born infants
whose births have not yet been registered, and
that this number may easily have been as high as
50,000 or 60,000 at the date of the census. The
attitude of mind which regards such children as
not having been placed upon the official roll and
not subject, therefore, to the census procedure is
an intelligible one . . .1°

It is impossible, of course, to estimate

even approximately the numerical importance of the omissions at various ages, but a
guess that they aggregate something like
one or two per 1,000 of the total population
would probably not be far off the mark.

They are offset in part by the erroneous’

inclusion of persons temporarily abroad and
by double counting.

While, then, the English censuses may be
eonsidered fairly complete, the demographic
details are not as accurate as might be
expected. The mistakes in the returns on
sex, to be sure, are undoubtedly few. But
the age data are less satisfactory. There
is in England, as everywhere, a tendency
to report age in round numbers—that is, in
numbers ending with o. It may suffice to
mention that, according to the 1931 census,
there were 245,684 men aged 50, but only
215,999 aged 51; 280,182 women aged 50,
but only 240,793 aged 51. Ages ending
with the digit 7 aré unpopular, while there
is a marked predilection for ages ending
in 8. According to the 1931 census, there

were more men and more women aged 58
than aged 57, more men and women aged
48 than aged 47, more men and women
aged 38 than 37, etc. That the age statistics
of many other countries are not so defective
as those of England is due to the fact that
in their census forms they do not ask for
the age at the last birthday, but rather for
the date of birth. It seems desirable that
henceforth England should follow their lead
in this respect.

Misstatements of marital condition are
also quite frequent. The large excess of
married women over married men which
appears at every British census can be
explained only in part by the fact that the
number of married members of the Army,
Royal Navy, and Merchant Service who are
temporarily abroad exceeds the number of
married foreigners who are temporarily in
this country and have left their wives at
home. It seems that tens of thousands of
women report themselves as married though
they are not. But a much graver defect is
the inadequacy of the statistics of divorced
people. Until 1921 all persons over 15 years
were asked to state in the census forms
whether they weresingle, married, or widowed.
As to divorced persons, it was evidently left
to their discretion which of these three
alternatives they liked to choose, and if by
any chance they were obstinate enough to
reveal their actual marital condition they
were probably counted as widowed. In 1921
a discreet attempt was made to identify
divorced persons. The heading of the column
relating to marital condition now read :

For persons aged 15 and over write “‘ Single,”
‘““ Married,” ‘‘ Widowed,” or if marriage dissolved
by divorce write “‘ D.’’ |

The innovation was introduced with great
reluctance and with the conviction that it
would prove to bea failure. The report states :

At the 1921 census an attempt was made for the
first time in this country to ascertain the number
of divorced persons in the population... The
total number returned in this category amounted
to 16,682 in all, of which 8,464 were males and
8,218 females ... It is greatly to be feared,
however, that doubts as to the value of such

returns, which were felt and expressed when it was
first decided to include the inquiry in the general
16. | | - -THE EUGENICS REVIEW

census questionnaire, have proved only too well
founded, for from an examination of the records
of the divorces which have been granted year by
year, after making full allowance for reductions in
the numbers by mortality and by a very high
remarriage rate, the expected numbers might well
be put at a figure twice as large as the total
recorded above, and it appears more than probable
therefore that a large number of persons failed to
return the desired info1mation.™

The number of men reported as divorced
was then slightly greater than the number of
women. Since the remarriage rate of divorced
men is much higher than that of divorced
women, misstatements of marital condition
must have been particularly numerous
among divorced women. According to the
I9g3I census the divorced males numbered
13,546 and the divorced females 19,169. It
will be interesting to read the official com
ment on these figures in the General Report,

which. has not been published as yet.

From a demographic standpoint the 1911
census is still to-day the most valuable of all
because it included questions concerning
fertility. Each married woman had to state
the number of years the present marriage
had lasted, the number of children born
alive to the present marriage, the number of
children still living, and the number of children who had died. The question about the
duration of marriage was answered incorrectly by a very large number of wives. The
tendency to concentrate on round numbers
—I0, 20, 30, 40—-was even more pronounced
in the case of marriage duration than in the
statement of ages. Moreover, misstatements
of short durations were exceedingly numerous. The ratio of couples returned as
married 0-1, 1-2, and 2-3 years to the number
of marriages concluded in the three years
preceding the census was 68, 85, and 89 per
cent. respectively, the understatement of the
number of couples returned as married under
one year being mainly due to a desire to
conceal ante-nuptial conception. The instruction to return only the children of the present
marriage was often disregarded. On the
other hand, many mothers seem to have
omitted in their statements children who
died young.}2

The first census embodying fertility ques
/ ‘

tions had been taken in 1875 in Massachusetts, and many other countries followed

‘suit. The decline in the birth rate made, of

course, the demand for such enquiries ever
more urgent, and between I920 and 1936
alone fertility censuses were taken in France
(1921, 1926, 1931, and 1936), Holland (1920
and 1930), Norway (1920 and 1930), Hungary (1920 and 1930), Estonia (1922 and
1934), Spain (1920 and 1930), Italy (193%),
Czechoslovakia (1930), Germany (1933), the
Union of South Africa (1921 and 1926),
Southern Rhodesia (1921 and 1926), Northern Rhodesia (192r and 1931), Australia
(1921), New Zealand (1921 and 1936). But
in this country no such enquiry has been
made since IQII.

Another grave defect which must be mentioned in this connection is the date of publication of the English census reports. The
fertility enquiry of I91I was made throughout the United Kingdom. The complete
reports for Scotland and Ireland were both
published in 1913. For England and Wales
a first volume, containing a number of, basic
tables, was published in 1917; the second
volume, containing all other tables and the
text, was published in 1923. I have already
mentioned that the text volume of the 1931
census is not yet available. The volumes
published so far contain merely tables. This,
it seems to me, is an intolerable situation.
which should be remedied and could be
remedied easily. I happened to be connected.
with the United States Census of 1900. The
publication of the 1890 census reports had
been very slow. But Congress was not
willing to run a similar risk again. The
Census Act of March 3rd, 1899, provided
therefore : .

The only volumes that shall be prepared and
published in connection with the Twelfth Census,
except the Special Reports hereinafter provided
for, shall relate to population, mortality and vital
statistics, the products of agriculture, and of manufacturing and mechanical establishments . . . and
shall be designated as and constitute the Census
Reports, which said reports shall be published not
later than the first day of July, nineteen hundred
and two.

We then had barely two years for the
preparation and publication of the reports,
_ DEMOGRAPHY—SCIENCE AND ADMINISTRATION 17

‘not .only of a most elaborate population
census but also of a most intricate census of
agriculture and of manufactures, in a country with a population nearly twice that of
England and Wales and with an area more
than fifty times as large. But we knew that
we had to do it, and all the volumes, tables
and text, covering nearly 10,000 large,
closely printed pages, were published within
the prescribed time limit.

4, English Vital Statistics

Civil registration of births, marriages, and
deaths was started on July 1st, 1837. The
records are probably as complete as in any
other country. Birth registration, to be sure,
was, somewhat defective prior to the introduction of compulsory registration in 1875,
but it is safe to say that nearly all children
born thereafter have been registered, though
often with great delay. Death registration
was almost complete from the outset.
Marriage statistics, of course, are absolutely
complete, since, while people may be born or
may die without being registered, there is no
marriage without registration. As to accuracy the vital statistics suffer from defects
similar to those of the census statistics. The
age at death is too often reported in numbers
ending with o. There is also, at least among
middle-aged persons, a predilection for ages
ending in the digit 2. Here again the remedy
lies in asking for the date of birth instead of
the age in years.

Until the new Population (Statistics) Act
came into force, the Registrar-General’s
Statistical Review showed merely the number
of male and female, legitimate and illegitimate live births and still births, registered
in each quarter. From July 1st, 1938, on the
Statistical Review shows in addition the
births by order of birth, age of mother, and
duration of marriage. The Decennial Suppflement gives in addition data about fertility by
occupation in the period centring around the
census. The Supplement dealing with the
year 1921 was published in 1927 ; the volume
which is to cover the years 1930 to 1932 is not
available as yet. But the records of the
father’s occupation are not the only ones of
which little use has been made. From 1837

on, the registration form recorded the date
of birth and the date of registration. But in
the published birth statistics no account.
(until 1944) was ever taken of the date of
birth. We know. the number of births registered in a given year, but we do not know the
number of births which occurred in that
year. According to a statement published
year-in year-out in the Registrar-General’s
Statistical Review “the average time lag
between occurrence and registration is
usually about a month.” This seems to
indicate that the average time lag is usually
though not always about a month. But
even if the average time lag were always
exactly one month, the difference between
the number of registered and of actual births
might vary considerably from year to year.
It may well be, therefore, that even in peacetime the changes in the official birth figures.
sometimes convey a distorted picture of the
actual changes in natality. The number of
registered births dropped from 613,972 in
1932, to 580,413 in 1933, and rose again to
597,642 in 1934. The number of registrations in the last quarter of 1933 (129,810) was
over 10,000 lower than in any other quarter
from 1850 to this day. It is possible, of
course, that the number of births was
actually as low in the last quarter of 1933 as
indicated by the official statistics. But until
there is proof to the contrary it seems safer
to assume that the drop in the actual
number of births in 1933 was smaller than
the drop in the number of births registered
in that year. The official birth rates in
1933-7 were 14:4, 14°8, 14:7, 14°8, and
14°9. It may well be that the actual birth
rate in 1933 was not lower than in 1935.
And which year had the highest birth rate is
anybody’s guess.

In periods in which rationing of food
induces parents to hasten birth registration
or de-rationing of food removes this incentive the official birth figures, of course, are
absolutely misleading. From 1918 to 1919
the number of registered births (which alone
appeared in the official statistics) increased
from 662,661 to 692,438 or by only 29,777.
Actually, the number of births registered in
1918 was much larger than the number of
18 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

births that occurred in that year while the
reverse was true in I9I9, and the increase
in the number that occurred has been estimated at three times the increase in the
number of births that were registered. In
1938-40, the numbers of births registered
were 621,204, 619,352, and 607,029 respectively. How many births actually occurred
in 1938 it is impossible to tell. In 1939 and
1940—according to the Statistical Review for
1940 (published in 1944)—the numbers were
614,479 and 590,120. It is most welcome
that the Registrar-General, who naturally is
more interested in birth registration than in
birth statistics, has at last yielded to the
demographers’ urgent demand for dealing
with births according to the date of the
event, and has published the numbers of
male and female legitimate and illegitimate
live and still births which occurred in 1939
and 1940. But the statistics for those years,
showing order of birth and duration of
marriage, unfortunately still refer to registered births and, therefore, do not convey a
true picture of the decline in fertility during
the first period of the war. These statistics
inelude for 1939 54,144 live births which
occurred in 1938 but were registered only in
1939, while they exclude 49,271 which
occurred in 1939 and were registered in 1940.
The statistics for 1940 include those 49,271
births, but exclude 32,362 which occurred
in 1940 and were registered in 1941.

The deaths up to now have likewise been
shown by date of registration. But here the
consequences are less serious. According to
a statement published each year in the
Registrar-General’s Statistical Review ‘‘ the
time lag between occurrence and registration
is usually only a day or two.”’ It would seem,
however, that the exceptions to this rule are
very numerous. Of the twenty-three tables
on mortality embodied in the Statistical
Review one shows the deaths by months of
occurrence. A comparison with the returns
by date of registration reveals that the
differences are sometimes pretty large. From
the third to the fourth quarter of 1935, the
number of registered deaths increased by
22,677, or 22°7 per cent., while the number
of actual deaths increased by 24,785, or 25-I

per cent. It seems desirable, therefore, that
henceforth not only the births but also the
deaths be classified throughout by date of
occurrence. |

The Population (Statistics) Act introduced only some questions of minor importance to be asked on the registration of death.
But the collection of details about deaths
has been fairly ample for many years, and
the mortality statistics of England compare
favourably with those of other countries.
I would even go so far as to plead for the
curtailment of the published tables in one
respect. I would advocate that the publication of standardized death rates be stopped.
The standardized death rate, which is meant
to convey a better picture of the trend of
mortality than the crude death rate, has
decreased from 20 in 1876-80 to g in 1935-9.
The crude death rate has decreased only
from 21 to 12. This crude rate is no adequate
gauge of the trend of mortality, as it is calculated without regard to the changes in the
age compositioa of the population. Since the
age composition is now more favourable
than sixty years ago, the crude death rate
overstates the decline of mortality. The
official standardized death rates are those
which would have been recorded if the age
composition of the population had been the
same as in rgor. Alli depends, of course, on
what year is taken as a standard, and it so
happens that by choosing the year rgor the
decline of mortality in the last sixty years ts
overstated still more than by a comparison
of the crude death rates. To compute what
the death rates would have been sixty years
ago and what they would be now if the com
‘ position of the population by age at both

dates had been that of 1901 is perfectly
futile. It is just as futile as to compute what
would have been the death rates then and
to-day if, both in the late seventies and now,
the composition of the population by occupation had been the same as in rgor. But
the computation of such standardized death
rates is not only futile, it is a nuisance.
Nothing, I am convinced, has contributed so
much to conceal the actual trend of mortality
in England as the regular publication of
these standardized death rates. The correct
DEMOGRAPHY—SCIENCE AND ADMINISTRATION

death rate derived from the life tables has
decreased in the last sixty years from 23 to
16 or only by about 30 per cent. England,
which in the 1880’s had a lower mortality
than, for example, Germany, Holland, and
Switzerland, had in the 1930’s a higher
mortality than those countries. The time
that is wasted in computing misleading
standardized death rates could not be better
used than in studying why the progress
achieved in lowering mortality in England
lags behind what has been accomplished in a
good many other countries.

The position is particularly unsatisfactory
as regards life tables. Thirty years ago
such tables were available for 1838-54,
1871-80, 1881-90, I89I-I900, 1901-10, and
Ig10-12. Since then tables have been published only for 1920-2 and 1930-2. While the
earlier tables comprised all years from 1871
to 1912, the recent ones cover only six of the
thirty-two years elapsed since 1912. Formerly
the bad years were taken with the good years.
It is obvious that the results of the new
procedure, which completely ignores not
only the war years but also such a bad peace
year as 1929, are much less conclusive. The
existing life tables should be supplemented
without delay by a life table for females for
Ig1I-20, and by tables for each sex for
1921-30 and 1931-9. The necessary data are
all available in the Registrar-General’s Office,
and by using modern short-cut methods
which yield results sufficiently accurate for
all practical and scientific purposes a life
table can be computed in a few hours.

_The marriage statistics in England are not
as ample as the death statistics but they are
not as meagre as the birth statistics were
until 1938. As in the case of the death
statistics it is not so much the tables showing
the basic figures which need modification
but rather the published rates and averages.
The Registrar-General’s Statistical Review
gives the marriage rates of (2) bachelors and
divorced men, (6) widowers, (c) spinsters and
divorced women, and (d) widows. This
lumping together of single and divorced
persons was immaterial sixty or seventy
years ago when the marrying divorced persons numbered only 100 a year and con
19
stituted only 0-2 per cent. of the remarrying
persons, but it is most confusing to-day,
since in 1939 no fewer than 10,698 or 20 per
cent. of the remarrying persons had been
divorced. One average which is particularly
misleading and which is published every year
in the Statistical Review, is the average age
at marriage. This figure was rising before the
war and gave the impression that people
nowadays marry later than in former times.
But it was rising only because the population
was ageing. It is obvious that in countries
where owing, for example, to a heavy
decrease in fertility the proportion of
younger spinsters decreases, the average age
at marriage may increase, even if the
nuptiality of the younger spinsters rises
while that of the older spinsters declines.
Since 1931 the frequency of marriages in
England has increased enormously. Yet the
average age at marriage of spinsters rose
in every year up to 1937. No wonder
that people who see those figures conclude
that the increase in the number of marriages
was largely due to the contraction of
marriages that had been postponed during
the depression. But a correct computation
of the mean age at marriage of spinsters,
that is of the mean expectation of single life
at birth for those who eventually marry,
shows that it has actually decreased in every
year since 1931. The additional marriages
concluded in that period were then early
marriages, not delayed marriages.

The correct mean age at marriage can be
derived only from a nuptiality table which is
constructed according to the same principles
as a life table, and which shows the probability of marrying. Many official nuptiality tables have been computed in the
course of the last forty years in foreign
countries, but none in England. Our knowledge of the frequency of marriages, in so far
as it is based on official documents, is, therefore, quite defective. As in the case of life
tables all necessary data are available in the
Registrar-General’s Office, and nothing could
destroy as quickly the myth that our population problem may be solved by an increase
in marriages as the publication of official
nuptiality tables.
: , oa
'20

5. Official Statistics and Population Problems

In February 1944 the Government set up
a Royal Commission on Population. Its
first term of reference is “to examine the
facts relating to the present population
trends in Great Britain.”’ Let us assume
that, on being appointed, a member of the
Commission would have tried to examine
the facts by consulting all published official
statistics. He would have found that the
most recent general census available was the
one of 1931 and that the covering report was
not yet prepared ; that no fertility inquiry
had been made since 1911; that all birth
statistics weré based on the date of registration and were therefore somewhat uncertain ;
that the most recent statistics of the father’s
occupation were those of 1921 ; that no data
collected under the Population (Statistics)
Act of 1938 had been published so far. If he
had looked for gross and net reproduction
rates or for nuptiality tables, he would have
seen that such rates or tables have never
been published and never even been mentioned. If he had asked for any official
publication on population trends he would
have been given the Registrar-General’s
White Paper Current Trend of Population in
Great Britain, of which Earl De La Warr
said in the House of Lords on June 8th,
1943: “‘ This Report, if I may say so, is
completely misleading and therefore extremely dangerous. I cannot see the reason
or excuse for a Report of this character
unless it is just an attempt to allay public
concern on a problem that is in fact dangerous to the extent that the public do not
recognize it.”” If he had pointed out that the
Government in that same discussion had
announced that the Minister of Health
“proposes to publish a document on the
lines of the recent White Paper, in which the
statistical outlook would be set out and
discussed in a reasoned and balanced manner,’’ he would have been told that the plan to
publish such a document had been abandoned.

Since the appointment of the Royal Commission the position has improved considerably.

1. The results of the emergency census
taken for purposes of national registration

“THE EUGENICS REVIEW

on September 29th, 1939, were published in
the spring of 1944. The report shows the
civilian population by sex, age, and marital
condition. The returns are less trustworthy
than those obtained at the general censuses,
and the data for men are particularly defec
tive inasmuch as they exclude (for England

and Wales) about 900,000 non-civilians ;
but our knowledge of the age composition
and the marital condition of females has
become much more up to date.

2. The Government published in the
summer of 1944 data for 1940 collected
under the Population (Statistics) Act ; similar figures for 1939 were published in the
autumn of 1944, and shortly thereafter for
the second half of 1938.13 The tables for
1938 are accompanied by a covering report
which shows the gross and net reproduction
rates for 1938. Unfortunately the text is.
written in the same vein as the White Paper
on current trends of population. The
Registrar-General evidently thought that the
main object of such a report was. to fight
what his Medical Statistical Officer called
“that lamentable sense of national inferiority from which a large section of the
population now seems to be suffering.’
The essence of his argument is that the
population problem is not serious since a
population decline could be prevented by
encouraging marriage and particularly early
marriage. For 1939 and 1940 only tables.
have been published, but no rates and no:
text. It is to be feared, therefore, that in
their present state these statistics will be
of little use to the members of the Royal
Commission. However, the basic data are
now available, and it should not cause
unsurmountable difficulties to relate them
to other data hidden in the RegistrarGeneral’s Office and to provide an unbiased
interpretation of the figures.

3. The Registrar-General, in the spring of
1944, published for 1934-43 “‘ approximate
reproduction rates, corresponding to the
births which occurred in each year and
making allowance for a continuing improvement in survivorship conditions.”’* In his
Statistical Review for 1938 he had included
a net reproduction rate computed according
DEMOGRAPHY—SCIENCE AND ADMINISTRATION. aE

to the principles accepted .all over the world
(and adopted by the League of Nations and
the International Statistical Institute), which
imply. that such rates should be computed
on the basis of current fertility and mortality. His new rates take no account whatever of current mortality. Although in 1940
fertility was lower and mortality was much
higher than in 1935, he obtains for 1940 a
higher reproduction rate than for 1935
because, irrespective of the facts, he assumes
year-in year-out a steady gradual “ improvement in survivorship conditions.’”’ These
rates are not comparable with those of any
other country ; they are speculative because
all estimates of future survivorship conditions are uncertain ; they tend to overstate
reproduction because they disregard fluctuations in mortality. But if they were recomputed on the basis of current mortality
they would be most useful.

A start, no doubt, has been made in the
course of the last year to increase our
knowledge of the demographic position of
England. But much has still to be done in
order to enable the Royal Commission “ to
examine the facts relating to the present
population trends.” A few things have been
suggested before, such as the computation
of life tables and nuptiality tables, of gross
reproduction rates and of genuine net reproduction rates, and a proper analysis of the
statistics collected under the Population
(Statistics) Act up to 1944. But the most
important task of all is the immediate taking
of a special fertility (or family) census which
would fill many gaps caused by the numerous
sins of omission committed in the course of
the last decades. Such a fertility census
would convey a comprehensive picture of
essential demographic facts upon which (to
use Farr’s words of 1844) ‘“‘the greatest
ignorance prevails,’ for example, the incidence of childlessness, the spacing of births,
fertility differences between occupational
and social groups, and the distribution of
families of various sizes. The information to
be derived from such a census is indispensable for a serious study of the population
problem and for the framing of an adequate

population policy.

6. Future of Administration and Science

It may well be that in some very small
countries population and vital statistics do
not suffer if they are prepared in a RegistrarGeneral’s Office, but this combination is to
be found in no large country except England,
and it has yielded here quite unsatisfactory
results. It seems, therefore, advisable to
create an independent office dealing with
population and vital statistics. Whether
such an office should also be put in charge of
some other related statistics is not of decisive
importance. The Economist of October 7th,
1944, contained the following suggestion :

It is already contemplated to take the census of
production each year after the war; formerly it
was taken every five years. There is a strong case
for taking a census of distribution at frequent
intervals, perhaps every two years. Similarly, the
interval between population censuses has been far
too long in the past; it might-well be reduced
from ten to five years. But if the number of such
statistical investigations is to be increased. and if
they are to be carried out at short intervals, the
existing facilities at the disposal of the Government will have to be overhauled. It might be an
advantage, for example, to follow American practice by creating an organization analogous to the
Bureau of the Census, that is by making a single
organization responsible for all censuses. The
creation of a strong permanent organization would
not merely simplify the procedure, but it should
make for speed in the assembly and publication of
statistics.

The American Bureau of Census is in fact
in charge not only of population censuses
but also of vital statistics, and an organization analogous to this Bureau may prove as
beneficial here as it has proven in the United
States. The only reasonable objection which .
may be raised against the proposed change
is that it would not necessarily ‘‘ make for
speed in the assembly and publication of
statistics.”” But it is an incontrovertible fact
that for several decades publication of population statistics in this country has been
slower than in any British Dominion or
Colony or in any foreign country. An outstanding example of speed in publication is
to be found in India. The area covered by
the Indian census of 1931 was thirty times as
large as that of England and Wales, and the
population was nine times as large. Yet, the
forty-nine volumes of that Indian census
22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

which included an admirable text of several
hundred thousand words were published
within thirty months after census date.
Would anyone suggest that it is easier to take
a census in India, that it is easier there to
instruct the supervisors and the enumerators
(2,000,000 as compared with 40,000 in
England), to assemble the filled-up forms at
headquarters, or to train the necessary
clerical staff for coding, punching, and
attending the electric tabulating machines ?
And would anyone suggest that with the
present organization it would be possible
here to achieve what has been achieved in
India ?

Difficulties, it is true, may arise in finding
the adequate personnel for the new organization. The leading men should be competent,
unbiased, eager, and preferably young. It
is. here that Science can play an important
part. Our universities should establish
chairs for demography, and the students of
demography should be thoroughly trained
in statistics. This training would enable
them to find a position as statisticians if they
fail to secure employment as demographers.
But the demand for demographers will be
considerable in the future. The increasing
importance of the population problem will
afford many opportunities of doing useful
work in this country, and the great development schemes in the Colonies cannot be
carried out effectively without the assistance
of expert demographers.

In the field of demography, as in many
other fields, the Administration needs the
co-operation of Science. But there is hardly
any other field in which Science needs so
much the co-operation of the Administration. The demographic scholar can discover
methods by which the basic demographic

1

data may be correctly interpreted but he
himself cannot collect those data. They can
be collected only by the Administration, and
his chances of getting the data he needs will
obviously be much greater if he contributes
towards the education of the future personnel
of the Administration.

NoTEsS

1 Natural and Political Observations,
London, 1662.

2 See z7bid., p. 12.

% Thomas Sprat, The History of the Royal Society
of London, for the Improving of Natural Knowledge,
3rd ed., p. 67. London, 1722.

4See The Economic Writings of Sir William
Petty, ed. by Charles Henry Hull. 2 vols. Cambridge, 1899.

5“ An Estimate of the Degrees of the Mortality
of Mankind, drawn from curious Tables of the
Births and Funerals at the City of Breslaw,’’
Philosophical Transactions, vol. 17, No. 196, Jan.
1693, pp. 596-610; ‘‘ Some further Considerations
on the Breslaw Bills of Mortality,’”’ 2bzd., No. 198,
March 1693, pp. 654-6.

6 goth Annual Report of the Registrar-General of
Births, Deaths, and Marriages in England (1877),

. xi.
P 7 6th Report (1842), p. XXvil.

8 30th Report (1867), p. 222. See also r4gtk
Report (1851), p. xiii; 16th Report (1853), Pp. x;
27th Report (1864), pp. xix-xx; Supplement to
35th Report (1872), p. xi.

®See, for example, Congrés International de
Statistique a la Haye, Compte-rendu des travaux de
la septiéme session, seconde partie, p. 533. The
Hague, 1870.

10 Census of England and Wales, 1921, General
Report with Appendices, p. 78. London, 1927.

11 Tbid., p. 84.

122See R. R. Kuczynski, The Measurement of
Population Growth, pp. 83-90. London, 1935.

18 See Statistical Review for the Year 1938,
Tables, Part II, Civil; same for 1939 and for 1940.
London, 1944.

14 British Medical Journal, March 21st, 1942.

18 See Births, Deaths and Marriages registered in
the Quarter ended 31st December, 1943, Pp. I.

p. 72.
