EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE
WALWORTH WOMEN’S WELFARE
CENTRE.

: | - By Epwarp FULLER

t
'

Dr. Drysdale’s passing reference, in the October number of THE
EvuGEnics REview, to the Birth Control Centre at East Street, Walworth (the Walworth Women’s Welfare Centre), invites some detailed
account of this pioneer effort to bring within access of the poor, know+
ledge which may enable them to restrict their families within such
limits as may be prescribed by their circumstances. With but two
years’ history to look back upon—the Centre was opened, largely
through the efforts of Dr. and Mrs. Drysdale, in November, 1921—it is
not possible to draw conclusions as to the eugenic value of the work, but
there is sufficient evidence to show that it has a eugenic tendency, at
least in restricting reproduction from certain bad stocks and in cireumstances in which, from temporary causes, parenthood is not to be
desired. |
Take, for example, the case of inmates of Mental Hospitals suffer*
ing from intermittent insanity. It is now a well-established practice on
the part of the Medical Superintendent of at least one Mental Hospital
‘in the London area, to send his women patients, in suitable cases, on
discharge, to the Walworth Centre for instruction in the practice of
contraception. The patients come willingly, often with their husbands,
and are armed against the possibility of producing feeble-minded or
lunatic offspring. Ultimately, it is to be hoped, contraceptive
instruction will be available in the Mental] Hospitals themselves—for
this would appear to be a logical sequence of treatment—but meanwhile, a social service of high value is being performed by the Walworth
‘Women’s Welfare Centre in making this advice available for all expatients of Mental Hospitals who seek it.
: It may be remarked that special emphasis is laid, at the Centre,
on the joint responsibility of husband and wife in- parenthood or
absention from parenthood. There are, occasionally, cases where the
woman comes, furtively, without her husband’s knowledge, to arm
herself against his brutal advances. One such case, of recent date,
comes to mind: A woman, still in the early thirties and with eight
children, who had been so ill-treated by her husband that she had
secured a conviction for assault against him, with two months’ imprisonment. The occasion of the assault had been the wife’s refusal to allow
him his ‘‘conjugal rights,’’ for she knew, from bitter experience, that
intercourse meant certain pregnancy. But such cases are rare. The
monthly meetings for men—husbands of the women who have been
treated at the Centre—and the Men’s Propaganda Committee, which is
carrying the message of Birth Control into scores of offices and work598 EUGENICS REVIEW. |

shops, Trade Union lodges and clubs, bear witness to the fact that, over
this question of family limitation, there is, in many cases, agreement
between husband and wife.

This is as it should be. On economic grounds alone, these people
are condemned to a low standard of parenthood. By dint of great
devotion—which many of them exhibit—and with the good fortune of
keeping in regular employment, they can bring up one child, perhaps
two children, in conditions of moderate decency and with a fair chance
of their becoming useful citizens. But more than that they dare not
produce. Analysis of 100 recent cases, taken consecutively from the
record cards at the Walworth Centre, shows an average income of
54s. per week in a series ranging from 70s. (an exceptionally high
figure) to as low as 25s.—and this average does not include the many
cases of unemployment in which the only income is the Government
dole. A poignant case of prudent though, in the event, unsuccessful
deliberation in parenthood comes to mind. A young clerk and a typist
had married, with the intention of rearing a family, when their home
was established and the husband’s position assured. Meanwhile,
the girl proposed to keep on with her work to increase the family
exchequer so that the children, when they came, might have a better
chance in life than their parents had. Alas! Their knowledge of the
art of contraception was imperfect and, when the girl came to the
Walworth Centre, of which she had only just heard, it was found that
she was pregnant, and, to add to their distress, the husband was thrown
‘out of employment unexpectedly at about the same time.

It must be remembered, however, that the Walworth Centre does
not touch the worst cases. It argues a certain degree of self-respect,
foresight and social conscience for a woman to make the effort to visit
the Centre. Many of those who come obviously take a pride in doing
the best they can for the children they have and, for their sakes, are
anxious not to have more. The patients come from all parts of
London and even from the provinces, but for every woman who visits
‘the Centre, there are probably twenty others, in the poverty-stricken
and congested slums in its immediate vicinity, who do not trouble to
seek the help it can afford. From the point of view of the future of the
race, this is a disheartening fact which must be faced. An isolated
voluntary Centre, like that at Walworth, though it does admirable
work, does not touch the vast mass of careless reproduction which is
filling the world with degenerates and burdening the future with
unemployables. It does not touch the slum dwellers who, with no
food, no fire, no work and no money even to spend on the small and
transient comfort that the beer-shop affords, find, in sexual relations,
their only release from depression, and they indulge themselves,
careless of the fact that, months afterwards, they will have to
shoulder the burden of maintaining another little life.

Since its inception the Centre has dealt \ ith over 2.1 00 se] arate
cases each case entailing two visits, sometimes more. The Centre is
maintained solely by voluntary ef.ort, v.ithout any grant from ; ublic
funds.

The Centre has a eugenic, tendency, though a somewhat negative
one, in yet another way. It is found that a large, proportion of the
WALWORTH WOMEN’S WELFARE CENTRE. 599

older women who come for advice have been in the habit of bringing
on miscarriages by the use of drugs and in other ways—invariably with
injury to themselves as individuals and as mothers. Of the 100 cases
quoted above, 34 women had had miscarriages , some of them two, three
and four each. Birth Control—more properly, Conception Control—
tends to prevent these voluntary (and criminal) abortions, with all
their evil effects on the individual and, potentially, on the race.
Even to the incorrigibly fertile, the contraceptive advice given and the
methods advocated at the Walworth Centre hold out some hope—
though emphasis is laid on the fact that no absolute temporary preventive of conception has yet been discovered. Three such cases stand
out in the 100 under review: (a) Twelve children, born respectively in
1906, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 18, 14, 18, 19, 21, 23, with a miscarriage in 1920.
Three of the children died in infancy and one in early childhood. (b)
Fourteen children, born respectively in 1902, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12,
14, 17, 18, 20, 22, and pregnant again on examination at the Centre.
There had also been one miscarriage, and of the 14 children born,
seven had died, all in infancy. (c) Seven children, born respectively
in 1912, 13, 15, 17, 19, 21, 22. This case was sent to the Centre by a
Poor Law Guardian in the country. It is to be noted that, in the
former two cases—and in countless others not here considered—the
only rest which the women had from child bearing was during the
husband’s absence on war service. It is hoped that, even in such
prolific cases, the methods of contraception advocated at the Walworth
Women’s Welfare Centre will, at least, secure a better spacing of
births, with consequent advantage to both mothers and children.
