THE PROBLEM OF DEAFNESS AND ITS
PREVENTION.

By MAcLEOD YEARSLEY.

THE medicine of the future is preventive, it is in the nature of
progress that it should be so, and, as time goes on, every branch
of medical science will partake more and more of a preventive
character. That branch of the healing art which deals with
the treatment of diseases of the ear and of the deafness which
arises therefrom is of comparatively recent origin, and, during
the last quarter of a century, has made great strides. Hitherto,
however, it has dealt rather with bi-products. It has perfected
the treatment of intracranial abscess, and the numerous other
serious and often fatal complications which may arise during
acute and chronic abscess in the ear, but too little attention has
been paid to the great importance of prompt interference with
their primary causes, although much valuable work has been
done in the elucidation of such causes. With regard to the deafness which arises from non-suppurative forms of ear disease, the
record of modern otology is less satisfactory. In spite of the
fact that the causative factors of deafness are well known, little
has been effected in the prevention of the terrible infirmity to
which they lead, and many persons have been and still are
allowed to progress to serious or complete deafness without
adequate struggle to avert it. The means at the disposal of
the surgeon for the relief of deafness are often wholly
insufficient to alleviate and the sufferer has to be content with
such artificial aids as trumpets, tubes, or lip-reading. The
great majority of such cases are, as a matter of fact, eminently
preventable, and there is no reason why deafness, as confidently asserted by Dr. Kerr Love, may not be made to pass
away from our midst.

Deafness, has been taken lying down by the profession and
the laity for too many years. It is time that this was fully
realised in order that the means for prevention, near to hand,
are taken universally. According to the statistics of the Census
for 1901—those for 1911 are not yet available—there are, in the
THE PROBLEM OF DEAFNESS AND ITS PREVENTION. II17

United Kingdom, 21,855 persons classified as ‘‘ deaf and
dumb,’’ This takes no account whatever of the numbers who
have become deaf in youth, young adult and later life. When
it is realised what an enormous loss of otherwise serviceable
citizens this means to the State, the argument for prevention
will come home with greater force. The majority of specialists
are fully aware of the direction in which the prevention of
deafness lies, but it needs a great movement, in which the laity
must take part, to give the necessary stimulus for prevention
to be carried out. In order that this movement may be initiated,
it is essential that the laity should be put into possession of the
salient facts relating to deafness and its origin. These facts,
once grasped, should arouse those previously ignorant of them
to a sense of what is going on around them, and stimulate
public men and responsible bodies to set going the machinery
of efficient prevention.

Deafness may be divided into the congenital and acquired
forms. Research has shown that, among the congenital cases,
there are at least two classes, those in whom the condition appears
sporadically and in whom no hereditary tendency can be
detected, and those in whom a distinct hereditary tendency is
to be found. Until recently both these groups have been confounded together, but, largely owing to the work of Dr. Kerr
Love, they have been distinguished as entirely separate. The
group of cases in which deafness occurs sporadically in families
will need further classification, since it contains not a few
instances in which the deafness was not congenital at all, but
occurred at some period of infant life, usually before the second
year (that is, before the acquisition of speech), from some
acquired cause the nature of which was overlooked. It will be
more convenient, therefore, to consider true hereditary deafness
first.

By true hereditary deafness is meant that form of deaf-birth
in which the condition makes its appearance in several members
of a family, these members being found in successive generations and collateral branches, and it is not enough that they
should occur merely in one generation, for it is possible that,
where several brothers and sisters are born deaf, it is rather an
118 EUGENICS REVIEW.

instance not of true hereditary deafness but of sporadic deaf
birth, due to some such cause as syphilis. The application of
the Mendelian theory to the problem of hereditary deafness is
of considerable help and, with further research, there is no
doubt that it will be found to be of still greater assistance.
Mendel’s law is now well known, but a short recapitulation of
its chief points is necessary here. This is best given by quoting
Bateson’s summary that ‘‘ The essential part of the discovery
is the evidence that the germ cells or gametes produced by
cross-bred organisms may in respect of given characters be of
the pure parental types, and consequently incapable of transmitting the opposite characters; that when such pure similar
gametes of opposite sexes are united in fertilisation, the
individuals so formed and their posterity are free from all taint
of the cross; that there may be, in short, perfect or almost
perfect discontinuity between these germs in respect of one of
each pair of opposite characters.’’ This summarises Mendel’s
theoretical interpretation—the theory of gametic segregation—
of the important set of facts which he discovered. Mendel
assumed that the hybrid offspring of two pure-bred parents
differing markedly as to a unit character, produce two kinds
of germ-cells, one kind with the dominant character, the other
kind with the recessive character. In other words, the gametes
are segregated into two sets of ‘‘ pure ’’ gametes.

To illustrate the Mendelian hypothesis the simplest
example that can be taken is the well-known experiment in the
breeding of peas. The fertilisation of two individuals of tall
peas will give a posterity of tall peas only, whilst the result
with dwarf peas will be a posterity of dwarf plants only. If,
however, a tall plant be crossed with a dwarf, the resulting
first generation will all be tall. In the next generation, if the
cross-bred plants be allowed to fertilise themselves, the offspring
will show the two original forms, of which three will be tall
and one dwarf. In this case, therefore, the ‘‘tallness’’ is
‘* dominant ’’ and the ‘‘ dwarfness ’’ is ‘‘ recessive ’’ and, in all
cases of Mendelian crossing, it will be found that the results
will show, on an average, three dominants to one recessive.
In Mendel’s original experiment, out of 1,064 plants, 787 were
THE PROBLEM OF DEAFNESS AND ITS PREVENTION. II9Q

tall, 227 were dwarf. When these recessive dwarfs are allowed
to fertilise themselves, they give rise to recessives only, for
any number of generations; that is to say, the recessive
character breeds true. Of the dominants one-third are ‘‘ pure ’”
dominants, which, in subsequent generations, give rise to
dominants only ; and two-thirds are cross-bred dominants, which
on self-fertilisation again give rise to a mixture of dominants
and recessives in the proportion of three to one.

Without going further, it may be pointed out that the
theory of Mendel furnishes an explanation of the fact that deafbirth may appear in, formerly, unexpected fashion in families
showing hereditary deafness. If no further fact were made
patent than that the union of two hereditarily deaf persons may
give rise to deaf born and hearing offspring and that the latter
may carry in their germ-cells the (?) recessive character of
deafness and so may, even if mated with hearing persons, give
rise to further deaf-born children, that fact alone is of vast
importance. In hereditary deafness, from the study of such
imperfect family trees as we possess, hearing appears to be the
dominant character, deafness the recessive, hence, in order that
the number of hereditary deaf-born persons may be reduced it
is important that those known to carry the recessive character
should not be allowed to mate together, or that, if permitted
to marry, they should only mate with hearing persons whose
family histories are without taint of deafness.

In dealing with the prevention of true hereditary deafness,
therefore, the questions to be considered are mainly social and
educational. One must, however, go further, and point out
that, amongst families showing hereditary deafness, there are
those who show that defect alone and those who show it in
conjunction with mental deficiency or imbecility or epilepsy.
The latter class should be prohibited from marriage altogether,
a prohibition which should include those members of the family
who are apparently healthy, since they are likely to be carriers
of the recessive characters. At the present state of our social
evolution, it is difficult to interfere with apparently sound
individuals and we must for the moment, be content—inadequate
120 EUGENICS REVIEW.

as it may be—to use repressive measures with those who show
the recessive character in their persons, feeling that, as more is
known upon the subject and we can speak with more authority
upon matters of heredity, we shall take more care in the breeding
of our future citizens. With advanced and certain knowledge,
the wider prohibition will be sure to prevail in the future. To
this end it is important that the mentally defective and epileptic
deaf should be segregated for the whole of their lives.

As regards those who exhibit hereditary deafness alone and
uncomplicated, the matter is somewhat different and, possibly,
capable of easier solution under present conditions. The
segregation of the deaf in residential institutions and their
acquisition of a language, that of signs, which can only be
understood amongst themselves or by a limited number of
hearing persons who pass their lives amongst them—certainly
not by the outside community—is a grave defect in deaf education, for it is one which must lead inevitably to the intermarriage
of deaf persons. What is required is that the deaf should
associate more with hearing persons and less with one another,
and that, by means of speech taught by the oral method and
lip-reading, they should be able to communicate with their
hearing fellows. To this end the day-school system and instruction by the oral method must be made more universal. There
are persons, happily diminishing in number (as reactionaries
generally do in the face of progress), who would make of the deaf
a class apart. Such persons are doing a grievous wrong to the
very class they believe they are benefiting, for they deprive the
deaf of free intercourse with the hearing and force them to
intermarry in their quest of sympathy and family life. Until
these defects in the social welfare and education of the deaf are
remedied, it is unfair to expect intermarriage between deaf-born
persons not to take place.

Hitherto the occurrence of deaf-birth only in families in
which similar cases have occurred in other generations has been
discussed ; but what of the appearance of a deaf-born child in a
family, all the members of which have been hearing hitherto?
Great light has been shed upon this question by the recent
masterly research of Dr. Kerr Love. To him we owe a great
THE PROBLEM OF DEAFNESS AND ITS PREVENTION. I2I1

debt of gratitude for the disentangling of the very complex
subject of sporadic congenital deafness. It will be found on
investigation that nearly all the children in institutions for the
deaf come from the poorest class of the community, those who
live in a continual condition of dangerous overcrowding in their
homes. The social status of the families from which come the
deaf children of Glasgow—the city to which the researches of
Dr. Kerr Love chiefly refer—is that of the single apartment
home, and these show overcrowding to an appalling extent.
This overcrowding means untreated syphilis, uncontrolled use
(or rather abuse) of alcohol, carelessness in the upbringing of
children. Consequently the child death-rate is high and there
is a deaf-mute rate which is never approached in the houses of
the well-to-do classes. This makes for an increase of sporadic
congenital deafness and of cases of early deafness in childhood.
The damage to hearing occurs before birth or during the first
years of life, and the deafness which results is irreparable.
Under such circumstances, and there is no reason to doubt that
they prevail as much in London, Liverpool, and other large
cities as in Glasgow, parental neglect is rife to an extent of
which the ordinary person has no idea and, even if he has some
inkling thereof, never fully realises. Indeed, it would appear
that the parents care no more for their offspring once they are
born. And yet it has been shown! that the children of the very
poor are at birth physically quite equal to those of the well-to-do.
Hence the position as to prevention lies to a large extent in
solving the housing question. The matter cannot be put better
than it has been by Dr. Kerr Love: ‘‘ If deafness is to be prevented, there must be decent and healthy conditions for the
children of the poor during the first years of life. Like a plant,
or any young animal, they must have room to grow, they must
have simple, clean, free conditions of life. This is the first
step for the prevention of infantile or sporadic congenital
deafness.”’

But there is something else in addition to the miserable conditions of the families from which the great majority of our deaf

1 Kerr Love, four lectures on the Causes of and Prevention of Deafness.
The National Bureau for promoting the general welfare of the deaf. P. 35.
122 EUGENICS REVIEW.

children spring. Some workers at the subject have ventured to
see in alcoholism the chief factor. But, even granting the
effect of chronic alcoholism in the parents upon their germ cells,
it is rather the conditions which lead to habitual alcoholic excess
that account for the results in the children. It is the poverty
and misery which lead to the excess and the consequent neglect
of the children that’ must be attacked before the parents are
lectured and preached to upon the sins of alcoholism and the
benefits of total abstinence (misnamed ‘‘temperance’’). How
many of those who talk glibly upon the evils of intemperance
realise the causes that lead thereto? It has been truly said that
it is not possible to make men and women sober by Act of
Parliament, but they can be weaned from their intemperance by
making their homes brighter and more healthy and their conditions of life more bearable. Healthy men and women who
have something to live for do not need the oblivion that
drunkenness brings to blunt their senses and give them a brief
respite from their misery. It is not right to look upon every
case of alcoholism as a disease.

It is not in alcoholic excess alone that the additional factor
in the solution of sporadic congenital deafness is to be found;
some more potent agent must be sought. This agent has been
shown by Dr. Kerr Love to lie in untreated syphilis and he has
been the first to establish the fact, upon undeniable evidence,
that congenital deafness is sometimes due to this disease.
Syphilis is the only disease which causes deafness in both parent
and child; it is at work both before and after birth and so forms
a link between congenital and acquired deafness. From careful
investigation, by means chiefly of the Wassermann blood-test,
Dr. Kerr Love has been able to publish the histories of 21
families. In these families there were 172 pregnancies, which
resulted in 30 miscarriages, and 112 live births. Among these
there were 75 deaths (including the 30 premature births), nearly
all of which occurred in the first or second years. Thirty-one
children were deaf, or blind and deaf, and of the 66 remaining
living children, many were born before the poison entered the
parental blood. Many of the 66 are not healthy, and more are
likely to become unhealthy, because the blood-test showed that
THE PROBLEM OF DEAFNESS AND ITS PREVENTION. 123

the poison was still present. ‘‘ Nearly two-thirds of the children
born are dead, or, if alive, are either deaf or blind or both (106
in 172), and with a few exceptions there are no adults in the
families. In many of the families one or more deaths from
meningitis have occurred.’’ This is a fearful record for one
city and it is more than probable that it is equalled or even surpassed in our other great cities. What an appalling waste of
life, a waste eminently preventable. The sin of syphilis has
been talked about with bated breath for years, but not the real
sin of syphilis. That lies, not in its method of propagation,
but in the way the disease has been regarded hitherto. The
real sin of syphilis is not one of commission, but one of omission. Happily for humanity times are changing, and we are
now discussing openly what formerly we only dared to think,—
that the time has come, indeed it has been long overdue, when
syphilis should be regarded as a disease and not as a secret sin.
The present Royal Commission will have plenty of evidence
before it to prove that this disease is one of the most fell enemies
of social life, one that, properly handled, can be stamped out as
smallpox has been eliminated, as tuberculosis is being eradicated. It is not an exaggeration to say that there is no disease
more disastrous to child health, more destructive to child life,
than is syphilis, not even tuberculosis. Yet it is not notifiable,
and amongst the poor is scarcely ever treated. An infectious
disease, due, like many other diseases which we deal with in a
rational way, to a micro-organism, it enters the blood of the
parents and is transmitted to their offspring. Children it stunts,
dwarfs, kills. Many children thus tainted are still-born or die
within a few months or during the first year, whilst of the survivors many become blind, deaf, or both. Many of the child
deaths attributable to the disease occur from meningitis and it is
by meningitis, when it does not end fatally, that it causes brain
defects. Deafness may occur before birth, either from prenatal
meningitis extending to the essential nervous apparatus of hearing, or by disease of that apparatus alone. Yet syphilis is a
disease very amenable to treatment, and it is only because it is
allowed to go untreated that it is transmitted to the child. It
was long ago pointed out that the children who become deaf or
blind are those in whom treatment was neglected in infancy.
124 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Syphilis, as has already been pointed out, forms a link
between congenital and acquired deafness. It has been proved
to be a potent cause of sporadic deaf-birth, thus causing also
mutism; it may, and frequently does, cause deafness after the
speech habit has been formed, between the ages of 6 and 16.
Many of these children present, with their damaged sight,
damaged ears, deformed faces and often damaged brains, some
of the most terrible object lessons that syphilis can give. These
are cases for prevention, not for cure, and they alone would form
sufficient reasons for saying that our present methods of regarding syphilis are disgraceful to a civilised and Christian country.
The obvious, the only possible way in which syphilis, which
probably causes more sporadic deaf-births than can at present
be demonstrated, is to make notifiable every case of the disease,
congenital or acquired, in order that mother and child may be
reached with a view to prompt treatment. Public opinion is,
happily, tending in this direction. At the recent International
Congress of Medicine in London the consensus of opinion was
overwhelmingly for notification. The Congress on Infant
Mortality, held about the same time, expressed itself similarly
and the writer of the present article was instrumental in obtaining a unanimous and strongly worded resolution to the same
effect from the Association of Medical Officers of Health, and
this was forwarded to the Local Government Board.

It is necessary, before leaving the subject of congenital
deafness, to allude to the part played by consanguinity in deafbirth. A great deal has been said as regards the possible
influence of blood relationship as a factor in congenital deafness,
and, from his researches,! the writer has found that, out of 309
families of congenitally deaf cases, cousin marriages occurred
in 22, or 7°08%, whilst in 592 families of acquired deaf children,
such relationship was present in only 2 cases, or 0°32%. It is
undoubtedly true that a much higher proportion of consanguineous marriages is to be found in the family histories of
congenitally deaf cases than among the normal population. In
the United States, Fay? found that the percentage of deaf

1 The causes leading to educational deafness in children. Lancet, July 20 and
27, 1912.
2 Marriages of the deaf in America, Volta Bureau, Washington, 1898.
THE PROBLEM OF DEAFNESS AND ITS PREVENTION. 125

children born from marriages reported as consanguineous was
nearly four times as great as from marriages not so reported.
The reason probably lies, however, not so much in consanguinity per se, but rather in the question of stock. Arguing
upon Mendelian lines, if the stock is good and free from the
taint of deafness, there is no reason why the offspring of a
consanguineous marriage should show deafness, because that
recessive characteristic is not present. Whereas, if deafness
should happen to be present as a family taint, the union of two
blood relations, both of whom probably carry—although they
may themselves be hearing—the recessive character in their
germ cells, would be likely to accentuate it and recessive
offspring would occur with a frequency which would follow the
Mendelian hypothesis. They would, that is to say, act as
impure dominants, giving rise to three dominants to one recessive, of which the recessives would breed true and of the three
dominants, two would be impure. |
Although the future is pregnant with possibilities for the
prevention of true hereditary deafness and the way lies clearly
marked out for the prevention of many cases of sporadic congenital deafness, it is in the domain of acquired deafness that
preventive measures are likely first to meet with greater success.
If such success could be achieved, the vast majority of cases of
acquired deafness would pass from our midst in a comparatively
short time, for the whole secret of the prevention of acquired
deafness in adults lies in that of its prevention in the child. It
is, therefore, here that a great field lies before the worker in
preventive medicine, and there is no reason whatever that his
efforts should not be crowned with a success as great as that in
any other department of his profession and, moreover, success
which should give him one of the greatest monuments in
medical history. The present age is the dawn of preventive
medicine, the air is thick with it and it will be the medical
science of the future. The three duties of the physician are to
prevent, to cure, and to alleviate. In the field of otology, however, these duties would seem hitherto to have been reversed
and the aural surgeon has rather endeavoured to alleviate, to
cure, and to prevent. The great majority of cases of adult
126 EUGENICS REVIEW.

deafness cannot be cured, a number of them cannot be alleviated ;
nearly all of them can be prevented ; it remains to be shown how
this prevention could be carried into effect.

The three great groups of causes of acquired deafness are
meningitis, the infective diseases, and primary ear disease.
As an illustration of the relative number of cases under each
heading may be taken the figures already published by the
writer. Out of 845 instances of acquired deafness, of which the
causes were definitely ascertainable, 723, or 85°2/, came under
these three groups, the numbers and percentages being :—

Meningitis ves ... 169 Or 23°5 per cent.
Infective diseases + 343 99 4774 95 4
Primary ear disease... 211 4, 2Q°1 45, 45

 

 

723 100°0
Each of these requires to be discussed separately.

Meningitis is a more potent cause than even these figures
would indicate, since among the cases arising from infective
diseases, a considerable number are due to meningeal complications. Meningitis owns a multiplicity of causes, tubercle and
syphilis among the number and, until its many forms and
causes are worked out, the prevention of the deafness arising
from it cannot adequately be proceeded with. Our present
knowledge of meningitis is—save for the advantage gained by
bacteriology—at about the stage of that of typhoid and typhus
seventy years ago. Hence research is necessary in order that
its varieties and causation may be elucidated. For the institution of such research it is important that every case should be
controlled by notification, for purposes of isolation, investigation and treatment. This is one of the suggestions that have
been put forward by the Medical Committee of the National
Bureau for Promoting the General Welfare of the Deaf, a
committee which has taken seriously in hand the whole question
of the prevention of deafness. The importance of investigation
into the causation of meningitis will readily be apparent when
it is realised that this disease causes as many deaths as scarlet
fever and measles together. In 1909, the deaths from
meningitis were 11,118 and this total does not include over
THE PROBLEM OF DEAFNESS AND ITS PREVENTION. 127

10,000 deaths due to convulsions, many of which were certainly
instances of meningitis, nor does it include deaths from
meningitis in the course of such infective fevers as scarlet fever
and measles. Here is another appalling waste of life that
should engage the attention of legislators.

In the second group of causes—the Infective Diseases—are
included such maladies as scarlet fever, diphtheria, measles,
mumps, smallpox, whooping cough, tuberculosis, syphilis.
The last-named disease has: been already dealt with in some
detail. Tuberculosis attacks the ear of infants and young
children and may cause great destruction of the organ and so
of its function. It is, however, a disease which tends to kill
and the majority of children attacked die before school age.
The prevention of deafness in this condition is, therefore,
almost entirely a question of the prevention of tuberculosis
generally, for the treatment of the ear complication is too often
one in which function has to be sacrificed in the attempt to save
life. Tuberculosis is one of those diseases the terrible nature
of which has arrested public attention, with the result that it is
slowly, but surely, being driven from our midst by modern
methods of hygiene backed by legislation. If the same methods,
aided by the flooding light of widely disseminated knowledge
with which tuberculosis is being overwhelmed, were pursued
in the case of syphilis, the latter disease would be shorn as
easily of its terrors. Indeed, the desired result would, probably,
be attained with greater rapidity and facility. Tuberculosis,
considering the present active measures for its prevention, need
not claim further attention in this article, since adequate means
for the prevention of deafness are bound up in those for attacking the primary disease.

Of the other infective diseases, the infectious fevers, the
greatest offenders are scarlet fever, diphtheria, and measles.
Much has been done by isolation in preventing their incidence.
As modern methods progress, they ought to be stamped out as
surely as smallpox has been eradicated, or, when it does occur,
bereft of its greatest terrors. But, unfortunately, the special
treatment, during the actual attack of these diseases, of their
ear complications has not been so satisfactory. Cases of scarlet
128 EUGENICS REVIEW.

fever, diphtheria, and measles are often sent out of the fever
hospitals before ear discharge has ceased. Often the discharge
carries infection; Kerr Love has known such a case dismissed
in the thirteenth week and has seen the brother of the child die
of scarlet fever before the infected child was a week home from
the hospital. Such an experience may not be a common one,
but the persistence of ear discharge and the destruction of
hearing is of common occurrence. The three diseases mentioned may cause deafness in one of three ways, by meningitis
(in which case its prevention comes under that of the brain
condition), by suppuration in the middle ear, or by catarrhal
disease of the middle ear occurring later. It is the suppurative
complication that requires most to be considered here. This
form of ear disease is not only often infective, but it tends to
remain, to destroy hearing and to kill. A fatal result may be
delayed for years, but it is none the less sure. It is scarcely an
exaggeration to say that more operations on the ear are necessitated by the serious brain and other complications of ear discharge following scarlet fever, diphtheria, and measles than in
any other form. The time comes when the surgeon has to
sacrifice function to save life; often the destruction wrought by
the disease has already destroyed the greater part of the hearing.
The proper treatment of these conditions is to prevent them
when they threaten or to interfere promptly when they occur.
Hence efficient treatment can only be carried out in the fever
hospital itself. Such measures require a specialist, a fact that
has been recognised by some medical officers of fever hospitals,
by the British Medical Association, by the National Bureau,
by the recent International Congress of Medicine, and by the
Association of Medical Officers of Health, all of whom have
pointed out the urgent necessity of adding aural surgeons to the
staffs of fever hospitals for this purpose.

Lastly, there remains to speak of the prevention of acquired
deafness due to primary ear disease. This problem is, again,
largely bound up with the prevention of such deafness in the
child. The majority of cases of deafness in young adults
originates during childhood, it is, therefore, the child that must
be dealt with. The medical inspection of school children, so
THE PROBLEM OF DEAFNESS AND ITS PREVENTION. 129

recently inaugurated, is doing much in this direction and will
do still more when the treatment which is its ultimate aim is
placed upon a more sure and more common-sense footing.
But, for the work to be done efficiently, i¢ must be carried out
by specialists, who have the greater experience necessary to the
end in view. School clinics and treatment centres for dealing
with aural disease in children should be in charge of specialists
or, failing that, under specialist supervision. There is no lack
of competent men to do the work and they alone can do it
efficiently. Middle ear deafness comprises about 80 or go/ of
all forms of deafness and 90% of these cases owe their origin
to inflammatory conditions in the post-nasal space, whence
they extend to the ear by way of the eustachian tubes. The
most frequent predisposing cause of middle ear disease thus
induced is the condition of enlargement of the pharyngeal
tonsil known as ‘‘ adenoids,’’ and systematic aural examination
of adenoid children has demonstrated that a high percentage—
probably 75/%—has some ear involvement. Moreover, those
who have studied the matter are convinced that many cases of
middle ear deafness first noticed in adult life have their origin
in inflammatory conditions of the post-nasal space, dating from
childhood. Now, as has been already pointed out, the routine
treatment of chronic catarrhal deafness leaves much to be
desired. Hence the only sure way of reducing the number of cases
of chronic deafness due to this cause is by prevention, and it is
probable that in no other field of preventive medicine are there
better opportunities than in the prevention of chronic middle
ear catarrh and the progressive deafness which results therefrom. The sooner this is recognised by the medical profession
generally and by the laity, the sooner will the terrible affliction
of deafness pass away from our midst.

[Mr. VYearsley suggests that if hereditary deafness is a Mendelian recessive
character, those known to carry this character, if they must marry, should be encouraged to
marry hearing persons in whose family there is no taint of deafness. It is not clear
that any eugenic advantage could be attained this way, as it would lead to the
production of a large number of heterozygous persons with deafness latent in

them, who in the not unlikely case of their intermarrying would provide some
deaf mute children. ]
