CHANGES IN FAMILY LIFE

The Questionnaire of the London School of Economics

the daily Press tried to create a sensa
tion by attacking this questionnaire,
readers may be interested to know the
principal facts about it.

The London School of Economics wished,
as part of its ordinary work, to establish
certain ‘norms’ for the English family,
and especially to discover how far its constitution and habits had changed during the
last two generations or so. It was decided
to adopt the questionnaire method of investigation, since it had been successfully
employed, for the same purposes, in several
foreign studies, and is in this country a
normal practice in the study of disease.
The questions to be asked in this case, however, were about the normal activities of
normal people.

The B.B.C. was approached and, realizing that the inquiry was of cultural value
and public interest, agreed to devote a few
brief talks to describing the objects and
value of the questionnaire, and also to do
the ‘donkey-work’ of distributing and
collecting the forms. That is the whole
story: the enterprise has no more governmental sanction than had Father Ronald
Knox when he gave (with the assistance
of the B.B.C. engineers) his famous description of a revolution in London. Moreover,
it can scarcely be called a ‘‘ snooping,’’
“amazing inquisition,’? an ‘‘ impertinent
inquiry,”’ “‘ searching census such as

the de certain irresponsible sections of

or a
no Government has dared to conduct ”’ (see
daily Press for these descriptions), to issue

an invitation to those who are interested in
assisting sociological studies, to answer
whatever questions they like, and to return
their forms in such a way as to ensure
complete anonymity.

This Society was invited to comment on
the details of the questions, an invitation it
gladly accepted since the inquiry promised
to throw much light on many of the problems
of eugenic research. It will indicate, for
instance, what interchange between social
classes has taken and is taking place; how
far mating was and is affected by such factors
as parental influence, social tradition, and
the like ; the extent of involuntary infertility
and of voluntary restriction of births; the
inheritance of longevity and fertility; and
much more. In so far, too, as the other more
strictly sociological questions widen our
knowledge of family life, they will inevitably assist the human geneticist to obtain
a deeper and juster view of the environmental background of his material.

Fellows and members of this Society
should have already been asked to reply to
the questionnaire, and any who have not
received copies can obtain them direct from
the B.B.C. They can rest assured that they
will be serving the cause of eugenics in
doing so, and will probably find the filling
up of the form an interesting and not very
laborious task. It took the present writer
a little under an hour to answer most of the
questions, and the remaining details were
supplied by the family over coffee after
dinner.

E. M.

\ pee,”

22
