THE DEVELOPMENT OF EUGENIC POLICIES

A Memorandum by the American Eugenics Society

population make it clear that many
of the changes which would be desirable for eugenic reasons are equally desirable
for the purpose of improving our social
environment and retaining the best of our
inherited cultures. Eugenics should receive
new impetus from its relationship to other
social needs.
The following considerations appear to be
fundamental to the working out of sound
eugenic policies.

Re verte studies in psychology and

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS

1. The Decline in Births

For some years past the women of childbearing age in the United States have not
been having enough children to replace their
own number.* If present trends in birthrates continue, the population of the United
States will begin to diminish in numbers in
the next twenty to thirty years.t After that
time, our population may diminish at quite
a rapid rate, especially if the downward
trend of births continues. Eugenists as such
may have no opinion as to whether a rapid
decline would be harmful, but the public
generally is likely to be distressed by any
decline and to demand counteracting
measures.

In several European countries the public
is already much concerned over the decline
in births, and many measures have been
adopted, of which some are undoubtedly illconsidered. It seems therefore a particularly
opportune time for the careful study and
development of population policies which
will be eugenic in their effect. Eugenics will
be more strongly supported if it is associated

*Lotka, A. J. Modern Trends in the Birth Rate.
Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social
Science. November 1926.

+ National Resources Committee. The Problems of a
Changing Population. Government Printing Office,

1937
in the public mind with a discriminating
increase in births, than if it emphasizes
further restriction.

2. The Distribution of Hereditary Capacity

An infant a few days old possesses an
hereditary capacity for speech. That capacity will never become a developed quality
unless the child lives in an environment
where it can hear the speech of others. It is
possible to measure developed qualities, but
very difficult to measure hereditary capacities.

When a developed quality is measured in
any large group of people, the trait which is
being measured is found to be distributed
among them in a fairly regular way; there
are fewest people at the extremes and the
great majority cluster near the average.
When plotted on a chart, the distribution
approximates the ‘‘ Normal Curve of Distribution.” The accompanying diagram* of
the distribution of intelligence quotients in
the United States presents a typical example
of such normal distribution.

fo} tp NE
COP SCet

    
   

80 90 100 110 120 190 140

If the curve for the developed qualities of
any social, racial, or regional group is superimposed on the curve for the nation as a
whole, the overlapping is very great. With
few exceptions, a substantial fraction of any
group, whether high or low in the social
scale, 1s superior to the national average,
and in every group there are a substantial
number of people who are below the national

* Hollingworth, 1930. Mental Growth and Decline.
New York: Appleton.

117
118

average in the socially valuable qualities
discussed in a later section.

If hereditary capacities of any large group
of individuals could be measured before they
have been influenced by the environment, it
is probable that their distribution would
take the form of a normal curve like that
above, although any given individual might
be in a very different position on the two
curves. If curves for hereditary capacities
of different groups were superimposed, we
have every reason to believe that there
would be a large amount of overlapping even
between the most diverse groups. In any
study of the distribution of hereditary
capacity, the great majority of people would
be found clustered on either side of the
median line.

Any effective programme of eugenics
should therefore provide for selection within
each of the regional, racial, and occupational
groups and within each of the broad socioeconomic groups. And to be widely effective,
eugenic policies should attempt to sort out
the families whose qualities lie fairly close
on one side or other of the average ; quite as
much as the smaller number of families who
are distinctly above the average. It is
evident that the preponderating majority of
births in the numerous families nearer the
average will ultimately tend to determine
the hereditary qualities of our people, far
more than will the births among the more
limited number at the extremes.

3. The Relationship Between Developed Quahities and Hereditary Capacities

Individual differences in hereditary capacity present a wide range. People at one
extreme inherit factors that limit development to such an extent as to produce mental
and physical inadequacy. Those at the
other extreme inherit factors that in the
proper environment can produce genius.
Since the time of Galton, an increasing
number of studies have been made to determine the effect of genetic differences in
influencing the development of personal
qualities. The technique of these studies has
been gradually improved. Work on identical
twins and on foster children reared in varying

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

types of homes has helped to demonstrate
the effect of environment when heredity is
held approximately constant, and of heredity when environment is held approximately constant. There is now no reasonable
doubt that hereditary factors are extremely
important as the basis for development.

When people live in different environments it is hard to tell how much their
personal differences are due to differences in
their hereditary capacities. But when their
environment is generally similar, as in the
case of people with similar social status and
in the same occupation, there is a fairly close
relationship between hereditary capacity and
personal qualities.* Because of this relationship, it is possible, as well as highly desirable,
that methods for increasing the proportion
of births among those with superior hereditary capacities in each of our various occupational groups should also have the effect
of preserving the best in our various cultures,
by increasing the proportion of children born
in the best available home environments.
The confirmed environmentalist will then be
as much interested in obtaining a better distribution of births as is the confirmed
hereditarian.

4. The Proportion of Large Families

The replacement of any group of people in
the next generation depends very largely on
the proportion of large families. If one tries
to lay out a hypothetical distribution of
births for a normal American group, it
becomes apparent that the group will not be
self-replacing unless about 20 per cent. of the
couples have five or more children. If the
group is actually to increase, the percentage
must be even higher.

At present in the United States there is no
large non-rural group among whom 20 per
cent. of the married couples at the high school
level can raise five children without seriously
impairing their standard of living. The
implications of such a statement are farreaching, and to a large extent determine the
type of eugenic measures which are required.

* Schwesinger, G. C. Heredity and Environment :
Studies in the Genesis of Psychological Characteristics.
Macmillan, 1933.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF EUGENIC POLICIES

5. The Importance of Social and Economic
Factors in Determining the Proportion of
Large Families
It is apparent from the studies of Raymond

Pearl and others that social and economic
factors are altogether more important in
determining the birth-rate than are physiological factors. It is therefore in the social
and economic field that we must seek the
factors which will be most widely effective
as measures of eugenic improvement, and
which are most important as fields of
eugenic research.

6. Agreement on “ Desirable’’ Qualities

Eugenics does not seek to breed genius or
specialized types. It seeks only such a distribution of births as will tend to raise each
group of our population closer to the level of
its best types. Any general improvement in
human stocks will tend of itself to increase
the proportion of specially gifted people.

A few basic qualities are almost universally
regarded as highly desirable. These include
intelligence, good health, relative immunity
to physical and mental disease, and certain
qualities of character. Many different kinds
of character may be valuable under varying
circumstances. There is general agreement,
however, as to the value of courage and selfcontrol, kindness and tolerance, initiative,
self-reliance, honesty, and a co-operative
spirit. On the other hand, it is difficult to
imagine any form of society which would
desire to increase the proportion of definitely
anti-social traits, such as an unbalanced
personality, inability to co-operate with
others, lack of self-control, shiftlessness, and
cruelty.

7. Freedom of Parenthood

Granted that there is broad agreement on
generally desirable qualities, a perplexing
question still confronts those who are concerned with the development of eugenic
policies: ‘‘ Who is going to decide who the
best families are? ’”’ The practical policies
now being proposed by eugenists would put
the answer to this question very largely in
the hands of the parents themselves. Only
after such policies have been tried out in

119g

practice would we know whether more
authoritative measures are necessary or
desirable. A brief consideration of the
possibilities of true freedom of parenthood
will make this clear.

To-day, very few people are really free to
have exactly the number of children they
would choose. Those unfamiliar with birthcontrol are not free to limit the size of their
families. Those who practise birth-control,
especially in the cities, are generally deterred
from having many children not only by a
laudable desire to maintain high standards
for such children as they do have, but by
other social and economic causes apparently
beyond their control. Among such people,
freedom from the economic and social handicaps which attach to large families should
cause an increase in births. The possibility
of such a change is indicated by the greater
proportion of large families among certain
small groups in this country who to-day have
the freest choice as to number of children.
The better-educated farmers in some of the
most prosperous agricultural regions still
have a fair proportion of large families. Ina
number of urban studies, families in some of
the highest rental groups appear to have
more children than those in the rental groups
immediately below them.* The graduates
of some of the older privately endowed
colleges apparently have children in direct
relation to their socially valuable qualities
as rated by their fellow classmen. ft

Among the families least fitted to assume
the responsibilities of additional children,
complete access to contraception might be
expected to reduce the proportion of births.
The argument that there are many people
who would not limit the size of their families
even if birth-control was more effective and
more cheaply accessible than it is at present,
appears to be refuted by the experience of
Stockholm and other European cities.

Studies are needed to determine what
personal qualities would be most effective in
causing people to have larger families if

* Lorimer and Osborn. Dynamics of Population.
Macmillan, 1934.

¢ Huntington and Whitney. The Builders of America,
Chap XVII, 1927, and Philips, J. C.
Iz0

neither their economic nor social status were
thereby altered, but certain general tendencies seem evident. It is reasonable to suppose
that these qualities would include a strong
physique, good health, love of children,
unselfishness, ability to get along with other
people, compatibility of husband and wife,
willingness to assume responsibility, and
willingness to make sacrifices for the sake of
the family. These are all socially valuable
qualities. There is some evidence that these
good qualities tend to go together and to be
associated with intelligence more than with
stupidity.* Thus, it appears that under
conditions of perfectly free choice, couples
would tend to have children somewhat in
proportion to the degree to which they
possess the highly desirable qualities mentioned above as conducive to large families.
The importance of this is evident when we
reverse our statement and say that the
smallest families would be more likely to be
found among the people who are poorest in
physique and health, least fond of children,
most selfish, most difficult to get along with,
least happily married, and least willing to
make sacrifices for the sake of others.

Under present conditions the very qualities which would be expected to lead to
larger families if people had full freedom of
choice, lead to great restriction. Unselfishness, affection, intelligence, and other good
qualities may cause parents to restrict their
families if they are convinced that the
advantages of their children will be curtailed
by large numbers. The present stage of
modern civilization appears to be highly
dysgenic in its effect on vast numbers of the
very people who are most desirable as
parents.

8. The Tentative Nature of Eugenic Proposals

To many professional biologists and geneticists the implications of the present statement may be unsatisfactory. Some will hold
that it does not go far enough in attempting
to determine and direct the biological aspects
of selection through the science of genetics.

* Chassell, Dr. C. Correlation of Intelligence and
Character. Teachers College, 1936.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

To these we would reply that neither is the
science of genetics sufficiently advanced for
such an attempt, nor does public opinion
desire it.

Others will feel that they cannot sanction
proposals of so general a nature until science
has advanced to the point where it can more
accurately predict genetic results. To them
we would reply that in a practical world
people do not wait until knowledge is complete, but base their actions on the best
knowledge at hand. Great improvements in
domestic animals and domesticated plants
useful to man were made long prior to the
development of genetics as a science. It
would be highly unreasonable for an intelligent people to fail in developing policies
which might have an equally important
result in the improvement of mankind, even
though those policies may at the start be
tentative. Bearing this in mind, eugenists
will recognize that the final test of eugenic
measures can only be found in the study of
results obtained in actual practice. Such
studies must go hand in hand with the
development of eugenic policies.

9. Historical Examples

There are many historical examples of
selection by which superior stocks have been
established and maintained over a long
period of time.

For many centuries the Parsis have
dominated the business of the Bombay
Presidency. They are above any other
Indian group in education, respect for
women, economic activity and many aspects
of culture. They rise above their neighbours,
in an environment which for others is
enervating both climatically and socially.
The Parsis are the produce of a most drastic
process of selection. For more than a century, long ago, they were persecuted for
their religious beliefs, pillaged and driven
from one refuge to another. Finally, of those
who remained, a small remnant was allowed
to settle in India on condition that they form
a distinct caste which would not intermarry with outsiders. They were a highly
selected group, and under the caste system
have remained so to an outstanding extent.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF EUGENIC POLICIES

Iceland furnishes another example of
effective selection. The original Icelanders
were drawn largely from the upper classes of
the old Norsemen, and from the best of their
retainers. They were those who chose to
migrate peacefully rather than recoup their
fortunes by forays to the south. In Iceland
they underwent a further process of physical
selection under the influence of an extreme
climate. There has been no appreciable
migration since the first settlement 1,000
years ago. To-day, although Iceland is the
poorest in natural resources of any country
in which Europeans have long been settled,
its civilization is at a high level. In proportion to its population, the land which
produced the great Norse Sagas and which
developed the first effective form of democratic government has contributed more
names to the Encyclopedia Britannica than
any other non-English speaking country.
Its people are among the most literate and
scientific in the world, and cultural institutions abound in great numbers.

Many other examples of selection come to
mind, such as that which took place among
the early Puritans who settled in New
England, and among the ancient Jews. We
cannot tell how far the distinctive qualities
of these groups are the product of biological inheritance and how far they are
the product of cultural inheritance. But the
evidence seems clear that selected parents
tend to produce selected children of similar
characteristics, and that this process has
frequently been continued over long periods
of time.

NATURE OF EUGENIC POLICIES

In the light of the various general considerations enumerated above, the path
towards a practical programme of eugenics
becomes a little clearer.

We are justified in encouraging the system
of voluntary parenthood which will some
day be almost universal because of the
spread of birth-control.

But voluntary parenthood must include

freedom to have children as well as freedom

to restrict their number. Thus conditions of

C

I2I

life in the United States should be so modified that an increasing number of intelligent
parents will have greater freedom to raise
large families. This means freedom from
false values and standards inculcated by
education and by our urbanized environment, freedom from the economic handicaps
now attaching to large families; freedom
from social conditions which make the
proper rearing of children an unwelcome or
an impossible burden. With any advance
which can be made towards these objectives,
we shall approach nearer to a process of
eugenic selection at once voluntary and
natural.

Policies for putting such a programme into
effect should be developed through public
discussion and in co-operation with the
many social agencies actively concerned
with the betterment of man’s condition. It
is hoped that the series of Conferences now
being carried on with leaders in various
fields under the auspices of the American
Eugenics Society may help to develop a
number of practical measures.

The present statement has been prepared
as a background for such a consideration of
eugenic policies. It is not intended to
include any actual proposals. However, an
outline of the general frame in which various
eugenic measures would fall may help to
clarify the discussion which has preceded.

It appears that the major emphasis of
eugenics should be on policies which would
encourage a greater proportion of large
families among people who are above the
average of their group in socially valuable
qualities. Such policies should be designed
not only to reduce the economic handicaps
now attaching to large families, but to create
a new set of values. In actual practice the
application of measures in both these fields
should be made simultaneously, for economic
needs and human values constantly interact,
each affecting the other.

(a) Measures to Reduce the Economic Handicaps Imposed by Large Families

In our urbanized society, to have four or

more children usually means a lowered level

of living which few couples are willing to
I22

accept. Several European countries are
making serious efforts to solve this problem,
notably France, Germany, Belgium, and
Italy.* The most widely practised method
is that of the family allowances, in the form
of bonuses in proportion to the number of
children. In France, where this system has
become compulsory in all industry, the
allowances are paid by the employer, and
within each industry there are equalization
pools to prevent an undue burden on any
one firm. The allowances in France cover
approximately 25 per cent. of the cost of
maintaining each child. A somewhat similar
system exists in Italy, and has been compulsory in Belgium since 1930.

In Germany various special measures have
been set up, the most important of which is
the provision for marriage loans, of which
one-quarter is remitted with the birth of
each child.

All these measures have been developed
for the purpose of increasing the birth-rate,
in most cases without regard to the type of
people among whom births would increase.
They were not primarily intended to be
eugenic measures. The study of their operation, and their effect on the birth-rate of
different types of people, will be of great
importance in teaching this country what
ought and what ought not to be done in the
best interest of eugenic development.

Indirect measures for stimulating births
may perhaps have a more selective effect on
the birth-rate than do the large scale experiments now going on in Europe. In addition
to direct payments to the parents, there are
many other ways of diminishing the cost of
rearing children. Economic changes affecting
the birth-rate may be developed through
modifications in many fields of social activity,
such as:

Co-operative nurseries.

Education, through scholarships or other
means.

Housing, and suburban development.

Maternal and medical care.

* Carr-Saunders. World Population. Oxford University Press. 1936.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Opportunities for some earnings as a part
of the educational process.

Recreation.

Social services, nursing, child welfare, etc.

In these and many other fields, it is possible to make changes which would not only
reduce the cost of having a large family, but
would tend to reorient the sense of human
values among the very people most desirable
as parents.

(6) Changing Human Values

European attempts to influence the birthrate by money rewards would probably be
more successful and also more eugenic if they
were accompanied by an intelligent attempt
to reorient human values. In the long run,
appeals to patriotism are of doubtful effect
on the birth-rate. Far more effective would
be an early and continuous conditioning in
the values attaching to home and children.
The environment of young people during
their period of growth should lead them to
feel that some of the most important human
satisfactions are those connected with rearing
a family.

The present environment of most of our
children is far from fulfilling this ideal. The
briefest consideration of American education, conditions of housing, attitude towards
marriage, the difference between commercialized recreation and home or outdoor
recreation of the simpler and least expensive
types, will indicate many changes which
would influence the development of human
values.

Enough has been said to indicate that
eugenic policies may require rather important changes in economic relationships, in
human values and in social customs. It may
be difficult to achieve these changes within
the framework of existing society. But until .
the serious attempt has been made through
every channel of social activity to reorient
human values with respect to family life,
and to remove as many as possible of the
economic handicaps now attaching to large
families among responsible people, we shall
not know what further steps are needed.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF EUGENIC POLICIES

(c) Policies of Negative Eugenics

Until recently, there seemed no danger of
actual decrease in the better stocks of the
nation, and eugenists were chiefly concerned
with diminishing the birth-rate of those with
poor genetic qualities. There is ground for
hope that the aims of negative eugenics may
be attained. The culture pattern of family
limitation, and improved methods of contraception, are spreading to all groups in the
cities and, more gradually, into the rural
districts under the leadership of sociallyminded women. A start at least is being
made in preventing reproduction by presumptive carriers of hereditary defect, as is
evidenced by permissive laws for eugenic
sterilization in twenty-eight states and
increasing provisions for obligatory segregation of defectives. Our immigration laws,
with the support of public opinion, should
become increasingly eugenic. There are also
many factors operating in American life
which would tend more and more to limit the
proportion of large families among economically marginal people. Among these factors
may be included the opening up and improvement of isolated and slum areas, rural
and urban, through programmes of housing,
rehabilitation and the extension of social
services, and the increasing influence of
urbanization with more uniform aspiration
for higher standards of living. The heavy
cost of the programme of relief to which the
nation has suddenly, and perhaps permanently, been committed is helping to
arouse public interest in the question of the
part played by the birth-rate in problems of
inadequacy. It is reasonable to hope that
the United States, with its rapidly developing agencies for public service, may follow
along the lines of development which have
been taking place in Stockholm, where the
excess of large families among the marginal
economic groups has largely disappeared,

123

and in our own State of California, where
carefully guarded measures of eugenic sterilization have been successfully in effect for
several decades. These are the known goals
of negative eugenics, which under proper
leadership and with an aroused public
opinion are quite likely to be attained in the
United States, if we may Judge by what has
happened in other countries. That they
should be attained as rapidly as possible is
vitally important. If these changes take
place, births among isolated and_ less
educated families would no longer make up
for the shortage of births which already
exists among those families with more
adequate resources and at a better level of
education.

Then will come the final test of the
eugenic ideal. Will it be possible for society
to make such changes in its forms, and in the
values which it sets for men to follow, that
the interests of society in obtaining more
children in certain families will coincide with
the individual interest of the parents of such
families ? Can we develop such a system of
freedom in parenthood that those parents
who are at or above the average of the nation
in cultural and in genetic qualities will have
enough children to replace their own
number and increase their proportionate
number as well? There are a few hopeful
signs. Among some of the specially situated
people who most nearly approach true freedom of parenthood, large families are rather
more frequent than among those of their
group who have greater economic handicaps.
These and other trends hold possibilities for
further development. But if the decline of
births among responsible parents becomes
too great, all effort at social advance will be
immeasurably handicapped.

The problems of positive eugenic selection
have become national problems which
require the attention of all thoughtful
citizens.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIX, No. 2.
