THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

r | =: ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
was held at 69 Eccleston Square,
S.W.1, on Tuesday, June 16th, 1942,

at 5 o'clock, with the President, Lord

Horder, in the Chair.

MinuTES. The Minutes of the Annual
General Meeting held on Tuesday, June 17th,
1941, which were contained in the Annual
Report for 1941-2 (copies of which were
distributed at the Meeting) were taken as
read and signed as correct.

ANNUAL Report. The Chairman presented the Annual Report, the formal
adoption of which was seconded by Mr.
Titmuss and carried unanimously.

STATEMENT OF ACCOUNTS AND BALANCE
SHEET. The Honorary Treasurer presented
the Statement of Accounts and Balance
Sheet for the year ended December 31st,
1941. These were unanimously adopted.
The Honorary Treasurer said that he would
like to point out that for the past year the
Society had been able to live within its
income, partly because its activities had
been greatly reduced on account of the war.
Arising out of this statement, Mrs. Hodson
asked if the question of lectures to members
of H.M. Forces from the Society had been
considered. Dr. Lewis said that a panel of
lecturers, on various subjects, to H.M. Forces
was in existence, and undertook to find out

more about this, and those Fellows and

‘Members who were present were asked to

send in to him the names and addresses of
anyone whom they considered would be
suitable speakers. It was agreed that a
special meeting of the Emergency Committee should be held in July, on a date to
be arranged, in order that the matter could
be discussed.

HONORARY OFFICERS AND COUNCIL FOR
THE YEAR 1942-3. Following the procedure
of the two previous years, it was proposed
by Miss Robertson, seconded by Mrs.
Jenkins, and carried unanimously, that the
Honorary Officers and Council should remain as appointed on May 16th, 1939, with
the exception of the following: Lord
Salvesen (whose death had been recorded),
Sir Charles Arden-Close (who resigned last
year), and Professor Fisher, Dr. Fraser
Roberts, and Dr. Thornton (whose resignations had already been reported and accepted) ; and that the Emergency Committee for the ensuing year should consist of the
following: The Lord Horder, Mr. Cecil
Binney, Mr. B. S. Bramwell, Mr. C. F.
Chance, Miss E. Corry, Hon. Mrs. Grant
Duff, Mr. W. T. J. Gun, Mrs. E. M. Hubback, .
Dr. A. J. Lewis, Mr. R. Martin, and Mr.
R. M. Titmuss.

ELECTION OF AUDITORS FOR THE YEAR
1942-3. Messrs. West & Drake were unanimously re-elected.

ANNUAL REPORT, 1942-3

In this Report, the accounts relate to the
period December 31st, 1941, to December
31st, 1942. The rest of the Report covers
the period from March 31st, 1942, to March
31st, 1943.

The Report has been made as brief as
possible owing to existing conditions.

General.—During the past year, the affairs.

of the Society have been carried on by an
Emergency Committee formed from the

22

Council. The names of the members of this
committee are starred in the list of the
Honorary Officers and Council which is given
on the inside of the front page of the cover.
Six meetings of this committee have been
held in the period under review.

It has been the general policy of the
Emergency Committee to reduce activities
and expenditure during the war. In the last
six months, however, there has been a revival
