Contents

 

Notes of the Quarter page 57
THE BIOLOGY OF CO-OPERATION—POPULATION
PROSPECTS—ABORTION LAW—HUMAN GENETICS IN
ROMANIA—THE GYPSY UNDER SOCIALISM—ABORTION BY VACUUM-ASPIRATION METHOD—SOCIAL
AND GENETIC INFLUENCES ON LIFE AND DEATH

Co-operation in Primates . . . . J. H. Crook 63
Co-operation in Primitive Human Societies B. Benedict 71
Co-operation between Human Groups . . FH. Tajfel 77
Contraception and the Catholic Theologians C.B. Blacker 85
Notes and Memoranda. . . . . . . 95
Reviews of Books... . . . . . . 97
Other Notices . ‘ ‘ : . . . . 107
Periodicals. . . . . ‘ ‘ . - 109
Commonwealth Immigration: Some Facts . ‘ ‘ . 114
Correspondence ‘ . . . . . . . 116

THE EUGENICS SOCIETY is not responsible for statements made or
opinions expressed by authors of articles, reviews and letters.

PUBLISHED Quarterly, Oliver and Boyd Ltd., Tweeddale Court, High
Street, Edinburgh.

PRICE: 17s. 6d. (U.S.A. $3.00) per copy and 60s. (U.S.A. $10.00) per
annum, post free. Issued free to Fellows and Members of The Eugenics

Society.

 

Galtonia candicans, which is reproduced on the front page of the cover,
is a flowering plant named in honour of Sir Francis Galton in 1880 by
Professor J. Decaisne of the Paris Museum of Natural History
PERIODICALS

THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF
HUMAN GENETICS

November 1965, Vol. 17, No. 6.

Cystic Fibrosis of the Pancreas: An Estimate of the
Incidence by MERTON S. HONEYMAN and ESTELLE
SIKER.

Eight children out of a total 26,087 live-born
developed meconium ileus, and a ninth was diagnosed
as cystic fibrosis, within the first month of life: an
incidence of 1 in 2,900. On Hsia’s assumption that
meconium ileus is present in 15 per cent of all
children who will be affected with cystic fibrosis,
this would represent an eventual incidence of 1 in
489, a maximum estimate. In fact, up to the age of
seven, a further five children of the original total
were known to have developed the disease, giving
a minimal direct estimate of 1 in 1,863 for the
incidence. The true value is probably somewhere
between the two.

Hereditary Variants of Serum «,—Antitrypsin by
U. AXELSSON and C. B. LAURELL.

Deficiency of «,-antitrypsin, the principal trypsin
inhibitor of serum, leads to a serum activity of
55 per cent normal in heterozygotes and 10 per cent
in homozygotes, these latter also being subject to
pulmonary emphysema. Another variant giving
a-antitrypsin with retarded electrophoretic mobility
is described in the present paper. The serum in
question came from an apparently healthy forty-sixyear-old woman who proved to be heterozygous for
a ,-antitrypsin deficiency and for slow «1-antitrypsin.
Study of the proband’s relatives supports the view
that three allelomorphic genes are concerned at the
locus for «;-antitrypsin.

Is Hyperploidy of Sex Chromosomes Associated with
Reduced Total Finger Ridge Count? by MILTON
ALTER.

The author obviously hopes that his question may
result in more dermatoglyphic analysis on patients
with aneuploidy of the sex chromosomes. Even the
few studies so far published seem to show quite
nicely the inverse relationship between total finger
ridge count and number of X and Y chromosomes.
Thus the highest counts occur in Turner’s Syndrome
and the lowest in patients with XXXXY. The
reduction probably results from a greater frequency
of arch patterns, with zero ridge counts, rather than
from an overall effect on all patterns.

Dermatoglyphics in Translocation Down’s Syndrome
by HUBERT C. SOLTAN and KATHLEEN CLEARWATER.

On the supposition that “translocation Down’s
syndrome’”’ patients have slightly less than full
trisomy of chromosome 21, the authors looked for
dermatoglyphic distinctions between such patients
and those with “regular trisomy”? which could be
the reflection of their different karyotypes. Palm
prints proved similar. Radial loops on the 4th and
5th fingers occurred slightly more often in the
regular trisomy group, but it was in the hallucal
area that the main differences were noted. For
instance a large distal loop configuration occurred in
only 8 per cent of the regular trisomics whereas
31 per cent of the D/G translocation patients
showed this pattern (42 per cent of normal controls
show it).

Maximum-likelihood Estimation of the Proportion of
Nonpaternity by RICHARD F. POTTHOFF and
MAURICE WHITTINGHILL.

Given that a number of ‘“‘trios’’, each consisting of
a putative father, a mother who, in every case is
assumed to be the true mother, and a child have
been examined with respect to a particular genetic
trait, the problem discussed is that of estimating the
proportion of children (A) for whom the putative
father is not the true one. The expected frequencies
of combinations of different phenotypes in groups of
three are given for four different genetic situations:
two alleles without dominance, as in the MN systems
two alleles with dominance; two sex linked allele;
with dominance; and the ABO system with four
possible phenotypes. These frequency tables can be
combined when the individuals in the sample have
been examined with respect to more than one trait.
A numerical example is given.

Heredity of Blood Groups in Chimpanzees by A. s.
WIENER, J. MOOR-JANKOWSKI and C. M. ROGERS.

Certain new simian-type blood factors have been
studied by these authors in fifteen chimpanzee
families. All members proved to be group A of the
human type ABO system. There are no individual
differences in chimpanzees for the MN or Rh-Hr
systems, but comparison with analogous situations
in humans helped in understanding the V-A—B and
C-E-F simian systems. More than ten simian-type
blood factors have now been identified in these
primates.

109
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

A Complex Familial Chromosome Translocation by
JEAN DE GROUCHY.

Microcephaly with severe mental and physical
retardation and a history of epilepsy are the main
clinical features in the fifteen-year-old male index
patient. In common with that of his phenotypically
normal father, his karyotype showed 46 chromosomes with a very large chromosome and an extra
chromosome identical to No. 17 replacing two
chromosomes in Groups A and B. The author’s
interpretation of the anomaly is a translocation
between a chromosome 4-5 and a chromosome 2,
involving three breaks with insertion of a fragment.
In the father there is a balanced karyotype but, on
the assumption of a particular type of crossover at
meiosis, the boy could in effect be monosomic for
one chromosome segment and trisomic for another,
although his karyotype appeared to be identical with
that of his father’s. The term ‘“‘aneusomy by
recombination” has been coined for this type of
genic imbalance. The author discusses genetic
counselling in such a family. The risk of recurrence
may well be higher than 50 per cent, and is a function
of the frequency of crossing-over in the interstitially
translocated segment of chromosome 5.

This issue also contains the Scientific Programme
of The American Society of Human Genetics
meeting, 25th-27th August 1965. The University of
Washington, Seattle. HELEN BLYTH

EUGENICS QUARTERLY
December 1965, Vol. 12, No. 4.

Random and Nonrandom Inbreeding by GORDON
ALLEN.

This paper sets out and attempts to elucidate “some
rather neglected problems that arise when inbreeding concepts originally based on the assumption of infinite populations are applied to finite
populations and especially to human isolates”. The
author asks for his findings to be confirmed or
refuted by specialist mathematicians.

Measurement of Inbreeding from the Frequency of
Marriages between Persons of the Same Surname by
JAMES F. CROW and ARTHUR P. MANGE.

This comments upon and amplifies the paper by
Dr. Allen above mentioned.

Inbreeding in Small Human Populations by KENNETH
MORGAN and J. N. SPUHLER.

A further amplification setting out some of the
problems of “obtaining estimates of population
inbreeding coefficients from raw field data’’.

110

Male Attitudes towards Family Limitation in East
Pakistan by MOHIUDDIN AHMED and FATEMA
AHMED.

A very comprehensive survey obtained by a group of

“highly qualified male interviewers” from 195

married males aged twenty to fifty-four and living
with their wives. Some interesting features emerged,
due largely to the fatalistic attitude towards life in
general—in which good and bad both emanate from
God and must be accepted without complaint.

Differential Mortality in Israel by Socioeconomic
Status by H. Vv. MUHSAM.

Official statistics of deaths for the years 1961-62

- show a reversal of the usual negative correlation of

socioeconomic status and mortality—where higher
classes enjoy lower mortality—and this paper
investigates the reasons.

Studies of Fertility and Family Limitations in Taiwan
by RONALD FREEMAN and JOHN Y. TAKESHITA.

One purpose of these studies is to answer two sets of
questions about “that stage of the demographic
transition in which mortality has been low for some
time and fertility has just begun to decline’. The
questions are as follow: 1, Prior to any organized
family planning programme what changes occur
‘“‘naturally” in fertility and family planning and what
sectors of the population change first and most? and,
2, Can the process of fertility decline be accelerated
in a short period in a large population by a massive
programme to help married couples have the
number of children they want? If such a programme
is effective, what sectors of the population and what
aspects of the programme are responsible for the
success ?

Communication from P. P. TALWAR.

A note on the “Test of Significance of intervals
between confinements of different birth orders”’.

Book Reviews:

Human Behaviour—An Inventory of Scientific
Findings. Bernard Berelson and Gary A. Steiner.
Harcourt, Brace & World Inc. New York 1964.
The inventory contains over a thousand findings and
covers a very broad field—not previously annotated.

Heredity and the Nature of Man. Theodosius
Dobzhansky. Harcourt, Brace & World. 1964. This
book is based on a course of lectures and goes
beyond the usual limits of this subject, and ventures
into the ethical and spiritual sphere.

Teaching Genetics. C. D. Darlington and A. D.
Bradshaw (editors). Philosophical Library, New
York 1963. A compilation of the papers delivered at
a symposium held in Britain by twenty geneticists.
PERIODICALS

Population Dynamics: Causes and Consequences of
World Demographic Change. Ralph Thomlinson.
Random House, New York 1965. A textbook for
undergraduate courses in population studies.

Advances in Planned Parenthood. Aquiles J. Sobrero
and Sarah Lewit (editors). Schenkman Publishing
Co. Inc. Cambridge, Mass. 1965. The proceedings of
the annual meeting of the American Association of
Planned Parenthood Physicians held in Dallas in

1964.
This issue contains the Index for Vol. 12 of
Eugenics Quarterly. Cc. W. U.

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS
December 1965, Vol. 2, No. 4.

Genetic Factors in Diabetes Mellitus Studied by the
Oral Glucose Tolerance Test by G. Ss. THOMPSON.

Glucose tolerance tests performed on 164 caserelatives and 107 control subjects showed a continuous distribution of blood sugar concentrations
with no clear cut division into normal and abnormal
values in either series. This does not support a single
gene theory and suggests a multifactorial mechanism
of blood sugar control. A genetic influence was
demonstrated since, 7, case relatives had more labile
blood sugar values; ii, female case-relatives had
higher mean blood sugar values. The results relating
to body weight show that obesity leads to higher
blood sugar values in, i, both male and female
subjects with a positive family history, if, the female
sex generally.

Family Studies and Aetiology of Club Foot by
RUTH WYNNE-DAVIES.

Reporting a study of patients attending the Princess
Elizabeth Orthopaedic Hospital, Exeter, suffering
from talipes. Incidence of the various forms of the
malformation were calculated to be: talipes equinovarus—1-24 per 1,000 live births (males 1-62 and
females 0-80 per 1,000); postural talipes equinovarus
—0-50 per 1,000 live births (males 0-24 and females
0:78 per 1,000); talipes calcaneo-valgus—1-09 per
1,000 live births (males 0:07 and females 0-33 per
1,000). Metatarsus varus—1-:21 per 1,000 live
births (males 1-02 and females 0-19 per 1,000).
Maternal age and birth order effect, sex ratio and
the occurrence of associated malformations are
discussed, as are the findings in the relatives of index
patients.

Epidermolysis Bullosa by B. Cc. CLARE DAVIDSON.

Seventy-seven patients with epidermolysis bullosa,
occurring in twenty-eight families, were examined
and grouped according to clinical findings and mode
of inheritance. There were fifty with dominant
epidermolysis bullosa simplex. Of the twenty-seven
patients with epidermolysis bullosa dystrophica,

twenty-one were considered to have the dominant
and six the recessive type. Seven families with
dominant epidermolysis bullosa were studied for
linkage. Neither the simplex nor the dystrophic
forms showed evidence of linkage with ABO,
Rhesus, MNS, P or Duffy blood groups.

A Masculinizing Syndrome Associated with a
Double-satellited Extra Chromosome by RUSSELL
A. RHODE.

The clinical and genetical findings in a woman with
sterility, hirsutism and additional features of
Cushing’s syndrome are presented. Chromosome
studies disclosed a normal female karyotype except
for the addition of an aberrant chromosome which
was doubly satellited. The origin and significance
of the extra chromosome are discussed.

Chromosome Mosaicism in a Hermaphrodite by
C. J. DEWHURST, A. J. N. WARRACK, C. E. BLANK,
AUDREY M. BISHOP and W. B. HESLOP.

A true hermaphrodite is described. Chromosome
studies disclosed that the child is most probably a
sex chromosome mosaic, having the chromosome
complement 45/XO and 47/XX + centric fragment.
The precise nature of the chromosome fragment
cannot be determined.

Assessment of Two Macromethods and Three
Micromethods of Culturing Human White Blood
Cells for Chromosome Analysis by N. P. BISHUN,
W. R. M. MORTON and P. FROGGATT.

The techniques are fully described and the results
discussed.

Genetics of Human Blood Coagulation by c. B. KERR.

A comprehensive review-article of the genetics of
human blood coagulation with references.

March 1966, Vol. 3, No. J.

Pyridoxine-responsive Anaemia Determined by an
X-linked Gene by M. Ww. ELVES, M. S. BOURNE and
M. C. G. ISRAELS.

A family is described of which eighty-three individuals have been investigated, a pyridoxineresponsive anaemia being found in six middle-aged
men. It is suggested that the anaemia in this family
is an X-linked recessive condition. Other published
families are discussed and all would be consistent
with such a mode of inheritance. No evidence of
prose linkage with the gene for Xg blood groups was
ound.

111
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Juvenile Polyposis Coli by A. M. 0. VEALE, I. MCCOLL,
H. J. R. BUSSEY and B. C. MORSON.

The histopathology, clinical features and family
histories of eleven patients with juvenile poliposis of
the large intestine are described. Associated congenital abnormalities were found in four of the
eleven patients studied. In some cases there was a
family history of juvenile polyposis and/or cancer of
the large bowel. Genetic explanations are discussed
and it is concluded that juvenile polyposis may
result from modification of the action of a gene for
adenomatous polyposis by an allele received from
the normal parent. Isolated cases may be the result
of fresh mutation. There is no evidence, as yet, that
juvenile polyposis is a pre-cancerous condition.

Sex-linked Cleft Palate: Report of a family and
review of seventy-seven kindreds by DAVID E.
WEINSTEIN and MAIMON M. COHEN.

A family is presented with an apparent sex-linked
recessive form of facial cleft. Chromosome studies
on the four affected individuals and five normal
family members were normal. Cases of clefts of the
lip and palate seen in a heredity clinic from 1941
to 1964 are reviewed with an analysis of seventyseven kindreds.

The 45XO/46XY Mosaic Intersex Syndrome by
W. P. U. JACKSON, MARGARET HOFFMAN and
HAWA MAKDA.

Two cases of XO/XY sex chromosome mosaicism
are described, one with female and one with male
phenotype. The male was producing spermatozoa in
his single descended testicle. Other cases in the
literature are summarized, showing the wide
diversity of manifestations of this type of mosaicism.
Attention is drawn to similarities with that of XO
gonadal dysgenesis: some masculinization, however,
always occurs, presumably due to the presence of
the Y chromosome.

A B O Blood Groups and Cirrhosis of the Liver by
A. J. ZUCKERMAN.

The distribution of blood groups A and O in 182
patients with cirrhosis attending a London hospital
was compared with that of a sample of registered
blood donors in four regions of the British Isles. No
significant difference was found.

Glucose-6-phosphate Dehydrogenase (G6PD) Deficiency, Abnormal Haemoglobins, and Thalassaemia in
Yugoslavia by G. R. FRASER, P. GRUNWALD and
G. STAMATOYANNOPOULOS.

Examination of blood samples from 493 male
Yugoslavs disclosed four partial and one complete
examples of G6PD deficiency. Four of the twentyeight females tested were heterozygous for this gene.

112

Of 560 samples tested, only two instances of
abnormal haemoglobins were found. Suggestive
evidence is presented, on the other hand, that a
moderately high incidence of f-thalassaemia trait
exists in Yugoslav Macedonia and on the Dalmatian
coast, areas where malaria was previously hyperendemic.

Bimodal Distribution of Erythrocytes in Hetero
zygotes for Strong Mediterranean Glucose-6-phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency by E. SARTORI.
F. PANZION and F. ZACCHELLO.

Short-term in vivo survival studies were carried out
with erythrocytes damaged in vitro by increasing
doses of menadione sodium bisulphite from two
normal and two mutant hemizygotes, and from four
heterozygotes for strong Mediterranean Gé6PD
deficiency. The rate of erythrocyte destruction
referred to the menadoine salt concentration showed
a unimodal distribution in the hemizygotes, in
ranges considerably higher in the normal than in the
mutant ones. In the heterozygotes it showed a
bimodal distribution, with two distinct peaks
corresponding to the modes of the former. This is
considered proof of the Lyon hypothesis, which is
discussed.

Turner’s Syndrome: Further Demonstration of the
Presence of Specific Congenital Deficiencies by Jouy
MONEY and DUANE ALEXANDER.

SRA Primary Mental Abilities testing of sixteen
patients with Turner’s syndrome, verified cytogenitically, confirms earlier reports that man
exhibited deficiencies in space-form perception and
dealing with numbers. A deficiency in speed and
fluency of lexographic association was also present.

Incidence of Congenital Pyloric Stennosis in Malta
by E. A. CACHIA and F, F. FENECH.

A review of eighty-nine cases of pyloric stenosis
which presented at St. Luke’s hospital during 3
thirteen-year period. Incidence is calculated to k
0:088 per cent. This is below that found in the
United Kingdom and Sweden and higher than some
Mediterranean countries.

Gonadal Dysgenesis and Ulcerative Colitis: A Case
Report with Clinical, Cytogenetic and Post Morten
Findings by E. D. WILLIAMS, E. ENGEL, PRICILLA
D. TAFT and ANN P. FORBES.

A case of ulcerative colitis occurring in a patient
with gonadal dysgenesis, with a sex chromosome
constitution of XO/X and isochromosome for th
long arm of X, is described. Blood appeared tc
be XO and colonic mucosa cells X and iso-X.
The frequency of the X iso-X sex chromosome
complement in cases of gonadal dysgenesis wit
PERIODICALS

auto-immune disease is discussed and possible
mechanisms are presented.

Down’s Syndrome with a Familial D/D Reciprocal
Translocation and a G/G Chromosome by H. B.
MARSDEN, R. I. MACKAY, A. MURRAY and H. E.
WARD.

A case of Down’s syndrome with D/D and G/G
translocations is reported in a family carrying a
D/D translocation. The possible reasons for this
association are discussed.

Congenital Anomalies due to Transmission of a
Chromosome Translocation by J. E. GRAY, J. A.
DARTNALL, R. D. G. CREERY and J. CROUDACE.,

A male infant with multiple congenital abnormalities
is described. Chromosome studies on the mother
revealed a missing small acrocentric chromosome,
an abnormal chromosome in the medium range and
an additional chromosome morphologically identical
to a number 16. It is thought that these findings are
consistent with a translocation involving part of a
medium range chromosome and a small acrocentric
chromosome, the mother being a balanced translocation heterozygote. Chromosome studies on the
infant revealed the same abnormalities except that
the medium range chromosomes were normal. The
infant is thus probably trisomic for part of a medium
range chromosome.

A Family showing Transmission of a Translocation
between a 6-12 Chromosome and a 21-22 Chromosome by J. E. GRAY, J. A. DARTNALL and B. G. P.
MACNAMARA.

A male infant with multiple congenital abnormalities
and pyloric stenosis is described. Chromosome
studies on the mother, and some other members of
her family, revealed an additional chromosome
morphologically similar to a 13-15 and a missing
small acrocentric. The additional chromosome 13-15
is thought to represent a translocation involving the
short arms of a 6-12 chromosome and the short
arms and satellites of a 21-22. Since the medium
range appeared morphologically normal, it is
thought that one chromosome in the medium range

represents the translocation of the long arms of the
6-12 and those of the 21-22 remaining from the
former translocation. Chromosome studies on the
infant reveal a missing small acrocentric and
apparent trisomy for a medium range autosome.
The authors conclude that the infant is probably
trisomic for the long arms of a medium range
chromosome. (However the propositus must also
be monosomic for the short arms of a chromosome
21-22.)

Chromosome Mosaicism in a Child with Features
Characteristic of the ‘‘Cat Cry’’ Syndrome by
J. H. TURNER, L. W. BASS and S. KAPLAN.

Mosaicism with three cell lines is described in a
child with features characteristic of the “‘cat cry
syndrome”. The cellular types in order of the
frequency with which they present are as follows.
Type 3: cells with a count of forty-seven which
includes an abnormally long  sub-metacentric
chromosome, thought to be either a duplication or
translocation B group chromosome, a shorter nonpairing sub-metacentric chromosome thought to be
a deleted B group chromosome plus a fragment
chromosome less than half the size of an average G
group chromosome. Type 2: cells with a count of
forty-six which are similar in all characteristics to
those of Type 3 except that the fragment chromosome is missing. Type I: cells with forty-six chromosomes and a normal karyotype. The possible origin
of the cell lines is briefly discussed.

Detection of Chromosome Mosaicism by Compufer
Methods by JOHN F. JACKSON and PAULE. PULLEY.

Describing the application of computer techniques
in the detection of chromosome mosaicism and in
the determination of sample size for any given
analysis in which mosaicism is suspected.

Chromosome Preparation from Leucocyte Culture:
A simplified method for collecting samples by post by
JANET M. ANDERS, ELIZABETH C. MOORES and
RICHARD EMANUEL,

The technique is fully described.
DAVID MANTLE

113
Contents June 1966, Volume 58, Number 2

 

Notes of the Quarter page 57
THE BIOLOGY OF CO-OPERATION—POPULATION
PROSPECTS—ABORTION LAW—HUMAN GENETICS IN
ROMANIA—THE GYPSY UNDER SOCIALISM—ABORTION BY VACUUM-ASPIRATION METHOD—SOCIAL
AND GENETIC INFLUENCES ON LIFE AND DEATH

Co-operation in Primates . . . . J.H. Crook 63
Co-operation in Primitive Human Societies B. Benedict 71
Co-operation between Human Groups . . H.Tajfel 77
Contraception and the Catholic Theologians CC. B. Blacker 85
Notes and Memoranda . . . . . . . 95
Reviews of Books. . . . . . . . 97
Other Notices . . . . . . . . 107
Periodicals . . . . . . . . 109
Commonwealth Immigration: Some Facts . . . . 114
Correspondence ; . . ; . . . . 116

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY OLIVER AND BOYD LTD., EDINBURGH
