7O EUGENICS REVIEW.

in an address to the Roman Senate, commanded a Christian wife who,
taking advantage of the Roman law, divorced her husband because of
his debaucheries so that she might not partake of his crimes by living
with him. St. Epiphanius allowed divorce, and said that if either party
married again the Church absolved them from all blame, tolerated their
weaknesses, and did not reject them either from the Church or eternal
life.

The theory of the indissolubility of marriage did not apparently find
favour in the Church until after the Fourth Century, and here in
England, after the Sixth Century, Theodore, Archbishop of Canterbury,
in a Penetential, declared marriages to be dissoluble on the grounds of
desertion, adultery, impotence, relationship and captivity.

Is there not ground for the assumption that the ecclesiastics, at a
time when their conduct caused the Church the greatest humiliation, were
more influenced by cupidity than religious zeal in enforcing the doctrine
that marriage was indissoluble? They assumed sole control over the
marital relations. They granted, for pecuniary consideration, permission
to marry, and when those whom they had joined together desired to
have their marriages dissolved, they found, also for a pecuniary consideration, specious excuses for separating and then remarrying the
parties, while still insisting that the sacred tie was indissoluble. Mr.
Lee, in the Cambridge Modern History, says “the most holy sacrament of
marriage, owing to remote consanguinity coming within the prohibited
degree, was made a subject of derision to the laity by the venality with
which marriages were made and unmade to fill the pouches of the
episcopal officials.” He might have instanced the case of Bothwell who,
when he wanted to divorce his wife in order that he might marry Mary,
got a decree on the ground that one of his ancestors had married into his
wife’s family a century before. As Cardinal Borgia, the Vice-Chancellor of Innocent III., wittily, if profanely, said, “ God desireth not the
death of a sinner, but rather that he should live and—pay.”

If Sir Lewis Dibdin, or some other lawyer equally well grounded in
Church history, might divest himself of all prejudices in favour of present
received theories, and with a mind trained to weigh evidence, should set
himself to write a history of English Church law and divorce, the result
of his labours would be glady welcomed. R. NEWTON CRANE.

Andrews, C. B. Life, Emotion, and Intellect. London and Leipsig.
T. Fisher Unwin; 1913; price 5s. net; pp. 95.

THE author makes use of the following passage as a kind of motto to his
book: “Life is real; intellect is artificial; emotion, although it is obliged
to express itself in intellectual formulz, is our nearest approach to the
essence of life.” His persuasion of the artificiality of the intellect appears
to lead him into statements with which Eugenists must quarrel. We
attempt, he says, to destroy love by Eugenic marriage certificates. If love
is blind then the believer in the Eugenic health certificate for marriage is
blinder still—and so on. Galton long ago gave a complete answer to
statements of this sort. Society has erected all kinds of barriers, economic and customary, within which the emotional activities of the individual
are confined, the Eugenist regarding many of these as purely artificial
wishes to substitute rather better ones, resting more on a biological than
on an economic and social basis. We join the author in deploring any
attempt to standardise humanity. Eugenics aims at the preservation
and preponderating survival of the best of a/Z classes. On the whole the
book is a not uninteresting essay on the emotions, with special reference to
the emotional reticence of Englishmen. C. S. Stock.

Delzous, Louis. La Famille Frangaise et son Evolution.  Libraire
Armaud Colin; price 3 fr. 50 c.; pp. 287.

THIS book is an interesting study, by a French lawyer, of the forces at

work in France during the nineteenth century which transformed the
REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 71

family life of the pre-Revolution period into the family life of to-day.
For a long period after the establishment of the Napoleonic code, the
middle-class, organized into a compact network of officialdom, preserved
a high standard of rectitude, and maintained the traditions of rigid
parental authority. Circumstances, however, occurred which discredited
official rank to some extent, and an aristocracy of wealth arose in its
place, with a consequent lowering of moral standard. Divorce was reintroduced, and family life deteriorated.

The Napoleonic code, which made an equal division of property
compulsory, gradually tended to reduce the size of families, and the
practice of neo-Malthusianism spread throughout the ranks.

Parental authority decreased as the place of the child in the family
rose in importance. The former spartan methods of training now made
way for a highly specialized and scientific system of rearing, which, though
excellent in many respects, rather tended to develop the mental and
physical side of the child at the expense of the moral.

In the industrial world, the woman wage-earner became a new factor
to be reckoned with, and the bad effects of married women’s work upon
the husband, home, and children are traced in a very forcible and convincing manner.

It is impossible in a short notice to give a fair idea of the scope of
this work. As an illuminating exposition of the laws of cause and effect
it may be recommended to all those interested in modern solutions of
social problems. EDITH CORRY.

Leopold, Lewis. Prestige: A Psychological Study of Soctal Estimates.

London. T. Fisher Unwin; 1913; price tos. 6d.; pp. 352.
THIS is a curious and unsatisfactory book, partly on account of the
nature of the subject and partly on account of the style, which is
often obscure and involved. The sentence summing up the outlines
of the argument is an example of difficult and uneasy English: “ We
shall endeavour to prove the recipient of prestige, then its possessor,
and finally we shall strive, in the psychological situation of both,
to find that peculiar constantly recurring essential point which—setting
aside all coincidences—characterises prestige” (page 46). Again, the
constant and unnecessary use of italics is confusing to the eye and
mind: “For instance, the prestige spell of long past times that have
become up to date, of exiles who are expected home but live at @
distance, or of the Papacy, which is surrounded by religious sentiment
but skut off from the world in the Vatican, are classical instances ”
(page tog). Even in its context, such a sentence, also in italics, as
“ Prestige of intellectual career paralyses a good many possibilities of
proletarian self-consciousness” (page 230) is difficult of apprehension
by the ordinary man.

But apart from obscurities of style, prestige seems to be one of those
intangible creations of the human race which defy analysis, and even
350 pages of careful study, full of suggestive examples culled from
history and anthropology, do not bring us much nearer to a real understanding of the nature of prestige. Readers interested in the dark
places of human psychology and in the irrational values attached to
different actions and characteristics at different periods of time will find
much to stimulate their curiosity, but we put down the book with the
feeling that prestige has been successful in defying the efforts which
would reduce it to an affair of paper and ink and give concrete expression to its indefinable psychological effects. C. D. W.
Parkinson, RIGHT REV. MONSIGNOR Henry, D.D., Ph.D. A Primer of

Social Science. London. P. S. King and Son; 1913; price 2s..;
Pp- 270.
THIS little book was written at the suggestion of members of the
Catholic Social Guild. “It is intended for beginners, and aims at pre