ERUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE MERSEYSIDE
SURVEY"

By D. CARADOG JONES, ™.a.

From the Department of Soctal Science, University of Liverpool

has been made to present a picture of

social and economic conditions in three
volumes. The first volume describes the
general population, its composition by sex,
age and marital condition, its accommodation
by families in houses, leading on to a discussion of overcrowding and poverty. The
second volume then proceeds to an analysis
of the earning part of the population, bringing out the industrial character of the area
and examining in some detail the chief
occupations by which people make a living.
The non-earning or dependent part of the
population is left for discussion in the third
volume, which gives also an account of
various public and social services provided
for these and other sections of the community.

Although these volumes describe existing
conditions, the picture is not a picture of
still life. All life is a flux: we cannot exist
without changing. Yet the change that is
constantly taking place is not a pure matter
of chance ; the harvest to be reaped in the
future is largely determined by the seeds
planted to-day. For that reason eugenists
try to take the long view in their judgment
of any social phenomenon. They recognize
that, if conditions are not what they should
be, the most radical way of altering the
conditions is to alter the people who create
them and that is not done in a day. It is
not without reason, therefore, that, after
finishing our survey of things as they are on
Merseyside, we should look forward, in the
final chapter of the third volume, and raise
certain vital questions as to differential
fertility and the future trend of population.
The first paragraph of that chapter will
perhaps serve as my introduction.

[: the Survey of Merseyside an attempt

* A lecture delivered before the Eugenics Society on
March 17th, 1936.

“Few social phenomena have excited
so much public interest and claimed so
much of the attention of students in recent
times as the decline of the birth-rate
throughout the civilized world. The rate
of the fall has varied from one country to
another and that has added to the excitement of the event. But it is a curious
fact that, when so much has been written
and said upon the subject, its qualitative
aspect is seldom stressed. The comparison
between one country and another is nearly
always discussed in terms merely numerical. It is proposed in this chapter to ask
from what sections of the community the
future population of Merseyside is being
recruited. Are all sections equally fertile ?
And, if not, are we producing from the
best stock ?”

My intention in this paper is to put before
you some figures which I think are an
answer, although it is not suggested that
they are a complete answer, to these
questions.

Method of Inquiry Adopted

Merseyside, as defined for the purpose of
the survey, includes in addition to Liverpool
three other county boroughs and a few
neighbouring urban districts. We may begin
by noting the extent of the fall in the rate of
natural increase of the population of the four
boroughs, measuring from the period 1881-5
which was not far from the time when the
birth-rate began to decline generally. The
figures are such as might be expected when
we bear in mind that there is a large Catholic
element in Liverpool and Bootle, while
Wallasey is predominantly the home of
clerical and other black-coated workers who
cross the Mersey daily to and from their
work.

103
104

TABLE I

MEAN ANNUAL RATE OF NATURAL INCREASE PER 1,000
OF THE POPULATION

 

Eng. & | Liver- | Bootle | Birken- (Wallasey
Wales pool head
1881-5| 14-1 10:6 16°9 17‘I 15°5
1930-4) 3°3 7°3 8-6 5'3 I°7

 

Information about the rate of growth of
population is based on figures obtained from
official sources and, whenever possible, such
sources were used in the survey; but, in
addition, a large number of special investigations were designed. One of the most fruitful
took the form of a kind of household census
—every thirtieth house in every street
throughout Merseyside being visited if the
occupation of the head of the family was
believed to be such that he would fall within
the field of national insurance. School
attendance officers were remarkably successful in obtaining answers to a fairly detailed
questionnaire as to the composition of these
families in regard to such matters as age,
sex, occupation, earnings, housing accommodation, birth-place and size of family. In
this way particulars, more or less complete—
some more complete than others—were
obtained concerning a random sample of
nearly 7,000 families of the working-class
population.

Having collected our material, the procedure in general was to apply similar
methods to different groups of individuals,
families, or other entities so as to obtain
more or less comparable results. Care was
taken at the start to formulate definitions
of terms such as overcrowding and poverty,
which are commonly used but to which
people attach meanings that differ or, more
frequently perhaps, no precise meaning at
all. The random household census supplied
us then with norms of various kinds—it
told us, for instance, what proportion of
families in each area in Merseyside as a
whole was living in overcrowded conditions
or in poverty, according to the definitions
laid down; it told us what proportion of
adult males was unemployed, what proportion ranked as skilled workers, and so forth.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Any family or individual found to be definitely below the average of its class in some
chosen respect, in housing accommodation,
in income, in employment, could then be
labelled sub-normal in that particular respect.

The data collected were recorded on cards,
one card to each family when the family
was the unit of investigation, as in the household census, or one card to each individual
when the individual was the unit. After the
particulars on the cards had been checked,
and confirmed or corrected if necessary, the
first step in any analysis usually consisted
in sorting the cards according to the object
in mind. The illustrations which follow will
make the procedure clear.

Fertility in Relation to Occupational Skill

All occupied males were graded according
to the nature of their normal occupations.
It will suffice if we consider three grades
only : non-manual workers, skilled artisans,
and unskilled workers. While the occupation
of the head of the household determined
whether or not a particular family should be
investigated, all members of the same family
were included no matter what their occupations might be. Since also the earnings of
minor officials, clerks, shop assistants and
others of the same class, are not infrequently
below {£250 a year, it follows that nonmanual workers are represented in the
survey although their proportion is not
high. Cards of married couples could thus
be sorted into groups on the above basis
according to the occupational grade of the
husband. It was possible further to_ pick
out within each group cards relating to
wives who were between 40 and 50 years of
age, and to sub-divide these according to the
number of their children, living and dead.
By taking only wives over 40 we could be
sure that the families were not far from
completion. We have then the result shown
in the initial columns of Table II. The direction of the trend is familiar from other
researches in the same field, but the gradation in the proportion of families with a
small and a large number of living and dead
children is none the less striking.

The numerical importance in the sample
EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE MERSEYSIDE SURVEY

105

TABLE II
FERTILITY OF DIFFERENT GROUPS COMPARED
(Mothers 40 to 50 years of age)
Percentages of Families with Children to the Number Shown

    

Fathers engaged in
Number

of eS

  

children Non-manual Unskilled

 

Alive:
oto2 ...
6 or more |

Dead :
oO ves
3 or more

No. of Fam.

eee | TY | aE EE |

Mean No. of
Children:
Alive
Dead

Born

of the three groups concerned may be
gauged by noting the number of families of
each type represented. The least satisfactory

group is not only the most prolific: it

contributes also the largest number of
families to the total sampled. The net
effect, expressed as the number of living and
dead children per family in each group, is
shown at the foot of the table. The unskilled
manual worker produces on the average a
family of about 54 children as compared with
4 produced by the skilled artisan and rather
less than 3 by the non-manual worker. But
death takes a higher toll from the unskilled
worker, so that the average number of
living children in his family is reduced to
about 4, as compared with about 2} in the
family of the non-manual worker. It should
be carefully noted that the purpose of this
part of the table is not to compare the
chances of death in the different groups.
Clearly, large families stand a greater chance
than small families of having some dead
children to record, for the simple reason that
in the former there is a larger number of
children at risk of death ; although this may
not be—and most likely is not—the only
reason why the number of deaths in the
families of unskilled labourers is above the

   

Position in relation to
Poverty Line

Fathers

SS

   

In Regular

 

37°0
27°0

189

4:02
1°77

5°79

average. In point of fact, about 27 per cent.
of the children born in the unskilled group
had died as compared with only 15 per cent.
in the other two groups; and, generally, a
similar difference will be discovered between
other groups to be presently contrasted.
The main intention here, however, was
simply to show that families of the unskilled
class have an exceptionally high mortality
experience. Whatever be the cause, it is an
expensive experience to the community.

Fertility in Relation to Regularity of Work
Let us introduce now another measurable
character, namely regularity of employment.
A skilled engineer who is only employed
intermittently may be worse off than an
unskilled labourer with a regular job. There
are others in worse plight who lack both
skill and work. All male heads of families
sampled in the survey were placed in three
classes according to the character of their
employment at the time of the inquiry:
(I) in regular work ; (2) casually employed ;
(3) unemployed. If we confine our attention
to the two extreme classes and pick out as
before the cards relating to wives of 40 to 50
years of age, sorted as to size of family, we
have the result shown in the middle columns
106

of Table II. It should be observed that the
families comprising these groups are obtained
by a cross classification of the population
previously considered, being drawn from all
occupational grades. The difference between
the two groups in child mortality is particularly well defined. The less satisfactory
group of the two is in this casé relatively
small in size.

Fertility in Relation to Income

When the occupational grade is low and
work is irregular the income coming into the
home is precarious. This suggests another
comparison obtained by grouping families
with wives of 40 to 50 years of age according
to their position in relation to a poverty
line. A poverty line is defined by estimating
the minimum income required to provide a
household of given composition with the
bare necessaries of life. The actual income is
then measured against this theoretical minimum standard, in order to see whether it is
above it or below and by how much. The
Merseyside poverty scale, incidentally, was
closely modelled on that used in the London
survey. In the last columns of Table II
two groups of families are compared: in
the one each family is 50 per cent. or more
above the poverty line; in the other each
family is below the line. The former group
is about four times the size of the latter.
Again the contrast in fertility is clearly
marked. Also, in 27 per cent. of the destitute
families there were 3 or more children dead ;
in fact, in this class the number of dead
children per family is double that among
families in a better position.

Fertility in Relation to Dependence

Families may exist for some time below
the poverty line without help from an outside
source, but sooner or later they will be
dependent upon others. The next step down
the scale, therefore, is to examine the fertility
of families in receipt of public assistance.
Hitherto we have been discussing results
obtained from analyses of the random
household sample. We proceed now to an
independent investigation designed to provide, with the co-operation of the Public

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Assistance Authority in Liverpool, information concerning a random sample of rather
exceptional sub-normality: namely, unemployed men, between 22 and 50 years of
age, who at the time of the inquiry had been
in receipt of out-door relief practically continuously for a period of two or more years.
The intention was to secure a group of ablebodied men who might fairly be said to be
unemployable or verging on unemployability, and whose condition could, in all
reasonable likelihood, be attributed to personal deficiencies of one kind or another.
Men who were disabled from work by accident or sickness and men over 50 whose
disabilities might be put down to the
infirmities of advancing age were accordingly
excluded from the inquiry.

Confining ourselves to married men of the
unskilled labouring class in this sample,
they can be divided into three groups
according to the age of the wife, as follows :
under 30, 30 and under 40, 40 and under 50.
Further, within each age group they can be
sub-divided as before according to the
number of children recorded as alive and
dead. The fertility and mortality of these
families, labelled sub-normal, is compared in
Table 3 with the fertility and mortality of
the relatively normal families of the same
occupational grade obtained in the course
of the random household census. The contrast is quite as remarkable as any observed
in the earlier tables.

Occupational Class of Existing and Future
Population

So far attention has been directed to the

fertility of different classes of the population.

I pass next to an investigation which sums

up effectively the net result of such tenden
cles as we have been considering for the
population as a whole. A random sample of
rather more than 700 births in Liverpool
was obtained by taking all infants whose
births were notified in the first fortnight of
February 1930. This number was equivalent
to an annual total of 18,642 births, whereas
the number registered in that year turned out
to be 18,881 and in the following year 18,626.
Thus, there seems little doubt that the sample
EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE MERSEYSIDE SURVEY 107
TABLE III
FERTILITY OF FAMILIES OF UNSKILLED LABOURERS
Percentage of Families with Children to the Number Shown
Number Wives of Age under 30 Wives of Age 30 to 40 Wives of Age 40 to 50
0 xm |
Children Normal Sub-normal Normal | Sub-normal Normal Sub-normal
Alive |
o to 2 72:1 65°7 47°3 | 21-6 30°2 21-9
6 or more 27°9* 34°3* 11-8 15:8 26°8 35°6
Dead : |
° 84-7 58°7 63°0 | 43°9 43°8 35°6
3 Or more 15°3t 41°3f 7°7 | 13°4 2I°5 30°T
No. of Fam 390 143 584 | 246 523 73
Mean No. of :
Children:
Alive 1*76 2°24 2°95 | 3°79 3°93 | 5°53
Dead “24 “52 . | I-iI 1°49 | 1°97
Born 2°00 2:76 3°64 | 4°90 5°42 ! 7*30

* 3 or more alive.

includes the great majority of the births
which actually occurred during the chosen
fortnight. It therefore gives us a very
good idea of the classes from which the
future population is drawn. The random
household sample, on the other hand,
provides a fair picture of a large section of
the existing population ; and it was possible
to estimate roughly the size of the unsampled
section, which can be classed occupationally
as non-manual, from a knowledge of the
total private family population in Liverpool
given in the last census. When these two
groups, each sub-divided according to the
occupational grades of the heads of the
families concerned, are placed side by side,
we have the following significant result :

TABLE IV

PERCENTAGE OCCUPATIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF THE
EXISTING AND FUTURE POPULATION

 

 

 

   

Group Non- | Total
skilled | skilled | Skilled Manual

Headsoffamilies in existing Populn. 30 | 100
Fathers oO
Future Population 19 100

 

¢ 1 or more dead.

Dual Influence of Heredity and Environment

All the tables hitherto examined converge
to the same familiar conclusion: the lower
a man is in the social scale, the larger in
general is the number of his children,
living and dead. So long as these conditions
persist, the scales become increasingly
weighted in favour of the socially lower
classes generation by generation. Those who
regret to see the inevitable day coming when
the population of Great Britain will begin
to decline may argue that it is better to have
babies born in the slums than no babies born
at all. Although this puts the case in an
extreme form, we might agree to the implied
principle if it could be proved that such
infants have the same chance as others of
starting life well endowed in mind and body
and of subsequently growing up to be capable
men and women. But have they? Most of
the available evidence unfortunately points
in the opposite direction and there are two
a priort reasons why this should be so. It
may be laid down as an axiom or selfevident truth that, as a general rule, persons
who are sub-normal—meaning by subnormal, definitely below the average of their
class—in skill and in the amount of employment they get are likely to be sub-normal
also in physique or intelligence or both.
108

Accordingly, if heredity counts for anything,
we cannot be more than moderately hopeful
that such parents will beget strong and
intelligent children. And, if environment
counts for anything, there is equal room for
doubt whether the sort of home weakly and
dull-witted parents are capable of providing
for their children is calculated to promote
their wise development. We need not decide
with any degree of nicety, even if we could,
how far heredity and how far environment
each contribute to the conditions we observe.
It is well to remind ourselves, however, that
one can never completely compensate for a
poor endowment, but that even a good
endowment may fail to come to perfect
fruition in an inferior environment. When
a growing proportion of children are being
born and bred in families at the bottom of
the social scale it is not necessary, therefore,
to prove that they all start life stunted in
body or weak in intellect in order to establish
the fact that we are not as a nation making
the best use of our human resources.

Defect at Birth in Relation to Parent's Class

Let us see how far these considerations are
borne out by statistical evidence. We make
contact with one another and with the
outside world by the eye, by the ear, by the
intelligence. It follows that anyone who is
blind, or deaf, or mentally deficient must find
it difficult, if not impossible, to live a full life.
If such an affliction be present at birth, as
it is in the mentally deficient, the handicap
is vastly increased, because it is impossible
to acquire any store of early impressions of
the world of light, of sound, or of learning to
assist the imagination in later years. There

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

are other defects which may be equally
crippling. Some children are subject to
epileptic fits, or they suffer from congenital
heart trouble or congenital paralysis ; others
have an acquired disability, it may be
rickets, rheumatism, or tuberculous glands.
Then there are a host of ailments, major or
minor, which may be classed under the
general heading of ‘‘ poor health.”’ All these
in some degree must act as obstacles to any
great personal attainment, and only heroic
characters of the Helen Keller or Roosevelt
type can surmount them. An attempt was
made therefore in the course of the Merseyside survey to collect parallel information
over the same perfod of time about all such
defective or disabled classes in the community. For our present purpose interest
centres in the children, and the chief source
of information concerning those who might
be described as sub-normal in sight or
hearing, mind or body, was the Special
Schools Department of the Local Education
Authority. In regard to feeble-minded
children, whose defect was of too grave a
nature for them to be educable in Special
Schools, the case papers of the West Lancashire Association for Mental Welfare were
consulted. There were 841 defective children
of 5 to 16 in the Special Schools group and.
257 in the Mental Welfare group. The blind
numbered 69, the deaf 150, the epileptics 48,
and the physically disabled 662. In the lastnamed group about 150 children were under
5 years of age, and information about some
of the cases came from Tuberculosis Institutes and a Child Welfare Association.
Information as to ill-health was given on
the random household sample cards.

TABLE V
SOcIAL CLASS OF FAMILIES CONTAINING DEFECTIVE CHILDREN

Percent. of Unskilled| Percentage of Fathers recorded as Unskilled in Families with one or more Children

Fathers in Random|———————_——————_- emer
Sample of WorkingClass Families* Blind Deaf (M.D. (MW)t} M.D. (SS)f Epil.
40 53 43 43 63 70 55

    
 
   

44

* Since all families containing a sub-normal child must have at least one child, the families in the random sample
were for this purpose also restricted to those containing at least one living child.
¢ The Mental Defectives are divided into two groups, those under the care of a Mental Welfare Association and

those attending Special Schools.
EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE MERSEYSIDE SURVEY

The result is shown in Table V. In every
case the percentage of the unskilled fathers
is higher in families with a defective or sick
child than among working-class families in
general. The excess is large in families with
a child who is blind, physically defective,
epileptic, or a higher grade mental defective.
In the other cases the difference, though
consistent in direction, may be the result
of random sampling ; but, judging from the
table as a whole, it can be accepted as a
conservative statement that, the more
children there are born in families of the
unskilled class, the greater is the chance
that they will be in some respect sub-normal
or born with a predisposition to subnormality. I do not wish to be misunderstood
here. I am not suggesting that the chance
of any of the grosser defects appearing is
necessarily a high one. We shall be in a
better position to say what the chance
precisely is when we have discovered how to
identify the carriers of defect. What I do
venture to say is that there seems to be a
greater chance of sub-normality appearing
in some classes than in others.

Influence of Parent’s Class on Infant’s Progress

But whether the child of the unskilled
labourer be well-born or ill-born, in the
eugenic sense of the term, can we look
forward at all hopefully to its future? That
is the next question to examine. In the first
place it is relevant to point out that the
incidence of death, as the earlier tables have
shown, is definitely higher in this class than
in others. What of the survivors? A careful
analysis of records kept over a period of two
years of the health and progress of a random
sample of infants born in Liverpool in
February 1930, to which reference has

109

already been made in this paper, led to
the following broad conclusion—I will not
trouble you with the details of the inquiry :
‘““ There is a close association between the
progress an infant makes and the social and
economic status of the family into which it
happens to be born. In general, the lower
the status, the less satisfactory the progress
of the infant. The impression of this determining factor is to be found upon the health
of the parents, the attention the mother
receives at her confinement and the prospect
of the infant being properly fed, if not
breast-fed, all of which react upon the
progress made.”’

Influence of Parent’s Class on Child’s Success
at School

Although the social status of the parents
may tell against the child in infancy, the
prospect may possibly grow brighter later
in life. For most working-class children
education ceases at 14. Some, more favoured
than others, get scholarships to secondary
schools. Who are these favoured children ?
Has the social status of the parent any
influence here or has the child of the unskilled labourer the same chance as any
other child ? One good index of social status
is housing accommodation and Table VI
throws some light on the position. In this
table all the wards of Liverpool are arranged
in groups of five, in the order of scholarships
gained by pupils in elementary schools
within the several wards, taking into account
the total number of pupils attending such
schools in each area. The result is shown in
the second row of the table. In the third row
the percentage of families found to be overcrowded in the same wards in the random
household census is recorded. The closeness

TABLE VI
ASSOCIATION BETWEEN HOUSING CONDITIONS AND SUCCESS IN GAINING SCHOLARSHIPS

Wards grouped in order of success I 2

Mean No. of Scholarships per
1,000 pupils wes | I1‘3 6-2
4°5

Percent. of Families overcrowded

 

6-4

 

B

3 4 5 6 7 8

4°3 3°2 2*2 I-I 0:6 0:0

7°5 9°9 ri *2 13°2 19°6 27°8
Ito

of the connection between housing conditions and success in gaining scholarships is
striking. How far it is due to the influence
of the conditions under which the children
in the poorer neighbourhoods are living,
how far to the poorer intelligence of these
children, and how far to inferior teaching in
the schools they attend it is impossible to
say. My own opinion is that each factor is
in part responsible. However that may be,
the net result is that the children of lower
social status find themselves handicapped at
this stage again in competition with their
fellow pupils, in that fewer of them find
their way into secondary schools.

Influence of Parent's Class on I ndustrial
Career

But perhaps this makes no difference when
they begin their real life-work after school.
If they are not quick at their books they may
be sharper in other ways and able to use
their hands to better purpose. The results
of an analysis of a random sample of over

1,700 children leaving secondary schools in
the Merseyside area have a bearing upon
this discussion, for although it is true to say
that only a small proportion of elementary
school children find their way to secondary
schools—about 14 per cent. in England and
Wales at the time our inquiry was made—
nearly three out of every four children
admitted to secondary schools are exelementary school pupils. Here are some of
the conclusions reached. The better the
previous examination record, the higher
the occupational grade entered by the child
on leaving school; but more than half the
children sampled had either never entered
or had failed to pass any recognized external
examination while attending secondary
schools. The record of examinations passed,
however, is not only evidence of the mental

ability of the child. It is closely related to

the length of stay in school and this is
largely determined by the social class (or
occupational grade) of the parent. In short,
the occupational grade of the parent has
considerable weight in the determination of
the occupational grade of the child. The

THE EUGENICS REVIEW |

division into different social classes on this
account begins quite early in life, being
decided by the kind of school the child first
enters ; but it is worthy of mention that the
exceptional child of poor parents, once he
gains admission to a secondary school, has
as fair a chance as the average child of
parents in a better position to make a good
start in life. An independent inquiry showed
that the percentage of boys entering blindalley occupations rose significantly as the
father’s occupational grade declined, with
the result that two out of every three of the
sons of unskilled labourers had no settled
employment to look forward to in the future.
Further, the majority of the boys who were
out of work at the time this inquiry was
made were recorded as below the average 1 in
intelligence.

One slender hope remains. Is there any
chance for those who start perhaps as
errand boys to rise to better positions later ?
In order to discover whether this ever
happens, and, if so, to what extent the
general situation is thereby improved, an
analysis was made, using the random
household material, of the occupations of all
fathers in the sample having sons who were
also occupied. Incidentally, this necessarily
restricted the inquiry to sons who were
fairly young, some of whom may not have
secured permanent work in the sense in
which any such work can be called permanent. It was discovered that, of all sons
whose fathers were unskilled workers, about
II per cent. were classed as non-manual
workers and 13 per cent. each as skilled and
semi-skilled workers. But the net result is
less satisfactory than it at first appears ;
for, whereas the proportion classed as
unskilled labourers among the fathers was
roughly 40 per cent., the proportion so
classed among the sons had risen to 50 per
cent. This increase is explained in part by
the high proportion of the sons of unskilled
workers who remain in the class into which
they are born, and in part by an addition to
their number from the ranks of skilled and
semi-skilled workers. Thus, although a little
is gained on the swings, more is lost on the
roundabouts.
EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE MERSEYSIDE SURVEY

We have sought in vain a way of escape
from the conclusion which common sense
warned us we might expect. If we continue
to people this island increasingly with the
offspring of unskilled labourers, it will be
exceptional, not according to rule, if they
turn out to be much above the average of
their class either at birth or afterwards.

Are Mental Deficiency and Other Types of
Sub-normality Related ?

I should like at this stage to make an
apparent digression by recalling Dr. E. O.
Lewis’ discovery that a large proportion of
high-grade defectives are to be found in a
restricted group of families, which include
also more than the average number of insane
persons, epileptics, paupers, criminals, unemployables, slum dwellers, prostitutes,
inebriates, and other social inefficients.
Later, in evidence submitted to the Brock
Committee, it was reported that at least
30 per cent. of the parents of such defectives,
though not actually certifiable as defective
themselves, are persons of sub-normal intelligence. In other words, to all outward
appearance they are indistinguishable from
the type of parent frequently found in the
unskilled labouring class which we have
been discussing at such length. Moreover,
figures from the Merseyside Survey have
been produced which at least suggest that
other defects and disabilities are more likely
to originate in this same class than in others.
That leads us to ask how far there may be
common factors at work which encourage
the appearance of sub-normality. It is
difficult to believe that all such defects as
we have been considering are quite unrelated
and that consequently they present problems
which must be tackled independently.

IItr

Further, whether their roots are single or
multiple, associated or otherwise, it is
clearly of the first importance to discover
which types of disability originate after
conception, being merely the progeny of a
poor environment, and which necessitate a
digging farther back if they are to be
eradicated. A third possibility remains:
the seeds of certain defects may be transmitted from parent to child only as unpleasant potentialities; they remain quiescent
unless the soil in which they are planted is
favourable to their appearance. In other
words, it is only by the co-operation of
heredity and environment that the undesired result is produced.

Frequency of Sub-normality in Certain
Families and Houses

Such questions, however, will require long
and detailed research before they can be
settled. But, looking at the matter broadly
from the standpoint of the social student
and not that of the medical specialist, Table
VII is not without interest. It shows the
proportion of each of certain defects found
under the same roof or in the same family
as one or more of a group of selected defects.
For instance, about 15 per cent. of all the
sub-normal cases investigated were known
to have a relative also sub-normal in one or
more of the senses listed in the table. Also,
about one out of every five sub-normal cases
was not found alone in the same house ;
where, for instance, mental defect occurred,
physical defect, intemperance, destitution,
or some other sub-normality was not infrequently also present. Incidentally, the
high figures under deafness are attributable
to the marked tendency for the deaf to
intermarry.

TABLE VII
PERCENTAGE OF DEFECTS OCCURRING MORE THAN ONE TO A FAMILY OR HOUSE

Defects occurring

13°8 39°0
19°! 45°1

18+4
20°5

Family ...
House

7°9
10°5

 

 

Nature of Defect or Disability

more than one to——+—--——_, .
| a Blind Deaf | Epil. M.D. |

 

* The heading here indicates some record of immorality, crime or alcoholism.
II2

Concentration of Sub-normality in Certain
Districts

Sub-normality thus frequents certain
families and certain houses; it is natural
that we should find it more concentrated
also in some districts than in others. Table
VIII contrasts conditions in two districts of
much the same size, Exchange, one of the
inner areas of Liverpool, and Walton, a
neighbouring area which stretches out towards the boundaries of the city. Not only
are the rates of defect considerably higher
in Exchange than in Walton, but other
social indices—the proportions of families
overcrowded, below the poverty line, and in
receipt of public assistance—point in precisely the same direction. Moreover, the
more sub-normal district has an exceptionally
high birth-rate coupled, perhaps fortunately,
with high rates of mortality. As a measure
of the direction in which things are moving,
and the rate of the movement, it may be
added that, if the mean birth-rate for 1930
to 1934 be compared with that in 1906 to
1910, a short generation ago, it is found that
the fall in the Exchange district is only from
34 to 3I per I,000, or 10 per cent., whereas
the fall in Walton is from 32 to 14 per 1,000,
or 56 per cent. This brings us back to the
point from which the paper started and it
may be helpful if I now pick up the thread
of the argument which holds the tables
together and briefly traverse its course
again.
Summary and Conclusion |

I started by showing that a relatively

high fertility is present among families
where the husband and father is sub-normal

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in occupational skill and employability, and
in families which are below the poverty line
and frequently dependent on public assistance. The question was then raised as to
whether the increasing swing left resulting
from this higher rate of parenthood among
the unskilled than the skilled was necessarily
to be deplored. If the parents are subnormal does it follow that the children also
will be sub-normal ?

As evidence on this matter figures were
given which indicated that, the more parenthood is confined to the unskilled, the greater
is the probability that among the offspring
will be children who are sub-normal in
physique and intelligence. Those who hold
heredity to be of little account may make
light of such evidence. Some would fain
believe that, although all men are not born
equal, the chance of being well-born is
nevertheless much the same in all classes.

But, granted that the unskilled labourer’s
child is, at least potentially, sound of head
and strong of limb, can it be assumed that
he stands as good a chance as others of
doing well after birth? On this point the
result of investigations during infancy, in
school, on entrance into industry and later
in life were quoted. The impression they
gave was that the children of the unskilled,
if they survive at all, are in general handicapped throughout life by the dual influence
of their heredity and their environment, the
two prime factors which are always so
difficult to disentangle. A clear dividing line
cannot be drawn, for instance, between those
who suffer a disadvantage on account of poor
health and apparent dullness of intelligence,
in part the effect of unsatisfactory home

TABLE VIII
LOCALIZATION OF SUB-NORMALITY

 

Deathrate

Birthrate

 

 

District

Exchange
Walton

 

Inf. | Defects per 10,000 of Population
Mort. |

Percentage of
Families

 
EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE MERSEYSIDE SURVEY

conditions and lack of proper education, and
those who can be certified as definitely
defective at birth. In this connection it was
pointed out—and the fact is not without
significance—that higher-grade mental defectives are known to be largely recruited from
—a class which is sub-normal in intelligence
and which is the chief source of other subnormalities; and tables were submitted
suggesting the existence of common influences linking together the various groups
which, if not sub-normal, might be described
as on the border-land of sub-normality.
Finally, two districts were contrasted to
illustrate and further emphasize the intimate interaction between environment and
heredity in the production of sub-normal
conditions.

If it may be assumed that the picture
drawn is as true in some degree of other parts
of the country as it is of Merseyside, it must
follow that, unless the present differential
class fertility can be reversed-—by the
encouragement of a higher birth-rate among

   
  
    
 
  
  

Sex-Education, etc.

a Quarterly journal published in August,
November, February and May
Editor-in-Chief :
Editor for England: E. F. GRIFFITH, M.R.C.S.
Subscription : 18s. per annum, post free
Single Numbers: 4s. 6d. net, postage 4d.
London Agents:
136 Gower Street, W.C.1

Important to Students of Eugenics, Sociology,

 

MARRIAGE HYGIENE

A. P. PILLAY, O.B.E., M.B., B.S.,

H. K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd.,

  

II3

the eugenically well-endowed and by the
discouragement of so high a rate among the
eugenically inferior—we are inevitably piling
up for ourselves trouble in time to come.
We may, with an equanimity for which I
believe there is little justification, shut our
eyes to the risk we run of increasing the
number of those who are definitely subnormal in mind or body at birth; but we
can hardly escape the fear that the proportion of young people brought up under subnormal conditions is steadily growing.
Something may be done to stay the tide by
the provision of improved education, subsidized houses, free maintenance and school
meals, and other forms of public assistance
in money or kind. It will be difficult, however, notwithstanding all our social services,
to prevent a decline in the average level of
physique, intelligence and culture of the
nation. Its arrest, in so far as it is arrested,
is accounted for by our ever-expanding
social heritage—each generation begins to
build where the last left off.

   

! LEWIS'S
MEDICAL & SCIENTIFIC

LENDING LIBRARY

|

Annual Subscription : from One Guinea
Prospectus on application

|
|
|
|
|

BOOKSELLING DEPARTMENT:

Large stock of books on Medicine and Allied
Sciences, including “* EUGENICS,”’ etc.

Catalogues on application
H. K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd., 136 Gower Street,
W.G.1

 

   

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVIII, No. 2.
