THE NON-SANE NON-INSANE OFFENDER"
By W. NORWOOD EAST, M.D., ERCP.

HE invitation to deliver the Galton

Lecture is an honour which I sincerely

appreciate, and I am happy to believe
that it is a recognition of the social importance of the branch of medicine in which
I have been engaged for many years.

I have selected for my subject the NonSane Non-Insane Offender because I believe
that the scientific approach to crime has
sufficiently advanced in this direction to

enable a more appropriate method of treat-.
ment to be applied to this class of law-.

breaker. I also realize that associations
like the Eugenics Society can advance
medico-sociological affairs, and forward
changes which are overdue, by their readiness to discuss informally with others
problems to which many people are disinclined to listen in a set address, however
important the subject may be in promoting
social welfare.

It will be remembered that Sir Francis
Galton introduced his method of composite
portraiture to the Anthropological Institute
in 1878, and selected for his first trials
portraits of criminals from English prisons
who had been convicted of murder and other
crimes of violence. He considered the connection between criminality and insanity,
and studied the possibility of a criminal
class being perpetuated by heredity. At
the same time he recognized the difficulties
involved in forming a correct judgment
upon so elusive a problem. I like to think
that he would have approved the subject of
this lecture which deals with a group of
offenders who often fail to make a success

of marriage or provide a happy and healthy

home, and may be considered therefore
dysgenic apart from the possibility of transmitting character traits which result in
criminality.

It is not my purpose to consider here the

* The Galton Lecture, delivered before the Eugentcs
Society on February 17th, 1947.

above matters as they presented themselves
to investigators in the last quarter of the
last century. I may add that personal
experience leads me to believe that the
facial appearances of those inside a prison
are indistinguishable from those outside,
that the connection between criminality
and insanity ‘is infrequent in England and
Wales, and that crime, per se, is not inherited.

‘In the year 1938, when life in Great
Britain was more or less normal, more than
three-quarters of a million persons in
England and Wales were found guilty of
offences of all kinds. According to law
children under the age of eight years cannot
commit crime, and it is an established fact
that persons over the age of sixty-five seldom
do. The above total therefore was mainly
made up of persons between these age
limits, but. the number of our associates
who have offended against the criminal law
is usually unsuspected and largely a matter
of conjecture. As individuals they are so
much like ourselves that we fail to detect
anything criminal or unusual about them.
This fact, together with others more forcible,
goes to disprove the facile assumption of
the uninformed who would have us believe
that crime is a disease.

In the present context non-sane noninsane offenders comprise subnormals,
psychopathic personalities and psychoneurotics. The subnormals range from near
normal to near mental deficiency, the
psychopathic personalities. and . psychoneurotics from near normal to near insanity.
It will be convenient to consider them from
the points of view of causation, ascertainment, responsibility and treatment.

Causation

Criminal behaviour, like other forms of
human. activity, is the result of the interaction of various factors, individual and
THE NON-SANE NON-INSANE OFFENDER 7

environmental. The former include the
constitutional framework, physical and
mental, inherited and acquired. The latter
comprise the social, economic, material and
spiritual backgrounds. The earlier investigators erred when they attempted to attribute crime to a single factor or to a particular personal quality. To ascertain the
cause of any criminal act it is necessary to
collect and analyze all the available information regarding the circumstances of the
crime, the personality of the offender, and
the manner in which environmental circumstances have affected him. This is sometimes so complicated a task that it is only
possible to assess approximately the relative
importance of the interacting forces. Fortunately in many cases a rough estimate is all
that is required for practical purposes.

In 1913 Goring showed that there was no
such thing as a physical criminal type
among 3,000 males in English convict
prisons. In 1942 an official investigation
into the physical condition of 4,000 male
offenders between the ages of sixteen and
twenty from the London area showed little
evidence of physical inferiority. At the

same time it must be conceded that some

observers consider that there is at least some
physical basis for crime, and there is no
doubt that occasionally crime is a direct
consequence of a physical illness. It may
also be noted that physical inferiority is
sometimes associated with marked social
and professional ability.
Inherited mental qualities and _ those
acquired as a result of psychological experiences are of great importance in determining
criminal behaviour. In 1941 Bagot found
that backwardness rather than mental

defectiveness influenced the incidence of

offences amongst juveniles from the Liverpool area. Among the 4,000 adolescents in
the London area, mental defectiveness was
present in nearly 4 per cent, a proportion
appreciably higher than in the. general
population. Other mental abnormalities
were present in about 4 per cent also. In
the general prison population in England
and Wales, 1 per cent are certifiable as
insane and half of i per cent as mentally

defective. There are no reliable figures in
this country regarding the number of
offenders in the non-sane non-insane group.
It will probably be found somewhere
between 5 and 20 per cent.

I am aware that at first experienced
observers overestimated the proportion of
mentally defective prisoners. But whatever
the size of the non-sane non-insane group,
mere numbers are less important than the
fact that offenders in the group are likely
to repeat their offences. And generally it
may be accepted that repeated offences by
adults, and to a less extent adolescents,
indicate a fundamental difference between
the mental make-up of the habitual and the
first offender.

One of the most important causes of persistent criminality is habit, the stereotyped
form of response to environmental circumstances and subjective conditions acquired

by repetition. Habits enable many persons

to face difficulties and conserve energy, but
they may impose upon a less tough-minded
person action which takes the line of least
resistance and a vicious circle may result ;
a particular situation arises, the consequential difficulty is repeatedly avoided and a
crime is repeatedly committed. It sometimes happens that the only way to break
up this sequence is forcibly to detain the
offender for a considerable period so that
he is guarded from the situations which
give rise to it.

Few will doubt that one of the most
important causes of criminal behaviour is
an imperfect development of character,
using this term for the inherited and
acquired qualities which to some extent
depend upon intelligence, but also are related to temperament as well as national
and social traditions, and which affect and
should direct the control of voluntary and
involuntary behaviour. The character of
many offenders in the non-sane non-insane
group appears to be incompletely developed.
It fails to reach the adult level and is incapable of further progress. So it comes
about that whereas some offenders in the
group have their place among the non-sane,
others are found among the non-insane.
8 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Still others are found between these extremes.

In passing, reference must be made to
the fact that crime is most frequent among
those with least economic security. This
does not mean that persons in comfortable
circumstances are inherently more lawabiding than those on or near the poverty
line. But it does mean that the latter are
subjected to many temptations and stresses
which the more favoured escape. In consequence. of mental and environmental
stress social values are altered. Moreover,
we must not forget that a certain number
of persons below the poverty line remain
there because their mental equipment is
insufficient to raise them to a higher status
or appreciate the importance of socially
acceptable behaviour. |

A causal factor which receives scant attention to-day is the lack of religious education.
Frank selfishness is the rule. Children are
frequently brought up without proper care
or attention and home life is disappearing.
Cupidity is the modern goal, short-term
expediency supplants old-fashioned honesty.
Many irresponsible persons marry for amusement or greed, and look upon the Divorce
Court as an office where a new licence is
obtained to legalize a fresh adventure.
The search for pleasure grows apace, and
hard work is no longer regarded as a Christian
tenet or as an invigorating friend, but as
an opponent to be avoided.

This brief survey of some of the matters
which require consideration in any attempt
to introduce the facts associated with
criminal behaviour among the normal group
of offenders is necessarily incomplete. But
it serves as a background to the more remote
problems which arise when offenders in the
non-sane non-insane group are under review.

Ascertainment

The allocation of the individual offender
to his appropriate mental group usually
presents little difficulty, but it may be otherwise if the characteristics of one group
overlap or become superimposed upon those
of another. Always at the centre are typical
examples of their kind. Outside this nucleus
other offenders are neither black nor white

but different shades of grey and they tend
to infiltrate into the outskirts of adjacent
groups. For example, the boundary line
between normal and subnormal people or
between the psychoneurotic and insane is
sometimes ill defined. Further, insanity
may be imposed upon an offender in any

- group.

An approximate idea of the meanings of
the words mental defectiveness and insanity
is usual among educated people, who realize
that their knowledge of these subjects is
necessarily imperfect. The conception of
normality requires further consideration
because it is often more inexact than many
believe. — ~

For the most part we judge the behaviour
of others by our own, and estimate the
motives and intentions which govern their
behaviour by comparing them with our own
instinctual urges. Herein lie certain fallacies
if we are ignorant of the secret projects and
temptations of others, and underrate the
difficulties of understanding oneself. The
matter is more complicated when criminal
behaviour is assessed and the offender is
determined to hide or disguise the reason
for his activity or, as sometimes happens,
is at a loss to understand it. Further, the
ordinary person is often more potentially
criminal than he is willing to believe, and
sometimes unconsciously maintains his selfregard by exaggerating the culpability of
those who break the law. .

In.the ordinary affairs of life behaviour
follows efforts directed towards satisfying
the emotions associated with the innate
urges, acquisitive, aggressive, sexual, parental, gregarious and the like. It is influenced
by the psychological mechanisms of conflict,
repression, dissociation, projection and
others. It is controlled as a result of education and convention, of morality and religion,
of a sense of social responsibility and fear
of opprobrium, and by penalties.

Abnormal behaviour may arise if some of
the innate tendencies are more and others
less imperative than in the ordinary variations of ordinary men and women ; if social
adjustment is impeded by any of the above
psychological phenomena; and if selfTHE NON-SANE NON-INSANE OFFENDER 9

control is insufficiently exercised or is misused. We have no yard-stick to measure
the strength of an instinctual urge in ourselves or in others, and it sometimes appears
excessive’ because adequate control is lacking. At other times the urge appears weak
because it is controlled by a strong will.

Crime results if normal or abnormal
behaviour is prohibited by law. But note
the fact that the law does not cause the
prohibited act ; it attaches to it the quality
of criminality. "

A too narrow view of normality leads to
error. In the ordinary affairs of life we consider normal behaviour is synonymous with
average behaviour. But this standard may
be misleading if we believe that our own
thoughts and activities necessarily conform
to those of others, and that any deviation
therefrom is evidence of abnormality.

A single man, capable, intelligent, temperate
and a skilled craftsman, fell in love with a
married woman of his own age during the
absence of her husband overseas. From time
to time intimacy occurred between them until
the man discovered that she had resumed
relations with a former lover. He thereupon
hid himself on his rival’s premises, and when
the latter returned stealthily attacked him
from behind and struck into his brain with an
axe and killed him.

_ The homicide was not mentally defective
or insane, neither was he suffering from any
minor mental abnormality unless the word
is used so freely that it has no real significance. His conduct might appear to be
abnormal to those who are unaware of the
fact that many murders are manifestations
of the possessiveness which is a biological
urge and is seen in the lower animals, particularly during the mating season. And here
note the fact that murder is usually committed during a state of intense emotional
disturbance which is not necessarily related
to insanity or other mental abnormality.
Some may consider that civilization has
advanced our behaviour far beyond the
activities of the animal world. But the
thinness of the veneer may be exposed, as
someone wrote many years ago, if a waiter
at a dinner-party upsets a plate of hot soup
over the nicely starched shirt-front of one

- personal qualities.

of the guests. Indeed, recent world events
have not only demonstrated the great
heights to which men and women can rise,
but have also exposed the depths to which
others can descend. The poor quality of
much of our veneer has been unmasked
beyond a peradventure, and many thoughtful
minds view with alarm the defects apparent

-in the underlying structure.

Normal behaviour may occur in the
insane, and abnormal behaviour in those
who are mentally normal if the emotions
are too violently disturbed by chance circumstances. Moreover, a crime committed
by a person who is mentally abnormal is not
necessarily associated with his aberration.
For practical purposes we accept as normal
a considerable degree of variation in matters
concerning intelligence and wisdom, temperament, ethics, will-power and _ other
In other words, in some
people behaviour is represented by an
almost even horizontal line, in others the
line is wavy. The oscillations are due to
transient constitutional and environmental
causes,

As we look out on the world to-day and
consider the lessons of history, it becomes
abundantly clear that for practical purposes
a good deal of latitude must be allowed to
instinctual behaviour before we regard it as
abnormal. We have seen Nazism attain
its climax by the aid of an aggressiveness far
surpassing the ordinary.. We see men going
to the extreme of normality in their lust for
power in different spheres, and we meet
others who, although within the limits of
normality, destroy an honourable career
by nauseating behaviour. And here let me
add that as a psychiatrist I claim no more
authority to decide when normal behaviour
becomes abnormal than any other wellinformed person, unless mental disorder or
defectiveness ‘is present. If so it must be
accepted that special knowledge and experience are required, not only to diagnose the
mental condition but also to determine
whether it has caused the behaviour in
question.

I believe that although our knowledge is
incomplete the different sub-groups of the
Io

group with which we are concerned can be
sufficiently differentiated to enable the
psychiatrist to state his reasons for placing
the offender in his appropriate setting.
Having done this he can go no further than
propose and carry out the course of treatment which appears to him to offer the
greatest chance of rehabilitating the offender.
But it is clearly a matter for others to decide
whether the advice can be accepted in the
interests of justice and the security of
society.

We cannot disregard the fact that when ~.

mental abnormality is suggested as an
explanation for a crime legislators as well
as the public show some apprehension,
believing that psychiatrists too often introduce this plea in an attempt to excuse the
offender.

The fact that the behaviour and opinions
of another seem extravagant is not necessarily evidence of mental abnormality.
Neither is the fact that the reason for an
act or decision is not understood by the
person immediately concerned. Indeed the
subconscious mind influences our activities
perhaps more often than is recognized.
The second Marquess of Reading writes of
his father when Rufus Isaacs, Q.C., ‘‘ He
was perfectly refreshed by five hours sleep,
and even these hours were not wasted.
Some subconscious faculty was at work
while he slept and he would awake to find
a complete set of facts, the proper arrangement of which had given him so much
thought on the previous night, neatly sorted
out and pigeon-holed in his mind the
following morning.”

Turn to more humble folk. To the man
who falls in love with a woman without
realizing that she first attracted him because
of some feature or quality which characterized the girl of his choice in an earlier
and intense emotional situation. Or to those
who commit crime as the result of a forgotten
experience in their early years which was
associated with severe emotional disturbance.

Although constitutional and_ environmental causes of behaviour are always
present, there is some reason to believe that
in a general way their relative importance

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

has some connection with the different
periods of life. In juvenile and senile crime
the constitutional factor is often more
important than the environmefital.
adulthood and maturity the environmental
factor may predominate. But the differences
are seldom exact enough to allow the normal
to be clearly separated on these grounds
alone from the abnormal. When mental
defectiveness, insanity or the non-sane noninsane mental conditions are related to
crime the constitutional factor is generally
of first importance. At least this may be
said, normal behaviour usually requires the
constitutional and environmental factors to
be fairly balanced.
physical, mental and social maturity which
influence the desires, opportunities and
ability to commit crime do not necessarily
develop at the same rate in the same person,
neither do they necessarily equally deteriorate as age advances.

In a recent article Fritz Schmid! declares
that although psychiatrists have adequate
conceptions of psychosis, neurosis and organic
brain disease they have not yet developed
any satisfactory classification of the personalities who do not fall into these categories. If some of the latter show deviations
from socially acceptable behaviour such as
delinquency some of the psychiatrists call
them “ normal,’ holding the view that these
deviations should be explained in other than
psychiatric terms, whereas other psychiatrists
label them ‘ psychopathic personalities.”
He also states that in most cases the latter
term adds nothing to our understanding of
these subjects nor does it give much help
for treatment. To this criticism I would
teply that the clinical types included in the
non-sane non-insane group of offenders are
more definite and precise as a result of
modern investigations than the legal mind
of Schmid] seems to allow; that experience
affords ample proof that the ordinary
methods of treatment are usually here inadequate, and that there is reason to believe
that they can be improved upon if they are
replaced or supplemented by more enlightened measures. I entirely agree with
the view that there is much loose talk upon

In

It may be added that

¢
THE NON-SANE NON-INSANE OFFENDER II

this subject among the uninformed, and
that merely to affix a label to an offender is
valueless, and indeed worse if it suggests
knowledge where there is ignorance. Moreover, I have consistently refused to accept
the view that the delinquent or criminal is
necessarily different from the law-abiding
citizen. At the same time I am ready to
believe that as our knowledge increases the
conception of the non-sane non-insane
offender will become more complete.

Only a brief reference is necessary to the
subnormals and psychoneurotics, as both
classes are fully recognized. Subnormals
are found in all classes of society, and the
majority are able to float in the general
population without breaking the law. But
they are handicapped in that they frequently
fail to gain promotion in their occupations

in the face of competition, and are accident
prone at their work. If they commit crime
they tend to repeat their offences because
of their limitations, and because occupational
placement is difficult in a competitive world.

Psychoneurotic symptoms are an _ indication of mental conflict, and the four
generally accepted types need not be considered here. I may however mention the
anxiety type in order to emphasize the wide
range of emotion which may occur in normal
persons.

The term anxiety is used in this connection for a morbid fear of danger of some
kind and usually arises from within. It is
necessary to stress the word morbid, as few
persons are free from all fear. Normal fears
tend to vary with different periods of life,
but the degree of fear is relative to the
danger, and need not be morbid to cause a
crime. Thus, a young man working for a
modest salary may embezzle his employer’s
money because he is afraid that he will lose
the girl of his choice unless he spends more
money on her than he can afford. On the
other hand a morbid fear may be the reason
for a crime; the offence of attempting to
commit suicide may result from an unreasonable fear that the ordinary aches and
pains which are common to many people
are due to a fatal disease which cannot be
faced. And note the fact that if we attempt

to escape from the things we fear we become
more afraid. If we defy them they weaken
and may entirely disappear.

Moreover, we know from personal experience, or as a result of observation on others,
how extensive the range of fear may be.
At one time a slight uneasiness of mind, at
another an overwhelming panic. In the
latter our psychological reactions may be as
unreasoning as some of those due to the
morbid fears which belong to the realm of
insanity. And in our fears we have an
everyday illustration of the transition from
the normal to the abnormal in the spheres of
emotion and behaviour. Itis with transitions
of emotion and behaviour from normal to

‘abnormal that we are mainly concerned in

the non-sane non-insane offender.
Elsewhere I have recently classified
psychopathic personalities into nine categories: psychic inferior personalities,
aggressive egocentric personalities, ethical
aberrant personalities, alcohol and drug
addicts, sexual perverts, schizoid, cycloid
and paranoid personalities. A brief reference
to them is necessary, as we seem here to
enter the borderland between character
deviations and mental abnormalities. |
Many have first-hand acquaintance with
psychic inferior personalities in whom inherited and environmental causal factors
have varying significance. Individuals in
this class do not lack intelligence like the
subnormals, but their negative qualities of
character are so conspicuous and compromising that any positive attributes they
possess are cancelled out. They lack initiative, self-confidence, resource, the capacity
for sustained effort, ambition and _ willpower. They avoid making decisions and |
shun responsibility, and are unable to
occupy with credit any position of authority.
They rely upon a married partner or friend
to shelter them from fhe difficulties which
the average person faces alone in the ordinary affairs.of life. They are recipients
rather than donors, but are frequently
pleasant and equable companions. They are
often industrious, well-meaning, contented
and affectionate. But they take the line
of least resistance and cultivate the habits
12 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

which bring them the greatest amount of
ease irrespective of the subsequent disadvantages. If disturbed from their ordinary routine they find it difficult to adjust
themselves to a novel situation. The
ordinary’ person going about his lawful
occasions usually has powers in reserve
which enable him to deal effectively with
the common difficulties of life, but the
psychic inferior has not enough reserve to
deal with a crisis or, if unaided, prevent it
from becoming a catastrophe. In short,

psychic inferiors fail in situations where .

what we call strength of character is required, and if they commit crime are likely
to repeat their offences on many occasions.
In one case, to which I have referred elsewhere, fifty offences were recorded with the
probability that more would follow. The
offences are usually attributable to negative
qualities of character, and are for the most
part of minor social importance—petty
thefts, minor sexual offences, drunkenness,
prostitution and the like.

On the other hand offences committed by.

aggressive egocentric and ethical aberrant
personalities are positive and of major
importance where social security is concerned.
They include some cases of murder and
other crimes of sexual or non-sexual violence,
burglary, housebreaking, conspiracy, largescale fraud and some larcenies. There is
much overlapping in the two categories and
future research may show that the difference
is chiefly one of emphasis—persistent
aggressiveness being the outstanding feature
in one, and a marked as well as persistent
divergence from moral standards in the
other. An important difference between the
two lies in the fact that in ethical aberrant
personalities the various instinctual urges,
acquisitive, aggressive, assertive, sexual,
parental, gregarious and others are at fault
together. :

In both the condition seems to be pri- marily due to factors which are inherent in
many cases, but are influenced by previous.

psychological or immediate environmental
factors. In both the offender is overconcerned with himself, extreme selfishness
dominates his thoughts and actions. He is

unscrupulous, and those who oppose him
are destroyed or injured as mere pawns in
the adventure of life. He is assertive, impulsive, amoral, undisciplined and unreliable.
He is uncritical of himself and self-confident
in spite of the fact that his record often
shows a succession of failures. He meets
opposition with immediate aggression, and
his response to the ordinary obstacles of
everyday life is mainly the result of excessive egoism which is unfettered by discretion
or the least regard for the feelings of others.
His will-power is forcible but distorted, and
applied to self-indulgences which are harmful
to others and often illegal. He is unable to
see the world from a general point of view
and his intolerance of the rights of others
prevents him from understanding or exercising the reasonableness of compromise.
His intelligence is often good and may be
superior, but various combinations of antisocial behaviour are carried to extremes.
He is lacking in wisdom and is unable to
profit by experience, partly it seems from
an inherent deep-seated defect, and partly
because less remote factors cause him to

: disregard a long-term advantage for a short
term gain.

I have published typical examples of their
kind elsewhere. A brief description of an
aggressive egocentric personality will illustrate that type of case. _

A powerful, well-built, healthy mechanic aged
23 years was convicted of larceny and shopbreaking. An employer described him as a
good worker but violent tempered. The police
also noted that he was violent. He was hostile,
insubordinate, assertive and persistently aggressive. His emotional tension caused excessive
.and explosive outbursts of violence in situations
which would not arouse a similar trigger-like
response in ordinary persons. He assaulted
other prisoners and attempted to assault the
prison staff on the slightest provocation. He was
callous, insincere, unscrupulous and untruthful.
He was unable to appreciate the rights of others if
they were opposed to his own desires. His
egocentricity was overwhelming. He had no
moral sense and no appreciation of his social
responsibility. He showed no remorse for his
behaviour, and whilst he unjustly criticized
others was uncritical of himself. His willpower was strongly directed towards the antisocial activities which were his sole purpose in

' life. He was unable to profit by experience,
‘THE NON-SANE NON-INSANE OFFENDER 13

and disciplinary awards for his violence in
prison and sentences of imprisonment for his
offences were ineffective. He was of average
intelligence, and there can be no doubt that
further crimes of serious violence would have
been committed had he not been killed as the
result of an accident when at liberty. It will
be noted that there was no evidence of any
sexual abnormality and he had not been convicted of any sexual crime.

In the ordinary affairs of life we meet
men and women who are within the range
of normality and are particularly aggressive,
many who are unscrupulous, and others who
combine both these qualities. Some gain
so-called success, others fail. But their
aggressive and unscrupulous qualities,
although extreme are part of a long-term
purpose and modified according to circumstances. And although the fear of detection
may not alter the manner of their lives, it
enables them to profit by their mistakes
and direct their activities into more carefully
selected methods of behaviour. There is no
hard and fast line between the more extreme
varieties of such persons and the aggressive
egocentric and ethical aberrant personalities.
At the other end of the scale psychopathic
personalities belonging to these categories
sometimes project their faults on to’ others
and develop an intense suspiciousness which
oversteps the border line between sanity and
insanity.

It is unnecessary to consider at length the
alcohol and drug addicts. There can be few
who have not personal knowledge of the
former and are unaware of the different
gradations which occur between the normal
drinker on the one hand and on the other
those who approach the outskirts of alcoholic
insanity. Excessive indulgence in alcohol
may be itself an indication of other mental
disorder and, as I have already indicated, is
sometimes due to psychic inferiority. But
for practical purposes it seems desirable to
limit the alcoholists in this group to those
whose addiction is independent of other
mental or character deviations and is itself
the essential abnormality. |

Addicts who indulge in narcotic drugs
occasionally appear in the criminal courts.
Some are insane and many traverse the high

road which leads to insane crime. But when
we sit in judgment upon them it is well to
remember the great number of people who
are addicted to aperients and other nonnarcotic drugs as a matter of habit, and to
the innumerable tea and tobacco addicts.

Sexual offenders form a large and important group, in which-a wide range of positive
and negative qualities are within the limits
of normality. Many sexual offenders are
not psychopathic personalities, and only
some forms of unusual sexual behaviour can
be regarded as sexually perverse. Crimes
due to these conditions are usually repeated,
they create alarm, and often are unaffected
by the usual sentences of imprisonment. A
man aged 39 years received sentences of
imprisonment totalling 137s years for sexual
offences committed during a period of 17
years.

Among our personal acquaintances are
usually a few schizoids; shy, solitary, retiring persons who show little interest in the
external affairs of life and live for the most
part in a little world of their own, mentally
detached from their associates as far as
circumstances allow. Others are cycloids:
their mood swings make them variable but:
often likeable companions. At one time, and
for no apparent reason, they are sociable,
gay, elated and full of the joy of life. At
another they are fearful and depressed.
Still others are paranoids; suspicious, unfriendly, irritable and ready to take offence.
They exhibit varying degrees of quarrelsomeness, and often abruptly terminate a
friendship on account of a fancied grievance.

We recognize persons belonging to these
types to be different from ourselves, and if
the condition is severe regard them as
abnormal although in varying degree. Their
lives whether schizoid, cycloid or paranoid
are often more difficult than is the case
with more evenly balanced persons, and if
they commit crime it may be related to their
mental peculiarity. The administration of
a closed security prison may be ill adapted
to the detention of some offenders of this
type.

It will be convenient to recapitulate the
most outstanding characteristics of psycho14 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

pathic personalities in general. Their
offences are likely to be repeated many
times and usually show a degree of impulsiveness and sometimes explosiveness which
may be significant in a particular setting.
They may be below, of average or superior
intelligence, but they fail to profit by experience. Their purpose is short-term and often
trivial, but they strive to accomplish it and
reject a long-term and more substantial

advantage. Although the offences are some- 
times little more than a nuisance others are
a menace to social security. If only slightly
tainted, psychopathic personalities may
hardly be distinguished from normal persons. Those who are severely affected may
be indistinguishable from the insane.

Responsibility

The many questions which arise in connection with criminal responsibility need be
mentioned in brief outline only. Excepting
infancy, some cases of coercion, privileged
occasions and the absence of jurisdiction,
an offender is presumed to be responsible
for the crime he has committed unless he was
at the material time insane according to law.
When a defence of insanity is raised in a
criminal trial it is customary to support it
by expert medical evidence, and for the
purpose of this thesis it is important to note
that the psychiatrist is not called upon to
declare that the accused is irresponsible.
That is a matter for the qualified citizen as
a member of a jury to decide ‘under the
direction of the judge.

The thoughts and behaviour of the insane
are to some extent related to the mental
diseases from which they suffer, and at first
sight it may appear that a psychiatrist is
the best person to decide whether an insane
offender is responsible or irresponsible for
the crime he has committed. But in many
cases the psychiatric opinion is challenged
and the insanity of the accused disputed
by an opposing psychiatrist. Moreover, the
issue 1s not only a question of insanity, but
whether the insanity has resulted in irresponsibility. Note also the fact that the
law .does not use the word responsibility
in the dictionary sense of the word. It

insists that responsibility means more than
being answerable for wrong-doing, and at
the same time restricts the word to express
a state of mind which exposes the offender
to legal punishment unless certain tests are
satisfactorily answered by the jury in his
favour. These tests are direct and simple
and are uncomplicated by psychiatric or
psychological diversions. The jury are required to consider whether a defect of
reason due to disease of the mind prevented
the accused from knowing the nature and
quality of his act, or that it was wrong.
The Court of Criminal Appeal in 1916*
further simplified the tests by declaring that
“the nature and quality’ of an act refers
only to its physical character, and that
““ wrong ’’ means contrary to and punishable
by law. As long as these tests are applied
there can be no doubt that a jury is competent to understand them. Moreover, few
will dispute the fact that the independent
character of the British citizen is satisfied
with the age-old procedure of trial by jury,
and accepts the view that a democracy
should make full use of experts and refuse
to be governed by them.

I repeat, in a criminal trial the psychiatrist
is required to satisfy the court and jury
that the accused is insane. The jury are
required to decide whether the insanity has
made him irresponsible in law.

There can be no doubt that modern
advances in psychiatry and psychology
whilst crystallizing medical thought in some
directions have added difficulties in others.
And whéreas the majority of psychiatrists
would probably regard anyone suffering
from a major mental disorder sufficiently
pronounced to require certification under the
Lunacy Acts to be irresponsible in the
dictionary sense of non-accountability, there
can be little doubt that the majority would
also agree that the degree of irresponsibility
varies in different cases, according to the
character of the mental disease present,
the motive and intention of the accused,
and all the circumstances connected with
the crime. Mark also the fact that within

‘tthe experience of living prison officials

* D.P.P. v. Codere. 12 Cr. App. R. 21, 1916.
THE NON-SANE NON-INSANE OFFENDER 15

criminals were formerly made worse because
they were treated as bad men, and that
uriless care is exercised we may go to the
other extreme and encourage those with
abnormal desires to gratify them on the
misunderstanding that a theoretical explanation is necessarily a valid excuse for a
crime. For although science teaches us that
many human activities are due to inherited
and environmental factors over which we
have little or no control, society cannot
submit to the law of the jungle or accept an
indeterminate view of the concept irresponsibility.

Nevertheless, in practice in certain situations degrees of culpability, that is to say
blameworthiness, seem to be accepted.
During recent years the word delinquency
has come to be used for minor offences
committed by juveniles, and is sometimes
used for offences committed by adults as if
it was synonymous with the word crime.
But an ugly thing is not made attractive by
a mere change of name, and although the
Children and Young Persons Act, 1933,
refers to “ Youthful delinquents” (s. 59;
s.-s. I) lam not aware that any adult is so
described by law. The point is of some
importance, as the term delinquency suggests
something less criminal than crime. In
other words less culpable.

Again, the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913,
provided that mentally defective offenders
might be sent, on conviction, to an institution for defectives as an alternative to
imprisonment. Where drunkenness is not
a defence it may be according to the facts
a mitigating circumstance. And the Infanticide. Act, 1922, enables the crime of
murder to be reduced to manslaughter in
the case of a woman who kills her newly
born child if she has not recovered from
the effects of giving birth to the child and
the balance of her mind is disturbed in consequence.* Further, in some cases of
murder the jury add a recommendation to

* The Infanticide Act, 1938 (§ & 2 Geo. 6, c. 36),
substitutes ‘‘a child under the age of 12 months”
for a ‘‘newly-born child.’’ It also takes into consideration ‘‘ the effect of lactation consequent upon
the birth of the child”’ as a disturbing factor of the
mental balance of the mother.

mercy to their verdict of guilty and thereby
express their belief that the offender is less
culpable than the ordinary homicide. There
is nothing to suggest that the offender in
any of these situations is irresponsible
according to law.

When it is considered that the non-sane
non-insane offender closely resembles the
ordinary offender at one extreme, and may
approach insanity at the other, there can
be little doubt that culpability will differ in
degree in individuals of the group. Judged
in this light the more abnormal the offender
the less culpable will he usually be, and
judged by medical standards the less punishment should he receive. At the same time
the more likely he is to repeat his offence,
the less likely is ordinary punishment to be
effective, and the longer should the public
be protected from him.

Treatment

In this dilemma it is important to bear
in mind certain other matters. Severe
penal measures are seldom necessary in the
absence of an excess of crime likely to cause
public alarm, or of organized criminality.
Although crime.is an unimportant social
problem when compared with poverty and
unemployment it would soon become a
menace to social security if it escaped
control. To avoid this punishment must be
certain, expeditious and adaptable.

As I see it the duty of the psychiatrist
here is to inform the court of the mental
abnormality present, its effect upon culpability, and, as I have already stated, to suggest
and if possible carry out appropriate
measures for the rehabilitation of the
offender. I repeat this seems as far as the
psychiatrist can go. Whether his advice is
accepted will depend not only upon its
possible effect upon the offender, but upon
public security if medical treatment is
adopted in lieu of, and not as an adjunct
to, a sentence of imprisonment.

The retributive purpose of punishment
may be anachronistic, the reformative and
deterrent demophylactic. To counter crime
by detaining the offender in an ordinary
prison surrounds him with artificial re16 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

strictions which are often unadapted to the
individual peculiarities of many non-sane
non-insane offenders. It is true that recent
years have seen many improvements introduced into prison administration, and that
prisons of minimum, medium and maximum
security have been established. But this
is not enough. A special penal institution is
required, combining the features of a prison
and a mental hospital, where the non-sane
non-insane offender can receive training
and specialized medical treatment if he does
not accept medical treatment whilst on
probation or is too dangerous to be allowed
his liberty. An annex to the institution
administered on colony lines will give
elasticity to the therapeutic and demophylactic purposes of the scheme, and enable
all the resources of mental treatment and
character building to be given an opportunity to assist the offenders in the group.
And since so much of the material—for instance the psychic inferiors—is of poor
quality, exceptional care on discharge will
still be necessary.

For this method of treatment the short
sentences usually given—say in cases of
exhibitionism and sexual assaults on young
children—are useless. Sentences approximating the legal maximum may be required
for the benefit of the offender and for public
safety. I maintain that for these reasons
we should not shrink from the imposition
of longer sentences if necessary in order to
ensure special treatment. Incidentally such
sentences will tend to restrict fertility and
have some eugenic value.

Summary

To many people crime is an unpleasant
and remote subject. But so short-sighted
a view fails to appreciate the fact that anyone of us at any time may be the victim of
violence, burglary, theft, fraud and the like.
It is therefore the concern of all, even the

most sheltered and exclusive, to assist pro
gress in the prevention of crime and the
treatment of criminals.

My thesis outlines a group of dysgenic,
and for the most part recidivistic, offenders,
and deals with different degrees of mental
abnormality and culpability. It does not
disguise the difficulties of the subject or the
dilemma arising from the fact that the more
abnormal the offender the less culpable will
he generally be, and usually the more in
need of specialized and sometimes prolonged
treatment. Many observers are disturbed
when non-sane non-insane offenders, if
unsuited for probationary treatment, are
committed to prison for short and ineffective
periods. Others are unwilling to impose
upon them longer sentences within the
legal limits for the purpose of obtaining
social security. There is reason to believe
that a solution to the preblem on progressive
lines may be attained in many cases if
modern psychotherapeutic, psychiatric and
educative measures are applied for a sufficient time in a special penal institution.
We are here dealing with quantitative
anomalies, and need courage, clear minds
and clear consciences if we are to deal with
them practically, effectively and humanely.

REFERENCES

Bagot, J. H. (1941), Juvenile Delinquency. London,
Jonathan, Cape.

Blacker, C. P. (1945), Eugenics in Prospect and
Retrospect. London, Hamish Hamilton.
Criminal Statistics (1938). London, H.M. Station
Offi

ce.

East. WW. Norwood, Stocks, P., and Young,
H. T. P. (1942), The Adolescent Criminal.
London, J. and A. Churchill.

East, W. Norwood (1945), J. Ment. Scz., 91, 385.

Galton, F. (1943), Inquiries Into Human Faculty.
London, J. M. Dent.

Goring, C. (1913), The English Convict.
H.M. Stationery Office.

Reading, Marquess of (1942), Rufus Isaacs, 9. C.,
Vol. 1, p. 108. London, Hutchinson.

Schmidl, F. (1946), J. Crim. Law and Criminol.,
37, I.

London,

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXIX, No. 1
