 

O P i r oy
3 Coe ae

 
   
    
    
   
   
   
    
 
   
    
  
   

BEGINNER in the study of population would probably learn without
surprise that fertility had declined at
more or less rapid rate in nearly all Eurocountries. He might be inclined to
ink it was perhaps in the natural order of
ings that in countries so thickly populated
me forces or other would sooner or later be
rking to prevent an excessive multiplican of the people. He might, indeed, be told
at it had been stated in writings of reputan that “population growth is a highly
lf-regulated phenomenon ”’ ;* that when a
pulation reaches a certain, undefined, denty biological factors come into play limiting
s growth ; and that this view was supported

known cubic capacity. Fruit flies so reared
em, when carefully counted, to increase in
umber according to a formula that can be
presented graphically by a curve in an
ymptotic condition at both ends. Such
nsiderations might lead him to infer that,
density of population is a factor deterining population growth, fertility would be
latively high in countries of relatively low
ensity, in New Zealand, for example, where
million and a half people occupy a country
ger than Great Britain. And if he were
icquainted with the works of Walt Whitman
le might recall the following lines :
“ Have the elder races halted ?

Do they droop and end their lesson,
wearied over there beyond the seas ?
We take up the task eternal, and the burden and the lesson, Pioneers!:O Pioneers!

 

i * Pearl, Ra mond; “* A-further Note on War and
opulation,”’ Science, New Series, Vol. LIII, p. 121.

the behaviour of fruit flies reared in bottles

47

LATION PROBLEMS IN THE BRITISH
-. COMMONWEALTH
By G, F. MCCLEARY, ™o, px.

See my children, resolute children,
By those swarms upon our rear we must
never yield or falter,
Ages back in ghostly millions frowning
there behind us urging,
Pioneers! O Pioneers! ”’

Turning from these rapt utterances to
prosaic facts, our beginner might be surprised to find that in the United States fertility has steadily fallen for over a century,
so that the net reproduction rate is now below
replacement rate ; that in Australia and New
Zealand a downward movement to the same
level has been accomplished in sixty years ;
and that in Canada and South Africa, though
complete statistics of racial fertility are lacking, there are good grounds for thinking that
the reproduction of the British stock has
fallen to the low level of Australia and New
Zealand and is heading for the lower level of
the mother country. He might well conclude
that these facts reveal problems even more
significant than those arising from the declining fertility of the old and densely populated
countries of Europe. |

I shall make no attempt here to examine
the position in the United States. It has been
ably discussed by American writers, whose
work constitutes probably the most considerable body of information on population
problems that has come out of any country.
I shall deal only with-the British Dominions,
and begin with Australia and New Zealand.

Australia and New Zealand

In both countries the white settlers have
sprung almost -exclusively from the United
Kingdom. Nowhere else does the Briton from
home feel so much at home. The British
transplanted in the southern hemisphere
have made no basic difference in their ways
of living. Continental visitors to the Antipodes note with some surprise that the
48

Australian, or the New Zealander, though he
lives in a sunny climate and loves the open
air, shows no desire to take refreshment at
an outdoor café as in Paris and other continental cities, but stands up to drink his beer
at a bar-counter as if he were in London.

White settlement in Australia dates from
1788, and the white population is now about
six and three-quarter millions. In the five
years 1860-4 the Australian birth-rate was
42-5 per 1,000 total population. It declined
to 35 per 1,000 in 1877, partly owing to the
cessation of the immigration of young married women. It remained about that level
until 1888, when a rapid descent began. In
1903 the rate was 25:5 per 1,000. In that
year the significance of the decline was discussed in a remarkable monograph* by the
Government Statistician of New South Wales,
the late Sir Timothy Coghlan, who pointed
out that the number of legitimate births per
I,000 married women under the age of 45 had
gone down from 328-8 in 1888 to 235°3 in
1g01. From the persistent and regular
character of the fall he surmised that the
minimum had not been reached, and that a
further decline might be expected; and he
added :

““ There appears nothing incongruous in
a declining birth-rate in an old civilization,
especially in one afflicted with the incubus
of militarism; but the extension of the
phenomenon to new countries, where
population is so much desired, is novel and
astonishing, and claims the deepest attention.”

Moved by Coghlan’s warnings, the New
South Wales Government in 1903 appointed
a Royal Commission to inquire into the causes
of the decline in the birth-rate in New South
Wales ; and the Commission, reporting in
1904, attributed the decline to the deliberate
interference with the function of parenthood
chiefly by contraception, but also, and to a
considerable extent, by abortion. They
could not trace it to any well-defined economic cause, but stated that the reasons for
restricting procreation given by most of the

* The Decline in the Birth-vate in New South Wales.
1903. - 
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

 
  
    
  
    
  
   
 
  
   
   
   
 
   
  
   
   
   

witnesses examined by the Commission ‘we
as follows :

“i, An unw

ii, A dislike of the interference wi
pleasure and comfort involved ;
child-bearjng and child-rearing ;
ili, A desire to avoid the actual physi
discomfort of gestation, parturitio
and lactation; and —

iv. An increasing love of luxury and
social pleasures. ~

The Commission found that the desire f
family limitation had previously been r

by a huge increase in the distribution of con
traceptive publications and appliances. The
pointed out that the decline in the New Sou
Wales birth-rate began with a sudden drop i
1889, and that in the previous year a case i
the law courts had given wide publicity to th
movement for contraception. In May 18
a Sydney bookseller was fined five guine
for selling Mrs. Besant’s Law of Population
He appealed to the Full Court of New Sout
Wales, which in December 1888 decided by
majority of two to one, Chief Justice Darle
dissenting, in his favour. Mr. Justice Win
deyer in his judgment said :
“* All prosecutions of this kind should
regarded as mischievous, even by thos
who disapprove the opinions sought to be

widely to diffuse the teaching objected to
To those, on the other hand, who desire i
promulgation, it must be a matter of congratulation that this, like all attempted
prosecutions of thinkers, will defeat its owt
object, and that truth, like a torch, ‘ th
more it’s shook the more it shines.’ ”

Extracts’ from Mr. Justice Windeyer's
judgment were reprinted and scattered
broadcast over Australia and New Zealand,
and had a wide circulation in Great Britain,

_™ Report of the Royal Commission on the Decline of
the Birth-rate in New South Wales, 1904, p. 17.
  
   
    
 
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
   
   
  
  
 
   

e Commission thought that the “ remarkle coincidence. between the promulgation
1888 of the views expressed in this judgt and the sudden fall of the birth-rate in
g, could not be considered fortuitous.”
‘ll be remembered that the decline in the
glish birth-rate began shortly after the
dlaugh-Besant trial had given an enorus publicity to the birth-control moveent in this country.

he Commission concluded their report
th the following words : ,

‘In whatever way the waning birthrate of New South Wales is viewed .. . it
is seen as a grave disorder sapping the
vitals of a new people, dispelling its hopes,
blighting its prospects, and threatening its
continuance. ... It is the duty of the
present generation of Australians to see to
it that their patriotism is not impugned in
time to come ; and that the loss of this fair
heritage of the British race, which, under
existing conditions, the philosophy of history foretells, is not made attributable to
them by those who may, in the days to
come, have to sacrifice their blood and
treasure in the vain hope of defending it.’’*

In 1904, when the report of the Royal
mmission appeared, the Australian birthte was 26 per 1,000. It rose slowly to 28-5
1912. The rapid fall in fertility was then
sumed, and in 1934 the birth-rate reached
e record low figure, for Australia, of 16- 39.
1936 it rose to 17-1, due to an increase in
e number of marriages following recovery
om economic depression. In 1932-4 the net
production rate, as computed by Dr.
uczynski,} was 0-96, the replacement rate
ing 1:0.
In New Zealand fertility has taken a simicourse. The birth-rate fell rapidly from
ver 40 per 1,000 in 1875-9 to 25 in 1899, rose
owly to 27-5 in 1908, and fell almost connuously to 16-2 in 1935. It was 16-6 in
936. In 1936 the net reproduction rate was
elow replacement rate ; it was computed by
i. Kuczynski ato-97,
The rapid decline of fertility in Australia
* Report, p.

| | Pp. 54. tT The Statist, December 25th, 1937.
.

POPULATION PROBLEMS IN THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH

49

and New Zealand is a phenomenon which, as
Coghlan said thirty-five years ago, is “ novel
and astonishing and claims the deepest
attention.” Mr. A. P. Herbert, addressing
the House of Commons as Parliamentary
representative of the University of Oxford,
attributed the decline of fertility in this
country to conditions such as high incometax, rising cost of education, insufficient
housing accommodation, increased prevalence of unpleasant noises, lack of thought on
the part of newspaper editors and of education on the part of those responsible for the
management of cinematograph theatres, the
increased use of the telephone, and undue
restrictions on the sale of beverages containing alcohol.* I suggest, however, that Mr.
Herbert’s list of depressing circumstances
cannot be regarded as explaining the decline
of fertility in Australia and New Zealand,
where things are very different. In no other
country is there so high a standard of living
for the poorer members of the community, so
much leisure and outdoor exercise. Poverty
as we know it in Europe is unknown. In
Melbourne I had to apply for expert guidance
to enable me to find a slum ; and when at
last I was shown what in Melbourne is called
a slum, I was unable to recognise it as the
genuine article. In no country is life more
sunny and pleasant. In that glorious sunshine, in view of the radiant youthful faces
that throng the great surfing beaches of the
Southern Ocean, the world appears, as it
appeared to Robert Louis Stevenson, “ as a
brave gymnasium full of sea-bathing and
horse exercise, and bracing manly virtues.”
If there is any part of the world where mankind may well be expected to thrill with the
joy of life it is in these two island Dominions,
in both of which the reproduction rate has
sunk below the rate required to maintain the
present numbers of the population.

In Australia there are no problems arising
from differences in racial fertility. The
aboriginals number little more than 60,000,
and for the most part live remote from white
settlement. The main problem these interesting people present is how are they to
eee

* Parliamentary Debates, November 2oth, 1937.
50

be prevented from dying out. In New Zealand, however, differences in racial fertility
suggest questions of considerable interest.
At the first census of the whole population,
which was taken in 1858, the people of
European origin were enumerated at 59,000
and the Maoris at 56,000. As the Europeans
increased the Maoris diminished, and it
seemed that, as in some parts of Melanesia,
the natives, unable to survive contact with
Western civilization, would dwindle to
extinction.

But these gifted people are endowed with
high vitality, and, though there is much in
the past that we must regret, they have been
treated with a consideration unfortunately
rare in the history of white settlement among
native races. They are represented in the
New Zealand legislature, and have produced
citizens of whose achievements all New
Zealanders are proud. They now show not
the slightest sign of moving towards extinction. For many years accurate particulars of
their natality were lacking ; for it was not
until 1913 that Maori births became registrable, and for years many births escaped
registration. From 1932, however, the registered number of births may be taken as
reasonably accurate, although probably still
somewhat understating the actual number.
In the five years 1932-6 the average annual
number of Maori births per 1,000 Maori
population was 41-6, their death-rate was
18 and the excess of births over deaths was
23:6 per 1,000. The corresponding figures
per 1,000 of the European population were
16-6, 8:3 and 8-3. ?

The crude death-rate of the European
population, 8-75 in 1936, is very low, owing
not only to the extraordinarily favourable
conditions in which New Zealanders live but
to the abnormal age composition of the population. The mean expectation of life in New
Zealand is sixty-eight years, and since
seventy years is about the utmost we may
reasonably hope to attain even by putting
into practice all known means of preventing
premature death, it is clear that ,there is no
prospect of preventing by further reductions

in mortality alone the tendency of the white.

population to diminish. The differential

THE EUGENICS REVIEW 
fertility of the two races that inhabit New
Zealand is now so great that without unex.
pected increases in immigration, or in the
reproduction of the European element, it
seems possible that at some future time what
the Maoris lost through inferior armament
may be regained through superior fertility.

Canada

In New Zealand the differences in racial
fertility are chiefly of interest as affecting a
distant, though perhaps not very remote,
future. In Canada and South Africa they
give rise to problems that may press for solution within the lifetime of the present genera.
tion. Both are countries of high fertility. In
both the net reproduction rate is well above
1-0. But there are remarkable differences in
the fertility of the settlers of European
origin. In both countries the fertility of the
British element is low, that of the nonBritish element is high, and in both the differences are wide. .

The first white settlers in Canada came
from France, but since 1763, when by the
Treaty of Paris they were separated politically from France, they have received very
few recruits from their mother country, and
between one and two million French Canadians have emigrated to the United States,
British immigration, on the other hand, has
been enormous. Yet between 1871 and 1931
the French Canadians increased by 170 per
cent. and the British by 155 per cent. In the
intercensal period 1921-31, the French Canadians increased by 19-3 per cent. and the
British by 10-5 per cent. The French and the
British now form 28 and 52 per cent. respectively of the total population. In the province of Quebec, where the French Canadians
form 79 per cent. of the population, the
birth-rate in 1935 was 24-6 per 1,000, and the
excess of births over deaths was 13:9 pet
1,000. In Ontario, where the majority of the
people are British, the corresponding rates in
the same year were 17:2 and 7-3. In British
Columbia, which is peopled almost entirely
by settlers of British origin, the birth-rate
was 13°6 and the excess of births over death

    
  
  
 

_ §°3 per 1,000.

To what is this differential fertility to be
    
   
    
  
   
  
   
  

cribed ?) M.:André Siegfried, in his recent
ook, Le Canada, gives a vivid account of the

adians differ in their outlook on life. The
ritish Canadian seeks a career in the towns.
He is drawn towards an occupation that
seems to promise advancement, wealth, in
uence. If he follows agriculture it is to
make good ; he uses the land as a means by

eighbours in the United States. ‘The French
Canadian shows less liking for an urban life.
He turns from the fervid pursuit of material
success. He prefers the country. He farms
because he likes farming. He loves his land,
not as an instrument to enable him to make

i“ Il faut culiiver notre jardin.”

_ But all this is true to-day of the peasants
lin the land from which the French Canadians
sprang, who for many years have been
remarkable for low fertility. In the fortyseven years 1890-1936 there were no less than
sixteen years, including 1935 and 1936, in
which the number of deaths in France
exceeded the number of births, in spite of a
large immigration of foreigners of high fertility, chiefly Poles and Italians. It was in
rural France that the balance of births and
deaths, as measured by the difference between the crude birth-rate and death-rate,
first turned in favour of death. As long ago
as the fourth decade of the nineteenth century, the departments of Lot-et-Garonne and
Eure, both rural departments, began to show
an annual excess of deaths over births, and in
the next decade they were joined by two

other rural departments, Tarn-et-Garonne >

and Gers. In 1935, of the ninety departments
of France, there were fifty-nine, chiefly rural
departments, in which the deaths exceeded
the births. It is not because the French
Canadians have sprung from French peasants that their fertility is high. We must
seek the explanation elsewhere.

It is not hard to find. I quote from M.
Siegfried’s book:' ©

_ POPULATION PROBLEMS IN THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH

any ways in which the British and French :

51

“The first reason is that the Church
takes a firm attitude against birth control,
and its instructions, given through the confessional and enforced by rigorous penances, are generally followed. . . . Finally,
I feel that the vitality of the French
Canadian community is the result of a
certain attitude towards life and work,
which is found nowhere else in America.

. . . It takes the form of a moral discipline of the family, exerted under the
direct influence of the Church. Thus it
respects values which are considered out of
date elsewhere, especially in the New
World. It believes in hard work, commends thrift and self-discipline, accepts the
doctrine of large families as a Christian
duty, and restricts ambition to sensible
proportions. Such thoughtful asceticism is
the very negation of Americanism. .. .
The existence on the North American Continent of a distinct people, ethnically different from their surroundings, is a curious
paradox. One wonders if it can possibly
last.’”’* |

South Africa

In South Africa two million white settlers
share with six millions and a half Bantus and
a million other coloured people, a country
rather more than five times larger than
Great Britain. Of the settlers of European
origin 58 per cent. are Dutch and 34 per cent.
British. For over a hundred years the Dutch
have had practically no recruits from overseas, whereas British immigration, though
not numerous, has until recent years been
fairly well maintained.

The fertility of the white people as a whole
is high ; the net reproduction rate in. 1933,
as computed by Mr. Pollak, was 1-215. But
it is due to the high fertility of the Dutch
element. Though adequate statistics of racial
fertility are lacking, it seems that the reproduction of the British has fallen to the low
level in Australia and New Zealand. |

As in Canada, the British in South Africa
make for the towns. Johannesburg is the
eS

* Siegfried, Le Canada, 1937.

_ f The South. African Journal of Economics, March
936.

T
52

most powerful magnet. It is there that
money may most quickly be made. In recent
years the city has developed with amazing
speed, and now contains one-eighth of South
Africa’s white population. The South African
Dutchman, like the French Canadian, is a
countryman. He is rooted to the soil, from
which he draws his strength. He differs from
the Briton in his outlook on life, his way of
living, and his sense of the value of things,
and it is there that the explanation of the
differential fertility of South Africa’s white
races may most profitably be sought.

But in both races of white settlers fertility
is declining. The net reproduction rate of the
white settlers fell from 1-448 in 1926 to
1-215 in 1933.* And the great majority of
South Africa’s inhabitants are not white
settlers. Little is known of the fertility of the
coloured races, but they outnumber the white
races so greatly that it is clear that the problems of differential fertility in the Union are
not limited to differences between the British
and Dutch elements. The prosperity of the
white population is bound up with the gold
industry, which has for years enjoyed a’ boom

* The South African Journal of Economics, March
1930

- Publishers: DAVID NUTT, London - G. E. STECHERT & Co.,
AKADEMISCHE VERLAGSGESELLSCHAFT m. b. H., Leipzig - Ri
F. ROUGE & Ce Tausanne - F, MAC

“SCIENTIA *

18 THE ONLY REVIEW the contributors to which are really international. Paolo |

18 THE ONLY REVIEW that has a really world-wide circulation.
Is THE ONLY

THE EUGENICS. REVIEW

New York - NICOLA ZANICHELLI, Bol Paris
he @ BERMAN Madrid - F. KILIA ‘S NACHFOLGER, Budapest

that reverberates throughout the whok
world. Though the industry has survived
various gloomy predictions, the mines are not
inexhaustible, and there are those who would
say that it has yet to be shown that South
Africa can survive as a white man’s country,

In this brief survey of fertility in the fou
great Dominions of the British Common.
wealth, I have made no attempt to enrich the
world with new facts or original opinions,
and doubtless what I have said may appear
but an incursion into the realm of platitude,
But platitudes may serve a useful purpose,
and my purpose will have been fulfilled if |
have shown that the Dominions present
population problems of high scientific in.
terest, which merit all the attention that can
be devoted to them.

But for my part I am unable to regard the
facts I have tried to summarize as constituting nothing more than interesting research
material. To me these facts seem fraught
with momentous significance. Pondering on
the rapid decline of British fertility all over
the world, one seems to feel the presence of
an element of Greek tragedy—the presence of
a mysterious force moving ceaselessly, relentlessly, to an unknown but tragic destiny,

  
  
  
  

a - FELIX ALCAN,
da, Porto - THE MARUZEN COMPANY, Tokyo.
TIONAL REVIEW OF
Published every month (each number containing 100 to 120 pages)

Editors : F. BOTTAZZI - G. BRUNI - F. 2 ENBIQUES
Fee ooal Secretary : Bonetti

¥ REVIEW of synthesis and unification of science, that deals inits articles with thenewest and most fundamental problems of all branches

of knowledge : scientific philosophy, history of science, scientific teaching and advancement, mathematics, astronomy, geology, physics, chemistry,

biological sciences, physiology, psychology, sociology, law, economics, bisto

of religions, anthropology, linguistics : cles sometimes consti

real and proper enquiries, such as those on the contribution given by the different nations to the advancement of science ; on de

most fundamental physical and chemical questions, and particular!
Scientia thus studies all the main problems interesting the intellect

terminism ; on the
on relativity, on the physics of the atom and of radiations; on Sitalism,
circles of the whole world, and represents at the same time the ‘first successful

realization of an international organization of the philosophical and scientific movement.
{8 THE ONLY REVIEW that among its contributors can boast of the most illustrious men of science in the whole world.

‘he articies are. published tn. the Haaenes of thete authors, and every, number bas & spiiemeat containing the French translation
that are not French. The review completely accessible to those who ort only Breath. (Write for a free copy to the General Secretary of

is thus

of all the arene

Scientia, Milan, sending sixpence in one stamp of your country, merely to cover packing and postage).

SUBSCRIPTION:

Substantial red

reductions are granted to those who take up more than
For information a4 apply to “ SCIENTIA ” Via A. De Togui, 12" Milano (Italy)

45 Shillings
"a subscription.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXX, No. 1.
