INCOME-TAX REBATES

The Birth-Rate and our Future Policy
By R. A. FISHER, Sc.D.

We have now almost all we can ask for in the way of income-tax rebates for children,
Dr. Fisher points out, and they are necessarily insufficient to centrol the birth-rate.
He foresees the coming of family allowances eventually—but will the change be made in
time? In thirty years, with their present birth-rate, the upper and middle classes will

be halved.—Ed.

HE rebates of income-tax for de
pendent children in the 1928 budget

represent the final stage in the
gradual adoption of this form of relief;
relief for which the Eugenics Society has
been actively pleading since the period of
pre-war taxation.

The amount of income freed from taxation
in respect of the first child has now been
raised from £36 to £60, and for subsequent
children from £27 to £50. These increases
are very considerable, and it is the contention of the writer that they represent substantially all that the Society ought to ask
for in respect of this particular form of
relief. This is not to say that, viewed from
a purely eugenic standpoint, the incidence
of income-tax upon taxpayers with different
numbers of dependent children could not be
readjusted with advantage, but that such
readjustments must be regarded as of very
minor importance compared to the main
reform now established; moreover—since
income-tax reform could never do more than
touch the fringe of the great problem of the
economic burden of parenthood—of still less
importance compared to other and more
direct attacks upon this problem.

SHORT AND FAT

Let us examine the present position at the
typical income levels of £400, £600, £1,000,
and £1,500 a year. We shall suppose the
whole income to be earned, and the taxpayer
to have a wife living, but no other dependent
relative, in addition to children. After deducting one-sixth of his income and £225 for
the married couple, there remains of £400
only £108 liable to taxation. The childless
man pays {10 16s. 8d., of which £6 is

remitted for the first child, and the remainder for the second; there is, therefore, no
relief available for the third and subsequent
children.

The position is not, of course, such as to
encourage fertility ; each child will, over the
dependent period, cost at a low estimate,
something like £40 a year, and even the £6
allowed for the first child will not go far
towards diminishing the economic motive for
preferring childlessness. Still less is done to
encourage the arrival of subsequent children; but all this is not the fault of the
Treasury. If more were remitted for the
first child there would be even less to remit
for the second, whether the additional remission were based on income or, as has
been suggested, on educational fees. From
this point of view tax abatement for the first
child has, at this low level of income, gone,
on the whole, too far; for the purpose at
least of diminishing the economic motive for
small families. Subject to a readjustment of
taxation, so that the poorer salary earners,
as a class, should not be more heavily taxed
than now, the production of children in this
group would be favoured by abolishing the
present exemption of £90 for a childless
wife. |
—OR LONG AND LEAN

At £600 a year the rebates work somewhat better, because there is more to remit.
The amount liable to taxation is £275, of
which £225 pays at 2s. and £50 at 4s. in the
pound. This makes £32 1os. tax for the
childless man, of which £11 is remitted for
the first child, and £5 each for subsequent
children down to the sixth; there are even
thirty shillings left for the seventh child!
80

The size of the family provided for seems
adequate, but the amounts provided are
lamentably small. The cost per child cannot at all moderate income levels be far from
Io per cent. of the gross income, or £60 a
year in this case. The especially insufficient
remission for children subsequent to the first
is as striking in this as in the previous case,
and is not altogether irremediable; it is

apparent that the abatement for the first.

child should, from the eugenic standpoint,
be less rather than greater than that for
subsequent children, especially since the
amount exempted for the latter is more frequently either untaxed, or taxed at a lower
rate.

At £1,000 a year taxation is sufficient to
allow with advantage of more substantial
rebates than those at present in force, provided it were made clear that the increased
exemption should fall upon the childless
taxpayers of the same income level, and not
upon poorer classes. The amount liable to
taxation is £608, of which £383 pays at 4s.
in the pound. Relief for the first child is
£12, and the full £10 for subsequent children down to the seventh. It would
evidently be an advantage at this and higher
levels to increase the relief per child, for
the total tax is nearly £99, which would
provide a relief of £20 per child down to
about the fifth; moreover, at this level of
income a relief of £10 per child is becoming
not merely an insufficient, but a negligible
set off to the cost of the increased family.

The same considerations apply with even
more force at £1,500 a year. The tax payable by a childless man is here £182 tos.,
which could be made to provide relief at the
rate of £30 or £35 per child over a reasonable family. The actual relief of £12 for the
first, and £10 for subsequent children, can
have no appreciable economic influence at
this level of income.

THE PRESENT RELIEF

The table shows the relief afforded by the
1928 budget for the first five children at
these typical incomes :

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Income £400 £600 £1,000 £1,500
First child £6 £11 £12 £12
Second child £4.16.8 £5 £10 £10
Third child Nil £5 £10 £10
Fourth child Nil £5 £10 £10
Fifth child Nil £5 £10 £10

The relief for the first child nowhere
exceeds 2 per cent. of income, and for subsequent children it is rarely above 1 per cent.,
although ro per cent. is a moderate estimate
of the cost. Nevertheless, increased reliefs
within the bounds of the present system can
scarcely be regarded as eugenically desirable. The advantage of increased relief for
income levels above £600 a year is set off by
an increasing disadvantage below that level.

If it be granted that salary earners of more

than £600 a year represent, on the average,
a higher level of mental ability than do
taxpayers at lower incomes, it must yet be
borne in mind that we have the same evidence for believing that these latter are on
the average distinctly more intelligent than
the general population, and that there are
many more taxpayers to be influenced at the
lower income levels. It would be bad eugenic
policy to sacrifice the reproduction of a
large class moderately endowed with valuable gifts, for that of a smaller class more
highly endowed. The point is one which has
been carefully examined in Major Darwin’s
The Need for Eugenic Reform, in which he
concludes that for purposes like the present
the most important class may be typified
roughly by the highly skilled artisan, or the
elementary school teacher, in fact, by the
lowest salaries paying income-tax.

Perhaps the most that could be got out of
income-tax abatement for eugenic purposes
would be to remit a fixed fraction, say, onefifth, of the tax payable on earned income,
for each dependent child. Such a system
should work simply, but the alteration in
method is comparatively drastic, and the
change would have to be accompanied by
a readjustment of taxation as between
different income levels to compensate for the
greater relief afforded to the higher incomes.

NEED FOR EQUALIZATION

The salient fact, however, of the present
situation is that the Eugenic Society’s
INCOME-TAX REBATES 81

policy in respect of income tax, a policy
which we have consistently urged not only
on eugenic but on economic grounds, has
been virtually adopted, and that there will
be, quantitatively, comparatively little to
gain by further modifications. We are,
therefore, in a position to see how much
more there is to be achieved by other means,
in mitigating the economic burden of parenthood. For though our vital statistics do not
at present show with exactitude just how
rapidly the tax-paying class is dying out,
they are sufficient to indicate clearly that
reproduction has already fallen to a level
somewhat above or below one-half of that
required to maintain a stationary population; and that the birth-rate is still falling
in this class with the same astonishing
rapidity (at least) as in other classes.

It will not be doubted, among those to
whom these facts are familiar, that the fall
in the birth-rate will not be checked, still
less a more adequate rate of reproduction
established, by any economic measures much
short of a complete equalization, in economic
status and standard of living, between the
parent and the non-parent, and between the
parent of a reasonably large against the
parent of an unreasonably restricted family.
How far such a complete equalization would
be effective in producing an adequate quotum
of children from the professional classes
may be doubted; however, since these
classes are admittedly much influenced by
prudential considerations in limiting their
families, somewhat better results might be
expected than would be inferred from the
failure of very substantial family allowances in increasing the birth-rate of the
French artisan. The writer has already
given reasons* for the opinion that though
the direct effect might be small it would

*« Bugenics: Can it solve the problem of the

decay of civilizations??? EuGrnics REvIEw, XVIII,
120-136, July, 1926.

increase progressively in the (socially)
higher classes, while leading ultimately to a
relatively diminished birth-rate in the
working class.

THE DIRECT METHOD

Many years ago, with remarkable foresight, Professor MacDougall suggested the
necessity among University teachers of an
allowance per child of 10 per cent. of the
basic salary. Now that the system of
pooling the liability for such allowances
among the different employing bodies is well
understood, there is no economic reason why
such a system should not be widely adopted.
The teaching profession and the government services, together with the clergy, offer
suitable examples. The London School of
Economics has already given a lead by
paying family allowances on a substantial
scale to its professors and lecturers. Such
a system, whether in the form of universal
insurance, or, for salaried positions, more
simply, as direct allowances, will doubtless
in time be adopted merely on its economic
advantages, as these come in time to be
appreciated.

The writer would urge, however, that
time is an essential element in the present
problem. In about thirty years, more or
less, with our present birth-rate, whatever
is worth keeping in the genetic potentialities
of the upper and middle classes, in England
and Scotland, will have been reduced to half
its present quantity. The fall in the
English birth-rate, both in the nation at
large, and in the taxpaying classes in particular, has taken the world by surprise ;
and we cannot, as in most social problems,
readily afford to wait until a fresh generation has grown up, alive to the new situation. The cost in human values of each
ten years’ delay is larger than we can
readily imagine.
