THE EUGENICS REVIEW

stage is properly set for a rational approach to
the understanding and interpretation of projections. For example, the single page devoted to
the choice of a time-span explains how for some
purposes it is advantageous to look far ahead
while for others only the next few years need be
contemplated. Similarly the value of a set of
alternative projections and the best concepts for
a range of such a set are expounded succinctly
and clearly. P. R. C.

SOCIOLOGY

Hobhouse, L. T. Sociology and Philosophy: A
Centenary Collection of Essays and Articles.
Preface by Sydney Caine. Introduced by Morris
Ginsberg. London, 1966. G. Bell for the London
School of Economics. Pp. xxvii+340. Price 45s.

THIS VOLUME CONTAINS twelve essays and
articles reprinted from various sources and an
interesting introduction by Professor Ginsberg.
This reprinting is very welcome; all the papers in
the volume are written with the clarity and
vigour so characteristic of Hobhouse and can be
read with profit to-day. It is a great service to
have rescued these writings from the semioblivion of encyclopaedias and learned journals
and to have made them easily accessible to a wide
public. Hobhouse, who died in 1928, was the
most outstanding English sociologist during the
first quarter of the present century. His work
covered a very wide range; he was a scholar in
more than one field and he also made notable
contributions to the discussion of the social and
political problems of his day.

The topic which inspired his main work was
that of social development, a topic which, as
Professor Ginsberg says, is again attracting
attention after having been out of favour for a
time. Hobhouse was careful not to equate social
development with progress; for him social
development was a process of mental learning
through experience the course of which had to be
traced by establishing the facts while judgement
of facts had to be kept distinct from judgement
of values. When expounding his view of social
development, which can hardly be contested,
Hobhouse was concerned in some of his writings
(though in none which are included in this

102

volume) to confute the somewhat crude attempts

to interpret social development as having a basis

in biological evolution, which were current at the
beginning of this century. In this he was fully

justified, but from some of his work he gives the

impression that he underrated the importance of
the genetic endowment of individuals; in any

case he did not concern himself with those

problems which are of special interest to students

of eugenics.

Of the essays in this volume, that on sociology
is the one which will probably be of greatest
interest to readers of THE EUGENICS REVIEW.
This essay, which originally appeared in the
Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics in 1920,
sets out the task of sociology as Hobhouse saw
it, and can be read with profit by those who work
in any of the special social sciences, demography,
for instance. His view is summed up in a
quotation which Professor Ginsberg extracts
from another article, not reprinted here, which
appeared in 1908: “General Sociology’, he
wrote, “is neither a separate science complete in
itself before specialism begins, nor is it a mere
synthesis of the social sciences consisting in a
mechanical juxtaposition of their results. It is
rather a vitalizing principle that runs through all
social investigations nourishing and nourished
by it in turn, stimulating inquiry, correlating
results, exhibiting the life of the whole in the
parts and returning from the study of the parts
to a fuller comprehension of the whole’.

A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS

ECONOMICS

Meade, J. E. The Stationary Economy. London,
1965. Allen and Unwin. Pp. 238. Price 35s.

ALMOST EXACTLY THIRTY years ago Mr. (as
he then was) James Meade published his
successful textbook An Introduction to Economic
Analysis and Policy in which he expounded, at an
introductory level, the then new ideas about
employment and income, and about imperfect
competition. He was concerned to stress especially their implications for policy problems,
and he actually used some of the new technical
concepts in advocating particular economic
policies. This latest volume from Professor
REVIEWS OF BOOKS

Meade launches a somewhat similar enterprise.
But this time the work is hardly, in any sense, an
“introduction”, though just how post-introductory it is, is not easy to say. I should rate it
at least as suitable for the third-year specialist
undergraduate. Also, the scope of the Principles
of Political Economy, of which this volume is
“Part A’, is much more extensive. Further
projected volumes are mentioned on (B) Capital,
Growth, and Fluctuations, (C) Beyond Competition, and (D) and (E) on applied problems, and
international economic relationships. But “how
far in fact the work will proceed is a matter of
great uncertainty” (p. 9).

On the other hand, as in his introduction of
thirty years ago, Professor Meade is concerned
to bring together recent technical advances in
economic analysis and to present, comprehensively, their implications, above all for policy.
For somehow to improve economic policy by
means of more refined analysis is the keystone of
Professor Meade’s intellectual creed, momentarily shaken, but not essentially shattered, by
the discovery, about fifteen years ago, that pure
analysis and taxonomy are by no means enough.

After an enlightening, but all-too-brief,
introduction, which raises several fundamental
questions about the relations between economic
analysis and policy which one would have liked
Professor Meade to argue further, he takes us off
into his remote model world. This volume is
concerned with a starkly simplified model
described in Chapter I. The model is one of a
completely closed economy, with no government,
no public goods, perfect competition throughout, no increasing returns to scale, no capital, no
continuing technical progress, and a very
simplified monetary system, with all markets
self-equilibrating at full employment. Above all,
Professor Meade is concerned with a world of
certainty; every individual knows, and can
predict correctly and certainly, everything
relevant to his economic decisions.

Professor Meade then takes us through a
course of static price and allocation analysis
which covers the greater part of the volume
(Chapters I-XI). Much of the ground has been
covered in countless textbooks, but Professor
Meade’s exposition is quite masterly in its clarity
and precision, and, at a number of points he

suggests fresh angles and aspects—new at any
rate to this reviewer—as, for example, on the
terms of trade.

In Chapter XII Professor Meade uses his
allocation analysis to draw the implication that
his perfectly competitive, omniscient, or transparent, self-adjusting model, will operate at a
kind of “optimum” where no individual can be
made better off without someone else being
made worse off. He emphasizes that, depending
on the initial distribution of factors, the actual
**Pareto-optimum” reached in his economy may
be one with an extremely unequal distribution of
income, morally intolerable by many people’s
ethical standards.

Professor Meade then switches (Chapters
XIII-XV) to a centrally planned model, for
which all the assumptions correspond with those
of the competitive model, except, of course, for
that regarding markets, and except, it seems
also, regarding the certainty and completeness of
knowledge possessed by the central planning
authority as contrasted with the individuals in
the competitive economy. Professor Meade’s
central planning authority seems to need trialand-error adjustments more than his competitive
firms, indicating some difference or asymmetry
in the degree of knowledge assumed. But his
central planning authority seems to have
available a great deal of precise, correct, and
certainly predictable data, so that its decisions
simply emerge by calculation or computation.
Chapter XIV, on the organization of production
in the centrally planned economy, provides a
most instructive exposition of some of the key
concepts in linear programming.

As a textbook of pricing and allocation analysis
this is undoubtedly, as one would expect, a most
distinguished work. It is with regard to the
precise extent and nature of its suggested
relevance for policy that doubts arise. It is surely
irrelevant to state that “on the strict assumptions
made in Chapter I and which have been maintained throughout this volume, there would seem
to be little to recommend the replacement of a
laissez faire competitive economy with a centrally
planned economy” (p. 234). Certainly Professor
Meade warns that “‘the fact that on the assumptions of the present volume there is little case for
a central economic plan should not be supposed

103
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to beg the question for the choice of institutions
in the world of reality” (p. 235). But when he
adds that “many features of the real world
which are particularly relevant to the choice of
the best institutional mixture have been assumed
away throughout this volume’, one is inclined to
suggest that “many” should be amended to “all’’.
A Pareto-optimum is simply a Pareto-optimum,
and can be described in terms of a highly simplified competitive economy of omniscient individuals, or of an economy organized by an
omniscient central authority, or of various
mixtures of the two. The significant problems of
economic policy and of the choice of appropriate
institutions are not problems of how to calculate
or compute “optima”? from complete data,
known and predictable with certainty, as
represented in textbook and blackboard diagrams. They are problems of how best to
provide against ignorance and uncertainty, how
to cope with ‘“‘externalities’’, which are not
exceptions, or curiosa, but the very stuff of a
modern economy in which motor-cars and more
spacious housing are the main desiderata.
Professor Meade is, of course, perfectly well
aware of these points, but hardly seems to give
them due weight in his conception of the
relationship between his highly abstract analysis
and policy conclusions.

It might be dangerous if undergraduate
students get the distorted impression of the
nature of policy problems that, given the
necessary value judgements, wise and realistic
decisions are, or can be, reached by calculations
or computations from complete data known with
certainty; and that they should therefore devote a
large part of their time and energy to the
cultivation of purely analytical, logical or
geometrical analysis. The belief in the supreme
importance of precise and subtle, but highly
abstract, analysis rather resembles that of the
senior Guards officer’s belief that the best
training for the battlefield was for the soldier to
spend much of his time performing meticulously
precise drill-movements on the barrack-square;
or the belief of the classics masters that devoting
much of one’s time to Latin and Greek composition was the best training in clear thinking
and expression (admittedly not nearly as bad an
idea as some of those which have superseded it).

104

But this line of criticism may not merely seem
rather carping, it is also premature. One will not
be able adequately to judge the emphasis of
Professor Meade’s work until further instalments
are unfolded. One should certainly look forward
to these confident that, as with the present
volume, one will be treated to a masterly and
instructive example of detached, lucid and
precise analysis.

T. W. HUTCHISON

CONTRACEPTION

Mears, Eleanor. Handbook on Oral Contraception. London, 1965. Churchill. Pp. xv+107.
Price 20s.

DESCRIBING ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES, Dr.
Mears writes “it is probably true to say that no
other group of drugs in general use has been
subjected to so much careful investigation on a
world-wide basis”. This handbook is a remarkably compact and efficiently constructed summary
of all the work which has gone into studying
oral contraceptives up to the beginning of 1965.
In a mere 100 pages it covers the clinical usage of
“the pill’ and sets it in its correct biological
context, and includes, in addition, chapters on
very recent advances, such as sequential therapy.

The book has arisen out of the work of the
Oral Advisory Group of the IPPF Medical
Committee. To a large extent it gets the best of
two different worlds. On the one hand, it
benefits from a single authorship which leads to
continuity and avoids the excessive length (and
price) of volumes that attempt to cover a large
field by calling on several authors. On the other
hand, it has the advantages of a symposium in
that many distinguished authorities on oral
contraception have been closely associated and
partly responsible for large sections of the book.

In summarizing the scientific aspects of the
subject all the most significant work on both man
and animals is adequately covered. All the
controversial issues that have arisen around oral
contraception are faced squarely and honestly:
possible effects on the pituitary, on blood
clotting mechanisms and on liver function, and
any long-term risk of carcinogenesis are closely
discussed. Perhaps one of the most useful
