NATURE AND NURTURE—A STUDY IN
CONDITIONS?

By E. J. LIDBETTER

IN previous papers, reviewing the circumstances under which
the Birth-rate in England has declined, emphasis was laid upon
the fact that the influences which brought about that decline were
such as would affect the more thrifty and provident section of
the community, and would have no bearing upon the shiftless
and less worthy members.

But this fact alone does not wholly account for the higher
fertility of the less desirable members. There are other causes
in operation accounting for the fact that their fertility rate has
not declined. In the first place the burden which social and
administrative provision has imposed upon normal parenthood,
has been lifted from parenthood in relation to defective stocks.
Again, among the actually defective, as well as among the lower
types, there is a diminished power of resistance to moral as well
as physical disorder, and less power of control. Discipline is not
practised, because not understood, and much loose living is the
result. This in turn leads, in a variety of ways, to early
marriage or co-habitation and many children.

The following three pedigrees illustrate the distinctive features between what I describe as the low type of individual, and
the defective stocks proper. (See Diagrams 1, 2, and 3,
illustrating mental defect, physical defect, and the non-sick and
low type group.)

Fig. 1—KEY TO THE DIAGRAMS.

‘a a : \, = Normal

C) =Insane Pauper €<. =Chronic Pauper e

et : ce z>, =No particulars
(i, =Feeble-minded or gm, ; Ay ea

C6 Idiot Pauper @ 3 =Occasional Pauper <Z

= oe (V)\ =Illegitimate
CT) =Tuberculous () =Pauper Child KX) 2

4 ~~ . * . f ws mee ; K > }

(F) = Epileptic cs a EH = Born in Workhouse
= ( } =Medical Relief 2 =Ilegitimate and
(B) = Blind padi ay born in Workhouse

‘ > - + @) =Physically Unsound 4 — Died i fanc
@® =Still-born (@ ys J ‘© =Died in Infancy

1 This paper formed one of a series of four prepared for the Haslemere Branch
of the Eugenics Education Society, on ‘‘ The Social Application of Eugenics.”’
‘oob'zF ynoqe je payeurtjsa uns & sioXedai1e1 ot} JSO9 sey pur ‘steak SII ynoqe 3e JNO SHIOM SS¥d SITY} UI A}]IGQees1eYO Jo potsod aat}OaTTCO ey, «= ‘syusled
JI9q} WIM Jal[al 1Oop-jno jo }dieoe1 Ul UVeq BAY JO a1e OUIU pus “S-T'g Uldn 1Y48noIq Buleq o1e JO o1OM UDs2IJG {o}JeUII}IBO]]I ATUTeJISO OTe U9} ‘UOT}eI0NN3
}SB] OY} UL UsApP[Igd mnoj-AjIg} 94} JO ‘AdUapuUs} [e1OUI-UOU payIeUr & Y}IM [eUIOU-qns A[][e]UEUI Se paqiiosep oq AeW YOO}S BY} BlOyM 94} UO “ply e[loequit
QUO pur ‘s}[Npe USUI OM} 91e DIOy TL, “SolyeuN] Joy suinyAse ul OM} pue ‘AreulIgUI IO ssNOYyYyIOM UI paIp saey 34810 ‘stodned useq saey IO 918 OM}-A}I105
woymM jo ‘s[enprlAlpul auo-A}XIs papnjour [e}0} oy, =“steadde yo0Jap jeorshyd 9331] Ar9a YOIyM Ul pue ‘odA} MOT & JO YDO}S BuTjessNI[I ve1s1pseg

"SBT

 
56 EUGENICS REVIEW E. J. Lidbetter :

KEY TO THE DIAGRAMS.

& = Insane Pauper @ =Chronic Pauper O Mamas
é = Feeble-minded or @& = Occasional Pauper Q =No particulars

Idiot Pauper known
}) = Tuberculous Ged) = Pauper Chiid &) = Illegitimate
(©) =xpileptic © =Medical Relief  €[) = Born in Workhouse
(B) _Blind Q =Iegitimate and
nee = Physically Unsound born in Workhouse

® =Still Born = Died in Infancy

_9

  
  
 

    

QO_ OGOOOLMAY (lYro0eee
"SP ae
DO OO) OD P Ag s (T} A ‘T) Oe) GY &) os

Fig. 3. Pedigree of atuberculous stock, Out of the surviving children six are tuberculous.
Only two, the eldest and the youngest, have not been paupers. The eldest son married an
apparently normal woman, who within three years of her marriage died of phthisis. The
mother of this group had a consumptive brother, whilst the father had a consumptive father,
and was himself one of twn survivors of a family of eight ; the other survivor became insane,
and his wife and children were paupers in consequence.
37

NATURE AND NURTURE

  

“1 ‘[ ‘a— (peqstiqeise useq jou sey ssaupur[q oq} Jo Je}OvIeYS Are}IpPsz9q OT}
‘AyIpeleq jo aseo anf vuzsd @ syuaseid ssaupuljq jo souenbas 9y} d10jo1ey} ys[IyM ‘peutusezep
useq JOU Sey SSOUpUl[G Sy} JO sInjeu sy) ‘“sjuvyuI ay} ul yuoredde si yOajJap [eluoW qIINOF
94} Ul pue ‘sieah SE pue zE ye psy) oy} ul ‘Ajaatjoadse1 gg pue O9 }e UOT]eIBUSd puOdeS ay} UI
‘age Jo sieaX of ye auesul swieoeq juslyed oy} UOT}e19UN3 jsag oy} UT ,,;UOTedIONUe,, Surmoys
OS[Y ‘991q} UL ssoUpUT[G pUe ‘SUCT}EIOUNs INO} UI JOJop [e}USWI SuIMOYsS 9oIZIpeg ‘Vv ‘Hy

  

NY

22 O ©02Q%99SS BO00

» a

PD.
58 EUGENICS REVIEW E. J. Lidbetter:

I give these pedigrees because they shew in such a clear
way the distinctive characteristics of each group. Generally, it
will be found that most of these characters appear in one and
the same group, but in the three I have selected the particular
kind of stock is clearly shewn.

It is here that the question of the most vital importance to
eugenics is raised,—the question of environment. I think that
most of the declarations I have heard on this question, have been
far too dogmatic, both in tone and substance—they lack those
qualifications which must necessarily protect a declaration on
this subject, and they presume knowledge which does not exist.
Unfortunately, too, political and social bias have an influence,
and the tendency is towards the establishment of rival
camps.

Throughout all life the effective unit is the finished product of heredity plus environment. The believer in eugenics
asserts that of the two factors, heredity is the predominant
partner. In this, he is undoubtedly well advised, for environment can do no more than develop or prevent the development of
inherent qualities.

But the eugenist must beware of attempting to demonstrate
the exact proportion of success or failure to be attributed respectively to the partners. The points which tell in sucha calculation are far too small for measurement by any instrument yet
available to us. Let us take as an example the well-known
question of maternal exhaustion.

We quite frequently come across a casein which a first child
is born shortly after marriage, and succeeding children at
intervals of from 12 to 18 months over many years. This is not
as common as it was a generation ago, but it isso in far too many
cases now,—and in others the difference is nearly made up by a
large number of miscarriages,—but, whatever the result in that
respect may be, it cannot be doubted that the frequency of conception tends to a reduction in the strength and vitality of the
mother, and also of the child. Granting that heredity is the
controlling factor in the condition of the child at birth and after,
it cannot be expected that the conditions of birth in which each
succeeding child is a trespass upon the premises of the
NATURE AND NURTURE 59

preceding one, will not reduce the effective value of the
offspring. .

Now large families and bad environment go together (for
reasons which we shall consider later), and so we find bad conditions of living and a high infant mortality rate closely correlated. But in an effort to estimate the respective values of
nature and nurture in remote and interlacing conditions, where
will you place maternal exhaustion? It is a fact that certain
stocks—not always bad stocks—have a high fertility rate, and in
such stocks we often find peculiar characteristics in succeeding
generations—low stature and diminished vitality. This may be
a transmissible characteristic, it probably is, but who will dare
say that it is not the result of maternal exhaustion and the
inability of the mother to nourish the born and the unborn at
one and the same time. |

So it is with most of the questions arising in this discussion ;
and it is because of these difficulties that we must not anticipate
the determination of the facts by a too emphatic expression of
opinion with regard to them.

It matters not in which direction we approach social
problems, we find the ground already occupied and popular
notion supplying a theory and a practice which may be
described as ameliorative but of little, if any, ultimate value.
This applies with especial force to the study of agencies in which
is involved a consideration of the relative values of nature and
nurture. —

Let us take, for instance, the question of housing. We find
infant mortality closely correlated with density of population;
we also find tuberculosis closely ?correlated with density of
population.

I have no doubt that an enquiry would also reveal a high
correlation between mental disorder and density of population.
On the face of it, says the student of sociology, bad housing is
a fertile source of all these undesirable conditions. The
diagrams shew an intimate association between infant mortality,
tuberculosis and mental disorder. If we could measure degrees
of mental weakness and strength the correlation would be much
higher—as it is, only definitely known lunacy is included.
60 EUGENICS REVIEW E. J. Lidbetter :

But let us push the enquiry further. On doing so we find
that density of population is also correlated with the cases of
mothers who go out to work, with low wages, with sickness
among the children, with parents who follow unhealthy trades,
with alcoholic intemperance and large families.

But we find that the unhealthy trades are trades in which
inefficient labour can be employed,—in fact, that efficient labour
will not touch them. That most of the parents in these districts
are employed in ways in which inefficient labour can be
employed,—and that many of the labourers are quite unfit for
any other work. Hence the low wages; hence the mother goes
to work to supplement the income, and hence the accumulation
of those domestic and social evils so commonly mistaken as
causative, but which are, in origin, effects of a cause which works
out in a diversity of ways. The home is neglected in the
absence of the mother,—it is therefore untidy and perhaps dirty ;
a child is kept from school to mind the house or the baby—their
education therefore suffers; the children are not fed or tended
with the regularity necessary for their proper nurture,—they
therefore look untidy and are often ill.

Other consequences follow which show that the whole
family lacks that regularity and standard of living which is
essential to the maintenance of industrial and economic efficiency.
But if your student of sociology put this family into the most
suitable house possible, the conditions would be as bad in a very
short space of time.

Now the correlation of all these undesirable conditions and
qualities is a matter of association merely. So far as it is a
question of cause and effect the bad environment is the product
of the inherent deficiency in the stock.

But in what does this inherent deficiency consist? If you
could examine the population of a typical slum area, person
by person, ignoring the aged, I am certain you would find a far
higher physical, and a much lower mental standard, than a
perusal of modern official and sociological records would lead one
to expect. The rise in the number of detained lunatics! in recent

1 Lunatics in England and Wales equalled in 1859 1 in every 537 of the population, and in 1gog, 1 in every 278.
NATURE AND NURTURE 61

years is not due to any large extent to changes in administrative
practice. It represents a real increase in the number of antisocial persons; and the increase in the number of such detained
persons is a fair index to the mental standard in the section
of the community from which they mostly come. Mental
condition is a question of degree; between a real intellectual
capacity and true insanity—that is, between the highest and
the lowest—we have every type and every grade of mental
condition.

Now it must be remembered that before any person can be
detained as a lunatic the examining Justice must find a definite
anti-social condition,—the person must be dangerous to himself
or others. Quite a high proportion of the persons alleged to be
of unsound mind escape certification, and are not detained. The
certifying Justice has failed to detect that condition of mental
instability which alone justifies legal detention. The individual
is, therefore, entitled to and enjoys full liberty or licence, as the
case may be, and he finds his way back to the particular
community from which an act of peculiar eccentricity, or a
moment’s excitement, or a drinking bout temporarily separated
him.

It must not be thought that the persons so released are
of full mental capacity,—or that only those examined are open to
question in that respect. The proceedings simply mark a stage
in a continuous process.

I have referred to this matter of certification at this length
because there is a general impression that insanity is a precise
and definite quality far removed from the normal condition.

This is true in theory only,—mental condition is, in fact, a
very finely graded and complex thing, and between the extremes
of mental fitness and unfitness there is room for an infinite
variety of qualities and kinds. Human efficiency varies with
these qualities and kinds, and although they cannot be said to be
truly inherited, yet the measure of resemblance between near
relatives is sufficiently close to warrant the suggestion that
qualities and kinds are peculiar to stocks and families.

One of the most striking things brought out on an examination of the pedigrees is the amount of in-breeding in these
62 EUGENICS REVIEW E. J. Lidbetter :

cases. (In one case, Fig. 5, p. 70, a woman whose uncle was
insane and who also had three mentally defective brothers,
married the widower of her sister, after his discharge from the
Asylum.) Can it be expected that in these cases the apparently
normal member will be in fact normal? In most of these stocks
the apparently normal member is so only in his or her class,—
but it is a class in which dullness and a limited mental range
predominate. Question them, examine them, and you will
find mental weakness, eccentricity, dullness and stupidity.
Occasionally you will find a bright member, but on the whole,
you will find them lacking in all or most of the attributes that go
to make up personal success or efficiency. From time to time
you will find among them persons grossly immoral, criminal,
alcoholic, and at times a person having a permanent delusion,—
locally known but regarded as harmless.

Now all these variable conditions,—moral, social, devotional,
etc., summed up in the word character or temperament are of
far more importance to the working class than the merely
physical. Mental tenergy—the will to do—is their essential
need. Essential in the double sense that it is the attribute they
most lack, and the one without which they can neither improve
themselves nor be improved. Let a man have the will to
live ; and to live well; and to be well, and he will find a way to
overcome the pressure of economic circumstance and to avoid
for himself and his family the terrors of a bad environment.
Let him determine to be well, to be independent and to bring up
his family in that way. To such a man the pressure of economic
conditions and the absolute necessity to maintain a good environment acts as a stimulus that provokes a ready response.
Independence of character and a strong will to enforce it are
surely the most enviable hereditary endowments.

When we turn from a consideration of the mental to the
physical disabilities of these stocks the subject is much more
complex. Examining the pedigrees one is struck by the variety
of disorders appearing in a particular stock. The process of inbreeding, already referred to, must have a great influence in this
direction, particularly with the mental and other known transmissible disorders.
NATURE AND NURTURE 63

But the more important consideration for us is the inherited
diathesis—the want of constitutional power of resistance—as
in tuberculosis. (This is well illustrated in Fig. 3. on
p. 56.) The constitutional weakness in which this, and similar
disorders are developed is undoubtedly inherited, and the development takes place in an environment rendered appropriate to the
development of disease by the intensified poverty resulting from
a low mental condition, and a diminishing power of resistance.

There is another factor having an important bearing on this
question, in the influence under which the standard of employable
labour has been raised. |

In 1880 there was passed the Employers Liability Act,
under which heavy penalties were imposed upon employers in the
event of accidents to certain classes of workers; these provisions
were extended to other classes of workers in 1897 by the provisions of the Workmens Compensation Acts. Again in 1906
the whole law was consolidated and extended to every kind of
worker and servant. Under these provisions, employers now
reject many applicants who formerly found employment. Nor
is this all; the period which marked this development in the
liability of the employer was marked also by the introduction of
the most elaborate machinery. Thus whilst the liability of the
employer was being actively pressed upon him, methods were
being introduced which he had to adopt and which increased
enormously the risk his liability had to meet.

Again in 1889 the great dock strike in London took place.
By it was established a standard of wages and hours of labour
in the skilled and unskilled labour of the docks. The principle has since been extended to many trades, and in effect
most skilled and many unskilled trades have established a
standard of wages and hours of labour applicable to all
workers.

The combined effect of these two processes has been, first, by
emphasising the increased risk of labour and imposing that risk
on the employer to create a demand for greater care and intelligence on the part of the worker; second, since the worker has
insisted on higher wages and shorter hours of employment, to
compel the employer to take pains to secure men capable of
64 EUGENICS REVIEW E. J. Lidbetter :

rendering a good return for the wages in the time. Here we
have in operation a process which has in fact resulted in
squeezing out all but the really efficient from most of the regular
and better paid forms of employment.

To sum up the situation it comes to this. The fertility of
defective stocks and their in-breeding has produced communities
of inefficient individuals. That automatically, and perhaps
unconsciously, legitimate labour has segregated itself from those
communities, which have in consequence become hopelessly
impoverished. A process has been in operation over many years
which, if it has not led to the segregation of efficiency, has
certainly led to the segregation of inefficiency. This is why we
find a high correlation between lunacy, tuberculosis, infant
mortality and most of the known undesirable conditions of
living.

But the question will be asked, what about the class just
above this defective class, and those classes rising almost
imperceptibly in status and condition. The answer is, that the
question is one as to the choice of mates. Given both parents
of normal health and intelligence, the offspring should be better
than the parents, because they have a better environment than
the parents had, and the capacity to take advantage of
it. If both parents are unsound or come of unsound stock, they
have a number of defective children, and sometimes not a sound
one. Between these extremes a variety of conditions appear,
as, for instance, when one of the parents comes from a defective
and one from sound stock.

It is sometimes suggested that by such unions dominant

strength may ‘‘ breed out”’ the defect. I find nothing to support
this view. I think it much more probable that the operation of
the “ law of anticipation ’’ removes the defect from the stock.
But even this view must be modified when we remember that
reversion is ultimately possible. . . On the other hand, there
is abundant evidence that a good stock may be vitiated by a
union with defective stock, and also that by such marriages
accessions of strength come to feeble stocks, upon which such
stocks persist. |

The measure of defect in these people of better status is toa
NATURE AND NURTURE 65

large extent the measure of their intermarriage with and consequent vitiation by defective stocks. In the same way, they supply
those accessions of strength without which defective stocks would
automatically come to an end.

Unfortunately, under the influence of a popular press and
the providers of light and tragic entertainment, the views of the
average young man and woman as to the kind of person he or
she should marry are somewhat loose and variable, and considerations of stocks and value give way under a misconception of
democratic ideal . . . moreover, onthe question of selection
in marriage it must be borne in mind that a high proportion of
the marriages among the labouring classes are arranged after, if
not in consequence of the pregnancy of the woman. Obviously
undesirable marriages are often enforced in these circumstances.
As soon as a young woman is found to be pregnant, all the
considerable forces—family, social and religious—range themselves into a conspiracy to get her married,—to the father of
the child, if possible,—but to get her married. Volumes might
be written on the inequities of this practice . . . but this
is not the occasion.

Generally it may be said that among the working classes no
selective force is in operation. In the great majority of cases
they drift into marriage as they drift through life.

Now the problems for Eugenists are two. First, can we by
a variation of environmental conditions raise these defective
stocks to a state of efficiency, in other words, will good nurture
replace the disadvantages of bad breeding? Second, to what
extent will bad environment destroy the advantages of good
birth ?

With regard to the first I have endeavoured to shew that
efficiency is primarily a matter of inberent quality. Not the
development of those qualities, but their possession. Environment can do no more than feed innate capacity, it confers
nothing, it develops what is already there.

Efficiency rests ultimately upon a biological basis, and in
these defective stocks the process of in-breeding, already referred
to, has bred out of the stocks both the stimuli which prompt

efficiency and the recuperative capacity which undoubtedly
5
66 EUGENICS REVIEW FE. J. Lidbetter :

comes to the aid of a stock weakened temporarily by mixture
with a tainted stock. It is this lack of a healthy stimuli and the
absence of recuperative capacity which explains the continuance
of pauperism or poverty generation after generation in a stock
which shows no serious physical defect.

The stimulus normally provoked by necessity is ineffective
in these classes—they lower their standard of living or become
dependent on others rather than rise to it. Only the activity of
the Local Health Authority prevents them falling even lower
than they are.

It is just at this point that those who talk of improving
these stocks by improving their environment lose sight of an
essential factor.

Improvement cannot be imposed from without. Whatever
the influence brought to bear, it can only be effective if and
when it supplements a desire for betterment and the capacity to
co-operate in the individual concerned. So far is this an
essential condition, that the measure of the response to external
influence must ultimately become the test between bad and
good stocks. The influence of this test as a selective agency is
already being felt in education, and in some occupations, and it
does actually contribute in no small measure to that segregation
of unfitness to which I have referred.

This point cannot be better illustrated than by the case of
the L.C.C. housing scheme on the Boundary Street estate. In
that case the L.C.C. took possession of, and cleared an area of
144 acres, on the ground that it was an insanitary area;
5,719 persons were displaced and buildings erected for the
accommodation of 5,524 at a cost of £282,607.. What was the
result? The actual result was this. When the clearance took
place in 1889, the occupiers were scattered into the adjoining
districts of Brick Lane, on the one hand, and Hoxton on the
other. They reduced those districts to conditions similar to those
of the cleared area—conditions which continue to this day.
They never returned to the rebuilt area, which, at the present
time is occupied as to a high proportion (probably above 70%) of
its accommodation by aliens. Many of the survivors of that
cleared area have been known to me during the past ten years,
NATURE AND NURTURE 67

and I know them as a mass of broken and twisted human
wreckage whom no external influence could improve.

In spite of all the social and economic changes of the past
decade, and the vast environmental improvement associated with
those changes—improvements of such a kind it will be noted as
to reach every grade of society—the poverty of the lower class is
as intense as it ever was,—nor is there sign of improvement,
mentally, morally, or physically.

Only in numbers have they changed, and that by a considerable increase. The increase is largely due to the higher survival
value conferred by the reversal of the selective death rate,—an
inevitable consequence of the general improvement of environment, and the indiscriminate distribution of private and official
doles. |

When we turn to the second part of this question, that is, as
to how far bad nurture will destroy the advantages of good
birth, we are on different ground.

Above the defective class which I have described, and below
the well-to-do, we have the great bulk of the community. This
is by far the largest part of the whole, and extends from the
border line of poverty to the comparatively comfortable. In this
group there is a high standard of health and intelligence; but it is,
in the main, untrained intelligence and health, which shews its
strength by persisting in spite of, rather than because of, its
conditions.

When we consider the numbers in this group, their splendid
health and sturdiness of character, and their potential, but
undeveloped capacity; when we add to that the stultifying
conditions of their living, the repressive character of their
environment, and the perversities of inappropriate education,
it is obvious that far too much has been written and said
about national degeneracy. The increase in the defective
group, which we have already noticed, is a matter for grave
national concern; and the fact that it is not recognised by
the public, creates a feeling of real uneasiness in the minds
of those who know. But this does not justify the hasty and
wide application of the term national degeneracy.

In the group we are now considering eugenists will find the
68 EUGENICS REVIEW E. J. Lidbetter:

material upon which their efforts must be effective. The
character of its members Is often obscured by their environment.
The vigour and recuperative power of their children, their easy
subsistence and avoidance of disease, all shew that they are
primarily a healthy growth. Let us not overlook this fact,
or avoid its significance under a too wide application of the
term national degeneracy.

The decline in the death-rate is not without significance in
this respect. The development of medical and surgical science
and of the science of hygiene, have played their part in
this direction, and if they have conferred survival value on a
considerable body of unfitness they have also prevented
catastrophies among the fit, as well as directed the movement
for the amelioration of conditions which has found expression in
so many ways.

Consider the diseases which these processes have successfully combatted. Cholera, small-pox, typhus and diphtheria have
almost disappeared, scarlet fever is under control, consumption,
judged by the death-rate,’ is a rapidly declining quantity, and
the only statistics with regard to venereal diseases, shew a
regular and considerable decline. All these, it will be noted, are
not merely those disorders that carry off the unfit and the ailing,
but, with the exception of consumption, they are disorders
which attack the fit and the unfit with complete impartiality,
and one of them at least,—typhus—was notorious in that it
carried off the strong and left the weak.

These are but the obvious results of that vast improvement
which has been the triumph of the environmental movement,—
which curiously enough commenced about the time when the
birth-rate commenced to decline.

The Education Act was passed in 1870, and the first
effective Public Health Act in 1875. These Statutes form the
basis of nearly all important improvements, and to the experience
gained in their administration may be attributed most of the
numerous complementary statutes. These form a positive net
1 Death-rate per million of population :
Tuberculosis. Small-pox. Scarlet Fever.

Five years—1871 to 1875 2,218 4II 759
i ¥ IgOI to 1905 1,215 25 126
NATURE AND NURTURE 69

work of legal and administrative provision, and constantly with
their operation the standard of life and health has improved.

But if the standard of life and health had not improved
under the influence of these provisions ; if it could not be shewn
that the death-rate has declined with the spread of these
agencies ; if public policy did not require their support ; and if
the purposes of race-culture had not been directly and obviously
served by the improvement of environment. . . If all these
advantages had not been abundantly established, there would
yet remain considerations of such importance as to make environmental improvement not only an advantage to the Eugenic
movement, but of vital necessity. |

First and foremost in these considerations is the relations
subsisting between what I have described as the defective and
the efficient groups. The line between these groups is difficult
to determine, but it exists, and I have done my best to indicate
its position. Now across that line a continual process of
exchange is going on . . . strength to the defective, weakness
to the strong.

Next to the segregation of the feeble-minded, the prevention of that exchange is the most urgent problem in practical
eugenics, because its prevention will check, and ultimately bring
an end, to that exchange between strength and defect which at
once perpetuates the defective stocks, and vitiates the good
stocks,—by the marriage interchange which is_ constantly
going on.

In a previous paper we have seen nature’s effort to return to the normal in these defective stocks, both in the principle of anticipation and by extermination. Those processes
are constantly being checked by accessions of strength to the
defectives from the sturdier stocks, whilst the reverse process
imports a defect into a good stock. Here we have nature’s
double-handed process for the cleansing of weak stocks and
the extermination of the bad being constantly thwarted and
neutralised by the perversities of human organisation (see
Figs. 6 and 7).

I give this as the first reason for the improvement of
environment because it is clear to my mind that the first
70

EUGENICS REVIEW E. J. Lidbetter :
4
S¢ ry e eS 7 (OD © BZ

Fig.5. Pedigree shewing the transmission of mental defect in
three generations through the apparently normal member. A man
having an insane brother became the father of six children; three
became insane. The only male normal had a mentally defective
child. One of the two normal daughters married a man who became
insane, and afterwards when she died he married his deceased wife's
sister.

 

Fig.6. Shewing the survival of defect by accession
of strength from the normal.
The tuberculous father in the
second generation died three
months ago, leaving a widow
and three children. His
brother died one week before
(heart disease). These were
both young men, and the last
of a defective stock.
NATURE AND3,NURTURE 71

  

vy

 
 
  

wy

\\

\

cosa =O

es

MH «op C)

®
iy
Fig. 7. Shewing the survival of tuberculous stock
by. accession of strength through the normal. The
ildren shown in the last generation are illegitimate.
At the time of their mother’s death from phthisis this
year, they and their reputed father and their mother,
and her mother (three adults and two children), were
living and sleeping together in one and the same room.

 

Fig. 8. Shewing the association between insanity, tuberculosis
and pauperism.

_ =Chronic Pauper = Normal
=Insane Pauper @ = No particulars
known
Idiot Pauper = Illegitimate

Born in Workhouse

Illegitimate and
born in Workhouse

= Died in Infancy

= Tuberculous an = Pauper Child
Epileptic © =Medical Relief

(B) = Blind
@ =8till-born ‘OF = Physically Unsound

Oe
vase cue or = Oceasional Pauper q@
¢ os
© po
©
72 EUGENICS REVIEW E. J. Lidbetter :

important influence of such improvement is to widen the
gap between the efficient and the non-efficient members. Such
improvements automatically lead to the segregation of kinds
and qualities. The efficient stocks improve because they can
improve, given the opportunity. But a defective stock cannot
improve, whatever the opportunity. Thus the gap making for
the segregation of inefficiency tends to get wider, and with that
process and the eugenic education of the efficient stocks, the
defective members must gradually be withdrawn from the field of
selection.

This interchange of strength and defect may some day be
checked by the public control of the right to marry. But to
this proposal there are some very considerable, and practical
difficulties.—(I find that a very high proportion of insanity is
transmitted through the apparently normal members of defective
stocks.’ Sex-limited inheritance affords a similar difficulty.)
Meantime it may be sufficient to say that social sanction is
a far more effective instrument in these matters than public
control, and if we can persuade the mother, and the matchmaker, that in marriage, social status counts, we may do something to help in a right selection.

Another reason why we should actively support the improvement of environment is that foreshadowed in the early part of
this paper, namely in the difficulty of deciding how to allocate
the respective qualities as environmental or hereditary. In the
ascertainment of degrees of human values, and the measure of
their inheritance, I look more to the development of the system
for the measurement of intelligence than to any other system,
because I believe that mental quality is the controlling factor in
human fitness and to a large extent controls the process under
which physical development takes place.

The subtleties of such elusive questions as that mentioned
at the commencement of this paper (maternal exhaustion)—and
there are many of them—cannot be measured by any system yet
known,—at least to me, and it is because I feel this impossibility of measurement, that I say that we must take steps
to ensure that in no phase of our social life can it be truly said

1 See Figs. 3, 5 and 7.
NATURE AND NURTURE 73

that the environment of the people is so bad as to be even open
to this discussion.

For all the reasons which I have here suggested or set out
eugenists will add their support to the movement for the
improvement of environment, not merely as a means to an end,
but remembering always that a well-born community will not
tolerate such conditions as exist to-day.

This policy is not inconsistent with the theory of eugenics
conceived by its founder, and its adoption need not lead eugenists
to forget that under the best circumstances human quality is the
controlling factor between success or failure.
