PUPULALION CHANGES AND ECONOMICS
By L. J. CADBURY

N the first number of the EUGENICS
| Ben for 1941* Mr. Lafitte made an

interesting commentary on Mr. Reddaway’s book The Economics of a Declining
Population. A more recent issue has contained his paper on certain aspects of family
allowances.t Both contributions raise such
important points that some further discussion
of them may perhaps be permitted.

I am sure all eugenists will take to heart
Mr. Lafitte’s parting advice to study the
book under review before attempting to
strengthen their case for a population policy
by the use of non-eugenic arguments. Also
they will be glad to know that he disagrees
with Professor Jewkes who sees no reason
why anything at the moment needs doing
about demographic problems. He makes it
clear that action is needed now, not forty
years hence, but it is not so apparent why he
regards a trend of slow population decline as
“* desirable ”’ until a total of 33-36 millions is
reached, which he suggests is ‘‘adequate.”’

It is true that if nothing is done a decline
is inevitable, but why should we assume that
if active measures are adopted we cannot
achieve stability at our present numbers ?
To do this the present N.R.R. of +75 has to
rise over the next two decades to unity.
Why should we not adopt this as our aim and
devise a policy to make it practicable ?. To
support a policy that looks to stability only
at the end of the century and a population
of 33-36 millions seems unduly acquiescent.

To reverse a population trend is admittedly
an extremely difficult thing to do, but if we
think it can be done to the extent of arriving
at an N.R.R. of unity in 60 years’ time, why
should we assume it is an pORSIDIe to do it in
twenty ?

* * *

Mr. Lafitte rightly warns optimists that
“reform of the economic system in itself
will not solve everything and that measures

* EUGENIcS Review 82; 4. P. 121ff. °
f 1btd. 38, 3. P. 67 ff.

13

to encourage parenthood are desirable.”
But is he not open to misinterpretation when
he says, “ that no substantial and sustained
rise in the birth rate is likely to be achieved
in the absence of far-reaching economic
reforms’? Is it not desirable to be more
specific ? .

The word “reforms” is generally used in
connection with acts leading to all types of
social betterment. We want social betterment for itself, but it would be untrue to
assume that all acts leading to it simultaneously stimulate the birth rate. In many
directions they have no effect on demographic .
trends, in some they may even aggravate
their decline unless this tendency is realized
and corrective measures taken simultaneously.

Mr. B. S. Rowntree’s recent book, Poverty
and Progress,* records the results of legislation which has had as its objective raising the general standard of living ; improving industrial conditions ; insurance against unemployment and sickness ; legal holidays and
pensions ; subsidized housing; etc. Apart
from certain aspects, it is a report of achievements of which we may well be proud. But
it is clear that among these achievements the
encouragement of parenthood is conspicuously absent.

As a matter of fact, if we select certain
sections of beneficial legislation, particularly
those dealing with the school-leaving age
and the control of juvenile employment, we
find progressive Acts have definitely been a
deterrent to parenthood. Such legislation
lengthens the period that elapses before a
child can begin to earn, and thus, unless
counteracting measures are taken, increases
the cost of rearing a family.

Another group of economic reforms which
are frequently assumed to have a beneficial
bearing on the birth rate are those whose
aim is to provide security. It is difficult to
dogmatize about this relationship. The

* London, 1941. Longmans. Pp. xx + 540. 15s.
14

teaching profession, for instance, have a very
high degree of economic security but they
are one of the least fertile groups in the
community. A feeling of insecurity may be a
deterrent in certain circumstances, but conversely security per se does not appear to
stimulate the birth rate.

The fact is that parenthood inevitably
involves taking risks, economic and otherwise. We can endeavour to minimize the
risks and we can try to create a courageous
outlook and disposition to face them. Can
we combine both? It is not easy as the very
act of investigating and legislating against
risks so often engenders an excessive spirit of
safety first. “Security” legislation and
measures for economic insurance by themselves are just as likely to discourage as to
encourage parenthood. It is important this
should be recognized and countered.

* ae *

Thus for our purpose we may divide reforms into three groups :

1. Those which promote the general spread
of the amenities of life but have little effect
one way or another on the birth rate.

2. Those of which I have given examples,
which excellent in themselves are a deterrent
to parenthood. The important point with
this group here is to recognize this deterrent
influence and to take counter measures.

3. Those which stimulate the birth rate
and which for the most part add to human
comfort and enjoyment as well. These
include all the efforts to remove the penalties
of rearing a family ; relief from the drudgery

of housework and maternity ; the provision.

of free or special food for children ; family
allowances in cash and kind ; public recognition of the social importance of parenthood ;
etc.
We are indebted to Mr. Lafitte for enumerating some of these ideas in his article
on ‘Family Allowances and Eugenics.”
He also makes other suggestions, including
the important one, “ that many things which
to-day are financial alternatives to parenthood should be withdrawn from commercial
enterprise and provided communally—
especially in the field of cultural and leisure
pursuits.” Is this the answer we should make

. ‘THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to what H. G. Wells has called the “ Social
appetites and opportunities ’’ that have been
so immeasurably enlarged since Victorian
times, but the fulfilment of which can only

so often be achieved by abstention from

parenthood ? |

Many of the “ good things of life ’’ have
been commercialized as well as having
become the alternative to parenthood.
Having become commercialized they have
been pushed by all the arts known to those
who specialize in “ breaking down consumer
resistance.”” Parenthood as merely one
among many desirable ways of spending
money and unsupported by propaganda has
thus suffered.

Is the withdrawal of its competitors from
the field of commercial enterprise the best
course to take ? In some respects it may be.
But it is doubtful if this is a practical way
of dealing with other competitors, motor
cars, travel, radio, gramophones,. a more
luxurious standard of living, etc. Here the
solution seems to be educating and influencing public opinion aided by deliberate
control of these alternatives chiefly through
taxation, assisted perhaps by some scheme
of rationing or controlled allocation.

* * *

When we get to the question of taxation,
it is important to distinguish between
measures designed to achieve vertical and
horizontal redistribution. Vertical redistribution aims at reducing the disparity in spending powers between the richer classes and the
poorer classes. Such redistribution is desirable on grounds of equity, but it cannot be
said to have any direct effect on the birth
rate, though it has an important indirect
effect in so far as the funds it provides are
subject to horizontal adjustments in their
spending. Horizontal redistribution in the
same economic groups between those with
family responsibilities and those without
them on the other hand, should have a direct
effect in reducing the financial deterrent to
fertility.

This is equally applicable to all sections of
society and calls for immediate attention.
Such documents as Mr. B. S. Rowntree’s
bovk or the Bristol Survey show that large
POPULATION CHANGES AND ECONOMICS

families are the outstanding cause of poverty
among the low income groups; Family
Allowances both in cash and kind, whether
“‘ earmarked ”’ or not, are increasingly recognized as the answer here. |

At the other end of the scale the incidence
of taxation on a single man, a married man
without children, and a married man with
three children, all in receipt of £10,000 a year,
is discussed by Mr. J. E. Allen in the December number of the Economic Journal. The
first pays £6,862 in taxation; the second
£6,832 ; and the third £6,757. That is to say
the last with three children to educate is left
with £75 more than the second and {105 more
‘than the bachelor. To mitigate the economic
disadvantages of raising a family, Income
Tax allowances on this scale are useless ;
they should be drastically revised, not
between the bachelor and the childless
married man, but as between these two and
the man with a family.

* ® *

Before leaving this aspect of the subject,
may I refer once again to another section of
Mr. Lafitte’s article on ‘“‘ Family Allowances
and Eugenics’’? In particular to the section
where he states, “ In our civilization prestige
goes primarily with the ownership of property
and conspicuous spending—preterably without conspicuous working to justify it.”” “And
“Social promotion depends on striving, in
competition with others and often to others’
detriment, for a higher income or greater
possessions.”” From these two premises he
proceeds to the conclusion. ‘‘ At whatever
rung one starts... it is a ladder best
climbed by those unencumbered by too many
children.”

But are these two premises and their
conclusion true? I do not deny that there
is some flaunting of conspicuous spending :
it is certainly one of the causes of antiSemitism. I suggest, however, that it is not
in evidence among large and important
sections of our civilization, those, for
instance, who seek their vocation in the
Services, in our Universities and educational
system, in the Arts, as members of Municipal
and National legislative bodies, and so forth.
I agree with Mr. Lafitte that we should

T5

“strive for a social order in which social
promotion depends on ability and social
prestige attaches to social service.’’ But for
this we want to look surely to a quickening
of intellectual and spiritual forces rather
than putting our trust in mere mechanical
changes in our economic structure.

The other premise is based on “ striving ”’
and “‘ competition.’”’ But can a democratic
economic order remove such elementary
human instincts? They can be to some.
extent eliminated in static caste or feudal
order, but surely we do not want to move in
such directions. Our object should be not
to destroy “ striving’ and “ competition ”’

-but to see that it drives human endeavour in

the right direction and that it does not
encourage people to remain among the
“ unencumbered.”

* * *

Turning to the other side of the picture
and considering the influence of demographic trends on the economic situation,
which is the main theme of the first article,
there is much truth in the statement that
“ the cessation of economic growth is bringing to a head all those economic problems
the solution of which was easier, but less
urgent and evident, in the period when
population was still steadily expanding.”

Structural unemployment has always been
a problem and a declining population emphasizes it. “‘ A shift in demand, when population is declining, may involve actual contraction of the total output of the industry
concerned, which would involve physical
transfer of capital and labour to new employments, with unemployment in the interim ; whereas in a period of population
expansion a fall in demand for capital and
labour of a specific type (e.g. horse transport)
might more commonly be met simply | by
ceasing to expand production of that type.”

It would be foolish to ignore the defects
and frictions inherent in the present economic system and to pretend that a cessation of population growth was their cause.
But surely one can disagree with this view
and at the same time recognize that cessa-tion of population growth removes a useful
economic lubricant, and that a period of
16 ’

decline goes further, actually introducing
new economic difficulties. Mr. Lafitte seems
to suggest there is something perverse in
associating a falling birth rate with future
industrial and other problems ; this attitude
is really unjustified however if we keep all
the factors in their proper perspective.

In the section ‘‘ Capital Outlay and Economic Progress,” the finance of our economic
system is surveyed. It is laid down that “ The

accumulation of capitalitself tends ultimately

to diminish the ‘ marginal efficiency’ of
capital.” This has hitherto, however, been
held in check by counteracting forces, which
by expanding the demand for it have maintained its marginal efficiency. These forces
were :

(a) technical advance, (b) increase in the
home population, (c) expansion of
foreign trade, (d) the rise in the standard
of living.

It is suggested that ‘‘ prolonged stagnation —

in any one of these forces of expansion would,
if the other factors continue to expand
demand for net additions to capital no
faster than before, have a depressing effect
on capital outlay.”

Each force is then reviewed in turn and
each it is suggested is becoming progressively
less effective. |

The moral presumably is that enthusiastic
supporters of a population policy must not

overlook these other factors which in the 
past have done so much to absorb capital,
and which in the future may be less effective.
This is eminently reasonable, but is there
not a further moral that if (a), (c) and (d) are
declining factors, (0), that of population,
‘tends to become all the more important, and
that from this financial.angle the reactions
of a declining and ageing population are
profound ?

This is a powerful argument in favour of
those who advocate every effort being made
to stabilize our numbers.

Though they are rather minor points and
do not affect the real issue, is the outlook
for (a) and (c) quite so gloomy as Mr.
Lafitte suggests ?

Discussing (a), the statement is made that,

~ employment).

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

“Recent technical trends have been mainly
in the direction of reducing the amount of
capital per unit of output.” It would be
interesting to have a list of industries where
this is the case and to know whether cognizance had been taken of two very relevant
factors ; shortening of working hours, and

_ the increasing use of ancillary services such

as power, heating, refrigeration, lighting,
ventilation, water supplies, effluent disposal,
etc. The shorter hours you work your
plant the larger it has to be for the same
output and thus more capital is required.
The more use that is made of ancillary
services the greater the capital that has to
be invested in them either by the industrialist himself, by public utility concerns, or
by the community.

On (c) it is said, “ It is impossible henceforth to count on overseas investment to
stimulate the demand for new capital in the
absence of deliberate measures to promote it.”’
But why should it be assumed we are not
prepared to take “‘ deliberate measures ”’ ?
This country has been badly treated in
many of its foreign investments, e.g. South.
American Railways, but the calculations
Lord Kindersley produced from time to time
before the war showed that things in the
aggregate were not quite as bad as one was
sometimes inclined to think. Though new
directions and methods for overseas investments need to be worked out, it would be
unduly pessimistic to assume they will not be
resumed after the war. In some directions,

such as our Colonial Empire, they are likely

not only to be resumed but amplified ; the
Colonial Office with the assistance of the
London School of Economics is examining
the position actually at this moment.
There is also the startling statement
attributed to Colin Clark that “of the
remarkable gains in productivity which have
been made since 1913, nearly the whole has
been lost’”’ (in the form of increased un
cs * *

Those who urge a stabilized population and
point out the burdens of an ageing population are taken to task in a section headed
“ Public Finance.” Harrod is quoted as
POPULATION CHANGES AND ECONOMICS

follows: “In the coming decade we shall
have a rapidly ageing population and the
maintenance of the older members will be
an increasing burden on those actively
employed.”’ For this view it is suggested he
is an unjustified pessimist by two arguments
that are not convincing.

The first is a table showing the probable
cost of Old Age Pensions, Widows and
Orphans, and War Pensions up to 1965-66.
The aggregate shows a very moderate ins
crease, but this is entirely owing to War
Pension costs dropping from {£40 million per
annum to {10 million. Bringing War Pensions into the calculation is to introduce a
completely irrelevant factor into a discussion
on whether an N.R.R. under tnity is going
to increase the cost of dependency, or not.
Further, the present war may completely
alter the War Pensions calculation.

The second argument suggests that increasing dependency costs can be ignored as
the rising number of elderly people who will
die will increase and thus Death Duties will
rise from £80 million 1935-9 to £105 million
1960-64. This surely is to confuse two quite
different considerations. The Old Age Pension figures reflect an increase in the number
of non-producing dependents. The Death
Duty figures are merely the trend of one
method out of many by which the Inland
Revenue decide how the community shall

~

be assessed. They do not reflect any increase ,

in the country’s earning power, wealth or
taxable capacity. It is no good, for example,
congratulating ourselves that the Death
Duty returns are rising 1f the Income Tax
returns are falling. Death Duties are merely
a convenient device for taxing capital; in
fact a convenient form of capital levy.

The trend of existing taxes as a whole may |

be a method of calculating the future
national income, one single tax device
certainly is not.

* * *

The statement, “ there is little justification
for gloomy talk about the increasing financial
burden of old people,” is hardly supported
‘by the figures.

The position is, in fact, worse than that
presented even by the quotation from Harrod.

17

While population is increasing the burden of.
the aged is automatically lower than that
carried by a stationary or falling population.
Conversely, the children are a heavier charge
en a rising than on a falling or stationary
population.

If we allow an N.R.R. of under unity to
continue for some time and then try to bring
it up to unity, we are going to carry a heavier
burden of dependency at both ends of the
scale. Untila stable age structure} is achieved
the generation which tries to arrest a declining population will have to carry the double
charge.

Once more an argument for striving at
once for an N.R.R. of unity and a stabilized
population as soon as we can manage it.

* ae *

Mr. Lafitte summarizes his main thesis by
saying, “I have endeavoured to show that
many of the economic arguments currently
put forward as grounds for stimulating the
birth rate. are ill-conceived, and that others
are really arguments for dealing with our
economic lack-of-system.”

Printing ‘‘ economic ’’ in italics is presumably to emphasize the fact that there are
other arguments for stimulating the birth
rate as, for instance, political and psychological ones. But should these be excluded
from the discussion and it be assumed that
they have no economic significance ?

The high standard of living in this country
is dependent on our position as a great centre
of international trade and finance, and the
focal point of the British Commonwealth. As
a first-class political power in the world we
can retain that position. If we were ever to
decline from being a first-class power, as
seems to be the destiny of France, then an
adverse reaction on our standard of living
appears inevitable.

Whatever the direct economic effects of a
declining population may be, they are not in

_ fact so fundamentally important as the in
direct effects brought about by such a

political change as this.

a * * ;
The psychological aspect is difficult to
analyze; it has its industrial and. social
reactions.
18 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Most thriving British enterprises look to
an expanding market, to higher sales, larger
premises, and development generally. Such
expectations are mainly based on creating
new “ lines ”’ and securing a fair share of an
increasing number of potential customers.

It is a platitude in business that ‘ You.

can’t stand still.’’ What is going to be the
effect of having to look toa declining number
of customers on the home market ?
the war we had the spectacle of some of our
export industries steadily losing ground. It
is readily understandable that these were
hardly happy hunting grounds for our men
of enterprise or those who were seeking to
develop new markets.

Since we became involved in war we have
had the experiences of curtailed supplies, reduced civil production, the inevitable prospect

SCIENTIFIC

Before °

of diminishing trade. No one, provided the
war effort is accelerated, complains of these
things, but the psychological effect of being
** concentrated,’ or in other words, of working for a diminishing market, is hardly
exhilarating.

A falling population would presumably
have similar if less pronounced results. Is
this a case of showing up inherent but unnecessary defects in our economic structure ?
Rather it is introducing a depressing element
into any form of industrial and commercial
or financial system, which we should strive
our utmost to avoid.

In conclusion, therefore, provided we do
not ignore the other factors involved, there
seems to be every justification in using economic arguments in support of a policy of
population stability.

BOOKS

in MEDICAL, CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL and PHYSICAL SCIENCE
supplied from stock, or obtained promptly to order.
FOREIGN BOOKS not in stock obtained under Licence.

A visit to this Department is respectfully suzzested.
Please write for LISTS, mentioning interests

H..K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd.,

Phone: EUSton 4282 (5 lines)

 

136 GOWER STREET
LONDON W.C.1

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXIV, No. 1.
