THE EUGENICS REVIEW

It is a typically Anglican report, valuable for
its endeavour to understand and do justice to
both sides, and for its attempt to reconcile them
in a practical, moral, and humane solution of
this pressing problem of the termination of
pregnancy. Both the extremes, of uncontrolled
liberty and of absolute prohibition, are rejected,
and an ethical mean is established which pays
regard to the rights of the foetus, the health
of the mother, and the good of society. While
relying no longer upon traditional beliefs about
the point at which the “soul”? was thought to
animate the body, the committee is firm in its
recognition of the moral significance of the
foetus as potentially a human life which should
be destroyed only for the weightiest reasons.
Its “‘broad conclusion” is that “in certain
circumstances abortion can be justified”—that
is, if it could be “reasonably established that
there was a threat to the mother’s life or wellbeing, and hence inescapably to her health”—
the existence of such a threat being decided by
the doctor: concerned, in full consultation with
those competent to advise him upon the different

professional and personal issues involved. In
particular, such consultation would be important
in cases of rape or incest, or where there seemed
to be a risk of a defective or deformed child
being born; always the decision taken should
be grounded upon the “prognosis concerning
the mother as affected by the pregnancy in
question’’—and in this connection it would be
wrong to take insufficient account of the
capacity of persons to respond to the challenge
of difficult circumstances. Suggested amendments to Lord Silkin’s Bill indicate the means
by which reform could most satisfactorily be
attained, though the Report stresses the importance of supplementing legal reform by education.

Should a second edition of the Report be
called for (and it is to be hoped that it will be)
consideration might be given to the claim that
emotional stress during pregnancy may adversely
affect the unborn child (pp. 37 and 46); many
experts in the field involved would not accept
such a claim on the basis of the authorities
cited.

SHERWIN BAILEY

OTHER NOTICES

Barish, Natalie. The Gene Concept. London,
1966. Chapman and Hall. Pp. xi+116. Price
10s. 6d. Paperback.

THIS LITTLE PAPERBACK is one of the
‘Selected Topics in Modern Biology” series.
The series editor, Peter Gray, describes it as a
‘background book’”’ designed to help the young
student in his introductory biology course.
Naturally, the author (of Chatham College,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania) starts off with a
chapter on “‘Mendel and his famous peas” and
carries the reader along with her in her enthusiasm for all the “intriguing”? and “exciting”
discoveries which have been made since then.
There are plenty of good, clear diagrams—a
few of them reproduced from the classics of
genetic writing—a very full glossary and a good

168

index. Altogether the book is a “‘must” for the
student who has not got a clue—he will soon
have one.

K. H.

Delevoryas, Theodore. Plant Diversification.
Modern Biology Series. New York and London,
1966. Holt Rinehart and Winston. Pp. vii+145.
Price 18s. Paperback.

THIS LITTLE BOOK is an introduction to the
study of plants. It is written from a new point
of view in which fossils and classification,
breeding systems and physiology are all brought
in to play. The illustrations, both diagrams and
photographs, are a pleasure to see.

Cc. D. D.
