~ LINKAGE IN HUMAN GENETICS’
By J. H. RENWICK, M.B., Ch.B., M.R.C.P.

Galton Laboratory, University College, London

‘Vy T has been known since the early years of
[e century that the chance of inheriting

one characteristic is not always independent of the chance of inheriting another
one from the same parent. This was a fundamental discovery and gave rise to the concept
of inheritance of blocks of genes later found
to correspond to segments of the microscopically visible chromosomes in the cell nucleus.
It was shown that, in both animals and
plants, the genes were arranged in a linear
order on the chromosome, that order being,
in the main, constant for any species, and
sometimes showing remarkable similarities
even from one species to another. The position of a gene on a chromosome is called its
locus.

Chromosome Maps

Maps showing the relative positions of
genes on the chromosomes have been made
for several animals and plants and, in the
study of the fundamental genetics of these
organisms, such maps have been of value in
numerous and often unexpected ways.

With their help, it has become possible in
Drosophila in a few cases to pinpoint a
specific gene as being in a specific band of a
chromosome as seen under the microscope.
Unfortunately the technique of making good
preparations’ of human chromosomes, so
that they can be seen clearly under the microscope, is not yet very satisfactory but we do
know that the chromosomes are of differing
lengths and staining properties and that
there are two of every type of chromosome.
Every gene on one chromosome has a
corresponding but often not identical gene
on its partner chromosome and all: such
gene variants or alleles at the same locus
are thought usually to resemble one another

* A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on March 21st, 1956.

149

in the biochemical processes which they control and therefore to resemble one another in
the type of visible product or “‘ phenotype ”’
of the individual.

There is little doubt that when a number
of such gene loci have been charted on linkag®é maps in man, these maps will prove to be
just as useful as research tools as they have
been in other organisms.

Linkage of the A.B.O. Locus and
that for the Nail-Patella Syndrome
The pedigree in Figure 1 illustrates the

linkage recently demonstrated between the

ABO locus and that for the nail-patella

syndrome. In the large sibship, eleven

 
   

OAA AAA

FAMILY E

Figure 1.—Pedigree of nail-patella syndrome showing
ABO phenotypes, to illustrate the linkage between the
ABO and nail-patella loci.

individuals were blood-grouped and it is

seen that all those who have inherited the

A, gene from the father are normal, whereas
those who have inherited the B gene have
also inherited the defective nails, small
patellz, and dislocated elbows characteristic
of the nail-patella syndrome.

It appears then that the father had, on one

‘of his forty-six chromosomes, a B blood

group gene at one locus and a nail-patella
gene at a neighbouring locus. On the partner
chromosome, he must have had an A, gene
at the ABO locus: and, because the nailpatella gene (Np) is so rare, we can be sure

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October, 1956. 48, 3.
150

that he must have had a normal gene (np)
opposite the nail-patella gene. One of his

chromosome pairs. must therefore be as_

B Np
| |

follows: Each child has

A, np
inherited either one or the other chromosome unchanged.

Figure 2 shows a similar pedigree except
that, in this family, the nail-patella gene
appears to be usually on the same chromosome as the O gene. The syndrome has, in

FAMILY B

 
 

ar
480 ABO A, 0 0 0

AB AO AO AD

Figure 2.—Pedigree of nail-patella syndrome. The
ABO groups are given and in the case of the A,O and
BO genotypes, the presence of the inferred O gene has

been recorded for the sake of clarity in five individuals.

fact, nothing to do with the A, B or O genes
except that the gene causing the syndrome
happens to be carried on the same chromosome. This is, therefore, an entirely different
situation from the association between blood
group A and carcinoma of the stomach, for
example (Aird, Bentall & Roberts 1953).
Returning to linkage, Figure 2 also demonstrates crossing-over. The last child in the
youngest generation has inherited the O
gene but not the nail-patella gene from his
affected parent. During the meiotic division
therefore of one of the cells in the mother’s
ovary, the two members of this particular
chromosome pair must have interchanged
segments and the point of interchange must
have occurred somewhere between the ABO
locus and the nail-patella locus. From
simple mechanical considerations it is easy
to see that on the whole, the nearer the loci

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

are together, the less frequently will the
point of interchange lie between them.
Hence, the frequency of recombination of the
genes gives a rough measure of their distance
apart.

In the family shown in Figure 1 there was
probably no crossing-over, but in several
others there has been a varying amount,
which raises the question of homogeneity.
Are all these families carrying an abnormal
gene at the same locus or is there another
locus not near the ABO locus controlling a
similar—in fact, indistinguishable—syndrome?

Figure 3 shows the counts of recombinants
in the different families as estimated by an
iteration method of Dr. C. A. B. Smith’s.
The estimated recombination fraction

Counts. of | recombinants by

NON- OBSERVED
RECOMBINANTS | RECOMBINANTS | TOTAL REC. FRACT. 7

family

   
   

Fane [ie [a [ans [ns

Figure 3.—Counts of recombinants respecting the
ABO and nail-patella linkage. No evidence of heterogeneity between families (see text). + Family G from
Jameson ef al. (1956).

(which would be the same as the cross-over
frequency but for multiple crossing-over)
ranges from practically zero in family E up
to 28 per cent in the smaller family C. The
heterogeneity y? appropriate to this iteration
method demonstrates that the variations
could well be due to chance (y?=—10-3 for
6 df., -1 < P <:2) so these linkage data
show us that we have no need at present to
question the singularity of the nail-patella
locus.

As another illustration of the sort of way
_ LINKAGE IN. HUMAN GENETICS

in which fiche information may contribute 7

to our knowledge of-genetical processes, we
can consider the way in which the degree of
severity is controlled in the nail-patella
syndrome.

When the nail defect in over 100 cases was
scored according to the number of nails
affected and the severity in each, there was
a striking similarity between sibs (correlation
coefficient of. 0-46 on forty-three sib pairs)
but no correlation between the severity in
the parent and that in the child (correlation
0:03 + 0-13 on fifty-seven pairs). In other
words, the severity in the child was apparently independent of whether or not the affected parent was severely or mildly affected.
Similar results were found as regards patellar
size as measured on X-rays.

Modifying Genes at same Locus: A
Hypothesis

Professor Penrose pointed out that these
findings could be explained on the assumption that the degree of severity in any individual depended mainly on a modifying
gene at the same locus as the main gene.
Such a gene would be indistinguishable from
normal in the absence of the main gene.
Figure 4 shows the situation diagrammati
Affected
parent

Normal

NPT INP, Pet +NP5 parent.

Np 77P2 [NP 7MPs MAT TP2 MPT 7MPs

Affected Normal
Figure 4.—Diagram illustrating the hypothesis of
allelism of main gene (Np) and modifying genes

(np: Dp,: nps) in the nail-patella syndrome.
cally. All the modifiers, np,, np, and nps,
have been depicted as different from one

I5I.

another and we do not in fact know how
many alternative variants there are. On
the allelic modifier hypothesis, an affected
individual, in handing on the main gene to
an affected child, would be automatically
excluded from transmitting the modifying
allele and there would therefore be no
correlation expected between parent and
child in the degree of severity of the syndrome. Similarly, since the normal parent
would carry two of these modifying genes
each affected child would receive one or the
other, and the expected correlation between
affected sibs can be shown to be 0-5, as was
observed.

This hypothesis of modifying genes at the
main locus could theoretically be tested
using our knowledge that the main nailpatella locus is closely linked with the ABO

 

ABO genotypes AB BO

Gene from normal A\gene Oggene

parent
7-6 19

Figure 5.—Example of use of linkage to test allelism
of main and modifying genes in the nail-patella
syndrome.

Nail score

locus. We should, in fact, be able to observe
linkage between the modifiers and the
ABO locus. So far the data on such a rare
condition are quite insufficient but Figure 5,
showing some actual observations, gives an
idea of the sort of family one would expect
if the hypothesis were true. »*

In this family, it appears that the normal
parent has two different modifying genes:
One of them has been transmitted to one
affected child (intensifying the nail defect)
and the other has been transmitted to the
152

other child (alleviating the severity of the ~

syndrome). At the same time each child
has received a different blood group gene
from the normal parent, as would be expected on the hypothesis of linkage between the
modifier locus and the ABO locus. It will
take a long time before we can accumulate
sufficient data like these to strengthen or
discountenance the allelic modifier hypothesis, but this is the sort of unexpected way
in which linkage information could be useful.

It has often been claimed that there might
in the future be opportunities to use linkage
more directly in the field of medicine, and it
is actually possible that some pathological
gene with late manifestation could be traced
through a family and prediction could be
made with the help of a normal “ visible ”’
gene carried very close to it on the same
chromosome. It is however unlikely that
circumstances would permit such a_ use
except on very rare occasions.

Other Linkages

As regards other linkages there are not
many that one can accept with any great
confidence. Of course all the sex-linked
genes are necessarily on the same chromosome, the X-chromosome. In the case of
hemophilia and colour blindness we know
that the loci are close to each other on the
X-chromosome, with an approximately ten
per cent recombination frequency as estimated by Haldane and Smith (1947). The locus

 

Key
GW mate, cliiptocytosis.
on male unaffected

@ temole. eliiptocytosis.

 

Q female, unaffected,

Figure 6.—Pedigree showing linkage between the
loci for elliptocytosis and for the Rhesus complex.
(After Goodall, Hendry, Lawler and Stephens, 1953).

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

for pseudo-hypertrophic muscular dystrophy
of young boys is probably slightly further
away from the colour blindness locus but
whether it is on the same side of it as the
hemophilia locus or on the opposite side
is not known. Walton, Race and Philip
(1955) have recently been responsible for
our information on this linkage distance.
To return to the other (autosomal) chromosomes, Figure 6 illustrates the linkage
between the elliptocytesis locus and the
Rhesus, or Rh, blood group locus. Ellipto
-cytosis produces elliptical red cells instead of

round ones and in this particular family, the
gene is coupled with the R, or cDE gene
complex. This linkage, which was demonstrated by Dr. Lawler and her various
collaborators, has a very high level of
significance.

Next, Mohr (1954) has shown convincingly
that the Lutheran locus is definitely linked
with some locus that has an influence on the
Lewis blood groups and further work should
soon define this locus more precisely. Some
other linkages have been described but
these are on less firm ground at the
moment.

Looking now to the future, the most
valuable contribution to speed up the slow
rate of discovery of new linkages would be
the indentification of new “ marker ’”’ loci
such as further blood group loci at which.
gene differences are common in the normal
population. At present there are several
blood group loci available and one could also
use the locus controlling ability to taste
phenylthiourea, or PTC, and probably the
recently described locus controlling the serum.
proteins as found by Smithies (1955) in
Canada. In many foreign countries one also
has the loci of the abnormal hemoglobins,

but, so far, no hemoglobin variants have

been found which occur commonly in this
country. We need to discover more normal
or near-normal characters of this type.

An average human chromosome probably
bears along its length a few thousand genes,
so it is clear that the very few linkages so
far established are only the prelude to the
enormous mass of work which has still to be
undertaken.
-LINKAGE IN HUMAN GENETICS 
REFERENCES

Aird, R. B., Bentall, H. H. and Roberts, J. A. F.
(1953), A relationship between cancer of stomach
and ABO blood groups. Brit. Med. J., 1, 799.

Goodall, H. B., Hendry, D. W. W., Lawler, S. D. and

Stevens, S. A. (1953), Data on linkage in man:

_ elliptocytosis and blood groups. II, Family 3
Ann. Eugen., Lond., 17, 272.

Haldane, J. B. S. and Smith, C. A. B. (1947), A new
estimate for the linkage between the genes for
colour blindness and hemophilia in man. Ann.
Eugen., Lond., 14, 10.

153

Jameson, R. J., Lawler, S$. D, and Renwick, J. H.
(1956), Nail-patella syndrome: clinical and linkage
data on family G. Ann. hum. Genet., Lond., 20,
348.

Mohr, J. (1954), A Study of Linkage in Man. Copenhagen:
E. Munksgaard.

Renwick, J. H. and Lawler, S. D. (1955), Genetical
linkage between the ABO and nail-patella loci.
Ann. hum. Genet., Lond., 19, 312.

Smithies, O. (1955), Grouped variations in the occurrence of new serum protein components in normal
human serum. Nature, 175, 307.

Walton, J. N., Race, R. R. and Philip, U. (1955), On
the inheritance of muscular dystrophy. Amn.
hum. Genet., Lond., 20, 1.

THE ECONOMIC JOURNAL

The Quarterly Journal of the Royal Economic Soctety

No. 263
I. ARTICLES

COMPETITION IN TRANSPORT AS AN INSTRUMENT OF POLICY

SEPTEMBER 1956

Vol. LXVI

G. WALKER

MEASURABLE UTILITY AND PROBABILITY: A SIMPLIFIED RENDERING

“WAGE POLICY AND A LABOUR STANDARD

S. A. OZGA
J. H. RIcHARDSON

INPUT-OUTPUT ANALYSIS: AN APPLICATION

INNOVATIONS AND EQUILIBRIUM GROWTH
THE REGIONAL LOCATION OF INDUSTRY
KEYNES AND SUPPLY FUNCTIONS: A NOTE

A FURTHER COMMENT
THIRD REJOINDER

Il. REVIEWS

III. NOTES AND MEMORANDA

A. A. ADAMS AND J. G. STEWART
H. J. BRuToN

R. J. NICHOLSON

Sir R. HAWTREY

Sir D. ROBERTSON

F. J. DE Jone

IV. RECENT PERIODICALS AND NEW BOOKS
MACMILLAN & CO., LTD., LONDON, W.C.2

 

| “ Application for Fellowship to
ROYAL ECONOMIC SOCIETY, 21 Bentinck Street, London, W.1

Annual Subscription £1 Ios.

Single Copy Ten Shillings

 
