PSYCHOLOGICAL SYNDROMES IN
CENTRAL NERVOUS DISEASE

A Genetic Interpretation *

By AUBREY J. LEWIS, Mp. MR.c..

is based on the study of syndromes

commonly regarded as endogenous or
“ functional,’’ but here occurring in relation
to organic changes in the central nervous
system. The cases I have investigated include cerebral tumour, arteriosclerosis, encephalitis lethargica, chorea, disseminated
sclerosis, G.P.I. (untreated or treated),
pernicious anemia, myxcedema, and septicemia. They showed, in characteristic form,
acute mania, self-reproachful depression,
paranoid schizophrenia, severe obsessional
disturbances and hysterical dissociation
(the last so typical in one case, that an
eminent author has written a whole book
about it alone, solely from the point of view
of the hysterical production of multiple personalities—he was unaware of the concomitant organic illness). Various writers
have reported similar cases in other gross
structural, toxic or nutritional diseases of the
central nervous system. In the explanation
of such cases, two main views have been put
forward :

1. That the site and nature of the lesion,
in the central nervous system or more widely
distributed, have been responsible for the
phenomena, which are specific for this lesion,
rather than for this individual. The hysterical phenomena that may follow carbon
monoxide poisoning, and the obsessional
symptoms following encephalitis lethargica
have been accounted for thus. Specht first
gave this view prominence; it has been
developed especially in relation to lesions of
the basal ganglia since.

2. The other explanation, which is more

, ‘HE investigation here briefly reported

* A paper read at the International Neurological
Congress, held in London from July 29th to August 2nd.

213

widely adduced, and of which Bostroem is
perhaps the chief exponent, assumes in the
patient a specific predisposition to one of the
varieties of mental disorder, which is “‘ released ’’ by the damage to the central nervous
system. There are subsidiary forms of this
explanation—e.g. that the endogenous syndrome is a reaction to the changed conditions
produced by the tissue damage (whether
evidenced mainly in physical or mental
form); but these too lean upon the
specificity of the patient’s Anlage.

Neither of the two main views, valid
though they are, covers all the phenomena.
Evidence of specific predisposition prior to
the illness may be completely lacking, say, in
an encephalitic who has now a gross obsessional syndrome : and, on the other hand, no
such disturbance of function, as, for example,
an acute mania presents, can at present be
accounted for etiologically in terms of
structural or humoral pathology. But the
appropriateness and complementary nature
of both views may be conceded, if their
incompleteness and assumptions are recognized.

THE BEARING OF RESEARCH IN
GENETICS

A view profitable for further study may be
derived, I think, from genetic biology. The
conception of rigid Mendelian characters,
transmitted by particular genes and either
dominant or recessive, has been modified in
the light of later research. I refer to such
studies as those on Gammarus, Ephestia,
and of course, Drosophila. The notion of
specific fixed predispositions to particular
mental disorders must be revised likewise.
It is now known in genetics that the fruit fly,
on which our whole theory of the gene has
214

been based, has only a minority of constantly manifesting or ‘‘ good’’ genes; in the
majority a number of influences, quite apart
from those producing mutations, determine
in what form, and at what stage of development, the gene-manifestation shall occur, if
at all. The genotypic milieu is itself significant in this direction, as is also the cytoplasm.

But more important than these for the
particular problem we are considering are the
environmental factors which can be demonstrated to affect the kind and the intensity of
manifestation. Temperature and nutrition
have been most investigated in this regard.
Such findings concerning the gene have, of
course, so far been shown only in a few
creatures remote from man, especially Drosophila, but then our whole gene theory of
heredity is based on such studies. Moreover,
the findings are in accordance with developmental physiology, by which their significance is amplified. There, many studies
have shown that it is upon successive
developmental reactions to the environmental
conditions that the manifestation of hereditarily laid-down structures and functions

depends. Constitution is thus a product of

environment acting during development, not
solely a hereditarily predetermined concrete
bodying-forth of the genotype. The role of
chemical and physical changes has been
worked out in many instances ; nutritional,
thermal, toxic, and electrical influences have
been studied. And these environmental
factors can modify the effects of rate-determining genes, too, as in the eye-colour of
Gammarus.

The importance of this for the psychoses is
suggested. The changes going on in the rest
of the organism are themselves additional
conditions affecting the time and manner of
manifestation of a particular hereditary
tendency: the endocrines furnish a most
striking instance of this. In general it may
be said that, for any given hereditary
tendency, certain conditions must be satisfied before it can become manifest: these
conditions are partly environmental, and
partly within the organism, though in that
case dependent on other genes and other

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

environmental factors than those for the
special tendency in question. Moreover, this
is true, not only for morbid tendencies or for
individual tendencies in general, but also for
those to be found in differing degrees of
intensity in all human beings. It does not
therefore exclude from genetic consideration
predispositions, such as the hysterical, that
are in some degree present in all of us.

TECHNIQUE OF INVESTIGATION

To investigate the environmental conditions for the manifestation of inherent
characters in the human being is obviously a
vast enterprise. But there are limited fields
favourable for such inquiry and in which it
may be of more immediate value. The concurrence of an endogenous syndrome with
a restricted somatic anomaly, especially one
affecting the central nervous system, is just
such a special field. Whereas in psychiatry
generally the study of environmental determinants is enormously difficult because of the
variety of influences conceivably at work,
here we have a special instance where at least
one of the possible determinants of manifestation can be fixed.

Where, as in two of my cases, a severe
paraphrenic condition present for years in a
myxoedematous woman clears up when she
is given sufficient thyroid, and reappears
when she ceases to take her tablets, a precise
statement can be made as to an environmental condition which when satisfied permits a disposition to become manifest. It is
permissible here to speak as though a disposition were in this case certain, since
nothing can be realized but what was hitherto
potential ; thus even though the predisposition had not been suggested by like disorders
in antecedents or collaterals, or by milder
manifestation as an anomaly of personality
in the patient, it must have been lying
available.

So much study in the heredity of mental
disorder has been directed at a “ yes”’ or
“no ’’ problem, as though the universally
present predispositions, which made the
response to any particular environmental
change the same in all persons, could therefore be ignored or even denied existence,
PSYCHOLOGICAL SYNDROMES IN CENTRAL NERVOUS DISEASE 215

while the hereditary characters with strong
intensity of manifestation—Penetranz as
Timoféef calls it—were assumed to be
independent of environmental influence.

I think that here one has a method of
investigation which is in a small way the
counterpart of the twin method. If, in the
twin, one has hereditary equipment and
morbid manifestation controlled, with environmental influence as the variable, here
one has the environmental determinant and
the morbid manifestation as the known
features. Of course the environmental determinant, whether it be, say, an encephalitis or
an intoxication or an endocrine disturbance,
may be only one of several possible determinants, or the last of a series of such
environmental conditions, essential during
development (or, later, in the more stable
phase) if the morbid predisposition is to be
exhibited. But it is the final and indispensable one, and in it the interplay between a
latent capacity on the one hand, and a direct
intervention and change of milieu on the
other, can be examined.

This is the point at which very profitable
study can be made as to the somatopsychic
relations ;, one sees the realization of what
has been hitherto only a functional potentiality, its liberation by means of a noxa,
which can in some instances be applied and
the result predicted with experimental certitude.

A WORKING HYPOTHESIS

My own series of cases is necessarily small.
I can therefore present no conclusions.
Tentatively, it seems that the specificity of
the environmental requirement can be greater

a

than one would have expected. The monozygotic fellow-twins, for example, of two of
my cases in this series—both encephalitics
—showed no indications, either in the personality or in the response to infections, of
such predispositions as had become manifest
in the affected twin in the form of, respectively, schizophrenia and severe obsessional
disorder. Nor have I found that the preceding personality has, in even a majority
of my cases, shown any of the familiar
characteristics regarded as indicating an
incompletely manifest predisposition, though
in the antecedents evidence of this was
forthcoming. There are others in whom such
characteristics or actually a similar previous
attack had occurred, so that apparently the
range of conditions necessary for manifestation was wider than in the other group,
or perhaps lay less directly in the somatic
sphere.

But it is only in the most tentative way
that one can report impressions gained from
small material. If such cases could be
collected and published systematically, as
disorders in twins now are, valuable data
would accumulate. And the emphasis would
properly lie on the conditions, single or serial,
which were essential for the manifestation
of individual or universal predispositions. I
have not mentioned, for reasons of time, any
distinction between the intra- and extraorganismal environment, or the accompaniment of the endogenous syndrome by
exogenous features, or the changes that are
more than only cerebral, e.g. in nutritional
disorders. I have left out these and other
relevant points, but they would not, I think,
when considered in detail, be found to conflict
with the general view I have put forward.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVII, No. 8.
