THE CONTROL OF POPULATION"
By C. P. BLACKER

for adjusting population to available
food supplies—can be seen in several
contexts. It appears as a British problem,
as a Commonwealth problem and as a world
problem.
Let us first consider how populations grow.
A demographic cycle has been described
with four phases or stages. The demarcations are not exact and the course
through them is variable. They can be
described as the high stationary, the early
expanding, the late expanding and the low
stationary phases. To these we could add a
fifth or declining phase. The high stationary
phase, of which China is a large-scale example,
is characterized by high birth-rates—generally around or above 40 per thousand—and
high death-rates, which balance the birthrates. The high stationary phase characterizes peoples living near the subsistence level,
who have gained but little’ control over
natural forces and fall easy victims of
their vicissitudes. In good years, when
crops are plentiful and when livestock
prospers, death-rates fall and population
increases. But in response to such catastrophes as droughts, pestilences or floods, the
gains are lost through numerous deaths. A
widely fluctuating death-rate, opposing a
continuously high fertility, mainly determines the size of the population, which varies
from year to year. Countries perhaps to be
counted in the high stationary phase are
Afghanistan, Persia, Arabia and Ethiopia.
So are many native peoples of Africa,
Indonesia and South America.
The second or early expanding stage is
characterized by birth-rates of the high
stationary level, and by lower, often falling,

| need for controlling population—

* Extract of a lecture given at the fourth annual
conference of the Rationalist Press Association, at
Magdalen College, Oxford, on August 9th, 1949. Dr.
Blacker made it clear that he spoke for himself only.
His remarks in no way committed any of the organizations with which he was connected.

death-rates. The difference between the two
rates, migration being ignored, is the measure
of the natural increase. The fall in deathrates is brought about by improved nutrition
and better medical services. All the countries
of South-east Asia except China (which is in
the high stationary phase) and Japan (which
is in the late expanding phase) are, or were till
recently, in this stage. The population of
the sub-continent of India, which is in the
early expanding stage, probably increased
by 50 million in the decade 1931-41 ; the
Health Survey and Development Committee
of India, reporting in 1946, regarded it as
possible that the population of India might,
in response to improved conditions, increase
by as much as 80 million in a decade.

The third or late expanding stage is
characterized by declining birth- and deathrates, the death-rates being consistently
lower than the birth-rates, thus yielding
annual increases of population. The U.S.S.R.
is the largest and most important country
included in this group. The birth-rate had
fallen, in 1934 and 1935, to 30-1 and the
death-rate to about 20. Since that date the
birth-rate has gone up and the death-rate
down, thus accelerating the annual rate of
increase. Japan is another country in the
late expanding stage.

The fourth or low stationary phase is
characterized by low birth- and death-rates
which, though not necessarily balancing each
other exactly, so interact that the population
about replaces itself. In this stage are most
of the “ Western ’”’ countries, despite the
fact that many have registered post-war
increases.

To these four stages we can if we like add a
fifth, a declining phase. Between 1936 and
1943 the population of France (migration
apart) was declining, deaths being more
numerous than births.

Let us now turn from a consideration of
stages of the demographic cycle to the

149
150

position of this country as found by the
Royal Commission on Population whose
report was published in June (1949). The
report consists of three main parts. The
first analyses the present trends of the
country’s population. The second assesses the
implications of these trends from the standpoints of balance of payments, age balance,
migration and Great Britain’s status in the
British Commonwealth ; the result of this
assessment 1s expressed in the following
words : “ We have no hesitation in concluding
that a replacement size of family 1s desirable in
Great Britain at the present time.’ The third
part advances recommendation as to how
this replacement size could, in practice, be
achieved. Various social measures are advocated which are simultaneously designed to
make parenthood voluntary, eliminating the
misconceived and unwanted child, and to
induce parents to replace their generation
by producing a sufficiency of wanted children. The Commission introduces a new
measure of replacement which they think is
to-day more meaningful than the net reproduction rate, namely the size of the family,
by which they mean the average number of
live births to a marriage of completed fertility. The average post-war size of the family
is 2:2 children. To effect replacement a size
of 2-4 is needed, an increase of 6 per cent.
The social measures recommended in Part III
of the report are therefore suggestions for
controlling the population, in this case by
increasing births by about 6 per cent.

The Commission recognizes the unique
position held by Great Britain in respect of
its population needs. The fact that this
country entered earlier than other countries
into the industrial revolution enabled us, by
selling our manufactured products, to import
increasing quantities of food. Our population
thus began to increase earlier than that of
other countries, and this numerical increase
led, in its turn, to the process which Woodrow Wilson described as ‘“‘ the swarming of
the English.”” Rich but sparsely populated
countries in the New World and in the
southern hemisphere were colonized by us.
Immense new resources of food were opened
up, of which we took advantage. As the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

population of Great Britain thrived and
multiplied it came to rely increasingly on the
granaries of the New World, much as Rome
and Constantinople waxed by drawing on the
granaries of North Africa. As long as we
remained a rich country with overseas credits
few complained, though many disliked the
spoliation of countryside and coasts. But
when the end of the recent war came we
found our population larger than ever before,
our credits gone and many competitors for
our goods in the world’s markets. It has
been calculated that we are now producing in this country about 4o per cent of
the food which, according to a dietetic
standard lower than that which prevailed
before the war, we need to sustain Great
Britain’s population of 48 million. According to the fuller pre-war standard we produce
but 31 per cent of our food requirements.
The Royal Commission clearly sees that the
necessary imports of food may be difficult to
maintain, though they take, on balance, an
optimistic view of the prospect. But their
optimism is not universally shared, and it
may be belied by events. Conditions may
well worsen when aid from America ends orif
markets for our industrial goods close against
us. They may even be transitorily worsened
by a dock strike. Our dense townships
further make us the most vulnerable country
in the world to atomic weapons. A growing
number of people may come to feel that our
basic position would be safer if our population
were reduced to within, say, 5 or 10 per cent
of the number we could comfortably feed
from our own resources.

This sentiment may well be reinforced by
another set of considerations. Our present
standard of living, though defective when
judged by pre-war standards, is incomparably better than that prevailing over much
of the world. Most of the countries in the
high stationary and early expanding phases
of the demographic ‘cycle, though suffering
high death-rates and much hardship from
malnutrition, have been afflicted by these
conditions from time immemorial and accept
them with little protest. Will they go on
doing so ? The social science departments of
India’s future universities will be able to
THE CONTROL OF POPULATION

draw attention to direr needs and more
glaring inequalities than have provided
material for our investigators at home ; nor
will encouragement be lacking from propagandists hostile to this country who proclaim
that the workers of the world have nothing
to lose but their chains. In the councils of
U.N.O. and of the Food and Agriculture
Organization (F.A.O.) voices may be increasingly heard asserting that needs rather
than purchasing power should guide the distribution of the world’s food surpluses. We
can, it seems to me, predict with something
like certainty that we will soon hear this
theme passionately advocated at international food conferences by speakers from
the starving countries ; they will be equipped
with a formidable armament of facts comparing the calories and vitamins in the
dietaries of well-fed with those in ill-fed
countries ; they will be briefed with figures
showing comparative rates of morbidity and
mortality and with other nutritive indices.
By these outcries the populations of the
underfed countries who have hitherto
accepted their fate with apathy will be
roused to a new awareness, and the populations of the well-fed countries will develop
new stirrings of conscience. No consciences
are more delicate in these matters than those
of the British. Thus moral considerations
may reinforce economic necessities in evoking a picture of a Britain whose native food
resources should come nearer to meeting the
needs of its population than they do to-day,
thus reducing the necessity to draw on the
world’s disposable food surpluses.

How could such an aim be realized ? Our
Commonwealth provides for us an answer
which is available to no other country. The
Royal Commission was fully aware of this
possible solution, and has commendably
stressed the unity of the Commonwealth.
It recommends that the problem of the
likely diminution of the British element
in the Commonwealth “should be studied
jointly by the Governments of Great Britain
and the other countries.”” It further hopes
that the Interdepartmental Committee on
Social and Economic Research, which they
would like to see made responsible for

151

population research, “‘ would co-operate with
the authorities in other parts of the Commonwealth and Empire in the study of population problems,” but they go on to say that
“it would be premature to consider the
setting up of a permanent organization
on a Commonwealth and Empire basis,”
at least until the joint study above mentioned
has been carried out.

If I may speak for myself, I would express
the ardent hope that the joint study in question will be promoted as soon as possible,
and that there will emerge from it two
organizations which would be complementary
to one another. The first would be a Commonwealth institute of demographic studies.
This institution would be concerned with
study and not with policy ; it would collect
and co-ordinate information about the
populations of the Commonwealth, and it
would promote special inquiries to remedy
defects in that information. The second
organization which I should like to see formed
would be a Commonwealth office of population. Its function would be to devise and
carry out a policy designed to weld the
Commonwealth into a demographic unity
supplementing the economic and strategic
unities which others are seeking to realize.
The nature of the policies devised and
approved would depend on the interplay of
forces in the countries attracting settlers,
and in the mother country from which
emigrants would disperse. Geographical ties
of a sentimental kind could be established
between certain parts of the mother country
and of the dominions and colonies. We have
a New Hampshire and a New South Wales.
Why not a New Sussex, a New Lincoln, a
New Cumberland ? Centres of population,
peopled from such counties or regions of the
mother country as have natural unity—such,
for example, as produce regiments—could be
established in areas overseas needing development. Information about the new “ counties ’’—there might be several, for more than
one receiving country might have its new
county—could be made available by photographs and exhibits in urban centres and
village halls ; and training schemes, designed
to acquaint the prospective settler with the
152

conditions in which he will live, and to prepare him for the new life, might be devised,
perhaps, on a county or regional basis. If
goodwill were sustained all round, the Commonwealth Office of Population would have
a big task.

The effective working of a scheme of largescale Commonwealth settlement would
present many formidable difficulties. The
families emigrating would need to represent a
cross-section of the population, with its due
proportion of young and old dependants, for
otherwise the mother country would be
depleted of its able-bodied population. The
adjustment of the mother country to a
shrinking population would be fraught with
stresses, some of which might seem now to
be wellnigh insurmountable. To reduce the
population of this country to within Io per
cent of what it could support from its native
food resources would involve a fifty- or
perhaps a hundred-years’ plan, and would
involve a transformation of our status as a
great Power. But such a transformation
has already taken place in relation to
the U.S.A., which, if history had taken a
slightly different course, might to-day be
within the Commonwealth. It might
have taxed the imagination of our forefathers of 150 years ago to visualize America
as the giant of industrial power, numbers and
wealth which now dwarfs us. In another 150
years we may be similarly dwarfed by
Canada and Australia. We need not regret
the change if cultural and historical ties are
preserved and loyalties do not wane. These
islands would play a part in the Commonwealth like that of Jerusalem after the
Diaspora.

These changes may not seem attractive
to all of us ; but they are possibilities which
developments in the world may perhaps
convert into realities and which we should
therefore be ready to meet. My theme, it
will be remembered, is ‘“‘ the control of
population.” I have tried to describe a
method of controlling population (mainly by
migration) which is available uniquely to us
but which, if realized, might be of deep
significance in the world.

I now turn to the second part of my sub
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ject, the control of populations in the countries now struggling in the high stationary
and early expanding phases of the demographic cycle.

For these, migration is no solution. There
is but one solution, the deliberate control of
fertility. But how formidable is the task of
transforming unbending forms of thought
and custom evolved over millennia and
woven into the texture of religion! At first
sight the prospect of imparting, within time
limits which can avert catastrophe, to the
teeming millions of Asia and to African
peoples whose tribal customs and traditions
are disintegrating under the impact of the
white man, a philosophy of life which aspires
to adjusting numbers to resources—this
prospect may seem hopeless. But perhaps
reflection may slightly mitigate our pessimism. For the conditions of the present have
never been matched before. Recognition of
demographic realities is increasingly spreading among enlightened men. I again quote
from the report of the Health Survey and
Development Committee of India, which
consisted of nineteen Indian and seven
British persons, all with high medical and
administrative qualifications. This committee, reporting in 1946, declared :

All of us are agreed that, when childbearing
is likely to result in injury to mother or infant,
there is every justification for the practice of
contraception. In such cases it would be the
responsibility of governments to provide instruction regarding contraception in maternity and
child welfare centres, dispensaries, hospitals and
any other public institutions which administer
medical aid to women.

Since malnutrition which augments the
risks of child-bearing is widespread in India,
where maternal mortality rates are high, this
essentially medical recommendation is capable of wide interpretation. Again, we can
picture the effects of realistic social studies
promoted in universities. New ideas, particularly when disseminated by Government
agencies, can spread quickly. Consider as
an example the experience of the U.S.S.R.,
where, in response (at least in part) to
Government-sponsored facilities for terminating pregnancies, birth-rates fell from 45 per
thousand in 1927 to 30-1 in 1935; and conTHE CONTROL OF POPULATION

sider how, thereafter, in response to a reversal
in Government policy virtually abolishing the
facilities for abortion and offering rewards to
mothers of large families, the birth-rate rose
in four years to over 38 per thousand.

No country in the world has yet made it
an article of Government policy deliberately
to reduce fertility in the national interest.
Who can foretell the results? If a health
service were set up which made it the duty of
those responsible for maternity and child
welfare to give to every woman delivered of
a child information on how to space further
pregnancies there might result an accelerated passage through the late expanding to the low stationary phase of the
demographic cycle. Let us not forget, in this
connection, how rapid was the decline in our
own birth-rate from over 35 per thousand in
1880 to under 15 in the year 1933. This
remarkable movement took place without
official encouragement, and similar changes
have occurred in other countries. We should
remember that the general idea of adjusting
population to food supplies is not essentially
foreign to the human mind; Sir Alexander
Carr-Saunders has shown how efforts in this
direction, taking the form of abortion,
infanticide and primitive methods of contraception, have existed in many communities
from immemorial times. The spread of
birth-control practices began in Britain
among the privileged classes and spread to
others. There are reasons for thinking
that the same thing may be happening
in India to-day. We can perhaps visualize the development in such countries
of peripatetic services similar in kind to the
caravan by means of which Dr. Marie Stopes
provided instruction in birth control to
rural areas. Winwood Reade, whose Martyrdom of Man is well known, speaking of
how the early Egyptians learned to control
the waters of the Nile, wrote: ‘‘ And then
Calamity will come and teach them by torture
to invent.” It may take the calamities of
further pestilences and famines to teach the
rapidly multiplying peoples of densely populated countries not so much to invent as to
imitate—surely an easier task. Under the
impact of Government encouragement and

153

feminist propaganda, and in the presence of
specially provided facilities, what has been
called “the Cake of Custom” may break
up more easily than might seem possible
now.

I will conclude with some general observations. First about France ; the standpoints
of Sweden and France about birth control
and voluntary parenthood afforded a contrast for our Royal Commission, which held
two conferences with French demographers.
The Swedes have for some years taken the
view (which the Royal Commission itself
espouses) that information about birth control should be made universally available,
that pregnancies should be planned and
births wanted. The French, on the other
hand, have been confronted for many years
with the realities of a shrinking population
which they have sought to mitigate by
actively encouraging immigration. They are
able to point to the undeniable fact that no
country, or even any social element or constituent of any country, has been demonstrably able to replace itself solely by means
of planned and wanted pregnancies. French
spokesmen are aware of the humanitarian
character of the birth-control movement, to
which they pay appropriate tributes ; but it
is their view that to universalize at the
present moment the knowledge of contraception might lead to “humanity being extinguished by an excess of humanitarianism.”’
It would be a mistake to regard this standpoint as reflecting exclusively the views of
the Roman Catholic Church ; it springs at
least as much from a purely secular appreciation of recent demographic trends, and of
the position of France, which within living
memory has thrice been ravaged by an
aggressive and populous neighbour. During
the two world wars wherein France has so
bitterly suffered, Sweden stood on the sidelines. It is at least possible that if Sweden
had suffered as France has suffered, her
strong humanitarian spirit would have found
less ready expression in social legislation.
France’s birth-rate has recently recovered
under the stimulus of massive allowances and
other benefits, some of which are described
by the Royal Commission (para. 446).
154

And here a respectful word about the
position of those Churches which oppose
birth control. The standpoint of the
Churches is in a sense more realistic than
that adopted by certain humanists who
believe that human nature is quickly
perfectible and that all the evils which
beset us are traceable to ignorance and
superstition. Deprived of the spur of the
goad and the incentive of the carrot, human
beings easily lapse into self-indulgence,
hedonism and sloth. Most civilized countries
have an element of their upper classes which
is ostentatious, extravagant, pleasure-seeking
and selfish. In a recent booklet on happiness
Dr. R. D. Lawrence has stated that the rich,
spoiled and idle women who have been
among his patients are the most unhappy
people he has come across. Such persons are
frequently much preoccupied with sex, and
their fertility is low. So is the fertility of
the very classes who are economically most
favoured. The enervating effect of luxury and
self-indulgence, culminating finally in an incapacity for military self-defence, is not to be
overlooked. The abuses to which contraception has in the past been put, and to which it
is sometimes put to-day, are seen by some as
a danger which we are not yet morally fitted
to challenge. There may be more in this contention than is generally conceded to-day.
The position of the birth-controller would be
stronger if he could point to any country or
to any social element in any country which,
by the “ constructive ’’ use of birth control,
had eliminated the unplanned pregnancy and
the unwanted child and yet produced enough
children for continuous replacement. I admit
that investigators of human reproduction
have only recently begun to inquire about
which pregnancies were planned and which
children wanted. Further light will doubtless
be thrown on this difficult but important
question by further research. I for one will
feel happier when this achievement is
definitely confirmed.

Life can be said to be a balance between
rights and duties. In some phases of social
development duties are overstressed; in
others, rights. In the inter-war period we
heard much talk about the right to happiness,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a phrase which, as the late Major Leonard
Darwin said, could be used to justify any
form and degree of selfishness. In a noteworthy passage which has been widely
quoted in the Press, the Royal Commission
say (para. 363) :

The cult of childlessness and the vogue of the
one-child family were symptoms of something
profoundly unsatisfactory in the Zetigeist of the
inter-war period, which it may not be entirely
fanciful to connect with the sophistications and
complacencies which contributed to the catastrophe of the second world war.

I will now venture to make a dogmatic
assertion. It is that a generation which
replaces itself by means of wanted children,
employing contraception to that end in the
“constructive ’’ sense stressed by Dr.
Stopes, will have to think of duties before
rights. If we can, in this country, produce such a population the outlook will
be bright. Hitherto sexual impulses have
mainly determined reproduction ; but contraception dissociates parenthood from these
impulses. In the animal world parental
instincts unfold in due course after young
are born in a natural and unconscious
sequence. It has been contended that philoprogenitiveness, or ‘‘ genophilia ”’ (a word invented by Dr. Spencer Paterson to denote a
love of and delight in children), is not
sufficiently strong and consistent an instinct
to guarantee of itself the effective reproduction
of human beings. Contraception thus brings
philoprogenitiveness into a new prominence
as a determinant of human survival.

If, then, replacement proves possible when
contraception is fully used, genophilia will
acquire a novel biological importance ;
and if, as has been contended, altruism
has its source in parental instincts, we may
witness a slow improvement of human
nature. We will at least see an improvement
in the conditions under which children are
reared. The misbegotten and unwanted
child will become the exception, and the
distortions of character traceable to lovelessness and neglect in childhood will become
rarer. On both social and biological grounds
gains would be made; Nature would cooperate with Nurture in raising humanity to
new levels.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLII, No. 3
