SIR JULIAN HUXLEY
M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S.

Population Planning and Quality
of Life’

Population Conference at Geneva in which

Margaret Sanger played a leading role; and
I have remained deeply interested in the problem. Much has happened in the thirty-two years
that have elapsed since then. Public interest in
the problem of population has grown in an
astonishing way. It was then an unpopular
subject, kept alive by a handful of devoted
pioneers: to-day you can hardly open a newspaper, from the august and respectable Times
to the most sensational organ of mass
circulation, without seeing some reference to
population-pressure and even to the onceunmentionable topic of birth-control. Important
nations like India and Japan have embarked
on Official policies aimed at reducing birthrates and a Pope has commended the subject of
mounting population to the consideration of all
good Catholics.

On the other hand, the problem has become
ageravated by an increase of about threequarters of a billion people—much more than
the world total only three centuries ago. In
some quarters there have been set-backs. The
World Health Organization of the U.N., under
pressure from some of its Member States, has
declined to include population as a fit subject
for its concern, in spite of the obvious connection between over-population and health, both
physical and mental. And many Governments
have been deterred from expressing an active
interest in population-control by fear of losing
votes or by pressure from vocal minorities.

However, the most encouraging change is

I: 1927 I ATTENDED the International

* A paper presented to the Sixth International
Conference on Planned Parenthood, New Delhi,
February 1959.

that public opinion all over the globe has
suddenly and dramatically become aware that
population is the most urgent problem now
besetting the human species. Research is being
pursued, action is being taken, and pressure is
mounting for more intensive research and more
effective and more widespread action.

It is especially encouraging that this Conference is being held in the capital of India,
graced by the presence of our great pioneer,
Mrs. Margaret Sanger, and inaugurated with
the active blessing of India’s great Prime
Minister, Mr. Nehru.

The theme of this conference is Family
Planning: Motivation and Methods. 1 shall
speak mainly of the motivations. I would say
that the ultimate motivation for family planning
is to secure an improvement in the quality of
life—to realize more possibilities of fulfilment
for more people; while the immediate motivation is the necessity to secure a reasonable
future for the human species before it is too
late. The latest figures from the Population
Reference Bureau show how urgent the global
human position is. The net increase was 47
million last year, and will be 50 million this
year. By A.D. 2000—well within two generations
—world population will in all probability reach
54 billion, and will quite certainly exceed 5
billion.

The Growth of World Population

It is important to realize the historical background of this process of human increase—the
trends of growth manifested by world population. The number of human beings in existence
has increased inexorably from prehistoric times
to the present. Before the discovery of
agriculture, world population cannot have num
149

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1959, 51, 3.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

bered more than a very few crores.* It must
have reached 100 million a little before the
birth of Christ: in the mid-seventeenth century
(the first date for which we can make a
reasonably accurate estimate) it was about 650
million. The one-billion mark was passed about
the turn of the nineteenth century and the twobillion mark before 1950, to reach a total of
over 23? billion to-day.

Furthermore, not only has the absolute total
steadily increased, but also the rate of increase
itself. Before agriculture, the annual compound
interest rate of increase must have been below
0'l per cent (one-tenth of one per cent). The
rate reached 1 per cent only in the present
century, but is now over 1°5 per cent—and still
rising. This means that, whatever measures we
take, world population will quite certainly go
on increasing absolutely for the next hundred
years.

Thus population has not grown at a uniform
or steady rate, but by a process of acceleration.
Furthermore, the acceleration has become much
more violent in the last hundred years, and
especially during the present century. This has
been due to the progress of medical science,
which has radically reduced the death-rate
especially of children and young people in
under-developed countries, without any comparable reduction in the birth-rate. This
spectacular success of death-control has resulted
in what can only be called a population
explosion, world population having doubled
itself in half a century, and being destined to
redouble itself, whatever action we attempt, in
well under that time in the future.

Population and Quality of Life

This continued and still continuing increase
in the number of people prompts the question,
What are people for? What is the aim of human
life? It cannot be merely increase in quantity.
Nor merely increased production of machines
or gadgets. Nor merely increased comfort and
passive entertainment. Nor merely increased
power and domination, individual or collective.
It surely must be increased quality of life, and

* Crore is the useful Indian word for ten million and
billion the equally useful American word for one
thousand million.

150

its progressive enrichment. More scientifically,
the aim of mankind must be to act as agent for
its own improvement and for the further evolution of our planet, by providing for greater
fulfilment of more human beings and fuller
realization of their individual possibilities and
social achievements, and in such a way as
not to prevent or hamper the attainment of
greater fulfilment by generations to come.
Fulfilment in this sense involves physical,
mental and spiritual well-being, understanding,
enjoyment, hope, the satisfying exercise of one’s
faculties, creative activity, the integration of
personality, participation in worthwhile projects, membership of a society which can be
proud of its achievements, and a sense of
significance in relation to the cosmos.
Population-increase is now infringing on the
quality of life in many ways, and curtailing the
realization of many or all of its desirable possibilities. Let us examine the present momentous
period and look at the degree to which various
possibilities are falling short of realization
owing to poulation-increase and are likely to
fall increasingly short in the immediate future.

Threats to Human Fulfilment

1. Physical well-being. Already two-thirds of
the world’s population are under-nourished, and
as the absolute number of human mouths
increases, the absolute total of under-nourished
human beings is bound to increase for a time,
and also the acuteness of under-nourishment in
under-privileged countries. By promoting undernourishment of all sorts—deficiency of proteins
and vitamins as well as of calories—population
increase keeps the physical and also the mental
energy of people at a low level, and so reduces
their possibilities of initiative and achievement
in all departments of life, including science and
art as well as material production.

2. The deforestation and erosion caused by
expanding populations have already reduced
the possibilities of agricultural production. They
are certain to become really serious as population increases and spreads, unless drastic
measures are undertaken.

3. Water-supply is beginning to prove inadequate in many areas, especially in the neighbourhood of over-large and expanding cities
POPULATION PLANNING AND QUALITY OF LIFE

(e.g. London, Los Angeles). Furthermore, water
for irrigation is the limiting factor for agricultural production in the world’s huge arid and
semi-arid areas. Here, dams and reservoirs are
urgently needed. But even when they are built,
the new areas that they supply become filled
with people in a few decades (e.g. the 5 million
acres irrigated by the Lloyd Barrage at Sikkur
on the Indus). Even a high dam at Aswan will
not cater for the needs of Egypt’s rapidly
increasing population for more than two or at
most three generations.

4. Over two-thirds of the world’s population
are still illiterate, and only a minute fraction
receives any higher education. And yet at all
levels, educational facilities (buildings, teachers,
books, equipment) are not keeping up with the
flood of new minds and bodies to be educated.
This holds up the progress of industrialization
and the improvement of agricultural practice as
well as scientific and technological advance in
all under-developed countries, especially those
that are already densely or over-populated, and
is delaying the possibility of mankind reaching
a collective understanding of itself and its
destiny, or of engaging in collective projects
of world development.

5. Human variety is being threatened by
population-increase. The need for mass-production and industrialization to supply food and a
living to vast populations is tending to the
destruction of cultural variety by a wave of
drab uniformity, and is substituting mechanical
tasks for creative and enjoyable work.

6. Population-increase is also restricting
human liberty. Once population-density has
reached a certain threshold value, further
increase inevitably demands over-organization
if efficiency is to be maintained, and overorganization reduces the area of freedom.
Regulation and regimentation, direct or indirect, become necessary. Mass-production
removes individual initiative, quantitative
norms imposed from above replace spontaneity
and qualitative incentives. Daily life and work
are routinized and existence becomes increasingly mechanical as well as increasingly mechanized. After a longer or shorter time, the
process eventually leads to more regimentation
or mass activity in every sphere of human life

—agriculture, industry, communications, entertainment, mass rallies and celebrations.

Alternatively, when for any reason productive efficiency cannot be maintained, overpopulation leads to social fragmentation and
under-organization (e.g. in rural Haiti), and
this again restricts other freedoms, such as
freedom from want and freedom for joint
creative and productive activity.

7. Increased population is leading everywhere to hypertrophied cities and conurbations,
even up to 10 million people and over. These
are far beyond optimum size for efficiency, and
far beyond optimum scale for truly human
living. Where the standard of life is low they
tend to develop into gigantic slums and largescale breeders of virus-fodder; where it is high,
they become generators of frustration and
wasters of time and energy. Their spread is
creating large areas of man-made ugliness and
drabness, and hordes of routinized people on
their tiresome daily journeys to and from work.

8. In_ technologically advanced countries
large populations are resulting in increased
traffic congestion, and increased appropriation
of land for housing and communications. In
some of them, such as Britain, there is already
a heavy pressure on mere space through the
competitive and mutually exclusive demands of
industry, defence, communications, housing,
and amenity on the rapidly shrinking areas of
open country.

9. In various places on the earth’s surface,
over-population can legitimately be compared
to a cancerous growth. It causes suffering and
discontent locally, and leads to large-scale
emigrations which are comparable to metastases
in cancer, and are creating social difficulties in
the recipient countries (e.g. West Indians in
Britain, Puerto Ricans in New York).

10. Over-population reduces the possibilities
of employment—there are not enough jobs to
go round, and certainly not enough worthwhile jobs of a satisfying nature. This is becoming serious in countries like India, where
large-scale rural under-employment is already
common and chronic urban and educated
unemployment is beginning to appear. China
too is already aware of this threat of overpopulation and adequate employment.

Igt
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

11. In under-developed and densely populated countries, continued population-increase
reduces the possibility of an economic breakthrough to a higher standard of living. Not only
does it tend to stabilize or aggravate underemployment with all its resultant inefficiency,
but, through the demands that it makes on the
national income for services of various sorts, it
is constantly cutting down the amount available
for capital investment. Every million added to
the population of a country means not only a
million more mouths to feed, but a million
more bodies to clothe, house, transport, and
keep in health, and a million more brains to
train and educate. The amount expended on all
this must be deducted from the amount needed
to improve transport, to extend industrialization, to start new industrial enterprises and
power . plants, new irrigation schemes, new
schools and colleges and technological institutes;
and this will be most serious in under-developed
and densely populated countries, where the
need for such new investment is most urgent.
Thus in such areas expenditure on populationcontrol should be given extremely high economic priority. Further, planning authorities
should constantly bear in mind the economic
(as well as the social) effects of investment in
projects (such as malaria control) which will
reduce the death-rate, as against those of
measures aimed at reducing the birth-rate.

12. The possibilities of wonder, enjoyment
and adventure available to man are being
curtailed. Population-pressure is reducing the
readily accessible areas of unspoilt wilderness
and natural beauty, while at the same time
increasing the number of people who want to
enjoy them. Even where National Parks and
Reserves have been established, they are being
whittled away by the economic, social and
military demands of an increasing population.
Similarly, the famous and beautiful cities that
are the goals of modern pilgrimage are
becoming spoilt by commercialization and congested with sightseers; so here, too, populationpressure is curtailing another important possibility of human satisfaction. And all over the
world wild life is being rapidly reduced or even
exterminated. The sight of an abundance of
large mammals and lovely birds leading their

152

natural lives is a wondertul and satisfying
experience: but, thanks to human population
growth, the possibility of enjoying it is rapidly
diminishing.

13. Human beings need to feel that they are
in some harmonious relation with nature. This
will become increasingly difficult if populationpressure forces us to an excessive or radical
exploitation of natural resources, instead of
aiming at a symbiotic existence, in ecological
partnership with our globe. Over-population is
preventing the development of a planetary ethic
based on the moral duty of conservation. |

For all these reasons it is urgent to reduce
the rate of world population-increase. The basis
of every real success here must be the development of a cheap and satisfactory oral contraceptive: and the prerequisite for this is research.
If one-tenth of one per cent of what is spent on
atomic missiles or space satellites were available
for research on the control of human reproduction, we would undoubtedly have an answer
within a decade. Research on this global subject
should be international. Perhaps bodies such as
our Federation and the Population Council
could help in promoting and co-ordinating it.

Motivations for Family Planning

Thus there are various motivations for family
planning and population-control. For governments, the realization that a reduced rate of
increase is necessary for the general health and
strength of their citizens, for economic advance,
for social stability, for adequate education, for
cultural achievement, and for intellectual and
technical competence, will obviously be the
prime motive for establishing an official
population policy.

Official population policies are something new
in the world, and we have to plan the best
methods of implementing them. Usually, the
Ministry of Health is put in administrative
charge of the subject of population and its control. It would seem desirable to enlarge such
Departments into Ministries of Health and
Population, with their two sub-departments of
equal importance. This would give the subject
of population a higher status in national affairs.
Propaganda, practical assistance and advice for
family planning could then be provided by some
POPULATION PLANNING AND QUALITY OF LIFE

form of Health Extension Service operating at
all levels.

Then Governments can provide some
economic motivation. Just as bonuses for large
families encourage population-increase, so a
system of family allowances in which the
amount allowed decreases sharply for every
additional child after the first two would
encourage family limitation. Taxation systems
might also be modified to operate in this direction. And of course Governments can help by
devoting much attention to research.

For the individual, there may be various
motives. There is first the wish that his children
should have more opportunities and a better
education and start in life. As children cease to
be an economic asset, the individual’s desire to
raise his family’s standards of living and enjoyment will become a more effective motive. And
if the individual can be made to realize that
family limitation will enable his country to have
a stronger and finer population, to achieve more
in science and art, in exploration and sport, and
to play a more important role in the world, his
patriotism too may be brought in as a motive.

Population Policy in India

Here I may be permitted a few words on
India’s population problem, as it appears to an
observer from another continent. In the first
place, India’s position in this matter is crucial.
She is the largest democratic under-developed
nation, not only in Asia but in the world.
Failure to solve her population problem will be
a political and social disaster: success will
secure her leadership in Asia and give hope to
the world at large.

Here again we must recall the historical
aspects of the problem. People sometimes say
that since India has persisted through millennia,
she will continue to persist whatever we do or
do not do. This is a fallacy. India has not
remained the same throughout its history: for
one thing, it has grown in numbers, and its
growth in numbers has changed its character
and modified its possibilities of further development. In early times, India’s population can
only be guessed at, but it seems clear that when
the East India Company was founded in 1600,
it cannot well have exceeded 100 million. By

3—ER

1834 it was estimated at about 130 million; it
had increased to about 200 million by 1871, and
to 300 million by 1910. To-day, India contains
about one-seventh of the human species: her
population is now nearly 400 million. It is increasing by over six million a year* (more than
all Australians in every two years). At this
annual rate, India’s population will double itself
in around forty-five years, and will reach threequarters of a billion before the end of the
present century—during the lifetime of many
Indians now living. This explosive increase of
nearly 150 million since 1921 has been caused
by efficient death-control, the mortality rate
having been almost halved during this period,
while the birth-rate has gone down by only
about 6 per cent. With all the health measures
now in force and projected, the death-rate will
certainly continue to drop, thus tending to
promote a still higher rate of increase.

The careful study by Coale and Hoover}
of Princeton has brought to light many important points concerning the relation of India’s
population-increase to its economic development. It is not for me to enter into detail: but
I must mention some of their main points. They
point out that unless the birth-rate is reduced,
India will be unable to achieve an economic
break-through from its state of under-development and under-employment to a developed
and developing economy. This is because the
demand for servicing the additional population
(an increasing proportion of which will be
children of an unproductive age and therefore
an increased economic burden) will make it
impossible to provide adequate finance for
industrialization and technological development. If present trends continue, a point of
economic no return will be reached in less than
thirty years. If, on the other hand, effective
measures aiming at population-control are
immediately undertaken, so that the birth-rate

* Accurate figures are hard to come by. Some
authorities put the annual increase as high as 8
million! Certainly 6 million is a minimum.

t Coale, A. J., and Hoover, E. M. Population
Growth and Economic Development in Low-Income
Countries: A case study of India’s prospects. Princeton 1958, University Press. (India, Oxford University
Press): arized in Population Bulletin, December,

1$3
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

begins to go down sharply by 1966 and becomes
halved by 1981, then a break-through to a
developed economy will still be possible. The
details of this dating may be modified by the
course of events, but the modifications cannot
be large. The broad conclusion is that for an
economic break-through to be achieved by
India the birth-rate must begin to go down
within a decade, and must be halved within a
further two or at most two-and-a-half decades.

Coale and Hoover also draw attention to the
disparity between the expenditures on birthcontrol and on death-control. The Second FiveYear Plan allocated $10 million for population
planning, but over $50 million for medical
health programmes, which will inevitably help
to unplan population. The allocation for malaria
control during the single year ending this March
was $14 million. This is an economic absurdity
—$14 million for one measure which will
certainly increase population, as against $10
million for all measures which could reduce it!

The only possible conclusion is that the
balancing of death-control by birth-control is a
matter of the utmost urgency for India, economically as well as socially, and that measures
aimed at reducing fertility should have an
extremely high priority in all future economic
planning. Much more should be spent on
research; a new army of doctors, nurses, midwives and health workers should be immediately recruited and trained, to encourage birthcontrol and give free advice and distribute free
contraceptives to all classes in all regions;
financial inducements should be given for
limiting families, whether by sterilization or
contraception; propaganda, through the press
and radio and by travelling speakers, should
be conducted on a national scale. Every crore
of rupees spent on such measures for preventing
births would pay handsome dividends in the
saving of many crores that would be needed to
feed, clothe, house and educate the babies that

154

would otherwise have been born. Just how
many, I leave to the economists to calculate.
But it is clear that, even from a purely economic standpoint, expenditure on populationcontrol is one of the most profitable forms of
investment for India.

Conclusion

To return from India to the world scene, I
am sure that the heaviest emphasis, and the
ultimate motivation, both for nations and individuals, must combine fear and hope. It must
be on the urgent necessity of limiting world
population, to prevent it inflicting grave and
perhaps irreparable damage on the whole
human species and its terrestrial home, and to
give mankind the hope and the possibility of
reaching new levels of fulfilment and new
heights of achievement.

The International Planned Parenthood Federation can contribute to this end in various
ways, including the holding of conferences such
as this. As a non-governmental but international
organization with no political or religious bias,
no axes to grind or outside interests to serve, it
might become of considerable importance as a
clearing-house and advisory body, whose help
and advice could be sought by any country or
any group. But to accomplish this, it would
need a considerable increase of revenue and
staff, including a Secretary-General of the
highest standing, and with ample provision for
travel, and perhaps also officials who could be
seconded for a period to countries in need of
advice and assistance. The time seems ripe for
this transformation of the Federation from an
organization mainly concerned with arousing
public opinion into one mainly concerned with
implementation and operation. Perhaps the
present Conference will consider ways and
means by which this desirable step might be
taken.
