THE TREASURER’S PAGE, No.

the April issue with the words:

“In the next article, I propose to
outline briefly the problems whose urgency
the Council has thought to justify the
expenditure of capital, and I would
briefly review some other problems the
elucidation of which calls for financial help
from the Society as funds become available.”’

The first part of my task—that of describing the problems upon which most of the
£2,200 per annum of the Society’s capital is
being spent—was accomplished for me by
the admirable statement in the Annual
Report set out on pages 7, 8 and g; but as
it may well be that some reader whose eyes
fall on this page has not by them a copy of
that report, the following is a brief summary :

| CONCLUDED the Treasurer’s Page in

£
Two Darwin Research Fellowships,
value {300 per annum each including expenses 600
The Population Investigation Committee : «» 500
Research on contraceptive ‘methods 560
Annals of Eugenics wee 300

When we turn to the problems which
the Society would like to tackle and the

125

researches which the Soczety would promote
if funds were available, I find myself confronted with a very serious difficulty because
of their number and range. To extend the
principle of the Darwin Research Scholarships alone might absorb very considerable
sums, greatly to the advantage of eugenic
knowledge, and I have before me, kindly
prepared by our resourceful and energetic
general secretary, a full memorandum on
the subject which has occupied fifteen
closely typewritten pages. I am delighted to
find that he is so impressed by the scope and
scale of the subjects which should be tackled
were funds available that he has persuaded
the Council to appoint a special subcommittee to prepare in printed form an
outline of the more urgent, so that the facts
of the situation may be laid before a wider
public than the Fellows and Members of the
Eugenics Society alone. As a copy of this
document, when produced, will be available
for every Fellow and Member of the Soczety,
I do not propose to trouble you further with
any statement on this aspect of the question
at the present time.

I propose in the next issue of the EUGENICS
REVIEW to occupy the Treasurer’s Page by a
comparison of the support given to the Society
by Fellows and Members with that given to
similar Societies by their members.

C. F. CHANCE.
