FITNESS FOR MARRIAGE
By C. P. BLACKER, M.c., MD., MR.CP.

be exchanged before marriage has been

put forward on many occasions and in
a bewildering number of different forms. It
has been urged on personal grounds, as a
means of securing the happiness and stability
of each marriage ; on hygienic grounds, with
a view to lessening the incidence of venereal
diseases ; and on racial grounds, with the
object of improving the hereditary qualities
of future generations. Every intermediate
combination that can be imagined between
a strictly voluntary exchange of certificates
and a compulsory enforcement of such
exchange has been suggested. For the British
public the matter was raised as a live issue on
November 14th last year, when a resolution
favouring a compulsory exchange of health
certificates was moved in the House of Lords,
by Lord Kilmaine.

Superficially viewed, the measure seems to
be logical and practical; when scrutinized,
however, it is seen to bristle with difficulties.
The Eugenics Society has appointed a committee consisting of Dr. Langdon-Down
(Chairman), Sir Humphry Rolleston (President of the Society), Mr. B. S. Bramwell,
Dr. Stella Churchill, Dr. Maurice Shaw and
myself, to draw up a Pre-nuptial Health
Schedule in accordance with the recommendations contained in the Society’s statement
of its Aims and Objects.* Before its first
meeting, I prepared for the committee an
abstract of the literature that was available
on the subject in the Society’s library, and
I have subsequently obtained information
from certain European countries which use
such certificates. The schedule has not yet
been prepared in its final form. It is hoped,
however, that it will be ready for publication
in the July issue of the REVIEW.

In the meanwhile, this article is written
with the object of providing a survey of what

Fr ‘HE proposal that certificates of fitness

men

* EUGENICS REVIEW, 1934, XXVI, p. 133.

33

has been proposed by various writers and
authorities. It will be seen that the subject
is not nearly so simple as it appears at first
glance, and that the authorities differ much
among themselves as to what they regard
as desirable. Some want voluntary measures
only ; others want the issue of certificates to
be compulsory, but their exchange between
engaged partners to be voluntary; others
want both the issue and the exchange of
certificates to be compulsory but the decision
as to whether marriage should or should not
take place to be voluntary ; others want a
wholly compulsory measure, involving the
prohibition of marriage in the presence of
certain serious diseases and defects.

The authorities differ also about what they
wish recorded upon the certificates. Some
wish to confine the inquiries to venereal
diseases; others wish to extend them to
other contagious diseases such as leprosy, and
to infectious diseases such as tuberculosis ;
others wish to include diseases of genetic
origin appearing in the individual ; others to
prohibit the marriage of normal people with
bad heredity. Nobody has yet attempted to
suggest what degree of morbidity in the
pedigree of such a normal person should
constitute a bar to marriage. Here is an
abstract of the more relevant papers.

GIBBONS, R. A., M.D. A State Certificate of
Marniage. Eugenics Review, 1924, XVI, I17.

The late Dr. Gibbons asked for legislation
requiring postponement of marriage until the
applicant had been certified free from (1)
syphilis, (2) gonorrhoea, (3) tuberculosis, (4)
genuine poverty, and (5) mental defectiveness. The furnishing of the certificates
should, in his view, be compulsory. His paper
does not discuss what routine medical examinations and investigations should be made,
nor does it take account of the individual’s
heredity.
34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

VIGNES, HENRI, M.D. Certificat Prenuptial.
Le Progrés médical, 1931, No. 41.

Three possibilities, the author argues,
present themselves. (a) A certificate, to the
verdict of which the individual should be
obliged to conform. (6) A certificate, to the
verdict of which there is no obligation to
conform, but which the betrothed persons
should be obliged to submit to each other or
to each other’s families. (c) A certificate without obligations of any sort, but intended to
furnish relevant information and to “ give
cause for reflection’’ (donner a réfléchir).
The author favours the third form of certificate. He points out that many French
parents require their daughters’ fiancés to
take out life insurance policies. If the insurance company refuses to insure, the
parents can deduce that the betrothed is
mauvais pour le service. Dr. Vignes demands
that the girl, no less than the man, should be
examined. ‘‘ I have already emphasized,” he
says, ‘‘that to be married to a woman with
infantile organs and an infantile nervous
system can be more disagreeable to a man
than it is to a woman to be married to a
syphilitic. Pelvimetry and the search for the
stigmata of congenital syphilis seem to be of
incontestable utility.”

The author would like to see instituted a
fantastically detailed list of routine investigations, involving records of the body build and
measurements of all the bony parts (in particular the circumference of the chest), the
weight and the relation of weight to build,
the pulse (sitting and lying down), the
frequence of respiration and its relation to
the pulse, the basal metabolism, the vital
capacity, the blood-pressure, the oculocardiac reflex, the visual acuity, the condition
of the ocular fundi, all objective stigmata of
congenital or acquired syphilis (with the
answer ‘‘ present ’’ or ‘‘ absent ’’), the objective stigmata of alcoholism, the examination
of the urinary pH, urea and sugar, the
Wassermann reaction and coagulability of
the blood, X-ray examination of the chest,
examination of the epididymis and the
cyto-bacteriological examination of the
normal secretions. ‘And,’ the author adds,
“in this enumeration I certainly have

forgotten much easily obtainable and diverse

objective information ”’!

VIGNES, HENRI, M.D. Certtficat de Mariage.
Proceedings of the Second Session of the
Institute of International Anthropology,
Prague, 1924.

This summarizes twenty-one answers to

a questionnaire sent out by the author.
Opinions are furnished by four obstetricians,
three anthropologists, one biologist, three
physicians, two paediatricians, one “‘ phthisiologue,”’ one specialist in venereal diseases and
three publicists. The questions bear upon the
general problem of how best to spread a
eugenic conscience throughout the community. The problem of marriage certificates is included. The answers show much
ignorance and irreconcilable differences of
opinion. Asa whole, they are so unconstructive that it is not easy to see why the paper
was written.

BIARDEAU, LAURE. Iv. Le Certificat Prenuptial.

This paper is not in our library, but a fairly
full review by Dr. R. A. Gibbons appeared
in Health and Empire, September 1932. Unfortunately no reference is given. The
book opens with harrowing statistics of
the incidence of syphilis and gonorrhoea in
France. It proceeds to a study of the laws
relating to marriage that have been passed
in different countries—i.e. Norway, Sweden,
Denmark, and, of course, the United States.
Proposals centring round the pre-nuptial
marriage certificate have been discussed in
Germany, Italy, Mexico, Holland, Czechoslovakia and Turkey. The impression given
by the author of the review is that the subject has been much discussed, and that a
number of ill-considered laws have been
passed which do not work in practice. This
especially holds of America.

ROLOFF, BERNARD C., Superintendent, Illinois
Social Hygiene League, Chicago. Medical
Examination Before Marriage. The World’s
Health, October, 1927.

This is an open letter written by Mr. Roloff

to Major Darwin. In a previous number of
FITNESS FOR MARRIAGE 35

The World’s Health, the latter had expressed
the view that prior to marriage each party
should be compelled to make a declaration of
the belief that he or she was free from certain
specific infectious diseases. Mr. Roloff regards this proposal as useless on the grounds
that people do not tell the truth about their
medical history. ‘“‘ When,’ he says, “I
studied the Michigan law I secured a copy of
the affidavit that each applicant for a licence
is compelled to sign and swear to. Upon the
back of this appear in small print, in legal
phraseology such as would baffle the intelligence of even an educated person, brief
extracts from the law to the effect that feeblemindedness, insanity, tuberculosis and
venereal disease acted as a bar to marriage.

“Ingham County, where the capital of
Michigan is situated, issued then goo marTiage licences yearly. In the two and one-half
years of his office, the deputy county clerk in
charge remembers not a single instance where
an applicant admitted being feeble-minded,
insane, tuberculous or venereal.

“ And in that very county I dug up the
case of a man and woman, both of whom had
been warned by social workers not to marry,
who secured a licence and married without
challenge, with this result :

First child a monstrosity.
Second child a still-birth.
Third child a still-birth.
Fourth child an imbecile.

_ Fifth child feeble-minded.

‘The husband deserted and all the living
members are supported in institutions or by
charity.”

LOPES DE VALLE, PROFESSOR J. A., University
of Havana, Cuba. Pre-Nuptial Medical
Examinations. The World’s Health. (Date
not given on reprint.)

Professor de Valle-reviews the history of

the subject and existing laws. He advises
everyone to submit to a medical examination

before marriage, and to refrain from marrying if they are affected with venereal disease,
pulmonary tuberculosis, leprosy, epilepsy,
chorea or other nervous affections. He
further recommends the establishment of
health centres where pre-marital certificates
will be given free of cost. He apparently
advocates voluntary measures only, but gives
no idea of exactly what examination should
be made as a routine. He refers vaguely to
hereditary diseases, but gives no clue as
to how they should be traced, or in what
degree they should be present in the pedigree
to contra-indicate the giving of a certificate
of fitness for marriage.

FIELD, A. N. Medical Marriage Certificates :
A Suggestion from New Zealand. Eugenics
Review, 1913. :

The author proposes that everyone should
be “‘ compelled by law to undergo a medical
examination.””’ The examination would be
private and confidential, and its results would
not be divulged even to the other party to the
matriage. The certificate would be issued to
the candidate for marriage, who could then
do as he or she thought fit with it.

A further proposal is that the certificates
should be graded. “‘ The ‘A’ or top grade
certificates given to a thoroughly sound and
well-built person would be something worth
having ; a ‘B’ would be tolerable; a ‘C’
would conjure up visions of doctors’ bills and
physic for a future family of physical weaklings, and ‘ D ’—well—would be a pity.”’
The author proposes that records be kept of
the number of “ A’s’”’ who marry “ A’s,”’
“ B’s,” “ C’s,” etc. “ The country would be
able to see at a glance how things were tending and, in the case of the ‘ D’s,’ more specific
information might be published in another
table to show the grounds on which they
were so classified.”’

Since there are about 8,000 marriages a
year registered in New Zealand, the cost to
the State at the rate of a guinea per examination would be under {17,000. Mr. Field
anticipates that some of those to whom lowgrade certificates were issued would wish to
dispute the doctor’s findings and that their
complaints could be heard by private appeal
36 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

boards in different districts. ‘“‘ Persons
appealing would deposit so much to defray
the expenses of the appeal, the deposit to be
returned where the appellant was successful
and to be forfeited where he failed.”’

The author makes no attempt to specify
what routine examinations should be performed, nor by what criteria the doctor
should classify applications in categories
“A” to c¢ D,”’

HEAGERTY, J. J., M.D., Chief of Division of
Venereal Disease, the Control Department
of Health, Ottawa. Medical Examination
Before Marriage. (The journal in which this
paper appeared is not given on the reprint.)

In this paper, medical examination before
marriage is advocated for three reasons:
(i) to give candidates for marriage full knowledge of their physical condition; (ii) to
delay the marriage of those who are suffering
from a communicable disease until the disease
is arrested ; (iii) to prevent the marriage of
the unfit.

As to (i) and (ii), the author writes:
“Whether or not it [i.e. the examination]
should be made compulsory is a matter of
grave moment and the decision should be left
to the mature judgment of the most enlightened and best thought of the country.”
The third reason clearly envisages a compulsory measure. The author attributes the
failure of compulsory medical examination
in the United States of America to the fact
that every male candidate is there subjected
toa Wassermann and “‘smear’’ test. “‘ There
is no necessity,’ says the author, “‘ for these
laboratory tests except in the case of
individuals who give a history of venereal
disease or are suspect.”

BARD, DR. LEOPOLD (Buenos Ayres). Sex
Hygiene and Health Certificates Before
Marriage. The World’s Health, 1926.

Here is outlined a Bill (limited in scope to

venereal diseases) which was drawn up for
presentation to the Argentine Legislative
Assembly. It proposes to establish a
“ national office of public hygiene ”’ charged
with the delivery of pre-matrimonial certificates. In the provinces the certificates are

to be delivered by a “‘hygiene service.”” At
these centres, “‘ every man desiring to contract marriage must, during a fortnight
preceding the registration of the intended
marriage, undergo a medical examination
and provide himself with a certificate stating
that he is not affected by venereal disease.”
The author does not say whether a Wassermann test should be performed as a routine.

TREDGOLD, A. F., M.D. Marriage Regulations
and National Family Records. Eugenics
Review, 1912, IV, I.

The author suggests that no marriage
should be allowed to take place without the
production of a licence, and that such
licences should only be granted after (a) a
medical examination of the individual, and
(5) an inquiry into his or her family history.

The paper is essentially a plea for the
establishment of an adequate central record
office. The medical examination should be
similar to that which is now required by any
good life assurance office, and should be
similarly conducted by specially appointed
local referees. The examination of the family
history would be made by a board of medical
experts, and the licences would be granted or
withheld by a central authority after a full
consideration of these two reports. The
author deplores the lack of adequate family
records , and for the proper functioning of the
central record office suggests that it would
be necessary to have (a) a system of notification, and (0) a method of compilation.

(a) Notification. The author regards as
unsatisfactory the way births and deaths are
now registered. Two medical death certificates are advocated. The first, addressed to
the local registrar, should merely state the
fact and cause of death, and be furnished as a
confidential document directed to the Registrar-General. The second would complete
the individual’s record already in the possession of the central record office. Defects of
development, detected in the course of the
child’s school career, would previously have
been registered and transmitted to the
central record office. (The author does not
specify which defects of development he has
in mind.) Diseases of various kinds should be
FITNESS FOR MARRIAGE 37

notified, importance being attached to epilepsy, insanity and various forms of mental
defect. The records relating to the careers of
criminals are also to be forwarded to the
central office, and clerks to the guardians
should be required to make an annual return
of all the chronic paupers within their union
districts.

(6) Compilation. ‘‘ The work of the Central
Record Offices would consist in the compilation of the various notifications received, to
form a personal history sheet, and in this way
there would be gradually built up a permanent record of every individual from birth to
the grave. By means of a system of crossreferences and indexing, the relationships of
each person could be shown and would enable
the family to be traced for a number of
generations.”

In this paper, the author is more concerned
to describe the principles which should guide
us in collecting and co-ordinating relevant
data, than in considering how the doctor
should proceed when furnishing a certificate
of fitness for marriage.

DARWIN, MAJOR LEONARD. The Need for
Eugenic Reform. 1926. John Murray.

Major Darwin discusses this problem on
pages 459 to 464 of his book. He is opposed
to the production of a pre-nuptial medical
certificate being made a compulsory prerequisite to marriage, on the grounds that it
would place too much power in the hands of
the medical profession. “‘ The following proposals are suggested for consideration : Each
party should be obliged before: the issue of a
marriage licence to sign a certificate in a
prescribed form, and this certificate should
be handed to the other party by the authority
dealing with these matters some time before
the issue of the licence. This certificate
should contain a declaration of the belief that
he or she is not suffering from certain noncontagious diseases or certain contagious
diseases in a form which might injure the
other party or the children of the proposed
union, the diseases in question, including
insanity, epilepsy, venereal diseases, tuberculosis, and possibly others, being set forth

in the printed form of certificate. The certificate should also include a declaration that
he or she had never been confined in a prison,
mental hospital, or home of inebriates, or had
been certified either as a lunatic or as a
mentally defective person, or had been convicted of any offence, or previously married
or divorced. When any such statement could
not be truthfully made, full particulars
should be given of the facts which made this
impossible. The name and address of a doctor who had been consulted should be stated,
with a definite request to that doctor to
answer any inquiries made by the other
party, or by his or her parents or guardians.”’

Thus it will be seen that Major Darwin
advocates a compulsory exchange of prescribed certificates, signed not by a medical
man but by the person about to get married.

POPENOE, DR. PAUL. (Personal communication.)

Mr. Paul Popenoe writes in a letter to me,
dated September 11th, 1934: “‘ I am afraid
we have nothing to offer on the subject of
physical examination before marriage. We
have talked it over, back and forth, for a good
many years, without ever making up our
minds what ought to be done and what can
be done. A dozen or so of our states have
laws that the male applicant for a marriage
licence must present a certificate of freedom
from infectious disease, but this, of course, is,
intended principally to prevent the spread of
venereal disease, and is of very little eugenic
importance. Now to frame a law that may be
properly enforced, and at the same time have
any eugenic value, is something that no one
has yet seemed to have discovered.

‘The Bill that was actually drafted by the
committee of our Eugenics Society here was

‘extremely short—merely' providing that a

marriage licence should not be issued unless
both of the couple presented a medical
examination certificate showing that they
were free from any condition that might unfavourably affect either the spouse or the
future progeny. This seems to me so vague
and general, that I believe it is worthless.
‘For the present, I am rather inclined to
38 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

favour the type of law which has been
adopted by the Society Union and has been
strongly commended in France and elsewhere, under which it is merely required that
each partner be fully advised of the deficiencies of the other. Then if they wanted to go
ahead and marry, they can do so with their
eyes open. This is a step forward, even if a
short one. In the present status of public
education, and with the very limited number
of competent examiners available, I do not
see how we can hope to pass any general law
that will be compulsory. I may be too pessimistic on this subject, and should be very
glad indeed to learn from you the lines of
your projected law.”

LORD KILMAINE’S SPEECH (House of Lords,
November 17th, 1934).

In this speech Lord Kilmaine moved the
following resolution: ‘‘ That the marriage
laws should be so amended as to make it
obligatory for both parties to the proposed
marriage to produce medical certificates of
fitness when they come before a Minister of
Religion or the Civil Authority.” It will be
seen that Lord Kilmaine proposed, not a
voluntary, but a compulsory measure. The
certificates should, in Lord Kilmaine’s
opinion, be signed ‘‘ by some competent
medical authority ; the fee for them should
be fixed, and should be fixed as low as
possible ; and some steps should be taken to
ensure that the answers given are true.”’
Lord Kilmaine’s proposals bear a general
resemblance to those of Mr. A. N. Field
referred to above. There should be four
certificates: ‘‘ Certificate A, the ‘ all-clear,’
showing that the parties are perfectly fit to
marry and to raise a family; Certificate B,
which will show that for some reason of
health it is advisable that there should be
delay, but that the parties may present themselves again three or six months hence;
Certificate C would say that the parties can
marry without danger to each other, but that
for family or other reasons it must be a
childless marriage ; lastly Certificate D would
prohibit marriage altogether.”’ Lord Kiulmaine concluded his speech with these very
surprising words: ‘ I would like to add that

among the objections to my proposal is that
couples might very much resent undergoing
medical examination. I do not propose that
they should undergo medical examination ;
that would only be necessary in the case of
venereal disease. In all other cases, it would
simply be necessary to answer questions
relating to general health and family history.”

As was to be expected, Lord Kilmaine’s
proposal met with vigorous criticism.
“How,” asked the Archbishop of Canterbury, “ is the private practitioner to take the
responsibility except perhaps in the case of
a clear-cut ‘ all is well ’—the Certificate A of
the noble Lord, or the quite definite Certificate D (prohibition)—how is he to take upon
himself the responsibility of saying there
must be delay, or of saying ‘I think you
must be prepared to render yourself childless’? That is putting an onus upon a private practitioner which needs a great deal
more thinking out before we can agree to it.”
(The responsibility would, in fact, be intolerable in view of Lord Kilmaine’s concluding proposal that no medical examination
should take place.) In replying for the Minister of Health, Viscount Gage said: ‘“‘ We are
convinced that to go now a long way beyond
what we are doing on the lines suggested by
the noble Lord without very large evidence
of public and medical support, would be
disastrous to the very cause which the
noble Lord has at heart. Though I cannot
therefore accept in any way the motion of the
noble Lord, we are very grateful to him for
raising the subject. We desire to listen carefully to expressions of opinion from the public
on these matters and we shall continue to
watch the whole situation with the greatest
attention, as I think everyone will agree it is
a matter of the greatest possible importance.”’

The debate was terminated by a short
speech from Lord Kilmaine withdrawing his
motion.

THE THIRD INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF
EUGENICS.
At this congress, which was held in New

York in August, 1932, Dr. J. A. Mjoen read
a paper entitled ‘‘ Health Declaration before
FITNESS FOR MARRIAGE

Marriage.”’* In describing the measures
which had been adopted in Norway and
Sweden, Dr. Mjoen opposed the requirement
that every candidate for marriage should be
medically examined, on the grounds that
such a measure would excite antagonism in
countries where prostitutes are exempt from
such examination. ‘‘ Personally,” he said, “ I
am of the opinion that a pre-nuptial examination is powerless to reveal the existence of
syphilis in its latent stage and that it is
embarrassing for women to submit to an
examination from which, in certain countries, prostitutes are exempt. Not advocating
obligatory medical examination, yet desiring
to safeguard married people and their children, we demand the registration by a doctor
of the declarations made by the contracting
parties as to their state of health. Given
under oath, these declarations have the effect
of awakening the conscience as to sex responsibilities.”’

MILLARD, DR. KILLICK. (Personal communi
cation.)

For some years Dr. Killick Millard, medical
officer of health for Leicester, and late president of the Society of Medical Officers of
Health, has advocated the exchange of
pre-nuptial health certificates. In a letter to
me dated December 3rd, 1931, he made the
following valuable suggestions: ‘‘ You ask
me for suggestions as to how such a form

* A Decade of Progressin Eugenics. Williams Wilkins
Co., 1934. P. 222.

39

should be planned and what points it should
include. I would suggest that a number of
health certificate forms used in connection
with life assurance by different companies
should be collected, and these should be gone
through point by point to see what could be
omitted and then to consider what particular
point should be stressed. It is undesirable to
make the form unnecessarily elaborate or
complicated, as we do not want doctors to
charge a big fee for giving them. This question of the expense is likely to be one of the
deterrents, because most young people getting married have so many expenses in front
of them, that even a guinea for each of the
couple would often be a serious matter, and
two guineas each would be still more serious.

‘“‘T should like to suggest that when the
certificate is drawn up the British Medical
Association might be approached with a view
possibly to agreeing to some recognized fee,
and in view of the public utility of the certificate they might be willing to fix upon a very
reasonable figure if they were appealed to in
the right way. Without some sort of lead,
medical men will be uncertain as to what fee
they ought to charge.”

Dr. Killick Millard’s suggestions have been
adopted by the Committee which has drawn
up the Society’s schedule.

In the next issue of the EUGENICS REVIEW
the measures relating to this subject which
have passed into law in other countries will
be summarized, and it is hoped to publish the
Society’s schedule.

— en

Publishers: DAVID NUTT, London - G. E. STECHERT & Co., New York - NICOLA 2A NICHELL, Bologna
FELIX ALCAN, Paris - AKADEMISCHE VERLAGSGESELLSCHAFT m. b. H Teiprg
RUIZ ae Madrid - F, MACHADO & C.ia., Porto - THE MARUZEN COMPA Y, Tokyo

ce SCIENTIA % REVIEW OF SCIENTIFIC SYNTHESIS

Foe one hh number contain to 120 pages)
ished every each number ining 100 to 120 pages
BOTTAZZI F. ENRIQUES
18 THE ONLY REVIEW the contributors to which are really international.

Editors: F - G. BRUNI General Secretary: Paolo Bonetti
I8 THE ONLY REVIEW that has a really world-wide circulation.
IS THE ONLY REVIEW of scientific synthesis and unification that deals with the fundamental questions of all sciences : mathematics, astronomy,
iy BEV chemistry, biology, psychology, ethnology, linguistics ; history of science ; philosophy of science.

REVIEW that by means of enquiries among the most eminent scientists and authors of all countries (On the philosophical principles
of the mews sctences ; On the most fundamental astronomical and physical questions of current interest ; On the contribution that the different countries have given to the ‘development of various branches of knowledge ; On the more important biological questions, etc., etc.), studies all the main
Pe soead t in intellectual circles all over the world, and represents at the same time the first attempt at an international organization
0! oer and scientific progress.

1g THE ONL REVIEW that among its contributors can boast of the most illustrious men of science in the whole world.
¥ aries x Review in the language of their authors, andsevery number has a supplement con the French of all the articles
The review is thus completely accessible to those who know only French. (Write for a free copy to the mote Secretary of
Soientis, Milan, sending cightpence in stamps of your country, merely to cover packing and postage).
SUBSCRIPTION: §0
Substantial reductions are granted to those who take up more than one year's subscription
For information apply to “‘ SCIENTIA,” Via A. De Togni, 12 - Milano 116 (Italy)

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVII, No. 1.

~
