Discussion on the Inheritance of Mental
Qualities, Good and Bad.

_ A discussion on the above subject took place after the Annual General meeting
on Tuesday, July 4th, at the Royal Society’s Rooms, in Burlington House.

Major Leonard Darwin was in the chair and the discussion was opened by Dr..
Tredgold.

Dr. TREDGOLD :—

In opening this discussion I would first of all remark that the title is not
strictly accurate and lest it should convey a wrong impression it may not be out of
place to emphasize the point that no qualities of mind (in the sense in which the
word quality is ordinarily used), either good, bad or indifferent, are, or can be,
inherited. An individual may inherit tendencies to the development of certain
qualities, both mental and physical, but he cannot inherit the actual qualities
themselves.

This may perhaps seem a small point, almost a verbal quibble indeed, but it is
not so in reality. There is clearly a very great difference between inheriting a
quality ready made and actually in being, and inheriting a tendency to its development; for if inheritance is merely of tendencies or potentialities it is obvious that
the result, that is the realization of the potentiality, may be dependent upon an
external factor, namely upon the extent to which the environment affords or withholds opportunities for such realization. Consequently it becomes of importance
to appreciate that imheritance is entirely concerned with the transmission of tendencies or potentialities and not of actual qualities.

That every living creature does inherit certain tendencies is a fact which needs
no demonstration. It is obvious to anyone possessed of ordinary powers of observation that all living creatures inherit tendencies to grow to a particular shape and
size and that such tendencies even relate to their intimate structure. Indeed it is
plain that were there no such tendencies creation would be in a state of absolute
chaos instead of consisting of an orderly series of biological species. With
regard to man, the individual inherits not only a tendency to grow in the general
likeness of the human species, but also of the race and even the nation to which he
belongs, indeed in many cases even in the likeness of his family. All this is common knowledge, but when we come to the question we are now considering, that of
the inheritance of tendencies to peculiarities of mental development, we find much
dispute and no little scepticism.

I think that perhaps the chief reason why those who, while admitting the
inheritance of tendencies in regard to the physical conformation, dispute or deny
it in the case of the mind, is to be found in the prevailing conception of mind.
Mind has long been, and still is, regarded as something which is entirely independent
of and altogether transcends matter and which, in consequence, is removed from
the ordinary laws governing inheritance. I do not propose to enter into any
discussion as to the ultimate nature of mind, but I do wish to emphasize the fact,
for it is vital to our discussion, that most, and perhaps all, of the manifestations
of mind, that is the qualities of mind, are intimately related to and dependent upon
brain structure, and that consequently there is no a priori reason against the
tendency to them being inherited. .

This point is of so much importance that it is desirable to make a further reference to it. Let us consider general mental capacity ; as is well known, this varies
in degree from a very high level of mental development to a state of idiocy so profound that mind can hardly be said to exist at all, and between these two extremeg
204 EUGENICS REVIEW.

there is every conceivable gradation. Now I do not suggest that our present
methods of macroscopical and microscopical examination of the brain are such as
to admit of our differentiating between minor gradations of capacity, we have not
yet arrived at this state of perfection and for the present we have to be satisfied with
discriminating between fairly marked differences. If, however, we can do this we
shall have established the fact of the relationship of mental capacity to brain structure and so have brought mind within the scope of the laws of inheritance. Further,
we shall be justified in assuming that even minor variations may be dependent upon
similar alterations which our present methods do not enable us to detect. There is,
in my opinion, not the slightest doubt that ample demonstration has been given of
the general correlation between mental capacity and brain structure. I need not
go into details, but I may say that, speaking generally, the brain of the person
suffering from marked mental defect is smaller, contains fewer cells and fewer
association fibres than does the brain of a person of average mental capacity.
Moreover, there is a general correspondence between the degree of imperfection discoverable after death and the amount of capacity present during life, whilst in the
non-defective there is similarly a general correspondence betweea the wealth of
brain cells and association fibres and the degree of mental development. Further,
in persons whose mental capacity is markedly on the wane, or who are suffering from
the various forms of chronic dementia, we find an atrophy and degeneration of the
same regions of the brain that are under-developed in mental defect. I think all
this shows quite clearly that there is a general correlation between mental capacity
and brain structure.

Can we carry this any further and find evidence of a correlation between certain
specia] mental qualities or aptitudes and brain structure? I need hardly point out
to you that the difficulties in the way of such a demonstration are enormous. It
was only comparatively late in the last century that we were able to relate a certain
portion of the brain cortex with movements of the limbs, although paralysis of
movement is a very common condition and one which admits of ready investigation. More recently other areas of the cortex have been mapped out and we now
know that certain regions are corcerned with the functions of vision, hearing,
smelling and sensation in general; but there are still vast areas of the brain cortex
which remain entirely uncharted and unexplored and at the present time practically
nothing is definitely known regarding the localization of particular mental qualities
or aptitudes, although the phrenologists may impose upon a gullible public by the
profession of such knowledge.

As I have remarked, however, our knowledge of cranial topography is still in
its infancy and the difficulties are very great, so that it by no means follows that
because we have not yet been able to relate certain special mental qualities to particular brain cells no such relationship exists. As a matter of fact there are certain
facts which are not only strongly suggestive of such a relationship but which
hardly admit of satisfactory explanation on any other view. Take for instance,
the mathematical faculty ; cases have been recorded of even mental defectives who
possess this to an extent which is really astonishing, on the other hand there are
otherwise normal persons who show a decided difficulty in doing comparatively
simple calculations. Similarly with musical ability; there are some persons who
possess this in a very high degree, there are others in whom it would appear to be
completely lacking. Or consider again what is termed moral sense, and by this I
should say that I do not mean merely an intellectual perception as to right and
wrong, but the feeling which accompanies such perception—the emotion of increased
self-respect and satisfaction which arises when we do the right, and the emotion of
repugnance, regret and shame at the contemplation or commission of the wrong.
Whilst perhaps most civilized people possess the germ of this feeling, and whilst
in some it may be developed to a very high degree, there are others in whom we
are compelled to conclude that the very germ is entirely absent. I might mention
other mental qualities which would appear to be psychological entities, such, for
instance, as the religious and aesthetic emotions, the qualities of pre-vision, inventive construction, symbolic perception and so on, all of which vary within a very
wide range in different individuals, but I have said enough to emphasize the point
I want to suggest, namely, that it is extremely difficult to account for the great
differences in these respects in different individuals other than on the assumptioa
that they are due to variations in brain structure, and that consequently they are
not outside the scope of the laws of inheritance.

Admitting, however, their correlation with brain structure, there is another
INHERITANCE OF MENTAL QUALITIES, GOOD AND BAD. 205

objection to their inheritance which is frequently put forward and which we have
toconsider. It is this; that the extent of the development of these mental qualities
in different individuals i is not due to any difference of innate and inherited tendency,
but to the nature of the environment. In other words, that all persons are born
with similar and equal tendencies and potentialities and the realization of these
is entirely dependent upon the nature of their surroundings. On this hypothesis
the person of high mental capacity and attainments is so because of the extremely
favourable nature of his surroundings, the person of mediocre capacity is so because
his circumstances have been less favourable and the mentally defective person is
defective merely because his environment has been still less favourable to the growth
of mind, which ,—as Euclid would say—is absurd.

I have no desire to minimize the part played by the environment in the development of mental capacity. As I remarked at the beginning, inheritance is of tendencies only, and it is obvious that whether these tendencies have full scope or suffer
handicap must be dependent upon external surroundings. But the action of the
environment is limited to the affording or withholding of opportunity and this is
demonstrated by abundant evidence. As I need hardly remind you, many persons
have developed great mental capacity and risen to positions of eminence even under
adverse surroundings; again no surroundings, however favourable, will make a
mental defective normal; and every elmentary school teacher knows that children
in the same class, living in the same street, and bred under conditions which are
precisely similar yet evince very different mental qualities and capacity. The
explanation can only be that they possess different innate tendencies. Are these
tendencies inherited and are they transmissible?

The answer to this question can only be supplied by genealogical studies. If
we find that the tendency to a high, to a low, or to a defective mental capacity ; or
the tendency to a marked development or to the absence, of some special mental
quality, is not confined to the individual, but is characteristic of the family, stock,
or nation to which he belongs, then we are justified in concluding that it is due to
differences in the germ plasm and is inherited.

Let us consider general mental capacity. In the first place I think there is
very little doubt that there are differences in educability, that is in the potentiality
for development on educational lines, which are dependent upon race. For ininstance, it has been found in certain schools in New York, in which children of
black and white races are educated side by side, that there are constant and important mental differences. The coloured groups require from a term to a year longer
than do the whites to complete the course, and in every subject of study the whites
attain to a higher average of scholarship. (M.J. Mayo, Archives of Psychology,
New York, Nov. 1913). With regard to social classes, the distinction in England
is now not nearly so great as it was a few generations ago; I think, however that we
can certainly find sufficient examples of two main groups to institute a comparison,
namely, those whose ancestors for several generations past have worked with their
brains (the professional and administrative classes) and those whose ancestors for
many generations have worked with their hands (the labouring classes). There
are, of course, some exceptions, but I do not think there is the slightest doubt that
on the average the educability of the professional classes is distinctly higher than
that of the labouring classes. And it is to be remembered that for nearly fifty years
all the classes in the community have had educational facilities, which, although
not perfect, are yet of a high order. We see similar differences running in families.
I need not refer to the facts regarding the inheritance of ability which have been
ascertained by Galton, Whetham, and other inquirers, for they are doubtless well
known to you; it is sufficient to say that they afford ample evidence of the hereditary
nature of the tendency to high mental capacity. Conversely, I have met many
examples in which a subnormal educability not amounting to mental defect has
been distinctly familial and has characterized all the members of a family for at.
least two generations.

The question of the inheritance or otherwise of that variety of subnormal
mental development which constitutes legal mental deficiency is one of such great
social importance that it is desirable to allude to it more particularly. I have
already mentioned that mental defect is associated with imperfection of brain
structure. This is readily recognizable in the more severe grades of idiocy and
imbecility, and although in the less pronounced condition of feeblemindedness
arrest of brain growth may not be so apparent, it cannot be doubted that here also
there is a material basis for the menta: defect. There are, however, two varieties
206 EUGENICS REVIEW.

of mental defect , namely Primary and Secondary, and it is necessary to distinguish
between them, for they are the result of very different causes. In the Secondary
group the innate potentiality for mental growth would appear to be normal and
arrest of brain growth is brought about by some entirely fortuituous circumstance
in the shape of accident or disease. For example, a child who is developing normmally, may have its brain injured during birth, or it may suffer from a severe attack
of brain inflammation in the early months of life. As a consequence some of the
nerve cells subserving the functions of mind are destroyed and the child grows up
with a varying degree of defect. Such cases, of course, are not due to inheritance
and the probability is that they are not transmissible. The Primary group, however, stands on an entirely different footing. There is here no untoward factor of
the environment, the circumstances attending development differ in no way from
those in ordinary children and the condition is clearly the result of an innate defect
of developmental potentiality. This defect is germinal and is transmissible and
although there are some instances in which no hereditary connexion can be traced
and in which the primary cause of the germinal variation is unknown, these cases
are relatively few and the great majority are undoubtedly the result of morbid
inheritance. The presence of such inheritance is shown by the fact that an unusually
large proportion of the direct or collateral ancestry evince a marked proneness to
mental or nervous abnormality in the shape of hysteria, epilepsy, neurasthenia,
insanity, early dementia or actual deficiency.

The objection is sometimes made that mental defect cannot be hereditary
because in many cases it is not preceded by actual defect but by other abnormalities
of the nervous system like those I have just mentioned. This objection seems to me
to result from the erroneous idea that it is ‘‘qualities’’ which are inherited , whereas,
as I have pointed out, inheritance is of tendencies and not qualities. My enquiries
have led me to the conclusion that the community contains a very considerable proportion of families whose germ plasm has undergone impairment and that in consequence of this the members of these families are characterized by tendencies to imperfection of the nervous system. In some persons these tendencies are manifested
as imperfection of function and we then have hysteria, epilepsy, neurasthenia,
and other so-called ‘‘functional’’ diseases. In other cases the tendency to imperfection is more pronounced and it then shows itself as a defective durability or premature degeneration , which is seen clinically as chronic insanity or the various forms
of dementia. In yet other cases the germinal impairment is so great and the developmental potentiality so lessened that the brain cells are intrinsically incapable of
developing up to the standard which is necessary to enable the individual to maintain existence without some degree of care, supervision, or control—and we then
have the various grades of mental deficiency. The important thing to note is that
it is not the actual mental defect , insanity, or functional disorder which is inherited
but the tendency to these conditions, the material basis of which is an impairment
of the developmental potentiality of the germ plasm—a state which is known as
the neuropathic diathesis.

I do not propose to discuss the origin of this germinal impairment, since to do
so would take us too far away from our subject; but I may remark that if appears
to me that there are various degrees of germinal impairment—-that is to say that
the tendency to neuronic imperfection varies considerably in different families
and in different generations of the same family—and that the extent of these tendencies accounts in great measure for the actual condition present in different
individuals. Moreover, I am inclined to think that the inheritance of this impairment is more akin to the blending which occurs in the case of pigment than of the
Mendelian type, but this is a matter which needs further investigation. In any
event there is no doubt that the tendency to imperfection is greatly augmented by
the mating of a tainted individual with one of similarly tainted stock. It is necessary to remember, however, that the actual manifestation of the taint may be
modified by the environment. Ifa person with a comparatively slight tendency to
defective nerve function is brought up under favourable surroundings, and if he is
so placed in life as not to be exposed to any external stress or strain, his latent
tendency may never become patent and he may live and die apparently normal.
But should he be exposed to any trying ordeal the chances are that he will break
down and there is no doubt that it was hereditary tendencies of this kind which were
mainly responsible for a very large proportion of cases of ‘‘shell-shock’’ during the
recent war. Should such a person be exposed to adverse surroundings during the
spring time of brain development, that is at birth or in the early years of life, the
INHERITANCE OF MENTAL QUALITIES, GOOD AND BAD. $207

development of the brain cells may be so embarassed as to result in permanent
mental defect. And obviously the greater the intrinsic impairment, the less will
an adverse environment be needed to produce this result. In many cases of mental
defect, as I have already remarked, defect is inevitable however favourable the
surroundings may be. .

So far I have dealt with general mental capacity ; we may now briefly consider

the inheritance of tendencies to more specific mental qualities. I may remark that
in the present state of psychological knowledge it is not possible to say exactly
which of the particular aptitudes possessed by individuals are due to innate differences of mental constitution and which are merely special developments, or acquirements. For example, it is possible that the particular mental processes operating
in a successful barrister may be different from those in the case of an eminent physician, asoldier, oradivine. It seems probable to me, however, that such differences
are not so much a consequence of differences in innate tendencies, as of acquirements due to training and use, and I am disposed to think that most men of really
good intrinsic mental capacity would have done equally well in whichever of these
callings they had taken up. I think this view finds some suppvurt in the study of
family histories, and the fact that some families take to law, others to medicine or
to the Church may simply be a result of the bias of surroundings and not of any
special inherited tendencies.
I think it cannot be doubted, however, that there are particular qualities and
aptitudes of mind which are due to innate tendencies, and although some of these
would appear to come into being spontaneously (which is only another way of saying
that we are ignorant of their cause) many of them certainly do appear to be inherited
and transmissible. A very good illustration of this in regard to music is afforded
by the history of the Bach family, of which I gave some details in an article published
in the Eucenics Review last year. In this family we find clear evidence of the
inheritance of a high musica] ability through four generations and in the case of
the most eminent of all, John Sebastian, that the tendency was hereditary is shown
by the fact that it manifested itself in spite of the denial of any special facilities
by his elder brother. As I have said, however, in many instances marked capacity
of this kind would appear to come into existence spontaneously, like the sports and
freaks which occur in plants and animals, it then constitutes genius, and in most
cases such genius is not transmitted to the descendants.

The general conclusions to which I think we are justified in coming are these:
That general mental capacity is correlated to brain structure and is the realization
ofa developmental potentiality which is germinal, and therefore inherited and transmissible. That this innate potentiality cannot be augmented by the environment,
although defects in the environment may interfere with its full realization: That
this innate potentiality varies in different families, ranging from a degree which,
under favourable surroundings, will result in high mental capacity, to a. degree
which is inadequate for normal mental life: That in addition to general capacity
there is evidence that certain special qualities and aptitudes may be similarly
inherited , although many of what are called the ‘‘qualities’’ of mind are acquirements resulting from individual training and are probably not immediately
heritable.

It is obvious that this is a subject of the utmost importance and there are many
other aspects of the matter which might be dealt with did time permit. My task,
however, is merely to open this discussion and I trust that what I have said may
suffice to do this.

Dr. BERNARD HOLLANDER :—

The subject of the debate this afternoon is ‘*The Inheritance of Mental Qualities.’’ For this purpose it is essential that we should agree as to the meaning of the
terms we use. We all know what is meant by inheritance ; but I am bold enough to
assert that there is a great diversity of opinion in this assembly as to what constitutes a primary mental quality. We still lack a proper analysis of the human mind
and we are still ignorant of the primary mental powers. No psychologist has yet
supplied a satisfactory classification of the elements of the intellect, or of the
primary emotions (with the exception of fear and anger) ; and as regards the instinctive dispositions we are no better off, and their terminology leaves much to be
desired. Even those qualities which psychologists regard as primary from their
point of view, are biologically highly complex. Though we shall never be able to
analyse the human mind as the chemist analyses his substances, it is evident that
208 EUGENICS REVIEW.

we must agree on the meaning of an elementary mental quality, before we can
decide whether it is innate or acquired, and whether it can be reproduced in the
offspring .

Prakce the question of the instincts which man has in common with animals.
There can be no doubt that they are hereditary. ‘Yet not in the same sense as in
animals. For there are in man no definite, hard and fast instincts such as characterise the lower types of animals, but rather a complex series of propensities to
action, neither automatic nor uniform, and controlled largely, at all events in the
adult, by the intelligence. If man were provided with instincts, like animals, he
would not require such a long period of protection and instruction. As these unconscious instinctive dispositions are not acquired by the individual, but are given
in the germ, they are transmitted from generation to generation, varying only as
other biological characteristics of the stock also vary. They depend for their
manifestation on inborn pathways of nervous currents, which have as their functional correlate inborn motor tendencies, and as their psychical correlate inborn
psycho-physical dispositions.

Psychologists have so far neglected the biological elements of the primary
instincts, and treated them (under the title Social Psychology and Psychology of
Behaviour) as if they were purely spiritual reactions to the influences of the environment. But we find that children show different dispositions to fear, anger, love,
etc., in different degrees long before they have any experiences and quite independent
of intellectual influences, and we find sometimes that all the training fails in curbing the natural inclinations. If we do not admit that they are due to inborn
peculiarities of brain organisation, it will be difficult to explain them. Education,
experience, and external influences in general, may draw out the inherited dispositions and may modify them, refine them, but they cannot create them. Education
and environment can act only in proportion to the degree of development of the
innate mental powers. External influences can sharpen existing aptitudes and
dispositions, but cannot supply new ones.

It must be admitted, however, that inasmuch as these inborn dispositions
depend for their manifestation on the highest and most unstable portion of the
organism, the brain and nervous system, they vary more widely than the grosser
physical traits. They are more modifiable and alterable, owing to the fact that
only about one-third of the connections of the nervous system are made at birth,
the other two-thirds being acquired by the individual during his lifetime. These
acquired connections must, of course, very greatly modify the character of the
original connections.

This observation will explain the fact that no mental qualities as such can be
inherited, only the potential dispositions to them; or, more correctly speaking,
the physiological units of each primary disposition, What these units are is still
a mystery. Tendencies that manifest themselves while the individual is still
immature are more certain to occur in their primitive form. Tendencies that do
not manifest themselves until late in life, may through the influence of adaptation
and education become modified or suppressed altogether. This much is certain,
however, the environment has no creative capacity. The mental quality must be
inborn.

The human brain is a living substance with limitless reserves of potentiatily,
which are ready to be realised, not by passive impressions of the environment, but
by active reaction to its stimuli. Nurture cannot give a child sight if born blind,
music if born tone-deaf, or even a passion for the acquisition of wealth without the
underlying native propensity. Our innate dispositions give us realisable potentiality, and the environment makes the realisation of potentiality possible. There
are many geniuses in the world who remain undeveloped and obscure for lack of
opportunity; there are many imbeciles whose defects are hidden because they are
never called upon to do anything requiring intelligence; and there are many criminals in the world who remain honest because they have never been subjected to
temptation.

The great majority of inborn differences between parent and offspring are due
simply to new combinations of the elements composing the primary dispositions.
Considering the long line of ancestors, and that half the cells come from the male,
and the other half from the female side, there is room for innumerable variations,
and the wonder is that there is any resemblance at all. The resemblance is often
due to the fact that the child gets the first stimulus from its parents, those qualities
resembling the parental qualities being encouraged; those differing being discourINHERITANCE OF MENTAL QUALITIES, GOOD AND BAD. 209

aged. The inherited capacities render the child more capable of receiving education, but the child has not always the opportunities which favoured the parents.
‘On the other hand, congenital deficiency in any mental quality cannot be brought
to the level of congenital strength.

It is the cerebral apparatus that is inherited; the stock of ideas has to be
acquired. There are no inherited mental structures, as is sometimes assumed.
Acquired knowledge perishes with the individual, but not the ability of his off‘spring to acquire knowledge of the particular kind. This is increased with the
growing complexity of the brain. Each child has to acquire its knowledge just
a8 painfully as its parents; the only thing that it inherits is the ability to do so.
For example, a child may inherit a group of brain cells adapted for the appreciation
-of music ; the mind-structure for it, it must form for itself. The developed complex faculty cannot be transmitted, for that would mean that the entire experience
on which it grew could be reproduced. Musical ability consists of many factors;
sense of time, rhythm, harmony of sound, appreciation of tone, etc. Each of these
is separable and presumably genetically distinct, and it may happen that not all
-of them are transmitted from the musical parent to his child.

In estimating the intelligence of children we must distinguish between general
intelJigence and special capacity. Even idiots sometimes possess special capacities, such as memory for numbers and even calculating ability, musical ability,
-extraordinary memory for facts, events, lapse of time, dates, names, and so on.
Again, the child may be backward intellectually and yet normal in its conduct,
_and the child may be highly gifted and yet as regards morals absolutely unmanageable. But there is no moral sense, so-called. There are only certain desirable
qualities, such as charity, faith, hope, love of the beautiful, and regard for one’s
fellowman. What is called morality is to a large extent the power of self-restraint ,
and this depends on a number of factors.

The title chosen for the subject of debate this afternoon says ‘‘mental qualities
good and bad.’’ But there are no good or bad mental qualities, strictly speaking.
It is one and the same quality that can be employed for a good or a bad purpose.
When we speak of bad mental qualities we mean really the uncontrolled propensities, the.selfish gratification of our desires, detrimental to the individual or to
society. All human beings are therefore potentially bad and they may be actually
wicked from an innate predominance of the selfish over the altruistic dispositions,
owing to congenital deficiency, neglect, or a faulty education.

That the same mental quality can be employed morally and immorally can be
illustrated by some examples of my own experience. Some time ago I was consulted
by a diplomatist of high standing about his young son, whom he described as an
inveterate liar. On investigating the history I discovered that the father was
known for his ability to handle truths artfully, and that the son, who had lost his
mother was allowed more or less free play of his innate dispositions by his governesses, and having not yet acquired the intelligence and gained the experience of his
father, he manifested the inherited disposition in a crude and objectionable
manner. I have seen sons of self-made millionaires addicted to kleptomania, or,
if they were not given to pilfering and fraud, they were certainly mean in the minor
money transactions of daily life. On the other hand, it is well known, that the
sons of wealthy self-made men are often wasters; generally however from mental
defect, lacking the capacity for industry , commercial ability, and love of possession
for possession sake. Sometimes their mental weakness is very marked, rendering
them easy prey for the unscrupulous.

I could give other examples of my own experience, which support Galton’s
‘observation, of sons failing with the sins of their father, and—I might add—
daughters succumbing to the weaknesses of their mothers. But I will add only
‘one more observation, that of diseases which more than any other seem to be directly
inheritable, namely epilepsy and insanity, especially that variety of insanity
known as melancholia. Of course, it is only the instability of the nervous system
which is transmitted; still, in the two diseases mentioned there seems a strong
tendency to reproduce identical symptoms. I should also like to give just one
-anecdote to illustrate the importance of heredity. A young man about to marry
-asked me for a certificate of his eugenical fitness. He himself was physically and
mentally sound. His paternal history was also in order ; but his mother was insane
-and so were a large number of her relations. Prominent on her side was one sane
man, an acknowledged genius known to the entire intellectual world ; yet his chil-dren are again affected, not with insanity, but feeble-minded. More of my cases
210 EUGENICS REVIEW.

show mental unsoundness on the maternal side than on the paternal, and I conclude
from this that it is more important for the offspring that the mother is healthy than
the father, probably because of her influence during the nine months before birth.

Neither the parental capacity nor the parental defect is always inherited as a
whole, but there is a disturbance of relations of structure and hence of function,
producing a constitutional deficiency which takes the line of least resistance. In
any case, it is only the disposition, not the actual quality, that is inherited, often
aggravated by a faulty environment, which it may be beyond our power;to change.

Can acquired mental capacities be inherited? This is a difficult problem to
solve, for, as has already been stated, we do not yet know what are the primary
innate capacities. But assuming that a mental quality can be acquired, its
inheritance will depend primarily on the extent to which it affects and impresses
the brain and nervous system. The brain controls the whole of the life processes
of an organism, consequently those acquired characters which do not affect the
brain directly are not transmitted ; on the other hand, those which do affect the
brain directly are transmitted. Any voluntary or involuntary effort which originates from the brain and increases or lessens the brain functions in any way, and thus
modifies the brain structure, tends to be inherited ; thus rendering the organism in
course of time capable of reacting to the varying influences of the environment in
certain ways. A surgical deformity, as the loss of a limb, even if experimentally
done for generations, need not affect the individual, for the inherent tendency of
the organism to produce the same complete animal is stronger than any artificial
injury. On the other hand, the inhibition of instincts for generations is likely to
affect the central nervous system, and thus ultimately to produce a change, not in
the abolition of the instinct, but in the direction of greater educability to restraint
in the same direction of inhibition. Muiltations therefore are not inherited.
Wooden legs do not run in families, although wooden heads do.

Let me repeat, it is not the capacity, but the educability which is inherited.
If two musically gifted persons marry, it does not signify that the child too will be
musical; but there is likely to be a greater educability for music, which by the
musical environment may be drawn out, stimulated, fostered, and brought to yet
greater perfection than the parental capacity. Therefore, the objection frequently
riased , that if acquired characters were passed on, children would be able to read and
write without having to learn, is unreasonable ; for though no child is born that can
read or write, every normal child inherits the apparatus for such acquirements.

Since, as regards mental capacity, we do not yet know what are the primary
biological characters which are most desirable, we must be satisfied for the present
with the elimination of mental and moral defect, which renders those so afflicted
likely to become anti-social. Clever parents—that is parents with a superior
cerebral apparatus—may not always produce clever children; but feeble-minded
parents—that is parents with brain deficiencies-——never will. The latter are more
prolific, careless of the number and quality of their offspring, and our humane
civilisation takes the greatest care for the unfit to survive. That slum children can
be rescued and brought to efficiency by change of environment, if they are not
actually mentally deficient, only proves my statement that there are no good and
bad mental qualities ; it is only in their use that they can be good or bad.

An education designed as if all children had the same cerebral endowments is
bound to fail. Children vary from birth in their instinctive, emotional, and intellectual qualities, that is, in their dispositions to them, according to the development, quality, and efficiency of the various parts of the brain, on which their
manifestation depends. True, we do not possess as yet the requisite knowledge of
the brain functions and of the units which make up the complex mental qualities
known to us. But the fact remains beyond dispute that, while education can do
much in drawing out and developing latent mental qualities, heredity is allimportant.

Mr.R.A. FISHER :— (Paper presented but not read).

The view has recently been put forward, with some show of reason, that
although innate mental qualities vastly outweigh differences of environment in
determining the personal achievement of individuals of the same race or class, yet
in considering the future progress of civilisation, the innate mental qualities are
of little importance compared with the Traditions, or Mental Environment in which
future generations are reared.

If this view were accepted, the interest of eugenists in mental inheritance
INHERITANCE OF MENTAL, QUALITIES, GOOD AND BAD. 211

would, I think, be entirely confined to the part they can play, in preventive medicine, in the elimination of mentally, as well as of physically pathological types.
It would still be our duty to establish the inheritance of mental defect, in order to
prevent the m ltiplication of those types who constitutionally cannot play any
self-supporting part in even a favourable environment, but the positive part of
eugenics, the part which Galton especially had at heart, in imagining a more
enterprising, more intelligent and a more capable race of men to whom the halfaccomplished task of controlling the earth might be bequeathed—that part of
eugenics would have to be set aside.

Now it may readily be admitted that the actual work achieved by any individual man or woman, depends almost wholly upon his mental environment.
A man who in the present century may reasonably hope to make a genuine and
permanent contribution to science, might be very unlikely to do so if he had lived
in the 17th century. At that time he might influence contemporary thought on
moral and philosophical questions. In the 13th century he could have done little
more useful than the collation and translation of Greek MSS. A few centuries
further back his mental activities would have left no written record. But though
his scientific achievement may be said truly to depend upon his mental environment, does it follow that had he been in other ages, his mental endowment would
have been a matter of indifference? In particular does it follow that he would
have taken no share in the building up of a favourabie environment in the future?
Are his clearheadedness, and love of objective truth -—for I may assume that he is
of a scientific temperament—are these qualities necessarily wasted, during the
periods when the facilities for scientific investigation are not such as to put actual
discovery within his reach? I suggest that it is not so, but that in every age in
which we can imagine him to have been born, he will exert an influence in the same
direction; in the direction of a clearer understanding of the world in which we live ;
of the elimination of false analogies, and verbal confusions. It appears to me that
his contemporaries and successors, in however narrow a circle, will have, by reason
of his life and thought, a better Tradition, a better Mental Environment, a better
chance of intellectual development than they would have otherwise had. Mental
Environment seems to me, therefore, to be principally built up, or broken down,
by the congenital mental qualities of successive generations.

The same questions may be viewed in another aspect, and I will again take
progress in Science, not as identical with advancing civilisation, but as an essential
element in advancing civilisation. The progress of science, like the growth of a
plant, may be checked by any one of a number of limiting factors. You may have
the men, but not the laboratories ; equally you may have the laboratories, but laek
the men to staff them. Even if we suppose for a moment that an environment
favourable to scientific discovery is guaranteed for the future, is it so obvious that
the future of scientific progress is assured? Or is it the case that many departments
of science are even now languishing for lack of a mastermind? The growth of
specialisation, passing as it does as an unquestioned necessity , is an ominous feature.
We are ready to assume that no man can master more than a smail fraction of his
subject although under modern conditions he may be free to give his whole
working life to mastering it. The laboratory specialist who makes the discovery
is different from the encyclopedic specialist who writes the text-book, and he in
turn differs too often from the academic specialist whe professes the subject at a
university. But I am told that modern science is now so vast that the only hope
of advance lies in increasing specialisation; that if Newton lived to-day he would
not comprehend the whole of modern Mathematical Physics. I doubt it; there
have been few, but sufficient, brilliant examples, such as the late Lord Raleigh, to
demonstrate that a single man can make great and permanent advances in a vast
variety of questions. The rea] advances in science do not complicate the matter,
but simplify it ; and Newton would find the Universe not harder but easier to understand if he has succeeded to the work of Maxwell. But if it be true, and I accept it
as a fact, that progress in modern science absolutely requires increasing specialisation, then it cannot be denied that existing limitations of intellectual ability are
a limiting factor in modern scientific progress; that science is being retarded, if
not by an actual falling off of ability, at least by a failure to raise our intellectual
standards up to the level of comprehending fully the ground which is already won.
Specialisation may mean that our modern mathematicians are not genetically up
to the standard of a Fermat, or a Newton; it must mean that more of that kind of
ability is needed to make full use of the present opportunities.
219 EUGENICS REVIEW.

The suggestion that specialisation is not wuolly due to the immensity of the
field is borne out by the fact that it is not altogether a new phenomenon; Chinese
savants are said to have specialised much at many periods, and certainly
specialisation was acute among learned Arabs of the 12th and 14th century, especially in philology. Science proper seems to have been neglected at this period, and
the last original advances that I know of in Moslem Science are in the 11th century.
In the three preceding centuries the Arabs had far surpassed their Greek masters
in mathematics and experimental physics. Nineteenth century visitors to Moslem
lands insist upon the fatalistic resignation of the people, their hatred of foreign
innovation, and their pessimistic lack of enterprise. This is usually ascribed to the
stultifying influences of the religious teaching and civil law, which has remained
unchanged since the time of Mahommed. Over and over again the Mahommedan
system has been described as one which raising its people some way towards civilisation, stops short and hinders their further progress. We may at least note the: fact
that in important respects, the Mental Environment has been unchanged, in so far:
in fact as Mental Environment can be imposed from without. But this fact forces
us to ascribe the period of scientific discovery and advancing civilisation, to the.
genetic mental superiority of the early Arabs. The record of the inventions is
almost wholly lost ; but it is known that the last of Greek Science, ignored by the
Greeks, was eagerly translated into Arabic, and that much of it has only been secured.
from Arabic sources ; that scientific navigation was enriched by the Mariner’s compass and the Astrolabe, by means of which communication was maintained with
colonies in East Africa, Madagascar, China and the East Indies; and that they
accurately determined the size of the earth. Except in mathematics, where we
find the foundations well laid of Algebra and Trigonometry, we have to infer the
science from the applications, including most of those characteristics of modern
civilisation which were unknown to the ancients. The use of spectacles ; probably
of clocks, certainly of cotton-made paper, of gunpowder both as a propulsive agent
and.in bombs; most successful applications of industrial chemistry in dyestuffs, in
metallurgy, and in ceramics, or again the windmill, hydraulic machines, and lead
piping for domestic hot and cold water supply. The industrial arts seem to have
survived the knowledge, which gave birth to them ; introduced into Italy by Saracen
slaves during the crusades, they played no small part in promoting that change from
the semi-barbarous to the civilised conditions, which we call the Renaissance.
And it is interesting to find scientific pioneers in Europe, drawing their ideas from.
the industrial arts which had crept in at this period ; as Boyle was induced to reject
Greek notions of Chemistry, by facts patent to any one familiar with furnaces ; and
as Descartes founded the mecanistic theory of physiology on the analogy of clocks,
and of the ingenious hydraulic water works he had seen in Italy.

I think we may therefore conclude that before Mr. Carr-Saunder’s theory, that
inherited mental and moral qualities are relatively in-operative in causing historical changes, can be accepted, at least three groups of facts require explanation.
Firstly, we may ask, how is Mental Environment, or Tradition, altered, progressively or retrogressively, except by the reaction to that environment of innate
mental qualities. In the second place to what cause other than the limitation of
our intellectual powers can we ascribe the specialisation in the sciences, which is
universally deplored, in its consequences, but admitted to be increasingly necessary. In the third place how is it possible to explain the great retrogressive changes
both in mentality, and in mental environment, which have overtaken the most
brilliant races of the past, changes to which every civilisation but our own, has in
its turn succumbed. It was possible for Gibbon to ascribe the degeneracy, and
incapacity of the later Roman Empire, to the disintegrating effect of Christianity ;.
the explanation is, in my opinion, wholly incomplete and secondary. But since
religious movements are still ordinarily accepted as prime causes, and not as
effects, I have preferred to emphasise the case of the Moslem civilisation, a case in
which the Tradition is unbroken, and as far as human limitations allow, the mental
environment has been unchanged. Yet Genius, and its concomitant Progress
flourished there for only a few centuries.

In stating these difficulties I have deliberately dealt only with the scientific:
faculties ; in the history of states and civilisations the moral qualities , independence,
integrity, public spirit , seem to me even more important ; but their discussion does.
not allow of such precise definition or exemplification. It appears to me that the:
future of all the world, for good or evil, is bound up in the innate mental qualities
of future generations, and that apart from the urgent problem of prevention, theINHERITANCE OF MENTAL QUALITIES, GOOD AND BAD. 218

studies of the inheritance of mental defects in which pathologists and social
workers equally co-operate, serve a great purpose in illustrating the vitally important facts of the inheritance of mental and moral qualities in general.

Dr. C. MaxweELut GARNETT spoke in discussion from the point of view of the
Educational Administrator and dwelt on the fact that in practice any system which
assumes an equal mental capacity in all children fails hopelessly. The differences
of mental endowment are a factor that must be reckoned with and the most completely successful sy:tem is one which, far from aiming at ‘‘Secondary Schools for
All’’ or any like generalisation, gives a wide training facility for all graies from
those capable chiefly of handwork to those of an advanced order of intellectual
capacity.

In the course of his remarks when bringing the discussion to a close, Mayor
Darwin spoke as follows :—

Mental potentialities, about which Dr. Tredgold has spoken in such an interesting manner, are I believe as a rule dependent on a large number of Mendelian
factors, and consequently form a continuous series; that is to say that all gradations of human germs, from that which must develop into an idiot to that which
may give rise to a genius in suitable surroundings, are found to exist. No doubt
certain differences betweer human beings depend on differences between but few
Mendelian factors, and consequently certain qualities, including perhaps feeblemindedness, lie outside this continuous series. The results of the menta] examination of American recruits, about which a good deal has been written lately. may
be cited amongst the many facts which tend to confirm this view as to the continuity
of mental differences ; and it is to be regretted that what has appeared in the papers
concerning these American investigations has created a prejudice against them.
We have been told that half the citizens of the United States never rise above. the
mental] level of children of 14 years of age; a startling statement which the man of
common sense is inclined to reject summarily. What is asserted is that the ‘‘Intelligence’’ of the average citizen is not superior to the ‘‘intelligence’’ of the average
child of fourteen ; a statement the truth or falsity of which obviously depends on the
meaning to be attached to the word ‘‘intelligence.’’ In this connection the meaning is, I take it, the capacity for learning an entirely new subject or solving a new
problem; that is a subject or problem for the mastery or solution of which our
previous learning or experience gives us no help. Now are we prepared to claim
great superiority in iutelligence, as thus defined, over a child of 14 years of age?
I doubt it. Which of us would feel quite happy if we had been rash enough to
accept a challenge from a schoolboy to see which of us could learn most Chinese in
a given time? I have known a very intelligent mother beaten over and over again
by her little children at an odious game called Pelman patience, a game entirely
dependent on attention and memory. I call it an odious game because I myself
have been beaten at it bya boy ofnine. If intelligence is in no way connected with
experience, we must not despise the intelligence of the young.

Accepting this definition of intelligence, it follows that if we cannot find subjects or problems which are new to adults, or in regard to which ordinary training
and experience are of no assistance, then we cannot test intelligence. Here we
open out questions which many find very difficult to grasp, and consequently
analogies have often been used as aids to explanation, as a rule not very successfully. At the risk of adding another failure to the list, may I try once again?
Now a motor car often will not run well when cold, and I want you to belicve me
for the moment, whatever practical motorists may say, that the hotter a motor car
gets, the better it runs. You must also assume that you always take the motor
home to its garage and let it get cold before starting out on an entirely new road.
These being granted as unquestionable facts, the machinery of the car is analogous
to intelligence, whilst the heat engendered by running, heat which continually
facilitates the further running of the car on the same road, is like experience or
knowledge. When a new car is bought, all we get is the machinery when cold; all
we find in a child starting on a new subject is its native intelligence. We cannot
alter the design of the car, or the intelligence of the child. We want a car which
will run on all kinds of roads, and we test our car accordingly ; and in the same way
the value of a human being is largely dependent on his power of meeting new contingencies and dealing with new situations; on his intelligence, in fact. Is the car
always quite cold when starting out on a new road? Is experience of no use when
214 EUGENICS REVIEW.

taking up a new subject? Here we enter on the debateable land. We may, however, as I believe, feel confident that the questions put to the American recruits did
largely get rid of the element of experience or knowledge and did, therefore, form a
good though perhaps not a perfect test of native wit. And this native wit is, we
believe, a potentiality passed on from one generation to another by natural inheritance.

When the intelligence of the American recruits was tested it was found that a
very large number of men were endowed with a medium intelligence, and that, as
regards those of both lower and higher intelligence, the numbers in each grade
decreased continually as the distance from the mean increased. Precisely the same
type of distribution would have been observed if the height of these recruits had
been measured in feet and inches; or, in other words, in both cases an approximately
normal curve of distribution would have been found. Here is a fact which, as far
as it goes, tends to confirm the belief that these levels of intelligence are inherited
in the same way that human stature is generally said to be inherited; or, more
correctly, that both are correlated with heritable potentialities. Let us hope that
this admirable work in America will be followed up in due course by an actual
enquiry into the heritability of these levels of intelligence, together with the rate
of multiplication of each group, and if possible the amount of change in social
status which is correlated with differences in intelligence. Here is an enormous
mass of possible enquiry of the greatest importance to Eugenics ; enquiries which, to
be effective, must be based on some such investigations as those which have been
undertaken in America and nowhere else. Let us hope that America will seize this

great opportunity.
