“Eugenics is the science which deals with all influences that improve the inborn qualities of a race; also
with those that develop them to the utmost advantage,’--SI1R FRANCIS GALTON (1904)

The Eugenics Review

EDITORIAL OFFICES: THE EUGENICS SOCIETY * 69 ECCLESTON SQUARE * LONDON °* SWI

* VICTORIA 2091

Editor for the Society: Mrs. K. Hodson

 

NOTES OF THE
QUARTER

THE MAKING AND THE TAKING
OF LIFE

THE ESSENCE OF “‘life’” is the everlasting
multiplication of its own specific kind within the
confines of an alien environment. The growth of
knowledge now transmutes the very success of
this multiplication into a new hazard to the wellbeing of our own species. Two tremendous
world wars killed between them perhaps as
many as 50 million people, the equivalent of the
total population of the British Isles. Yet that
number is now replaced in less than 400 days by
natural increase of world population.
Experience suggests that, as numbers in any
community or population increase, the seeming
importance of the individual diminishes. As
reproduction becomes more deliberate, and as
the necessity for global “limitation” becomes
more widely understood, the need emerges for
progressive appreciation of quality in the making
of new lives. This is the essential prerequisite for
eugenic advance, and entails further biological
evolution in the sense of advantageous differentials in actual reproduction. The growing
understanding of the importance and excitement
of psycho-social evolution is additional to, and
not a substitution for, deliberate eugenic bio
* Nature, January Sth, 1963. 197, 4862.

logical advance. Sir Julian Huxley’s recent
Fawley lecture* should stand as a landmark in
this subject.

The human dilemma is greater than this,
however, since qualitative improvement must be
sought without detriment to the conscious
appreciation of the importance and worth of
every individual. The population surge and
excess is a recent addition to an age-old problem.
We live in days of rapid transition, both biologically and in the evolution of propriety and
ethics. We must cherish the individual whatever
his quality, and yet what is an individual? On
reductio ad absurdum a living tissue culture of
human cells is not an individual which anyone
would hesitate to destroy. Is the foetus, the
product of rape of a still terrified girl, an individual who should appropriately be destroyed
by therapeutic abortion? Opinions vary. The
adult in misery may now voluntarily end his
existence without commission of crime. But
what of infants born grossly defective?

THALIDOMIDE

IN THESE NOTES two years ago (April 1961)
appeared these words:
Fourthly ... is the problem, set primarily
to the medical profession, of the appropriate
treatment of those infants born hopelessly deformed. At present this problem is quiescent in
comparison with others in our series.
Contraception, sterilization, abortion, suicide
and voluntary euthanasia were the other members of the series.

Since then enough thalidomide-damaged children have been born in Europe to be recognized
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and to cause a furore in both the lay and the
technical press. First, the lay papers followed
the difficulties of the American mother who had
taken thalidomide in the early days of pregnancy
whilst in Europe, and later wished for a ‘“‘therapeutic” abortion. This she finally obtained in
Sweden, with the finding that the baby, if born,
would have been deformed. And then came, in
November 1962, the acquittals in Liége of
parents, relatives and a doctor, charged with
murdering a limbless child which had resulted
from thalidomide ingestion.

For several years the knowledge that the mild
virus infection of german measles, occurring in
the early days after conception, can produce
infantile deformity has occasionally raised the
question of therapeutic abortion. More recently,
it has also been realized that virus pneumonia
may result in similar deformity, and it is probable, too, that an incorrect diet can, on occasion, affect the developing embryo. Thalidomide is the first widely used drug recognized to
have direct deleterious effects on the embryo:
undoubtedly there will be others. “Drug”
deformity has now come to be a problem alike
for the community, the medical profession, and
the pharmaceutical industry.

The problem of the severely deformed infant,
whether mentally or physically deficient, has
facets which are emotional and ethical, rational
and traditional. The suffering of a child with
gross physical deformity, even after surgery or
partial alleviation with gadgets, can be immense.
Additionally there is the mental suffering of the
parents, and often of the siblings, too, if the
mother tries to compensate for the disability by
so much devotion that the other children are
given insufficient love and care. Dogmatic, but
varied, assertions based on clear consciences
have been many, but few seem to have recognized,
at least in letters to the press, two fundamentals.
The one is that this problem has both physical
and temporal degrees, and the other is that there
is an evolution of conscience with the passage
of time, and from one generation to another,
among even the most devout of people. The history of the introduction of anaesthetics provides
an admirable example.

In the House of Lords, in 1936, Lord Dawson
of Penn said:

2

This is a courageous age, but it has a different
sense of values from the ages which have gone
before. It looks upon life more from the point of
view of quality than of quantity.

This was said in a discussion on euthanasia;
since then public, as well as medical, opinion
has considerably progressed. The Suicide Act
of 1961 now allows an individual to choose a
contrived death to end personal suffering,
though the unfortunate is often unable to put
the choice into practice. A medical practitioner
cannot help without committing a criminal
offence and jeopardizing his career.

The acquittals at Liége resulted in a remarkable correspondence in The Times, including
one leader and forty-two letters. Some of the
writers openly welcomed euthanasia for deformed infants, as well as, voluntarily, for older
people in distress and suffering. One of the
correspondents mentioned the Society’s name
on November 14th, 1962:

Let up hope, rather, that the time is not far
distant when, on petition of a parent or a body
like the Eugenic [sic] Society, a small panel of
medical men will sign an order for its destruction.

In fact, its Statement of Aims does not specifically include any consideration of the problem
set by the birth of severely deformed infants;
nor would the Eugenics Society in any way
accept the role of arbiter. Yet the problem must
be of interest to the Society. At present the
appropriate treatment of deformed infants is a
matter for the consciences of individuals, though
it may well happen that members of the Eugenics
Society would tend to be in one camp rather
than another. The Society, as such, would only
be directly concerned if deformed infants, for
any one of a variety of possible reasons, were so
nurtured that the possibility of reproduction
were to arise and with it the possibility of transmission of heritable abnormalities or inadequacies. There is no evidence that a thalidomide
deformity is likely to be transmissible.

In a_conservatively-minded country like
Great Britain the activities of a pressure group,
zealous for reform, may do more harm than good
to its cause if the group is brought into being
prematurely. The growth of the Abortion Law
Reform Association and the Voluntary Euthanasia Legislation Society are examples of pressure groups arising when the time is ripe. It is
NOTES OF THE QUARTER

difficult to see, however, how the problem of the
deformed infant (including mental or physical
deformity) can be dealt with except by special
legislation, since “sound” and fashionable
medical practice will never be able (except in
the case of the occasional perceptive midwife
or obstetrician) to deal with it without legislation. As with voluntary euthanasia and the now
public condonation of suicide, a doctor cannot,
yet, openly help without committing an offence.

The effect of thalidomide is now limited by its
recognition and the withdrawal of the drug by
the manufacturers. But this withdrawal only
occurred after the additional births of a number
estimated, in the United Kingdom alone, as
between five and six hundred grossly deformed
infants who are likely to require care over many
years of impaired and often painful existence.
Thalidomide is a complex product of a complex
society, and it has added to the difficulties of
mankind. Its effect has, however, probably
accelerated the advance of public opinion on subjects allied to the interests of members of the
Society.

POPULATION PERSIFLAGE IN THE
PRESS

THE ANNOUNCEMENT BY the Minister of
Health of new official projections of British
population showing prospects of a larger
growth and a younger age-distribution than
hitherto expected has given rise to comments of
very varying quality in the newspapers. At best,
the Minister’s carefully chosen (if a little slanted)
words have been repeated or suitably paraphrased. At worst, the leader-writers have used
the change, to what they regard as a more cheerful prospect, as an excuse to shuffle off the world
population problem in cheap and easy terms. As
readers of the REVIEW will know, from facts given
in the January, 1962 and January, 1963 issues,
Britain has not hitherto partaken in the world
problem of excessive fertility in the present
century but may now be showing some signs of a
mild movement in this direction. It does not
seem to be a cause for much rejoicing.

Needless to say, what has happened in Great
Britain has virtually no effect on the world

* Fabian Research Series 232. 1962. Pp. 31. Price 3s.

population prospects, which remain unchanged.
Let us, therefore, leave this particular confusion
on one side and deal with three other popular
errors nearer home that are so often repeated
and so rarely corrected. Let us state firmly that
it is wrong to suppose:

1. that those who make population projections
are forecasting what will happen in the future;
2. that a growing population must be a very good

g;
3. that Great Britain’s population is (or was until
recently) going to become materially older in
its age-distribution.

Let us hope that it will be generally realized
one day, not too far ahead, that the truth is quite
different, namely that:

1. population projections are, somewhat reluctantly, made annually in response to popular
demand for illustrations of the effects that must
follow if present trends in fertility, mortality
and migration continue; when the trends vary
between projections, then the projections
themselves will follow suit;

2. amoderate rate of growth can be economically
stimulating in the short run, but its long-term
effects may be harmful; a rapid growth is a
disaster for all countries and most of all for
under-developed areas;

3. Great Britain’s population has “ aged ”’ enormously already over the last thirty or forty
years and is unlikely now to age much further;
(what has happened is largely a reflection of
the fertility trends in the early part of the
twentieth century).

The Minister may well not be sorry to observe
that there will be more young people to stimulate
economic demand in the near future and replenish the labour force later on. But the consequence of a continuation of the higher fertility
level of to-day, as compared with that of seven
years ago, is a total population for Great Britain
of nearly 65 million in the year 2000 instead of
one of about 50 million (the present level).
Which total is going to be the easier to live with
in these islands—even if the larger one is somewhat the younger of the two?

TOO MANY PEOPLE?

THE FABIAN SOCIETY has recently published
a broadsheet by Mr. A. Carter in which the
truths mentioned above are much better recognized.* The author argues that we should prefer

3
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a stable to a rising population on both social and
economic grounds. Socially, he is concerned
chiefly with the use of land and with traffic
congestion on the roads, and makes arguments
generally similar to those used in a debate held
by the Eugenics Society some years ago. From
the economic point of view, his line of approach
is perhaps unorthodox, but he is able to make
some interesting points concerning the relationship between population size and productivity
and between population growth and the increase
of wealth. He is also able to refer for support to
the Report of the Economics Committee of the
Royal Commission on Population, if not to the
Report of the Commission itself. In a final
chapter, Mr. Carter maintains that control of
numbers is both practicable and a permanent
necessity. He supports the idea of a greater
amount of emigration from Britain and points to
the disadvantages of large-scale immigration into
this country of mainly unskilled labour. Encouraging emigration and restricting immigration
are aims that might well be capable of achievement in some degree in the long run, but it is a
pity that he gives no figures to illustrate the
demographic consequences that could reasonably be expected; if he had, it might have
appeared that no practicable development of
migration policies is likely by itself to be capable
of solving the problem of eliminating Britain’s
population growth.

The author does recognize, however, that “‘the
fundamental problem is the excess of births
above replacement level,” ‘“‘which is likely to
persist unless steps are taken to counteract it.”
In this connection the only measures he suggests
are smaller Family Allowances for larger
families, and a higher minimum age for marriage
—say seventeen or eighteen. Here his case is not
strong, for such measures would appear able to
command little political support at the present
time, and even if they were applied their direct
effect (as he himself recognizes) would necessarily
be small. The fact is that a larger vision and a
much longer-term policy (such as family planning and eugenics provide) are needed in order to
tackle effectively the problem of major demographic trends in any country.

4

TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE; A BANNED
EXPRESSION

A BATTLE HAS been going on at the United
Nations over the phrase “technical assistance.”
It began in 1961, when thirteen countries—
including Ceylon, Ghana, Greece, Nepal,
Sweden, Thailand and the United Arab Republic—put forward a long draft resolution in
which, inter alia, the view of the Population
Commission was endorsed that the United
Nations should “give technical assistance, as
requested by Governments, for national projects and programmes dealing with the problems
of population.”” This was not discussed until
September 1962, when amendments were proposed by France, Liberia and Spain, one of
which was the deletion of this passage. The
sponsoring countries carried their resolution,
amended but still including the foregoing passage, in committee, against the opposition
mainly of Roman Catholic countries; but they
failed to obtain a majority for it in the General
Assembly; the voting on the passage was thirtyfour for, thirty-four against and thirty-two
abstentions. This rejected, the remainder of the
resolution was then passed.

Why this argument over an apparently harmless phrase? It would appear, as some of the other
amendments also seem to indicate, that it is
held to imply, or include, the dissemination of
contraceptive appliances and knowledge of
methods of birth control that are in disfavour in
some countries. It was in this sense that the
debates in New York were reported in the
Guardian, which recorded the French delegate
as saying that the General Assembly had no
right to impose a collective view on the question
of birth control, “which risked violating certain
consciences and disregarding certain laws.”

Fortunately, help for the areas needing technical assistance can still be provided, even if it
cannot be given by the United Nations.

SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
THE CURRENT CALENDAR Of meetings of
Biological Societies, 1963, compiled by the Biological Council, lists the names of sixty-six
societies in the United Kingdom. It is both informative and salutary to scan the list and mentally
to place the Eugenics Society among the heteroNOTES OF THE QUARTER

geneous company. Almost all the societies listed
publish their own journals and the few which do
not are offset by those which publish more than
one. Membership varies from the highest honour
of election to the limited Fellowship of the Royal
Society to the thousands who join the Royal
Horticultural Society.

Most of the listed biological societies are
composed of learned enthusiasts within a fairly
clearly defined scientific discipline. Their objectives are the increase of knowledge in a limited
field by means of publication and mutual stimulation. As examples of the purest of such societies may be instanced the British Bryological
Society and the Malacological Society of London. Others such as the Mammal Society, the
Nutrition Society and the Marine Biological
Association advance knowledge and may provide the platform from which individuals may
seek to modify or channel public policy in the
realms of conservation or rational fishery.
Other societies seek deliberately to educate the
public in addition to furthering a particular
discipline: the Zoological Society of London is
the primary example, and it is notable, too, for
the possession of its own laboratories.

Many of the listed societies contain individuals
who possess a sharp social conscience. But few
of the societies themselves deliberately seek to
modify public opinion and action on account
of strength of conviction in matters of social
responsibility. The Eugenics Society is among
the few. The admirable Universities Federation
for Animal Welfare goes further and is in fact
a learned pressure group within a particular
field. It flourishes for three reasons: the enthusiasm of its directorate, the convenient alliance
of things of the head and of the heart, and the
relative simplicity of its appeal to individuals.

By contrast the Eugenics Society stands alone
among all the listed societies. Its aim is the
appreciation of social responsibility in matters
connected with human biological inheritance;
that is to say, human genetics ennobled by
responsibility. The Eugenics Society must build
on a foundation of increasing detailed genetic
knowledge. It must disseminate information
and spread the appreciation of responsibility:
that is to say, it is inevitably concerned with
education. Its role is too difficult and its material

too intractable for advancement other than by
the use of the intellect. Additionally, the complexity of the Society’s field of interest and its
very long-term nature make advance by pressure group tactics inappropriate, not to say
inexpedient. The Eugenics Society can, however
and does, advance by the subsidization of pressure groups which have aims sufficiently simplified to move the hearts of the many as well as
the heads of the more discerning. The long-term
subsidization of the Family Planning Association and the I.P.P.F. fall into this pattern.

In one further and important particular is
the Eugenics Society in isolation. It alone is
subject to active antagonism based on emotion
and ignorance of reality. No one will condemn
the British Lichen Society or the British Society
of Protozoologists for their enthusiasm and
increasing knowledge. But, just because the
Eugenics Society has consciousness of responsibility for the good or ill of our own species,
emotional reactions and antagonisms are all
too prone to flourish. These are regrettable facts
of life with which we must contend. Yet, looking
back, the advance in understanding over the
decades has in fact been remarkable, more
especially, of course, in the provision and the
acceptability of the contraceptive means for
attaining those favourable differential fertilities
which are the core of eugenics.

The Eugenics Society is up against the fact
that the mere increase of knowledge is a simple
matter in comparison with the deliberate improvement of the condition of men by the sensible use of new knowledge. Valid comparisons
may be made with the increase of knowledge in
the nuclear field.

A NEW PUBLICATION PROJECT

AN EARLIER DEFINITION of almost any concept is likely to seem archaic with the passage of
the years. Thus with eugenics—Galton’s “‘study
of the agencies under social control that may improve or impair the racial qualities of future
generations” now seems oddly outmoded despite its truth. A more sophisticated modern
definition might read “eugenics is the ennoblement of human genetics by an assumption of
social responsibility.” Yet the complexity of the
eugenic concept remains an impediment to its

§
THE EUGENCIS REVIEW

much wider appreciation by those many who
already have an inkling of reality in this difficult
field. To help such people the Society is planning
a volume under a title which shall encompass
much of our range of responsibility towards
future generations.

The scheme is to produce a volume bringing
together between a dozen and a score of personal
contributions from authorities on their own
topics. The contributions will, so far as possible,
be set in a logical order, but editorial work will
be used extensively to unify the whole. Thus, it
is hoped, it will be possible both to display the
wide area, and to clarify the inevitable complexity, of eugenic interest, where so many
factors are interrelated.

Such a volume should present eugenic thought
not only in relation to genuine realism but
also in relation to proper concepts of personal
freedom and responsibility. This last is an area
of concern in which the ignorant too freely
tend to criticize those who possess ideals which
extend beyond mere environmental factors.

OBITUARY
SIR CHARLES DARWIN,
K.B.E., M.C., F.R.S.

SIR CHARLES DARWIN had a long association
with the Eugenics Society: he became a Life
Fellow in 1930 and in 1939 he delivered the
Galton Lecture on Positive Eugenic Policy.* In
the same year he was elected a Vice-President,
which office he held until 1946. He was a member
of the Council from 1951 until 1961 during which
period he served as the President of the Society
from 1953 to 1959.

Sir Charles was unfailingly helpful in contributing Notes of the Quarter and book reviews
to the REviEw, besides the original papers which
we were fortunate in being allowed to print from
time to time. These included Eugenics: Galton
and After (1952); Energy in the Future (1955)
and The Ascertainment of Promising Families,
also in 1955. The last named was the text of a
lecture given on behalf of the Eugenics Society
at the Thirty-eighth Conference of Educational
Associations. This was during the period when
he was Chairman of the Society's Promising

* THe EuGENICcS REvIEw, 1939. 31, 13.
6

Families Sub-Committee, whose surveys were
an important part of the Eugenics Society’s
activities at that time.

Formal obituary notices and appreciations
appeared in the national press following his
death on the last day of 1962. We print below
two personal tributes.

Dr. G. C. L. Bertram writes: Sir Charles
Darwin was the Eugenics Society’s eighth
President, serving in that capacity from 1953 to
1959. Obituary notices elsewhere have told of his
many distinctions and achievements: here is the
place for a more personal tribute.

The personality of a President is large in the
mind of a new General Secretary taking office
during the great man’s tenure. Sir Charles could
scarcely be excelled in this regard: his good
sense and kindness were available at all times.
The mutual dwelling in Cambridge added
immensely to the convenience and the happiness
of the relationship. To use the modern idiom, a
eugenic “working tea’ at Newnham Grange was
always a pleasure and most instructive too.

Sir Charles’s The Next Million Years appeared
in 1952, and its essence later formed his Rede
lecture. Both received wide attention, though it
was characteristic of him to remark—with a
happy sense of family pride—that really it was
his sister’s, Gwen Raverat’s, Period Piece which
caught the public fancy. That of course was true
in the sense that there are always more who read
for pleasure than for enlightenment.

During the earlier part of his presidency Sir
Charles had taken a leading part in helping forward the Society’s Survey of Promising Families
organized by Dr. C. O. Carter, and in furthering
the concept of “promising” as opposed to
“problem” families. The reality of the new concept was well vindicated in that research, which
has perhaps not yet received the fuller recognition which it most certainly deserves.

Even after the six years as President were over
—that being the maximum allowable under the
Eugenics Society’s Articles—the Darwin presence was frequent and so very welcome at
Council meetings. It is a happy custom of the
Society that past presidents are always invited to
all subsequent Council meetings. In that way
the Society has, so very fortunately in recent
NOTES OF THE QUARTER

years, continued to profit from the wisdom of
Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders, Sir Charles Darwin and Sir Julian Huxley. Long may this
custom survive.

It was during Sir Charles’s tenure of office that
the Society celebrated its jubilee, the fiftieth
anniversary of its founding in 1907. The dinner
on December 4th, 1957, to mark the occasion was
presided over by Sir Charles. The occasion was
notable both for the presentation to Dr. Blacker
of the Society’s second Galton medal and, sadly,
for the thickest fog for many years which caused
both the Lewisham train disaster and the
absence of many who desired to be present.

Sir Charles was the Society’s first President to
spring from the physical sciences. As a physicist
he was especially well qualified to recognize the
numerical aspects of biological problems, more
especially of course the fundamental world
demographic problem. On this matter he took
what some may have regarded as too gloomy a
view, doubting whether any sufficiently important substitute for under-nourishment would
arise in time to afford a significant brake upon
excessive population increase.

As President, and perhaps because he was a
physicist and viewing from that perspective, he
had a clear perception. He perceived, perhaps
more than some to-day, that eugenics does truly
go beyond human genetics by the addition, to
that pure study, of personal and group responsibility and therefore need for action. Sir Charles
was also remarkably perceptive in his recognition
—and he published on this subject—that the
modern increased expectation of life postponed
the average age of leadership. Thereby, people
being what they are, the introduction of novel
ideas and ideals is regrettably postponed and
delayed beyond what is truly desirable.

Sir Charles Darwin was a great man, a kindly
man and a wise one. The Society was fortunate
indeed to have his leadership, and many of us to
be blessed with his friendship.

Dr. C. O. Carter writes: Sir Charles Darwin’s
ideas on eugenics were embodied in The Next
Million Years published in 1952. He was not
wholly optimistic. He foresaw that a fifth revolution would follow the fourth or scientific
revolution, when the stored energy in coal, oil,

and uranium would be exhausted. There would
be a world-wide shortage of power. Attempts
to get energy economically from heavy hydrogen
and hydrogen fusion would, he thought, fail.
Full exploitation of natural sources, water,
wind and sunshine would allow a population
and civilization rather less complex than existed
at present.

Further he thought that any attempt to limit
population on a world-wide scale would fail.
Man was a wild animal and any race which
successfully practised family limitation would
be replaced by more prolific groups. Population
would always press hard on food supplies with
many people undernourished and under the
threat of periodic famine:

There is no need for the procreative instinct
to become even as remotely as strong as the
sexual for it to defeat any opposing creed that
favours limitation of population, and so to
perpetuate the over-population of the world.
Nevertheless, Sir Charles thought that civil
ization based on the scientific revolution would
probably be retained, with golden ages alternating with times of hardship and a return in many
areas to barbarism. All civilizations tend to be
dysgenic, but the first civilized race which could
keep its civilization and, as a result of the
practice of family planning with the selfelimination of the psychologically sterile, develop
a strong procreative instinct would have an
advantage over all others—an advantage both
over civilized races without such an instinct, and
barbarian races who have not needed it for
their survival. This process would be helped,
and might be much accelerated, if creeds should
arise working in the same direction:

Is it possible that there should arise a eugenic
creed, which—perhaps working through what I
have called the method of unconscious selection
—should concern itself with the improvement of
the inherited nature of man, instead of resting
content with merely giving him good but impermanent acquired characters? Without such a creed
man’s nature will only be changed through the
blind operation of natural selection; with it he
might aspire to do something towards really
changing his destiny. .. . Attempts at improving
the lot of mankind have all hitherto been directed
towards improving his conditions, but not his
nature, and as soon as the conditions lapse all is
lost. The only hope is to use our knowledge of
biology in such a way that all would not be lost

7
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

with the lapse of the conditions. The principles

of heredity offer an anchor which will permanently

fix any gains that there may be in the quality of
mankind.

Many eugenists will not agree with Sir Charles
on all points. In the ten years since he wrote
there are clearer indications that an ample and
permanent supply of nuclear energy will be
available before stored fuels are exhaused. The
dysgenic influence of civilization may well be
arrested sooner than he thought probable.
There are perhaps already signs in Western
civilization of an increase in procreative instinct
in the more gifted groups, who were the first
to practise family limitation. The discovery of a
simple artificial method of photosynthesis giving
sugar from carbon dioxide and water may give
a sudden rise in food supply, which together
with the discovery of a simple reliable method
of oral contraceptive, may for a substantial time
lift the pressure of populations on food supply.
In this time a more intelligent future population
with a developed eugenic creed might well take
steps to limit the expression of their procreative
instinct.

But those who, perhaps mainly for reasons of
temperament, take a more optimistic view of the
future are in debt to Sir Charles for his thoroughgoing evolutionary approach to man’s future, and
the stress he laid on the instability of advances
due purely to cultural inheritance.

He was a courageous as well as a kindly man
and was glad that his own descendants would
be taking part in the vicissitudes of the future,
hard though these might often be.

OUR CONTRIBUTORS

E. G. Knox, M.D., M.R.C.P.

DR. E. G. KNOX graduated at Newcastle in
1949 and worked in paediatrics there, at first in
the health service but later with the University.
He spent six years as a whole-time member of a
team studying illness in relation to its environment in a representative sample of children in
Newcastle upon Tyne (the Thousand Families
Survey). Later he worked in the Department of
Social Medicine at Birmingham and at present
is back at Newcastle as a Lecturer in Paediatrics.
He has also spent some time in Nigeria and in the
Gambia.

8

Published and current work includes the
results of the child morbidity study already
mentioned, a series of studies on rhesus haemolytic disease of the newborn and ABO incompatibilities, work on congenital malformations,
studies of twinning and birth weights in Nigeria,
post-neonatal infant mortality in Birmingham,
inguinal hernia in Newcastle, a series of studies
on the aetiology of intussusception, and investigations of the epidemiology of congenital
oesophageal atresia, clefts of lip and palate,
leukaemia, and malignant tumours of children.

E. V. Kuenssberg, M.B., Ch.B. Edinburgh

DR. E. V. KUENSSBERG is one of a group
practice in Edinburgh whose members have been
carrying out research into familial morbidity
among their patients. The initial stages of this
study were financed by the Eugenics Society and
in January 1961 an interim progress report was
published in this Review (52, 225-8). Dr.
Kuenssberg has been awarded a B.M.A. Scholarship 1962-63; he is a member of the Research
Committee of the College of General Practitioners, and Chairman of the Scottish Council’s
Research Committee. He is also Honorary
Secretary of the Research Foundation Board,
College of General Practitioners.

S. A. Sklaroff, B.Sc. London

MR. S. A. SKLAROFF has been associated with
Dr. Kuenssberg in the mechanics of the ingenious filing system used in recording this research.
He has worked at M.R.C. Social Medicine
Research Units in London and Aberdeen, with
special interest in epidemiology and recording in
general practice; he is a member of the M.R.C.
Committee on General Practice Research and is
at present Lecturer in Demography and Vital
Statistics in the Department of Public Health
and Social Medicine in the University of
Edinburgh.

Professor A. S. Parkes, C.B.E., M.A., D.Sc.,
F.R.S.

PROFESSOR A. S. PARKES, who was for many
years on the Staff of the National Institute for
Medical Research, has been Mary Marshall
Professor of the Physiology of Reproduction,
Cambridge, since 1961. He is a Fellow of
NOTES OF THE QUARTER

Christ’s College, Cambridge, and of University Council and as a Vice-President; in 1945 he
College, London, and is President of the Assoc- read a paper at a Members’ Meeting on Some
iation of Scientific Workers. Problems of Reproductive Physiology, and in

Professor Parkes has long been associated 1957 he took part in the Society's Symposium
with the Eugenics Society as a member of its on Artificial Insemination (Donor).

ER—B
