AMERICAN EMIGRATION AND
EUGENICS.*

By ANDRE SIEGFRIED,

(Professor of Social Studies in the Ecole des Sciences Politiques, Paris. }

There is probably no people on record which is racially so highly
composite as that of the United States of America. It would be tedious to enumerate here the number of racial groups which occur in any
considerable numerical strength in that nation.

A recent phenomenon, and an extremely striking one, is the attention which the United States is concentrating on its racial components.
It is, of course, perfectly true that as regards the white element this
concentration is of recent date. The mixture however, between white
and negro raised problems long ago, problems which are still calling
for solution; indeed it is this last aspect of these problems that
has aroused a passion which for long periods has disturbed and will
disturb the social order. |

This racial complexity is due to waves and phases the history of
which we know with considerable precision.

The first influx, namely in the middle and latter half of the 17th
century was Anglo-Scotch and Puritan. These Anglo-Saxon settlements early began Black importations in the more Southern region for
the agricultural work to which, in the heat, white labour was not
adapted.

The second phase covering the period between 1840—1880, com-.
prises two elements mainly, the Nordic (German, Irish and Scandinavian ;) and Mediterannean (Slavs and Latin-Slavs). This incoming
group amounted to 9,500,000 foreigners, and the elements represented
were in the proportion of 91.6% Nordic, 8.4% Mediterranean and Slavs.
The cross section of this immigrant population can be made on another
plane, the whole divided into two somewhat antagonistic religious
elements, the Catholic and the Portestant, which cut across the racial
section.

The result for the United States was unexpected. The social
philosophy of 1780—90 was wholly mechanistic. It took as its fundamental standpoint the Freedom and Equality of all human beings.

The United States threw open its doors to all who would come
however heterogeneous the comers, in the unquestioning faith that
under a free constitution every man who was acclaimed politically a
citizen of the United States, would become personally and socially
American; that he would actually resemble the native-born of many
generations standing.

The condition of affairs in 1880 already proved this was not the

 

* Paper read at the International Federation of Eugenic Organisations, Paris,
July 3rd, 1926, in French.)
218 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ease. Large portions of the Eastern States and the middle East

showed themselves Germanised. To a great extent municipal and

political power was Irish with all the unmistakeable Erse character
istics ; while considerable groups were wholly Catholic, and free

Rucrican citizens were proclaiming their allegiance to a Bishop in
ome.

The third phase may be recorded as that lasting from 1880 to the
cessation of immigration in the great war. During this period
22,000,000 entered the United States.

The proportions racially stood at Nordic 22.8% ;. Mediterranean
Slavs 77.2%; Catholics predominated enormously, and there was
further a great proportion of the Jewish element.

‘*‘Martin Arrowsmith was, like most inhabitants of Elk Mills, before the SlavoItalian immigration, a typical, pure-bred Anglo-Saxon, which means that he was
a union of German, French, Scotch, Irish, perhaps a little Spanish, conceivably a
little of the strains lumped together as Jewish, and a great deal of English, which
is itself a combination of primitive Britain, Celt, Phoenician, Roman, German, Dane
and Swede.’’

—Quotation from Martin Arrowsmith, by Sinclair Lewis.

Turning to the question of the assimilation of these varying elements, it may first be pointed out that the group which most easily
amalgamated itself to the original immigrant stocks was the AngloSaxon, and in particular, the Calvinistic Protestants. The Lutherans
followed more gradually. Secondly, we have to consider a group
which could only be regarded as partially amalgamating with the
nucleus of the nation. These are the Irish Catholics, the German
Catholics and the Slavs. In the case of the first mentioned, two
causes may underlie their inherent difference from the main group;
not only does their Roman Catholic allegiance bring in an element of
foreign loyalty, they further retain something of the clan element of
their native family groupings, which means a somewhat indeterminate
allegiance within their national patriotism, and at times one which
conflicts with it.

Amongst the German Catholics it is possible that, in addition to
the conflicting religious ideals, the distinction of Catholic here indicates
also a sub-racial type. The German Catholic is very frequently not
Nordic or Teutonic; he is either Alpine or Dinaric. The Slavs have the
language difficulty. Unlike the Nordics whose languages all belong
to the same group, their native tongue goes back to a wholly alien
source.

Thirdly, we should consider those nationalities which are hardly
assimilable at all in the true sense. These are the French, Italians,
Greeks, Portuguese, Finns and Indians. Three main causes may in
these cases be adduced. There is firstly religious divergence strongly
correlated, at least in the case of the French, Italians and Portuguese,
with the family sentiment—the restricted variation of the Irish clan
sentiment. Many instances of this are familiar to those who, like the
present writer, have visited the States at frequent intervals over a
considerable period. It has been my practice to spend some time in
America once in every five years during the last 20 years. One finds
that Italian and Portuguese workmen often come to the States with
AMERICAN EMIGRATION AND EUGENICS. 219

no Intention of settling there. They save their generous wages and
bank them in the Home Country, or send them for the support of the
families left behind. Amongst the French, the strong family
instincts which form the basis in France of their agricultural system,
and which have been one of the primary causes of their low birth-rate,
are not altered on translation to the status of American citizen. Thus
the strong individualist sentiments which dominate the life of this
group are in sharp contrast to the ‘‘public spirit’’ which is one of the
dominant characteristics of the Nordic peoples. It is not intended to
press too much the difference between this individualism and the
family and clan sentiment just mentioned. It is probably the expression on the psychological plane, of the tendency which has on the
social plane been evolved (or possibly itself evolved), the racial clan
system of so many Celtic peoples.

Then, further in this group, you have the rather savage ‘isolation’
instinct characteristic of the Indian and Finnish elements, but its
political aspect is the same individualist tendency noted in the Mediterranean, and this position may be summed up by repeating that an
attitude exists in this whole group wholly at variance with the AngloSaxon civilisation, wherein the whole spiritual tendency is that of cooperation, of give and take; of an attitude of ‘fair play,’ each citizen
contributing all that he can to the whole, with no concentration, at
least in social concerns, on the narrower personal or family interest.
Lastly, we must consider how far in the American-born stocks any
assimilation whatsoever can be said to have taken place.

Regarding as American, those families which have been for at
least three generations on the Continent, we find that an external
resemblance obtains in identity of social customs and manners, the
free adoption of the same language, dress and education. But we
have to consider whether there has been any true assimilation, on the
level of ideals and sentiments. Modern students of Society in the
United States all answer this question with an unequivocal negative,
and it is due to the rather rude awakening caused by these pronouncements, and verified by the more thoughtful Americans in their
daily observation, that a wholly new phase of immigration policy is
evolving. This can be clearly demonstrated by a brief survey of
legislative phases corresponding to the three waves of immigration
already described.

The first phase is that of unconditional welcome to all who come:
it was the pride of the early American legislators to regard their
country as a refuge for all who fled from any particular conditions,
whether spiritual or physical, in their native land. Europe was
regarded as a source of supply of human material, with nosuspicion that
that material might be of very unequal value for the country of adoption.

The firm belief in the power of environment, and particularly in
the social and political environment, was at that epoch unquestioned.
Heredity was practically disregarded. Certain of the oldest families
might indeed point with pride to their Pilgrim Father ancestry, but
this pride was rooted in an historical sense, not in a biological one.

_. As a political theory this outlook had much in common with the
220 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Liberalism of England typified by the Manchester School. Confidence
in the power of education, and above all, political education, to effect
complete assimilation of any and every human type to a given ideal,
was unwavering.

A second period was initiated between 1882—1917; during this
period, probably in response to the defects shown by the type of immigrant frequently occurring during those years, the first restrictions
came into being. These were individual restrictions. It is true that
the yellow peoples were at this time subject to exclusion on racial
grounds. For the rest, no geographical or ethnical qualifications were
taken into account, but the suitability of an immigrant as a person
becoming the pivot of restriction, it was required that undesirable
persons (in the sense of those who were criminals, or physical or mental
defectives, or incorrigible loafers) should be excluded. Still the
belief in the malleability of any material drawn from European
sources was unshaken.

The third phase, namely that of ethnical restrictions has followed
with extraordinary rapidity. Already in 1917 the racial point of view
appears to be invading practical politics. Overtures to the legislature
once made, rapid developments in this process were initiated. The
work of the Eugenics Record Office on the Statistical side, confirmed
by studies from the John Hopkins University were conspicuous in
effecting this.

In 1917 the Asiatic was barred. It is interesting for our theory to

notice that this racial bar coincides exactly with the religious one,
namely, Non-Christian. Four years later, in 1921, the first law of
quotas shows how rapidly belief in Race, as an intimate factor of the
situation, has gained ground. In that year, and again in 1924, quotas
were instituted limiting strictly the number of any given racial element
allowed to enter the States.
. A number of different considerations, hard to disentangle from
each other, undoubtedly contributed to establish this point of view.
On the economic side, the low standard of living which allowed the
acceptance of low wage-rates by the Mediterranean group, has certainly
been one; and the ruling group, strongly Protestant, may have had an
instinctive fear of the Catholic element. The short history of the
States has shown today quite clearly that contact with Protestantism
in a free country has not obliterated Catholicism. To the European
onlooker, it is patent that the educated Roman Catholics in the States.
follow a modified form of that religion, but they are still Catholics,
and the numerical strength of this group, with its unwavering allegiance to an authority outside the country of its adoption, has caused
much searching of heart.

Bolshevism is a third feature. The attitude of the United States.
to this needs no emphasis. It has been clear from the outset. From
our present point of view it is exceedingly interesting to see how strongly
the legislation of to-day identifies the political tendency with the
racial type. No one has any hope of turning a Bolshevist into a
democrat; he does not want Bolshevism; he excludes the Russian—(or
to be precise the Semitic Tartar).

The quotas, on the opposite side, call for some comment on the
AMERICAN EMIGRATION AND EUGENICS. 221

racial characteristics which underlie, America’s attitude. It is of
course, clear, that the Nordic is more assimilable to American civilization. In the first place from the fact that it has the same type of
civilization in the home countries ; the development has been brought
about in the States entirely by the Nordic founders of the United
States. This is now expressed technically amongst students of immigration in the words that the Nordic type is the most assimilable. And
this expression finds its justification in the fact that taking immigrants
from out-lying rural districts, and particularly mountain tracts, from
Scotland, from Scandinavia, or from the sea-girt German plains,
in particular, or the mouths of the great German rivers, you get a
peasant who may be as uncivilised, untutored and unsophisticated as
any individual coming from Russia or the Balkan districts. The
language is not the same as that of the country of his adoption, but the
new tongue is, in point of fact, learned in a short period. Certainly
in the case of his descendants, you get a man who is capable of the
education offered in the State Schools, who adopts the manners and
customs around him and is fully prepared eventually, for the political
responsibilities of a democratic citizen.

Building on observation of these facts, the theory of the Nordic
superiority has been evolved, and at this point we may refer to the
considerable mass of literature which preceded and coincides with this
change of attitude in the United States. Many writers have now put
forward treatises on Nordic superiority, but those which have had a
very wide influence are in particular Stoddard and Madison Grant.
They, without exactly preaching eugenics, (at least under that name),
have called attention to the immense amount of research work on
inheritance of every side of human character, physical, and mental
and temperamental. As eugenic knowledge has grown and begun to
enter as a science into popular thought, so the old theory of human
equality, racial equality, and the possibility of educating a man of
any race by proper courses of training, to the type of individual desired
as a citizen, has become exploded.

But this idea of Nordic superiority stands not only on the general
considerations above cited. Americans have seen a confirmation of it
in the results of those psycological tests of a simple character carried
‘out on close on a million individuals recruited for the American army
in the war.

According to these tests, superiority of intelligence is found in
Nordic immigrants, much more than in Slavo-Latins. Iam not ready
to discuss here the real value of these tests. They may possibly
indicate that a lower type of immigrants came from southern than from
northern Europe.

In conclusion it is interesting to attempt an analysis of those
factors which really promote this assimilability.

In my view they may be taken as, firstly, a common civilisation ;
secondly, a common religion; and thirdly, a common language. As
we have noted, while an immigrant himself may not, as yet, as an individual have come to a great extent in contact with Western culture,
nevertheless the social development of his own country has naturally
run on the same lines as that attained in the United States. Above it
222 EUGENICS REVIEW.

has been made fairly clear that the difficulty in overcoming incompatible religious sentiments is fundamental.

Amongst the factors which retard or prevent the assimilation, the
family or clan type of social ideals, fuond amongst the Catholics,
together with the individualistic or self-centred tendency in habit and
outlook, form the second barrier, while difficulty in acquiring the
language certainly makes a last barrier hard to overcome. It is of
peculiar interest to see that in America laws of heredity have already
invaded the political field, and here one has reason to suspect that some
political animus at times shelters itself behind broad play on laws of
nature. It is only on this supposition that the recent liberal Irish
quota can be explained; a quota in itself contrary to the theories
expounded above, and at variance with the general trend of conclusions. The new immigration laws may possibly be regarded as a first
type of Eugenic law, and they are aimed first at a newly voiced desire
on the part of the Anglo-Saxons to maintain the purity of their race, of
which the first indication caused prohibition against further intrusion
of black and yellow peoples. But eugenic law has gone a step further
in the United States and is now aiming at purging the degenerate
elements within all races.

Twenty-three States in all have passed sterilization laws, purely
eugenic in intention. While in regard to immigration, a scheme has
already been proposed carrying the examination of the individual
immigrant as to his fitness for citizenship, into his family stock, in
order to learn whether be bears as a recessive, hereditary taints which
will appear among his progeny. It is in fact harder to conceive of a
wider application of scientific theory in social organisation, ranging
from the careful study of the character making up the individual as a
potential parent, to the psychological attributes borne in the race as
suitable or unsuitable contributions to the whole body politic.

TABLE OF RESULTS OF TESTS ON AMERICAN ARMY RECRUITS.
The percentage of individuals of superior intelligence found in the samples of

each Nation.
English .. se, 88 -. 19.7%
Scotch .. a8 oi -- 183.0%
Dutch __.... sa _ -- 10.7%
Canadians = _ -» 10.5%
Germans ws we -- 8.3%
Danes or ws «* -- §4%
Swede... a - -- 48%
Norwegians ut sie -- 4.1%
Trish - . -- 4.1%
Turkish and Austrian 2% if 3.4%
Russian . Fa i 2.7%
Greek i as BAY
Italians, Belgian a a 1.8%

Poles ax ee oe 1.5% 