RACE AND ATHLETICS
By Sir ADOLPHE ABRAHAMS, Kt., O.B.E., M.D., F.R.C.P.

EARLY forty years ago, an

uneducated native, a mathematical

genius, was discovered in a remote
village in India ; brought to Cambridge he
made many valuable scientific contributions.
He died, I believe, whilst still in his twenties.
All of this would appear superficially to have
little or nothing to do with the subject I
propose to consider, but I venture to think
that, as I shall presently show, it does in its
way provide its text or lestmotsv.

, * 6 J *

For two reasons, athletic ability is not a
good criterion by which to measure national
characteristics. It is, in the first place, a
special quality ; it is not, of course, incompatible with a good constitution and physique,
but it is by no means the same thing. I have
seen athletic prowess displayed by the most
unlikely looking material, both anatomical
and physiological, and even when disease
has been identified. The second reason is
that on account of world-wide competition
unreasonable attention has been paid to the
super-athlete by whom, quite illogically, the
race or nation to which he belongs has been
judged. To draw any valid deductions,
investigations on a large scale would be
essential so that the average and not the
exceptional would provide the proper information.

In the marathon race at the Olympic
Games at Amsterdam in 1928, the first five
men in order of their arrival were an Algerian,
a Chilean, a Japanese, a Finn, an American.
Are we to conclude that all these races are
distinguished for long-distance running ? By
no means.

Until some fifty years ago the cult of
athletics was practically confined to the
British Isles, and any exhibition of interest
and participation by other nations was rather
condescendingly accepted. The United
States, it is true, demonstrated a superiority
in specialized events regarded by our athletes
with a mixture of contempt and tolerance.

E 143

It was making a whole-time business out of
what should be considered a pastime, and
such transatlantic success did not appear to
challenge British athletic supremacy.

But with the turn of the century, surprises
were in store. Exceptional middle-distance
runners invaded us from Finland and Sweden.
From all over the Continent appeared expert
performers in what are called the field
events, as distinct from those that take
place on the track. And to a more limited
extent, yet on occasion with conspicuous
success, came runners at all distances from
places hitherto unsuspected of any such
association to challenge and surpass our
best.

Farther and farther into the world participation in athletics extended, revealing latent
interest, ambition, and ability. In 1932,
the negro became prominent. Hitherto some
isolated examples had participated with
moderate success, but now a special attribute
became unmistakable. Farther and farther
into the world the interest extends and one
can only speculate on the unknown and the
possible discovery of some tribe or race
possessing natural speed or endurance to an
extent that transcends anything the athletic
world has so far witnessed. |

When we attempt to isolate and -recognize
ethnic types of athletic capabilities we must
pause to consider the complexity of the
subject and avoid the danger of accepting
what seems only too obvious. The athlete
must possess moral as well as physical
attributes. For some events a highly strung
temperament is a sine qua non; for others,
stoicism, stolidity, an ability to tolerate
monotony. So nations that on the whole
correspond to one or the other type will be
relatively successful or unsuccessful, remembering again the fallacy of exceptions and the
necessity to think of the average.

Temperament again will be conspicuous
in the willingness to pay attention to the
minute details so necessary to acquire the
144

technique of the (artificial) field events,
quite apart, of course, from any natural
ability. The British lack of success in these
is a reflection of a reluctance to be bothered
rather than the result of any anatomical
inferiority.

Climate may be particularly favourable to
a certain achievement. Diet may play a part
although it seems to me that this aspect of
the matter has been emphasized more by
cranks and obsessionists than by responsible
investigators. The dietetic habits of a great
athlete are always scrutinized and imitated
on the idea that they are the secret of his
prowess.
me in all seriousness that the success of the
Scandinavian runners was due to the quality
of the fish inhabiting the waters round their
coasts. In my opinion, diet whether of an
individual or a race has little to do with the
matter.

But we are by no means at the end of the
complexity.

Psychological factors have to be considered.
The example and influence of a great
performer lead to a crop of admirers and
imitators. Then there are social factors. The
athlete who regards his indulgence as a
pastime cannot be expected to compete
successfully with one who by inclination and
circumstances can make it the whole business
of life. Circumstances comprehend all sorts
of influences and inducements such as
encouragement, the provision of skilled
instruction, the rewards for success, even in
some instances the imposition of penalties
for failure. Nations differ enormously in
their attitude : one may be well disciplined
and prepared to accept or even to prefer
what in another would provoke resentment
and obstruction.

Thus an ethnic factor or peculiarity can
be rarely if ever identified or isolated with
confidence. Perhaps the nearest approach
to a justifiable generalization is the negro’s
ability in short-distance races and as a
jumper. I confess that my acquaintance
with ethnology is so superficial that I feel
compelled to avoid any but the most elementary conclusions. How can one define
racial characteristics in a race which is a

Thus an Oslo physician assured

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

combination of races ? The American negro’s
African ancestors represent tribes as divergent as several peoples of Europe. Among
them were. the Arabs and Moors from the
North coast, Hottentots from the South,
Bantu tribes from the equatorial region,
representatives from Central Africa,. the
Gold Coast and the Congo. Add also a
certain, though trivial, admixture of Indian
and white blood. | ,

Moreover, to what is their relative
superiority attributable? It is natural to
correlate speed with some anatomical advantage—the length of the lower limb, the proportion of its two components, the shape of
the knee or heel—but I do not find any
convincing conclusions. I think there is some
special quality in his muscles—a more rapid
contractility or reduced viscosity. Alternatively, there may be asuperior co-ordination
related to his nervous system.

As a survival factor, swift running must
clearly have been of vital importance to
primitive man. And although the American
negro is a highly organized individual and as
remote from his ancestor as the white man,
it may be that this physical attribute persists
in him in relatively greater degree. Continuing this hypothesis we can reasonably
suppose that there may be remote races in
whom it is still more evident and, with the
extension of athleticism, will be revealed.

The factor of endurance may depend on
some trifle in biochemistry which makes
a sort of physical genius comparable to a
genius in the intellectual world. Whatever
it is, its distribution is according to Nature’s
ideas as in the case of genius of any kind. I
mentioned the mathematician in a remote
Indian village. So with athletics. Some
anatomical or physiological prodigy may
be born in the Tottenham Court Road or
in Siberia. The chances of his discovery
are naturally enormously increased by his
contact with athletic circles. The man in the
depths of Siberia whilst enjoying a local
reputation for fleetness of foot might well
remain in ignorance of a claim to be the
fastest in the world. As athleticism extends
farther and farther into the world physical
capabilities almost unbelievable by present
RACE AND ATHLETICS

standards may with reasonable confidence
be predicted.

In this Journal it is fitting that a few
words should be added on the subject of
genetics. Of course we cannot apply to
human beings the principles of selective
breeding of domestic animals and we are
sensible enough to recognize that it is the
sentimentalized affinities of young people in
the spring that predominate and will always
predominate, uninfluenced by any genetic
pronouncements, exhortations or warnings.

Yet suppose some human beings coldblooded enough to attempt to experiment
deliberately and to persuade an athletic
youth to mate with an athletic young
woman. It is only too likely than an athletic
young man is on the whole not attracted by
an athletic girl, but let us go on supposing.
The intention is that the man is a marathon
runner and the girl a sprinter and the hope,
that of blending the two qualities of speed and
staying power in the offspring. Well,
breeders of racehorses—which, after all, are
required for one specific purpose only—know
that it takes six or eight generations to fix a
given quality by heredity, and men are
hardly to: be judged by a less exacting
standard than horses or dogs.. Moreover,
we know how capriciously heredity acts,
and recall Bernard Shaw’s classic retort to the
beautiful danseuse respecting their relative

145

contributions to a prospective progeny.

So dismissing this impracticable consideration, what is to be learnt from actual
observation ? We know that cricket, rowing
and lawn tennis “‘run in families.”’ This
suggests transmitted ability, but we must
pause in reflecting that we are dealing with
an artificial acquisition; that encouragement,
opportunity and skilled instruction are from
the earliest age available, the influence of
which has to be accepted side by side with
native ability.

Yet it must be recorded that the greatest
of all cricketers was bitterly disappointed by
his son’s achievements with bat and ball !

But take a purely natural capability such
as swift or prolonged running. I cannot
think of a really great athletic father producing an athletic son of his own quality.
And this, after all, is what one would expect.
We know Nature’s dislike of exceptions and
her desire to restore the equilibrium. Athletic
history is, as yet, too short to provide
examples of ‘‘ throw-backs.”’ |

On the other hand there are a fair number
of examples of brothers displaying if not
supreme, at any rate distinguished, athletic
success, a form of inheritance in a generation
that is represented in other ways—intellectual, physical and pathological—and justifies the postulation of an athletic gene or, as
the physician might prefer to say, diathesis.

     
       
        
        
 

  
 

ers

There is also a
Reference Library
which may be consulted and Lending
Library for Mem
| Society for Constructive Birth Control
and RACIAL PROGRESS

The First Birth Control Clinic in the World
THE MOTHERS’ CLINIC

Founded by DR. MARIE STOPES, March 17th, 1921.

From the beginning dealing with all aspects of birth control and Demonstrations to
marriage problems.

OPEN DAILY (not Sats.) 10 a.m. to6 p.m. FREE
bers of the Society. Address : 106/108, WHITFIELD STREET, LONDON, W.1

Special Lectures
and Instructional

Members of the
Medical Profession
are regularly given.
Application by letter
necessary.

  

Eugenies Review, Vol. XLIV, No. 3
