HERBERT BREWER

Reversibility following Sterilization

by Vasectomy

[os REMARKABLE SPREAD in recent years
of the vasectomy operation as a means of
fertility control in India, the U.S.A. and
elsewhere brings into prominence the question of
its reversibility. As the Director of the Population Council, Dr. Warren Nelson, has observed,
“If the operation can be perfected so that the
success rate is 85 or 90 per cent, it is likely that
many people will find vasectomy an acceptable
method of contraception.” In the U.S. according to a recent report, the number of vasectomies
performed for contraceptive purposes has
doubled in the last decade and now amounts to
about 40,000 a year. The states of Virginia and
North Carolina have enacted laws specifically
permitting voluntary sterilization for the purpose
of limiting family size.? It seems likely that more
States will eventually follow suit.

In these circumstances it is readily intelligible
that an increasing number of men are asking,
what are the prospects of restoring fertility
following a vasectomy operation. The answer on
the whole is fairly encouraging. When Dr. V. J.
O’Conor circularized the majority of urologists
in the U.S. prior to 1948, he elicited that concerning the relatively few attempts at anastomosis following vasectomy that had been
attempted, 45:5 per cent had been successful.®
This was surprisingly good considering that most
of these operations were intended to be definitively permanent and that surgeons rarely gave
any attention to techniques calculated to maximize the prospects of success in reversal at a
later time. More recently, with the development
of better techniques, percentage success rates
have been reported of 77 by Roland.‘ 80 by
Dorsey,® the same also by Jhaver* and 88 by
Phadke.’ According to Dr. V. E. Goodwin of
the Department of Urology in California University Medical School, “‘the sterility which results

from vasectomy is reversible in fully 90 per cent
of cases if a skilful surgeon is available.”’®

However, it seems clear that relatively few
surgeons have the opportunity of the extensive
practice which is necessary to develop high skill
in performing anastomosis of the vasa. Anything
which can be done to simplify and, if possible, to
speed up both the initial operation as well as its
subsequent reversal would therefore appear to be
highly desirable.

It has been noted by a number of authorities
that both as regards animal and human subjects,
spontaneous reunion of several vasa is prone to
take place with great facility, so much so indeed,
that in the initial operation it is a major preoccupation of the operator to exclude that
possibility. Dr. Walter Stokes, who has wide
experience in this field, has stressed the importance of guarding against eventualities of this
kind.® Professor Elmer Belt of California
University Medical School states that even when
vasectomy is performed with great care, recanalization automatically re-establishes itself in rare
cases. He refers to a recent national survey in the
U.S.A. in which urologists were asked about this
particular point; in 971 replies to a questionnaire, there were reported 41 proven cases of
spontaneous recanalization. In a second series of
750 replies there were 55 spontaneous recanalizations.° However, as Tietze has pointed out,
vasectomy must still be regarded as the most
certain of all methods of preventing conception."
According to Rolnick"”

It has been recognized clinically for many years
that attempts at sterilization by either cutting or
tying the vas are often unsuccessful. I demonstrated many years ago that the vas deferens
regenerates very rapidly after it has been cut or
tied and that this regeneration is aided by its

sheath. Therefore if vasectomy is to be properly
done, a rather large portion of the vas should be

147

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1964, 56, 3.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

resected and the cut ends crushed and turned
backwards. Successful regeneration of the vas
deferens is possible many years after resection. The
remarkable regenerative capacity of all epithelial
lined ducts is exemplified here as in other portions
of the body, and it is chiefly this regenerative
capacity that makes urologic surgery possible.

This lucid exposition reveals how in attempting to escape the Scylla of spontaneous recanalization the surgeon is prone to run into the
Charybdis of irreversibility. For O’Conor noted
as among the most frequent causes of failure to
effect anastomosis the fact that so large a portion
had been removed as to preclude bringing the
severed ends together; another common cause
was excising tissue too close to the globus
major.'® As another American surgeon has commented, why should we find it so difficult to
recanalize the vasa, when nature finds it so easy ?
What it is now desired to suggest is that it may
be possible, by working with nature instead of
against it, to take advantage of the very healing
power revealed in the tendency to spontaneous
reunion, both to make the initial sterilizing
operation more simple and certain, while at the
same time conserving tissue and maximizing the
prospects of success in a reversing operation,
should that subsequently be found desirable. It
would appear a sound principle in surgical as in
many other arts to aim at achieving the maximum
by means of the minimum. Instead of cauterizing,
crushing and ligating, why not invoke the vis
medicatrix naturae itself to set up a barrier to the
exit of the sperms more effective than those imposed by man’s rather clumsy mechanical
devices.

In other words why should it not be possible
by bringing the two proximal ends of the severed
vasa into opposition and by allowing them to
unite, effectively to exclude the possibility of
sperms getting any further than the lower part of
the scrotal sac, into which, if the distal ends were
left open, they would presumably drain? Should
it prove feasible, it would obviate certain drawbacks which have come to light in a small
minority of vasectomies, in which ligating the
distal ends of the vasa has caused discomfort by
reason of back pressure. Also in the few cases in
which inflammatory reactions have occurred as
described by Friedman and others may be
associated with a faulty technique which might

148

similarly be obviated. An American surgeon who
claimed to have performed over 400 vasectomies
informed me that he had never encountered such
reactions in his own patients, though he had seen
them in other vasectomized men. This surgeon
used pure phenol to cauterize the crushed and
ligated proximal ends of the vasa while leaving
the distal ends open. However, it may be noted
that surgical lubricating jellies are capable of
producing granulomatous lesions when they are
employed without proper care.!®

It was noted editorially in THE EUGENICS
REVIEW that some surgeons who perform
vasectomy leave the distal ends open in order to
facilitate recanalization later.1* One great advantage which might accrue from the adoption of
the proposed technique is that it would encourage
surgeons to perform the sterilizing operation
with the idea of potential reversibility always in
mind. When surgeons approach the operation
with the idea of cutting something out rather
than of imposing a simple occlusion, they tend to
conceive the whole procedure in an obliterative
light which is really not essential. That this may
be so is suggested by the fact that in a recent
exchange of letters in the Observer a surgeon of
consultant status claimed in effect that vasectomy by definition is irreversible because you
cannot replace something which earlier has been
removed. It is true that, as a number of authorities have agreed, the term “vasectomy” is open
to objection on semantic grounds. Should the
proposed technique prove practicable and
become widely adopted, it would seem a good
opportunity to bring medical nomenclature more
in accord with realities by distinguishing it from
the earlier methods of vasectomy by designating
it specifically and accurately as “Reversible
Occlusion of the Vasa” (R.O.V. for short). The
operation of R.O.V. in itself would provide the
best possible education of the surgeon in the
hitherto infrequently practised art of reversal of
sterilization by anastomosis of the vasa deferentis.
In the initial operation a temporary sterility
would be imposed by anastomosis of the proximal ends of the vasa, while in the reversing
operation fertility would be restored by a precisely similar treatment applied to the severed
ends so as to reunite them in the same position
where they were at the beginning.
REVERSIBILITY FOLLOWING STERILIZATION BY VASECTOMY

In this connection, it would appear that both
the initial sterilization and the later desterilization might be immensely simplified, speeded up,
and rendered less expensive by the utilization of
surgical stapling machines, which seem likely to
be adaptable readily to such operations as these.
In 1961, a Russian surgeon gave a demonstration
in Washington and showed by an operation on a
dog’s blood vessels and organs that procedures
which, by traditional surgical stitching methods
would take hours, could be performed in minutes
by the aid of these suture replacing surgical
stapling machines.!” More recently, the Russian
claims have been confirmed by American workers,
some of whom have devised improvements to
make the apparatus yet more simple and rapid in
its operation. They claim that in this way it is
now possible for ordinary surgeons successfully
and rapidly to perform operations which otherwise would only be tackled by specialists using
exacting and time consuming manipulations.1§

It will readily be appreciated how important
the application of R.O.V. by means of surgical
stapling might conceivably become in connection
with the programme of voluntary sterilization on
mass scale, such as are now being attempted in
India. For example, it is stated that in the Punjab
the government has set itself a target of 100,000
vasectomies a year, but is finding it difficult to
achieve it by reason of shortage of qualified
personnel.!® Even though, as Gopalaswami has
claimed,”° the cost of a sterilization operation in
India is only one-tenth to one-twentieth that of
providing a free supply of contraceptives to
cover the reproductive span, the factor of cost is
still critical. The idea presently being mooted”
that the chief hope of overcoming the population
explosion lies, not in the pill, but in the revival of
the intra uterine devices that were emphatically
condemned by the Family Planning Association
a few years ago,” needs to be scrutinized
critically from the cost angle also. Intra uterine
devices demand periodical examination and
gynaecological check, and even, according to
some advocates, repeated X-ray examinations to
ensure that they have not dropped out unobserved. The latter practice appears completely to
ignore the warnings of the United Nations
Committee on Atomic Radiation, which stressed
that all forms of unnecessary radiation exposure

should be avoided; radiation of the female
pelvis is especially dangerous because mutagenic
effects, both somatic and genetic, are involved.
Where the intra uterine device has failed to avert
conception (as it is reported to do in at least 5 per
cent of cases) teratogenic effects may also be
involved concerning the highly vulnerable
embryo. Failure to carry out periodical examinations may eventually confront the physician with
a case like that described by Dr. Maizels where a
long forgotten Grafenberg ring seemed to have
provoked a carcinoma.”* The impracticability of
using intra uterine devices on a mass scale in the
backward countries has been well exposed by
Dr. Elkan.”4

On reasons alike of harmlessness, reliability
and of cost, the vasectomy solution seems far
preferable to that of intra uterine contraceptives
which many authorities insist are really abortifacients. The writer is not a surgeon but is encouraged to submit these suggestions because so
far the inquiries he has been able to make of
medically qualified friends have raised no
fundamental difficulty or objection.

In view of the almost desperate demographic
situation that is building up in the world as a
whole, it is surely only common sense to give
attentive consideration to every constructive
suggestion, regardless of whence it comes. If that
were always done we might be in less danger of
the tyranny of inert ideas which, as A. N. Whitehead stressed, represent a major menace to
progress.

It is well to remind ourselves that Western
Europe too has a problem of fertility control and
that we can hardly be content to let it be solved
by abortion which, as Professor Harmsen of
Hamburg has reminded us, takes terrible toll of
female health in destroying every year more
human life than all the infectious diseases combined. The example of India surely reveals that
voluntary sterilization by vasectomy offers a
harmless and effective alternative to the policy of
legalized mass abortion, whose evils are well
recognized in the countries where it is most
prevalent.

One last thought concerning the legal position
in Britain. The possibility of reversal has an
important bearing on the question of whether
voluntary sterilization for purposes of contra
149
THE EUGENICS

ception is lawful. For if it can be shown that in
accepting surgical occlusion of the vasa in order
to avoid producing unwanted children, a man is
only establishing a condition of temporary infertility which is capable of being removed,
should he wish it, there can hardly exist any
reason for treating him any differently from those
who accomplish the same end by other contraceptive means. As Dr. Glanville Williams has
pointed out,” vasectomy cannot be brought
within the legal definition of a maim, if it can be
shown to be reversible, because the legal meaning of a maim (as contrasted witha wound) is that
it is permanent. The development of better
methods of restoring fertility following vasectomy might indirectly help to clear up the medicolegal ambiguity which still surrounds voluntary
sterilization in this country.

REFERENCES

1. Nelson, Warren O. 1961. Fertil. and Steril., 12, 109.
2. Newsweek, 16.9.63.

3. O’Connor, V. J. 1948. J. Amer. med. Ass., 136, 162.
4. Roland, S. I. 1961. Fertil. and Steril., 12, 191.

cy

DOWDIANN

REVIEW

. Dorsey, J. W. 1957. J. int. Coll. Surg., 27, 453.

Shaver, P. S. 1962. J. Family Welfare, 9, 57.

. Phadke, F. M. 1959. J. Ind. med. Ass., 36, 19.
. Goodwin, W. E. Personal communication.

; Bae Et R. 1941. Human Fertil., 6, 79.

i t ¥

1964. Sterilization: Can It Be Undone ?
Pamphlet issued by the Human Betterment Associa
. Tietze, C. 1960. The Current Status of Fertility

Control. National Committee on Maternal Health
Publication No. 9.

. Rolnick, H. C. 1954. J. Urol., 72, 915-16.
. O’Connor, V. J. 1953. Second World Congress on

Fertility and Sterility.

. Friedman, N. B. et al. 1949. J. Urol., 62.

. Brit. med. J. 1961, 1082.

. Eugen. Rev., 1956, 48, 139.

. Washington Post, 12.7.61.

. Mallina, R. F. et al. 1962. Surgical Stapling. Scien
tific American, Oct.

. Amirichand, Col. 1962. Licentiate, 12, 52. Reported

in J. Amer. med. Ass., 6.10.62.

. Gopalaswami, R. A. 1962. Family Planning Outlook

for Government Action in India, in. Research in
Family Planning. Editor, C. V. Kiser. p. 79.

. New Society, 12.3.64, p. 19.
. Brit. med. J., 19.10.46 and 4.2.50.
. Maizels, G. 1964. Fate of Grafenberg Rings. Brit.

med, J., 14.3.64.

24. Elkan, E. 1964. New Scientist, 9.1.64.

. Williams, Glanville. 1958. The Sanctity of Life and

the Criminal Law, p. 103.

EUGENICS QUARTERLY

Vol. 11, No. 3

September, 1964

Contents

The New Outlook in Eugenics, FRANK LORIMER
Decline of Consanguineous Marriages in France from 1926 to 1958, JEAN SUTTER AND

JEAN-MICHEL GOUX

Does the Effect of a Family Planning Program Continue ?, YOSHIO KOYA
White and Non-white Fertility by Census Tract for 1960, J. WILLIAM LEASURE AND

NICHOLAS W. SCHROCK

Relation of Fertility to Occupation and to Income in the Male Population of Ann Arbor,
Michigan, 1951-1954, LEE R. Dice, PHmLip J. CLARK AND ROBERT I. GILBERT

Brief Reports:

Appraisals of Civilized Man and Savage, R. H. Post
_ Fertility Management and Concern with Over-Population in Mainland China, AMRIT LAL
Book Reviews, CLYDE V. KIsER, Book Review Editor

Recent Publications, HELEN G. HAMMONS

EDITORIAL BOARD
Frederick Osborn, Chairman

Gordon Allen

RICHARD H. OSBORNE, Acting Editor

Frank Lorimer

Consulting Editors: JAN BOOK, F. CLARKE FRASER
CLYDE V. KISER, LEIGHTON VAN Nort, L. D. SANGHVI, JEAN SUTTER

 

1.50

Published by AMERICAN EUGENICS SOCIETY

230 Park Avenue, New York, 17, N.Y
Subscription $7.00; Single current copies $1.75; Single back copies $2.00
