URSULA PHILIP

M.Sc.,

D.Phil. University of Newcastle upon Tyne

Genetics, and Eugenics in

Post-War Germany

ROFESSOR HANS NACHTSHEIM, the
Penis mammalian geneticist, has during

the last twelve years reopened in Germany
a discussion on eugenic policy. He advocates
legislation to allow voluntary sterilization of
people in danger of producing handicapped
offspring.

It needs the courage and steadfastness of an
old fighter to tackle these problems in Germany
two decades after the fall of Hitler’s régime.
Only a scientist who maintained his independence
of Nazi doctrine is in a position to do this.

Eugenic Sterilization: Legislation
During the last twelve years Professor Nachtsheim has written a pamphlet: For and Against
Eugenically Indicated Sterilization and a number
of articles in general and public health medical
publications. In these he discusses legal
aspects and the need for a positive eugenics
policy. Legislation for voluntary sterilization had
been in preparation in 1932, the year before
Hitler came to power. It contained all the safeguards needed in a democratic society and
resembled the laws passed in Scandinavia and
some of the states in the U.S.A. The law which
eventually reached the Statute Book had
enforced sterilization substituted, but contained
powerful safeguards against misuse. This was
essentially a eugenic measure and was, according
to Professor Nachtsheim, never abused. The
wholesale sterilizations and extermination of
unfit persons were carried out under different laws.
After the war the Control Commission
revoked the racial laws, but left the one dealing
with eugenic sterilization in being, probably
because such laws exist in the United States. The
Lander Bavaria, Hessen and Schleswig-Holstein
abolished it, whereas the remaining ones left it

oF

on the statute book though it has never been
invoked since the fall of the Nazis.

It is Professor Nachtsheim’s aim to clarify the
legal position of medical practitioners who want
to carry out eugenic sterilization at the request of
patients or their guardians.

In this form the legislation deals mainly with
the alleviation of individual suffering and does
not act in the interest of a consistent eugenic
policy. It may incidentally help to reduce the
number of abnormal people, or prevent breakdown and institutionalization of mentally defectives, who could usefully look after themselves,
but on whom the bringing up of a family would
impose an intolerable burden.

But Professor Nachtsheim demands a more
forceful eugenics policy in order to make the law,
which he envisages, fully effective. To somebody
who has as profound a respect for human
dignity as he, it is only possible to operate
eugenic measures on a voluntary basis. This
presupposes, as he states again and again, a
populace imbued with a will to eugenics, based
on an understanding of human genetics and its
application, which is almost totally absent in
Germany (and for that matter in England).

Human Genetics

Is Professor Nachtsheim justified i in saying that
knowledge of human genetics is now so well
founded that one could train medical men,
nurses, social workers, teachers and priests to
educate the public?

There is no simple answer to this question. We
know a great deal of the inheritance of clear-cut
factors and their possible eradication. But we
are also, in my opinion, very ignorant as to the
function of often widely distributed genes in
populations, for instance the allelomorphs of the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1964, 56, 2.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ABO bloodgroups. The genotype of future
generations depends on what the present one
hands on, both qualitatively and quantitatively.

Alterations to the genotype are to some extent
due to mutation. New allelomorphs arise, which
may or may not be detrimental. All natural
populations carry a certain genetic load without
being handicapped by it. The effect of the
genetic load is being studied in a number of
organisms, but we are rather ignorant of it in
man. It is however probable that this load is
added to by the use of mutagenic agents in
medicine, agriculture, food processing and
industry in general. In addition to the ionizing
radiations, Professor Nachtsheim lists forty-nine
chemicals in general use which have proved
mutagenic in Drosophila, some plants and some
micro-organisms. None has been used in
experiments on mammals, but it is unlikely that a
fair proportion will not alter the gene material in
man if deposited near the gonads. He advocates
that careful watch be kept on these substances.
Another factor likely to increase the genetic load
is the advances in medical practice, which by
compensating a genetical defect, allow procreation at a more or less normal rate, where it had
been impossible before.

With rare genes this would make numerically
little difference, at least within a limited time.

Diabetes
The situation changes with genes present at high
frequencies. Professor Nachtsheim is particularly disturbed at the success of insulin treatment
in restoring fertility to diabetics.

I think this is a fair example how an apparently good case can be made by using incomplete
information.

Arguments have been advanced to say that
diabetes is inherited as a dominant with reduced
penetrance; as a recessive; as a recessive with
some action in the heterozygote. In short we do
not know what the basic facts are.

What is certain, is that 4-5 per cent of western
populations have overt diabetes and that the
gene has to be looked for in as many as 30 per
cent of the people.

In recent years Vallance-Owen has isolated an
“anti insulin factor” probably a polypeptide
which seems to be a part of the physiology of

92

carbohydrate metabolism. Diabetics have this
factor in greater quantity. From this follow a
number of predictable conditions. High level of
“‘anti-insulin factor’? stimulates higher insulin
production in compensation. The islet tissue in
the pancreas works at a higher rate and may,
under stress conditions, break down, leading to
overt diabetes. Before breakdown, it causes fat
storage. “High level anti-insulin factor” is
inherited as a dominant. So far it has not been
possible to identify the homozygotes. They may
be lethal. It is to be found in the parents, sibs
and children of diabetics. It occurs in at least 20
per cent of the population.

If confirmed it would explain many aspects of
diabetes which have defied analysis.

In the present context it allows one to pose the
following questions. Can a dominant geneof such
frequency be regarded as detrimental ? What isits
functionin the genetic structure of the population ?

It might be safe to say that ability to store fat
can be an advantage under a “‘fast and feast”
nutritional régime though possibly not under a
‘four square meals a day”’ one.

Attempts to eliminate “diabetes” by eugenic
measures can have the consequence of making the
populationasa wholeless able to withstand famine.

Conclusion
A new assessment of eugenics in the light of
recent advances in genetics is very necessary.
But in order to yield results “population”
thinking in Mair’s definition has to be used as a
basis. Before any progress can be made we have
to understand to what extent important features
of mankind are determined by heterozygosity in
general and what is the function of single genes.

I feel that Professor Nachtsheim has overestimated the progress which has been made.
Before it is possible to educate the teachers who
can educate the people and convince our
legislators, we need to have much firmer ground
under our feet.

REFERENCES

Evans, D. A. P. 1963. Amer. J. Med., 34, 639-662.
NACHTSHEIM, H. 1952. Fiir und wider die Sterilisierung
aus eugenischer Indikation. Georg Thieme Verlag,
Stuttgart; 1963. Fortschritte der Medizin. 81, 711-713;
1963. Bundesgesundheitsblatt. 18, 277-286; 1963. In Der
Arzt des &ffentlichen Gesundheitsdienstes. Georg Thieme
Verlag, Stuttgart.

VALLANCE-OWEN, J. and LILLEy, M. D. 1961. Lancet i,
804 and 806.
