MARGARET PYKE

Family Planning:

Malthus, Bentham and Place
HOMAS MALTHUS HAS been described as the unwitting founder of the
birth control movement in Britain. I think
he would have regarded this as a disgrace rather
than a distinction. Although the thesis of his
Essay published in 1796 was that population increases faster than food production, the only
remedies he proposed were either complete celibacy or late marriage. These are, indeed, methods
of controlling births and are probably responsible for the present low birth rate in Ireland,
but they are certainly not included in what we
call birth control methods to-day.

Actually, Jeremy Bentham, in 1797, advocated
a sponge method of birth control in order to reduce the poor rate. But the man who did really
start the fire was Francis Place, a self-taught
workman who became a friend of Thomas
Wakley, a medical reformer who founded, and
for many years edited, the Lancet. In 1822, Place
wrote and distributed handbills which gave definite contraceptive information. These had considerable circulation in London and in the industrial districts of the North and, owing to the
discussion they aroused, they were reprinted in
several radical journals. Place naturally encountered considerable hostility and was described as
the “master spring that moves the whole infernal
machine”’.

Public interest in this subject seems to have
waned in the 1830s. Perhaps the passage of the
Reform Bill and the new Poor Law Bill absorbed
the energies of the radicals. The social ferment
inspired by the French Revolution and economic
difficulties following the Napoleonic wars died
down, clamour for social reform waned and interest in birth control declined. But there were
isolated incidents. In 1868 Lord John Russell’s

\ * The Galton Lecture delivered on February 27th,
963.

An Assessment

son, Lord Amberley, was greatly criticized for
taking part in a meeting on “over-population
and public health” and in 1854 Dr. George
Drysdale wrote The Elements of Science in
which he spoke of sex education, was critical of
the institution of marriage and warmly advocated the principles of Malthusianism. The book
went into thirty-five editions (up to 1904) and
was translated into ten European languages.

Bradlaugh, Besant and the Malthusian League
The event that really launched the ships was the
Bradlaugh-Besant trial of 1877-8. Charles Bradlaugh and Mrs. Besant reprinted Dr. Charles
Knowlton’s pamphlet on birth control called
The Fruits of Philosophy, and took a copy to the
Guildhall with a notice to say when and where
they would be selling it next day. They also informed the police, and in due course they were
arrested and brought before the Lord Chief
Justice on an indictment which accused them
Of unlawfully and wickedly devising, contriving
and intending, as much as in them lay, to vitiate
and corrupt the morals as well as youth as of divers
other subjects of the Queen and to invite and encourage the said subjects to indecent, obscene, unnatural and immoral practices, and bring them to
a state of wickedness, lewdness and debauchery.
Both defendants were found guilty but, on
appeal, the verdict was set aside because of a
fault in the indictment. It was after this trial and
the publicity which followed, and propaganda by
the Malthusian League which was set up in 1878,
that the birth rate in Great Britain, then standing at 35 per thousand, began to fall, and it went
on falling until it reached its lowest peace-time
level of 14-9 in 1933. To-day it is 17-1 and has
risen every year over the last seven years.
Ina Report on the Declining Birth Rate, written
in 1914, Ethel Elderton, Galton Fellow of the
University of London, found that the decline

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1963, 55, 2.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

was associated with increasing discussion and
dissemination of means to prevent conception or
destroy its fruits and with further restrictions on
the economic exploitation of children. The reduction in the economic value of the child was
certainly a big factor—with the passing of the
Factory and Education Acts, a child could no
longer pay its own way and became an economic
liability rather than an asset. Ethel Elderton
pointed out that, in the world we live in, a small
family can be better fed, clothed and educated
than a large one.

Even at that time there were confident persons
who adjured the great British people to have
more children for the sake of the Empire. On
this Ethel Elderton comments

Before an honest man devotes himself to the
rearing of a large family the members of which, as
far as he can see, will all be destined to the same
weary round of toil and the same limited opportunities he himself endured, he must be informed
precisely what economic measures will be undertaken to secure the liberties of the coming race
and must receive some guarantees that they will
be put into operation.

One very significant figure in this Report is the
comparison between what had happened to the
birth rates in the richest and the poorest of
the London boroughs. In Shoreditch the birth
rate in 1881 was 31-2 per thousand, in 1911 it was
30-16. In Hampstead it was 30-01 in 1881, very
little lower than in Shoreditch, but in 1911 ithad
fallen to 17-5.

After the Bradlaugh-Besant trial, few attempts
were made to suppress bona fide birth control propaganda, but there was the case of Dr. Henry
Allbutt. He was a Leeds physician and an
F.R.C.P. of Edinburgh and, fired apparently by
the best of motives, he published about 1885, a
Wife’s Handbook, a decent, popular medical
treatise, price 6d. It dealt with pre-natal care, the
management of a baby, etc., and had a chapter
on “how to prevent conception when advised by
the doctor’. He gave particulars of some birth
control methods and wrote that “when a woman
is advised by her doctor not to conceive on account of the state of her health, she had better
consult him as to which of these methods of prevention would be best in her particular case’.
One would have thought that Dr. Allbutt had
been sufficiently discreet—at least as far as his

72

own profession was concerned—but not so. The
Secretary of the Leeds Vigilance Association
protested to medical societies; Edinburgh passed
the buck to the General Medical Council who
found him guilty of “having published and
publicly caused to be sold a work entitled the
Wife’s Handbook at so low a price as to bring the
work within the reach of the youth of both sexes
to the detriment of public morals’’. The Council
found that, secondly, the offence was infamous
conduct in a professional respect. Whether this
was because Dr. Allbutt had given, in his book,
the name of Rendells, and also of the retailer of
a Mensinga pessary, or whether because he had
written a popular medical treatise, is not clear,
but he was duly struck off the register.

The First Birth Control Congress

Just a few years before this episode, in 1881,
there was what must have been the very first
International Medical Congress on Birth Control in London. It was arranged by the medical
branch of the Malthusian League and Dr. C. V.
Drysdale was in the Chair. Thirty to forty practitioners attended.

Marie Stopes

The next big step forward was the arrival on the
scene of that dynamic woman, Marie Stopes.
For some forty years the members of the Malthusian League had worked steadily and quietly,
without fireworks or excitement. They were
rational, serious and devoted—Marie Stopes was
a passionate pioneer. Fired by her own unhappy
marriage, by a powerful urge to help women to
achieve sexual fulfilment in their married lives
(for which limitation of pregnancy would be a
sine qua non) and by that great American pioneer
Margaret Sanger, Marie Stopes sailed into battle
with all guns firing and flags flying. She founded
the first birth control clinic in England, in March
1921.

Birth Control Clinics and Committees

The Malthusian League opened a clinic in Walworth in November of the same year. During the
next few years five societies were formed—Dr.
Stopes’s Constructive Birth Control Society, the
Society for the Provision of Birth Control Clinics,
with headquarters at Walworth, theWorkers’ Birth
FAMILY PLANNING: AN ASSESSMENT

Control Group, in which Mrs. Dora Russell and
Mrs. Frida Laski were active, the Birth Control
International Information Centre (Mrs. Gerda
Guy and Mrs. How Martyn) and the Birth Control Investigation Committee. The last was
started in 1926 on the initiative of Mrs. Spring
Rice and, later, with the co-operation of Dr. C.
P. Blacker and the support of the Eugenics
Society, to investigate methods of birth control
in use and to conduct research into new ones.
The Committee was very fortunate to have as its
first Honorary Secretary, the Hon. Mrs. (now
the Hon. Lady) Farrer. Its Chairman was Sir
Humphry Rolleston and it included such distinguished persons as Lord Adrian, Lord Brain,
Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders, Sir Julian Huxley,
Sir Arthur Ellis, Professor Lancelot Hogben and
Professor F. H. A. Marshall. It financed work
at Oxford by Dr. John Baker and Dr. Carleton
with which Sir Howard Flory was also connected
and which resulted in the production of VOLPAR

It will not have escaped your notice that this
group of eleven men (eight of whom are happily
still alive) includes one holder of the Order of
Merit, two Nobel Prize winners, two Presidents
of the Royal Society, one President of the Royal
College of Physicians, two Regius Professors of
Medicine, two Heads of Oxford and Cambridge
Colleges and four other Fellows of the Royal
Society.

This, perhaps, was the first sign that support
of birth control might lead to success and
preferment.

The Start of the Family Planning Association

1930 was the next year of outstanding significance. In April a conference on the giving of information on birth control by public health
authorities was held at Central Hall, Westminster. It was attended by representatives from
Authorities as well as by delegates of many
voluntary organizations, and it passed a resolution calling upon the Minister of Health “‘to
recognize the desirability of making available
medical information on methods of birth control
to married women who need it”. In June the
Minister issued Memorandum 153 MCW which
gave permissive authority for the provision of
contraceptive advice to certain classes of married
women for whom further pregnancy would be

detrimental to health. And in the following month
the National Birth Control Council, now the
Family Planning Association, was founded to
co-ordinate and centralize the work of the five
organizations which were all represented on the
Executive Committee of which Lady Denman
was Chairman. The first Executive was very impressive, for it included Dr. C. P. Blacker, Mrs.
Mary Stocks, Mrs. Eva Hubback, Mrs. Hugh
Dalton and Mrs. Spring Rice; the office and
staff were not so grand. They consisted of one
room and one staff—myself.

We decided that our immediate task was to
encourage Local Health Authorities to implement the Minister’s Memorandum and, as a first
step, we issued a leaflet and sent it round to all
Local Health Authorities. This led to a brush
with the Ministry. Mrs. Hubback and I were
summoned to an interview at which our leaflet
was severely criticized and finally the official who
was scolding us asked why we had presumed to
explain what the Memorandum meant, as indeed
we had, and Mrs. Hubback replied with innocent
candour “But of course we had to explain it, it
is so absurdly written no one could possibly
understand it”. The official’s pince-nez flashed,
the young man sitting at his elbow hurriedly
buried his head in his papers and it was borne in
on me, though not, I think, on Mrs. Hubback,
that we were talking to the author himself.
Perhaps it is not surprising that we had to rewrite our leaflet. :

When the Family Planning Association (under
the name of the National Birth Control Council)
started there were less than twenty clinics in the
whole country. After the Memorandum was
issued it was hoped that Local Health Authorities would meet the need, but it soon became
evident that this hope would remain unfulfilled.
Although the health provision could be sympathetically interpreted, it could also be used in the
narrowest possible sense. Councils were timid
and even hostile. A suggested compromise came
from Dr. A. T. Nankivell, Medical Officer of
Health of Plymouth. I went to see him about
implementing the Memorandum and he put a
proposal to me—he would lend us the premises
of one of his Maternity and Child Welfare
Centres and we would run a clinic. We could
also have the help of one of the doctors on his

73
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

staff who was keen to do this work. So we
formed a branch of the F.P.A. in Plymouth,
Lady Astor gave us £100, the Ministry of Health
saw no objection, and the pattern of the whole
future development of the F.P.A. was set. Today, seven out of every eight F.P.A. Clinics are
held on the premises of a Local Health Authority
or Hospital, and of these 184 Local Authorities
and Hospital Boards give grants, or per capita
payments for patients referred; 118 Local Health
Authorities have clinics of their own.

Further Progress

Progress to the outbreak of war was steady.
More clinics were opened, conferences (both
medical and lay) were organized, evidence was
given to Royal Commissions, medical schools
were urged to give training facilities and money
raising efforts were organized. The most exciting
of these was a Gala Ballet in 1936 for which Sir
Malcolm Sargent wrote a special ballet and
Dame Ninette de Valois and Dame Marie
Rambert produced special items.

In 1938 the office, which had now grown in
size, moved to 69 Eccleston Square where the
Eugenics Society most generously lent three
office rooms. Most branches managed to keep
open during the war and in 1943 the Branch
Conference and Annual General Meeting were
revived. The same year an ad hoc subfertility
committee was set up under the chairmanship of
Mr. Aleck Bourne and a seminological centre
was established under the direction of Dr. H. A.
Davidson. At this centre, one of the first of its
kind in the country, over 30,000 patients have
been seen.

In recent years the growth of the Association
has been rapid. It bought a house in Sloane
Street but has already outgrown this and is
moving shortly to larger offices in Tottenham
Court Road, which will be able to house all its
thirty-seven staff. It has 383 clinics run by 302
branches and, last year, nearly 300,000 people
visited these clinics. The large majority come for
contraceptive advice, but there are also those
who have been unable to have children and
others who want medical help for sex difficulties
in marriage. Apart from medical officers and
nurses, the clinics are run mainly by voluntary
workers.

74

For organizational purposes branches are
grouped into eleven Federations which appoint
representatives to the National Executive Committee and there are also thirteen area organizers.
At Central Office there are several sub-committees, both medical and lay, and there is a Medical
Advisory Council composed of leading members
of the profession under the Chairmanship of
Lord Brain, which guides the Association in its
medical ways. In addition, there are the Oliver
Bird Trust and the Council for the Investigation
of Fertility Control which are concerned with the
question of research and clinical trials. Over the
last few years these two bodies have been particularly concerned with the investigation and
clinical trials of oral contraceptives. After preliminary trials and consideration of all the data,
the Medical Advisory Council have approved
the use of three oral pills as an alternative method
of contraception in F.P.A. branch clinics which
fulfil certain required conditions, including
special training of the doctors. Criteria for selection of suitable patients are laid down and no
one is advised unless her general practitioner has
been informed and his consent asked.

Although, over the last thirty years, many improvements have been made in manufactured
contraceptives, it is notable that oral contraception is the only method of contraception used
to-day that was not in existence in 1900.

Among other activities of the F.P.A. are a
Pregnancy Diagnosis Centre, the publication of
an Approved List of manufactured goods which
have passed standard tests devised by the Association, a literature and mail order department,
and its own quarterly journal, Family Planning.

Three years ago the F.P.A. set up a Working
Party under the Chairmanship of Professor
Francois Lafitte

to review the aims and objects of the constitution,
organization and services of the Association, to
consider how these might be brought further into
line with present requirements and to make recommendations to the Executive Committee.

Last year the Working Party produced the first
part of its Report in the form of a Survey. Professional and salaried staffs in F.P.A. branch
clinics include some 450 doctors, 600 nurses and
60 Red Cross or St. John’s nurses as Assistants,
and 190 part-time and 20 full-time administrative
FAMILY PLANNING: AN ASSESSMENT

workers. Besides these salaried staff, there are
3,000 voluntary workers who act as receptionists, interviewers, supplies clerks and packers.

On the prevalence of birth control practice in
Britain, the Report uses Professor Glass’s Marriage Survey which shows that, of couples who
married in 1950 to 1960, 70 per cent practise
contraception. In an article in the April 1963
issue of Family Planning, Professor Glass states
that an estimate based upon the data collected
by the 1959-60 sample survey of the Population
Investigation Committee suggests that by the end
of their child-bearing years, some 87 per cent of
the couples married ten years ago may have used
birth control. This assumption is more likely to
under-state than over-state the probable total
incidence.

On social classification, the population of the
country is divided into 26:5 per cent non-manual,
48 per cent skilled manual and 25-5 per cent of
other manual workers. New patients at F.P.A.
clinics in November 1960 were 41-5 per cent nonmanual, 47 per cent skilled manual and 11-5 per
cent other manual. Thus, the non-manual were
over-represented, the skilled manual were in
about the right proportion, and the other-manual
were considerably under-represented. The F.P.A
is therefore seeing, proportionately, far more
middle and upper class and far fewer unskilled
working class women than there are in the
general population.

The most frequently used method is the sheath
(35 per cent) then coitus interruptus (27-5 per
cent) followed by a cap and the safe period (each
12-5 per cent).

As for use made of clinics, the Working Party
calculated that probably 11 per cent (one in nine)
of women under forty-five getting married, go
to a clinic before they have been married a year.

North Kensington Clinic, which, under the
chairmanship of Mrs. Spring Rice, was always
noted for its enterprise had, among its first
thousand patients between 1924 and 1929, 44-5
per cent who had had four or more children,
4:5 per cent who had had no children, and only
19 per cent who were under twenty-five years of
age. In 1960, out of 2,300 new patients, only 5
per cent had four or more children, 64 per cent
had had no children, and 60 per cent were under
twenty-five. These figures may have not been

ER—C

entirely representative because North Kensington is well known as giving special attention to
pre-marital cases, but in the Metropolitan region
as a whole, pre-marital cases formed 43 per cent
of all new patients in 1960—curiously, there
seem to be regional differences here for in Scotland this figure was only 24 per cent.

The Change in Public Opinion

Accompanying or following practical achievement there has been an astonishing change in
public opinion. The official view at the end of the
last century, as expressed in the BradlaughBesant indictment, the Allbutt case and letters
in the medical press which wrote furiously of
“beastly contrivances” and “filthy expedients
for prevention of conception” seems to have
changed little for the next fifty years. The Lambeth Conference of 1920 condemned the practice
of birth control and the Ministry of Health refused all action. Marie Stopes was abused and
attacked, and both she and the founders of Walworth were pelted with rotten eggs and windows
of clinics were broken. The founders of Manchester clinic were described in the Press in 1926
as “‘over-dressed, well fed and badly bred”
flaunting cigarettes between their painted lips
and shoving birth control down the throats of
the unwanted poor.

From 1930, when the Lambeth Conference of
that year set the door very slightly ajar and the
Ministry of Health circulated its cautious and
guarded, but highly significant and important,
Memorandum, opinion began to change. It was
all very slow, however, and active opposition
was replaced by what Lord Simon of Wythenshawe aptly described as a “conspiracy of
silence” which is, of course, much more difficult
to counter than vocal opposition. More than
one of our clinics has opened with a flood of
patients who had heard of it from meetings
called to protest at its opening.

A most important event was the publication,
in 1949, of the Report of the Royal Commission
on Population. This Commission had been appointed by the Government in 1944 owing to
fears then current of a fall in population. The
F.P.A. gave both oral and written evidence to
the Commission which said in its Report “Public
policy should assume and seek to encourage the

75
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

spread of voluntary parenthood” (para. 434)
and also “The giving of advice on contraception
to married persons who want it should be accepted as a duty of the National Health Service
and the existing restrictions on the giving of such
advice by public authority clinics should be
removed” (para. 66).

As regards the F.P.A. and public opinion, the
real break-through came in 1955. Two or three
of us met Mr. Iain Macleod, then Minister of
Health, at luncheon and asked him if he would
visit a clinic. He not only consented, but he also
came to Headquarters, made us a charming
speech on the occasion of our Silver Jubilee,
and lunched with us. The result of that was interviews on television and sound radio, a leader in
The Times, and tributes, both in the lay and
medical Press, to the work of the F.P.A.

The Editor of one of the leading medical
journals pointed out that

The History of the Family Planning Association
as a voluntary organization follows the British
pattern—the demonstration of a social or medical
need followed by attempts to meet it, growing
public favour and expansion of staff and premises
leading to the national provision of services.
Since 1955 visits from Ministers, debates in the

House of Lords, and television programmes,
have become almost commonplace. According
to The Times in 1959:

By general recognition of the majority of this
country, the Family Planning Association has
taken its place among the respectable and useful
adjuncts of the social services.

The change of outlook of the different
Churches has been marked. The Roman
Catholic Church does not condemn birth control as such, only certain methods. The Anglican
Church at Lambeth in 1958, said the use of
family planning “is a right and important factor
in Christian family life’ and the major Free
Churches have agreed substantially with this
judgement. The Society of Friends, the Jewish
Church and Hindu and Muslim leaders have
also made favourable pronouncements.

Growth of World Population

This country has been prominent in enthusiasm
and support of international work for birth control which has leapt into prominence during the
last few years because of what is popularly

76

known as “the population explosion”. Owing to
the spectacular drop in death rates all over the
world due to the use of new drugs and insecticides in massive health programmes, the world
rate of population growth has doubled since
1945 and is increasing steadily. It is reckoned
that by the end of the century our present world
population of 3,000 million will double.

In addition, there is the steadily increasing
recognition that parents have a right and a duty
to plan their families and that health, particularly maternal and child health, is greatly dependent on the practice of sound and sensible family
planning. Also everywhere there is the problem
of abortion, so sinister and so tragic. Finally,
even to-day, from one-third to half the population of the world suffers from hunger and malnutrition.

According to a very recent report of the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, it is also reckoned that

Should the population grow according to U.N.
forecast, the world’s total food supplies would
have to be doubled by 1980 and trebled by the
turn of the century in order to provide a level of
nutrition reasonably adequate to the needs of all
the world’s peoples.

The highest rate of population growth to-day
is in Latin America, and it is unlikely that rapid
progress will be made in that Continent. More
than half the world’s population lives in Asia
and it is there that the present problem is felt
most acutely. India, Pakistan, Ceylon, Singapore
and other countries have family planning programmes. Japan has the most thorough and has
achieved the most success. In ten years Japan has
halved her birth rate, which is now little above
this country’s. This has been done to a considerable extent by the practice of abortion, but at the
same time the Government has taken the most
vigorous steps to encourage and teach contraception as a substitute for abortion. In the ten
years from 1950 the percentage of contraceptive
users has doubled. In three Japanese villages and
one urban slum, some physicians gave information, discussed family problems sympathetically,
gave out contraceptives and visited their patients
regularly. Over a three-year period the birth rate
in the villages dropped from 26-7 to 14-6 per
thousand and in the slum from 53-9 to 16:5,
These reductions were accomplished concurFAMILY PLANNING: AN ASSESSMENT

rently with a drop of about 70 per cent in the
abortion rate in both areas. These figures show
what can be achieved by propaganda and education in present methods of birth control.

In India, sterilization is being increasingly
practised and encouraged, particularly for men.

It is very difficult to make any precise assessment of the effects of birth control programmes
in under-developed countries. Apart from Japan
there are few figures. In Puerto Rico the birth
rate fell 20 per cent in ten years. In Singapore it
fell every year from 1957 to 1961 from 42:7 to
35:5 per thousand. In Barbados births fell by
over a thousand—(7,833 to 6,754) in 1960-61,
and the number of new patients at clinics rose by
733. In Singur, in India, a decrease in the birth
rate from 45-2 in 1956 to 37-6 in 1960 is ascribed
to the introduction of an educational and clinical
programme of family planning in the area.

The problems of introducing birth control
programmes in the countries where they are
most needed are obvious. They can only be
solved by widespread education, the inclusion of
adequate provision in maternal and child welfare
services, the study of what methods are most
acceptable to particular groups and, above all,
by the discovery of simpler methods through
further research.

The International Planned Parenthood Federation to which thirty-three countries belong
increased its activities every year and hopes, in
time, to enlist the support of the United Nations
and its organizations. In December, 1962, the
United Nations General Assembly adopted an
amended resolution on population growth and
economic development. But in the final form the
key phrase “that the United Nations give technical assistance, as requested by Governments, for
national projects and programmes dealing with
the problems of population” was deleted. This
clause had been passed by the Economic Committee where voting had been 43 for, 14 against
and 42 abstentions. But in the General Assembly
the necessary two-thirds majority was not obtained. Meanwhile, more countries join the
I.P.P.F., the latest recruit being Egypt. Recent
expansion of work has been made possible by
very generous financial support from the U.S.A.
which has devoted great energy to raising money
for international work. The F.P.A. hopes to do

the same before long—names of millionaires will
be gratefully received.

The Oneida Community

The use of birth control has obvious relevance
to the practice of eugenics. As far as I know, the
only practical experiment has been the one by
the Oneida Community, of which Robert
Dickinson wrote

The Oneida Community experience is, as far as
I can judge, the only long continued, deliberate,
organized and consistent experiment in birth control by a group of intelligent people using a single
method, combined with physical examination to
check up the effects of health.

This colony was a communistic one of a voluntary type founded in Oneida, New York State.
Members were bound together by religious doctrines known as Perfectionism, and they gave
their leader, J. H. Noyes, or a committee,
authority to arrange matings. For the first ten
years, 1869-1879, piety was the chief basis of
selection. Later, health and intelligence were
taken into account. All methods of birth control
except coitus reservatus were rejected and emphasis was placed on the full sexual satisfaction
of the woman partner—remember, this was
nearly fifty years ahead of Dr. Stopes.

The Community eventually foundered because
as Noyes got older his leadership and magnetic
personality were less effective, so that religious
fervour waned. In addition, there was hostility
from outside the community. Noyes left it and
advised the Community to renounce “complex
marriage” in deference to public opinion, which
they agreed to do. The Colony had been financially successful for thirty-two years. On dissolution the members set up a Joint Stock Company (Oneida Ltd., manufacturers of Community silver plate), the assets were distributed
among former members. Support for children
was guaranteed up to the age of sixteen in proportion to the earnings of the Company and at
sixteen each child was given $200.

There are, unfortunately, few reports of the
results of this interesting venture. Of the fifty
eight births which took place between 1869 and
1879 there was only one death under one year
old. In sixty years there were only twelve deaths.
Kopf, statistician of the Life Insurance Company

77
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

said, in 1921, that there were two-thirds fewer
deaths in the Oneida Community than if a typical
rural experience of recent times had prevailed.
It was claimed that four-fifths of the children
were planned. Dr. Theodore Noyes, son of the
Founder, after twenty-two years, contended that
nervous diseases were far below the average for
the country.

The danger of drawing conclusions from isolated experiments is well illustrated here, since
the only possible conclusions to draw from these
figures would be that coitus reservatus is a highly
successful method of birth control, and that to
breed for piety produces longevity.

Birth Control and Eugenics

The connection between the Eugenics Society
and the family planning movement, both in this
country and internationally, has been a close one.
Under the powerful impulse of Dr. Blacker the
Society started both the Population Investigation Committee and the Birth Control Investigation Committee. It has provided free offices
both for the F.P.A. and the I.P.P.F. and has also
given them most generous and repeated financial
help. This seems to me entirely right—not only
because I have been at the receiving end of this
generosity, but because the use that is made of
birth control must be of primary importance to
eugenics.

Differences of intelligence are inherited—and
it is a fact that children who belong to small
families do better in intelligence tests than the
children of larger families. A possible explanation is that the less intelligent parents find it
more difficult to practise birth control.

The first impact of birth control clinics was
eugenic. Norman Himes gave figures of the
occupations of nearly 3,000 husbands from nine
of the first clinics showing a much higher proportion of unskilled and semi-skilled than in the
general population. Of the whole population, 13
per cent were classified as unskilled, but 34 per
cent of the clinics’ patients fell into that category.
As Himes said “‘the English clinics . . . have been
influential in disseminating contraceptive advice
to the lower social classes”. The spread of birth
control knowledge to these same lower social
classes is again illustrated by the Shoreditch
birth rate. You will remember this was virtually

78

stationary at 31 per-thousand in the thirty years
from 1881 to 1911—but in 1961 it was 16.

But, according to the findings of Professor
Lafitte’s Working Party, F.P.A. clinics do not
now reach the parents who are probably most
in need of their help. These are the families who
are so often in trouble or difficulty of one sort or
another. They not only suffer sadly themselves,
but become a sore burden on every local
authority and social agency with which they are
concerned. Whatever the trouble may be, there
is often one common factor—too many children.
These people will not come to a clinic. Over the
last few years the Eugenics Society has been
financing an attempt by the F.P.A. to deal with
this problem. In two large provincial towns (and
shortly in London), close contact has been established with the local health authority which
knows of families where there are already far
too many children and where home conditions
are terrible. There is a team of doctor, nurse and
social worker. The parents are (with the consent
of their own doctor) visited at home, taught the
most suitable method of birth control, given free
supplies and followed up. Results are encouraging, one most important point is that these
patients apparently find no difficulty in using
oral contraception and take to it readily. This
sort of experiment is expensive and could not
have been done without the help of the Eugenics
Society. When enough data has been obtained,
we hope to prove to local health authorities that
such work would be well worth while financially.
Children in care are very expensive. The cost of
some of these problem families to the community must be enormous. If, in one year, even
ten fewer children had to be taken into care the
cost of the scheme would be covered.

One of the early cries against the birth controllers was that of race suicide. When the birth
trate was going down in the nineteen-thirties,
alarming calculations were made of the rapid
dwindling of the population. It was taken for
granted that the birth rate would continue to fall
as knowledge of contraception spread. This
proved to be a complete miscalculation. The
acceptance of birth control is now almost universal in this country and the birth rate is considerably higher than it was. This is also true
for the U.S.A. It is clear that knowledge and
FAMILY PLANNING: AN ASSESSMENT

practice of birth control does not, in itself, lower
the birth rate. In fact, to some extent, the United
Kingdom, and still more the U.S.A., have their
own population problems—ours is not one of
malnutrition, but of congestion. The amenities,
if not the necessities, of life are going to be
seriously affected if our birth rate goes on rising.
Family Planning has had a powerful effect on
the place and status of women in our social life.
Freed from perpetual baby producing and baby
minding throughout their best years, they can
earn money and so, at least, share the status of
the breadwinner. They can also follow careers
play their part in public work and social life.
Family planning affords women the opportunity
to emerge at last from their age-old inferiority.
The history of the birth control movement in
this country is a success story, but what of the
future?
There are allegedly 300 abortions every day in
this country—Are we bringing that rate down?
One in nine newly-marrieds come to F.P.A.
clinics—what happens to the other eight? Do
they go to doctors? and what training have those
doctors received? Hitherto, few teaching hospitals have done much—in how many medical
schools is an attempt made to train students to

deal with the sex problems of their patients?

Ought we to press for all our work to be included in the National Health Service?

How should we tackle the problem of the
Roman Catholic Church? Ought we to be more
belligerent or should we concentrate on points
of agreement and methods of persuasion?

The F.P.A. has concentrated on advising
methods giving maximum safety—do these
methods demand too much effort and sophistication? Would concentration on simpler methods
increase or decrease the failure rate?

Despite all the television programmes, Press
articles and broadcast discussion on sex and
birth control which, even ten years ago would
have been hair-raising in their audacity, one
bride in thirteen is pregnant when she marries,
and illegitimate births for 1960 totalled over
43,000. Although pre-marital intercourse is
nothing new, our attitude towards it is. Young
people to-day discuss it freely and many of them
practise it. Who is helping them to make up their
minds and who will give them birth control advice when they want it? Should we?

These questions confront us—I hope that we
can meet them in a way which will justify our
future as, I think, we have justified our past.

79
