EUGENICS, SOCIALISM AND CAPITALISM
Debate at Members’ Meeting

T a Members’ meeting of the Eugenics
Society, held on Tuesday, June 18th,
at the rooms of the Linnean Society,

Burlington House, with Dr. C. J. Bond in the
chair, a debate on whether the principles of
eugenics are ‘‘ most favoured by a socialist
or a capitalist state of society ’’ was opened
by Dr. C. V. Drysdale and Dr. Stella Churchill,
and followed by an animated discussion from
the large audience gathered in the body of the
hall. Dr. T. Drummond Shiels, who was to
have opened the socialist case, was unfortunately indisposed and Dr. Churchill, at very
short notice, kindly consented to fill his place.
In his introductory remarks the chairman
stressed the fact that, whatever views individual Members might hold on the subject to
be debated, the Eugenics Society itself was
committed to no opinion or policy in the
matter. The Council would be glad to have
before it the relevant facts and the views of
Members of the Soczety, and on the basis of
such information it would, when the proper
time came, consider the whole problem.
Opening the debate, Dr. DryspDALE said:
In my view socialism and eugenics have been
and must remain almost totally opposed,
owing to their fundamental difference of outlook and estimation of human values. The
famous controversy between Godwin and
Malthus at the commencement of the last
century clearly revealed this difference, which
has persisted to this day. Socialism ascribes
poverty and social evils to the tyranny and
rapacity of the mch and powerful; it
assumes or asserts that Nature is beneficent
and that “ there would be plenty for all if it
were only properly distributed.” It sympathizes with or even glorifies the “‘ under
dog,” the “have-nots” or the “ proletariat,’’ and concentrates chiefly on securing
a more uniform distribution of wealth, with
little regard to individual capabilities or the
need for greater total production. Malthus,
on the other hand, showed that the belief in

109

the beneficence of Nature was mistaken, that
the fundamental cause of poverty was overpopulation, and that there had never been
and could never be plenty for all unless births
were considerably restricted. Darwin extended the principle of Malthus to all living
creatures, and showed that there had always
been a severe struggle for existence among
them, owing to their high rate of reproduction, which had led to the improvement of
each species by the early death of all who were
incapable of obtaining sufficient food and
protecting themselves in the struggle, while
those who were able to survive to reproduce
and rear their offspring handed on their
superior qualities to the next generation by
the operation of heredity. Applying this
principle to mankind, he found in it the
chief moulding agency by which man had
risen from the ape to his present stage of
development.

Eugenists, following Darwin, are convinced of the great importance of heredity,
and contend that there are great differences in the innate capability and value of
individual human beings, which improvement in environment cannot greatly affect.
Accordingly they hold that race improvement
cannot continue unless future generations
are recruited chiefly from the more capable
stocks, and that if they are recruited mainly
from the less capable, racial degeneration
must follow. If this is true, it is of the
highest importance that we should have.
some means of judging the relative values of
individuals to the community and seek to
encourage the reproduction of the more
valuable and especially to discourage the
reproduction of the less valuable types.

In the severe struggle for existence which
was the rule before family limitation was
adopted, and before socialistic measures for
the protection and maintenance of the
weaker had made such headway, this judgment was automatic, as more children were
IIo

born than could possibly survive, and competition ensured that only those endowed
with superior vitality and capability were
able to rear many descendants. But this
selective agency has now been arrested and
even reversed by modern humanitarian legislation, so that the self-supporting classes are
now restricting their families to an extent
which must bring about their rapid extinction, under the pressure of the taxation and
other demands for the maintenance of the
non-self-supporting individuals, who are still
having relatively large families. Unless this
state of affairs is changed by the reduction of
the fertility of the latter and their burden on
the former classes, our race in a few generations will be mainly composed of the descendants of those who have been unable to maintain themselves, i.e. to render such services
to the community as will compensate it for
their support.

The value of services to the community,
and therefore of the individual who performs
them, can only be gauged by competition.
Each individual must discover for himself
what services he can best render and offer
them to the highest bidder. No other judgment is safe, as it is subject to the bias of
the judges, as has been strikingly shown by
the German National Socialist eugenic proposals. In an individualistic democratic
community, each person buys the goods and
services he feels he needs most, and the
remuneration each person receives is really a
democratic vote as to his value. Competition was the deciding factor in Darwinian
selection, and it has been the law of life under
which our race has developed. Unless or until
we can find some other safe means of judgment, which our present knowledge certainly
does not provide, competition must and ought
to remain the basis on which fitness for
parenthood is decided. However great our
sympathy for the poor and weak may be, and
whatever measures we may take to relieve
them, we must accept the view that those
who are unable to support themselves and
their children in a competitive state by their
unaided exertions are biologically unfit, and
that we should do all in our power to discourage their reproduction.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

All this is so opposed to the doctrines and
spirit of socialism, with its fostermg of the
“have-nots,” denial of the superiority of the
rich and powerful, and denunciation of competition, that it seems impossible to believe
that a sound eugenic policy can ever be
adopted by a socialist State. Only one or two
socialists, notably Dr. Eden Paul and Mr.
H. G. Wells, have shown any appreciation of
the importance of eugenics, and even they
have mainly confined it to the importance of
restricting the reproduction of obviously
defective types such as the mentally deficient,
which is good so far as it goes, but only
touches the fringe of the subject. Any idea
that the poor on the average are biologically
inferior is contrary to their most cherished
ideals.

The true ideal of a democratic community
should not be the protection of the weak, and
an alteration of the social system in their
favour, but the breeding of strong individuals
who need no protection. This may be effected
without any hardship by retaining the individualistic competitive system, and continuing our relief to the unsuccessful on condition that they do not have children while
in receipt of relief, instructing them in the
best measures of birth-control for that purpose. By this means we can reconcile
humanitarian sympathy and democracy with
race-improvement, which are otherwise irrevocably opposed, and competition in life will
be a pleasure as it is in sport, when we have
the right number and right quality of people,
so that every effort raises their standard of
existence.

Dr. STELLA CHURCHILL: I want to explain
that I am here merely as a stop-gap. This is
the second time within the last few months
that I have found myself in this unfortunate
position. If a personal appeal had not been
made to me over the telephone, I should not
have submitted to this. If I cannot convert
you to the socialist point of view in the
twenty minutes at my disposal, it will be my
fault and not the fault of the cause I have at
heart.

First of all, I wish to pay tribute to Dr.
Drysdale’s careful exposition of what went
on in 1794. I am used to hearing “‘ What did
EUGENICS, SOCIALISM AND CAPITALISM

Gladstone say in 1884 ? ’”’ but I did not think
we should be reduced to finding a reason for
it because various people wrote about freedom
and competition in 1794.

We are living in a changed world. In the
world to-day we have a complete breakdown
of the capitalist system because it is failing
to deliver the goods to those who deserve
them. Dr. Drysdale says in fact that if you
see a very distinguished-looking old man
selling flowers in the street, a man older than
Dr. Drysdale, obviously an intelligent and
educated person, and you assume that that
man has done something in his life which
condemns him to the scrap-heap, he may
receive public assistance but may not breed.
Like many of those in this room, he may be
past the reproductive age. Are we, for that
reason, to say that people whose economic
circumstances are less happy than our own
are, for that reason alone, unfitted to breed
and shall be deprived of the right of parenthood? That is the position of Dr. Drysdale
and his sympathizers.

In the short time at my disposal, I have to
put before you the reasons why competition
produces not only not the best but the very
worst in society, why competition, as we see
it to-day, gives us a moneyed and rich class,
whose vices are to control others, according
to their tastes; whose financial disasters
expose thousands and perhaps millions of
people all over the world to poverty. One
can think of Kreuger and Hatry, and others,
whose financial power in a capitalist society
may shatter at one blow the position of many
thousands. Dr. Drysdale may see a young
married couple whose income is in one of
those concerns reduced to poverty overnight,
reduced to seeking help from the Public
Assistance Committee, as many of us know
from experience. Such a couple, regardless of
their heredity, their intelligence, their characters, are to be told by Public Assistance Committees: ‘‘ Live you shall, but breed you
must not.’’ That is an impossible position to
take up.

But let us continue with eugenics for a
moment, because I do not feel that we have
learned a lot from Dr. Drysdale as to what
eugenics may be. Negative eugenics you are

IIt

a little tired of—sterilization, birth-control,
and even destruction at birth. There is a
case for compulsory sterilization amongst
certain families, perhaps. On the question of
mentally defectives, it is very interesting to
know, as most of us do, that in old families,
the mental defective is by no means uncommon. I know of a public school where
there were two mentally defective sons of
earls. They were only admitted at that
school because they were in that social
position and had plenty of money. I maintain, and can prove to you, that there are
thousands of slum children whose intelligence, whose character, whose heredity, are
infinitely superior to that of the sons of an
earl, or even a duke—I do not know which is
the higher, really—but those children are
condemned, by the capitalist state of society,
to be wage slaves; they are condemned to
go to Dr. Drysdale on their bended knees and
say: ‘‘ We will work for you at any wages ;
if we work, we shall prove that we are better
than our neighbours round the corner who
belong to trade unions.”

Now what is positive eugenics? Positive
eugenics is, I admit, not sufficiently encouraged perhaps by the Eugenics Soctety,
and one of the things with which I have the
happiness to be associated is an endeavour to
draw up a health certificate before people can
marry and breed. We are up against an
enormous difficulty. Really, apart from a
few rare diseases of the eye, or of the blood,
and certain gross diseases, we do not know
what is inherited and what is not. Positive
eugenics may seem to be a vast and very
difficult subject, but I maintain that what
socialists aim at will give those people
who are of sound stock and of sound
heredity a chance to prove their worth,
apart from economic conditions. We socialists—and I am very happy to state that
I am allied with a distinguished body of men
and women all over the world—maintain
that there should be equal opportunity from
birth for all members of the community.
That is a very stable and, I think, a very
shrewd form of competition. There are a
number of jobs to be done in the world for
which some people may be more suitable
IIz2

than others, and if everybody had equality
of opportunity from birth, to be educated, to
be fed—not, I mean, as a free gift, but work
would be provided for their talents—then
you will know who were the geniuses, who
were the distinguished people, who should be
condemned to road sweeping and who should
be Prime Minister, and it will not be a question of having, shall we say, nine-tenths of the
Cabinet coming from one famous public
school, because they have the money and
choose their parents very wisely, in order to
get an education, and the money to go toa
university. The worst effect of civilization, as
I see it, is the waste of human material ;
human lives are wasted and malformed. It
is nothing short of impertinence to go to a
young man or woman who is out of work and
to say: ‘‘ You are out of work; you are not
worth anything ’”’—that is what in effect Dr.
Drysdale has said. He said distinctly that
if they could not get work they should, in
effect, be sterilized. Perhaps Dr. Drysdale
will be good enough in his reply to say what
he did mean by his statement, which I interpreted like that.

You may have heard the speech by a
working man which was broadcast the other
day. He said he wanted “ freedom to play
his part as a useful and respected member of
the community, freedom to raise his family
according to the best traditions of our
country ; liberty to educate his children
without the fear of their being unwanted
when they appear in the labour market ;
freedom in the last analysis to live what
Aristotle called the ‘ good life,’ that he may
hand on to posterity a brighter and a better
heritage than he himself has known.” It
seems to me it is nothing short of nonsense
to talk of the ways of Nature as necessarily
producing either best breeding in animals or
in anything. Are we so sure that we are
developing, by the natural process of the
capacity for killing, the type of animal that
we want to perpetuate ; are we so confident
that by encouraging those characteristics—
because that is what it amounts to—in human
beings we are going to evolve the qualities
which we all know exist in the race, but
which are not, I think, outstanding in the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

characters of profiteers and exploiters and
users of child labour in mines, and so on, of
which you all know a good deal better than
I do?

We have to-day a certain degree of socialism—you can call it what you like—in water,
gas and electricity. You have a number of
salaried workers, I have been one myself,
and you have those people who have what we
socialists want to have for everybody. We
want to do away with casual labour; we
want to do away with exploiting the workers ;
we want people to be able to bring up their
families under the best possible conditions,
and those who are not fit to have families
will have to be so educated that they will
understand it. Among your salaried workers
you have a number of people who are employed at a secure rate, which may not
appear to be very large to those who are used
to thinking in millions; but {400 or {500 a
year is riches to some of us doctors to-day.
We know that we shall have a pension which
will at least enable us not to go begging from
Public Assistance Committees, and to bring
up such children as Nature allows us to have
in comparative comfort and security and
with independence. I maintain that it is the
spread of that system which will evolve the
best type of human being. You are assuming
that because parents in slum areas, earning,
say, {2 or £3 a week at the outside, have
children, all those children in themselves are
inferior to those better off. You know as well
as I do that that is not the case. As a matter
of fact, I maintain, as a medical woman who
has done child welfare work for twenty years,
that there are mothers of the well-to-do and
rich classes whose children would have died
but for the services of nurses recruited from
that very class that is despised. I have
weighed 200 children born in Bermondsey
between 1920 and 1922, who came to the
clinic at birth, and there were 70 per cent.
above the average. By the end of a year,
those same children were in number only
30 per cent. above the average weight. I am
not pretending that weight is the only thing,
but they were beginning to deteriorate
because of the effects of their environment.

I have anxiously waited to hear from Dr.
EUGENICS, SOCIALISM AND CAPITALISM

Drysdale what effect he thinks environment
has on the eugenic situation of the race,
because a person may be perfectly healthy
and robust at birth, but after ten or fifteen
years of exposure to a number of infectious
diseases, and want of sleep and malnutrition,
may be ready to join what some of us have,
I think, misnamed the Social Problem group,
whose very existence I begin to doubt. I find
nothing in modern competition to show that
the best man gets the job, and I find everything in favour of giving equality of opportunity to all human beings.

Asa last word, may I point out that I think
the socialist party of this country is the only
one which has definitely tried to put birthcontrol measures into its programme.
Another instance of what I maintain is differentiation is that whilst the rich woman or
the middle-class woman can get information,
until a year or so ago the mother who could
not pay could not get knowledge of how to
restrict her family.

What I wish to deplore is the assumption,
which I think is wrong in fact, that wealth is
any criterion of intelligence or the right to
breed.

Mrs. Hopson : I should like, if I may, to
ask Dr. Churchill, before the discussion
begins, to clarify for us what the practical
scheme would be. Is it proposed to give large
family allowances to certain groups? I want
to ask her what the practical measures would
be which would differentiate between, let us
take, healthy and unhealthy constitutions,
because that gets rid for the moment of the
difficult question of the value of their
temperamental qualities.

Dr. CHURCHILL: If I reply to this question, I shall keep you here for the rest of the
day. I thought I made it clear that, under
socialism, there would be equality of opportunity, that is to say, educational equality. I
do not think that, in any form of relief,
whether you call it family allowances or
public assistance, you are going to be able to
discriminate between the child of the London
University and the child of the slum. With
regard to pre-marital or pre-natal examination, you must trust to the healthy development of conscience and a still more healthy

113

development of mind which will enable
people, on a voluntary basis, to refrain from
having offspring when they themselves are
not healthy. I do not entirely believe in
equality of pay for all jobs. I do not think
I can deal with it at greater length.

Mrs. DRESCHFIELD Said that in the colonies
the so-called reactionary and wealthy people
did all kinds of menial work, such as breaking
stones, whilst the people who had been
brought up to do so-called menial work
would not do anything. In Canada, she had
seen in advertisements for workpeople the
phrase ‘‘ No Englishmen need apply,” because English people upset everybody, and
would not do the little bit more for a little bit
less.

Professor HuxLEy: The point which is
raised surely concerns the whole question of
the relation of heredity and environment.
The great point at issue, to my mind, is this.
It seems clear to-day that the point of view
that environment directly affects the germ
is quite erroneous ; that is to say, we cannot
expect to improve the inborn qualities of the
race merely by changing environment. We
can, however, endeavour to do two things.
We can alter the expression of those inborn
qualities which exist, and we can alter the
selection which presses differently on different genetic types in different environments. The white man in the hottest part of
the tropics is at a disadvantage as against the
black man. There, environment encourages
a different physical type. When you come to
the social environment, the matter is far
more complicated, because, first of all, man’s
mental plasticity is so great, and then your
social environment is, in all developed societies, intensely complicated in itself because
of class structure. The social environment
for a man in one class of society is different
from that for another in a different class.

Dr. Drysdale said that the first thing to do
—and there I entirely agree with him—is to
determine the eugenic values of different
stocks. Speaking as a biologist who has had
to deal in that type of problem, I can see no
other way of doing this scientifically save
by equalization of the environment. Unless
you equalize the environment of people of
114

different classes, you cannot know what their
genetic qualities are.

Dr. Drysdale spoke of a man deciding for
himself what he wanted to do when offering
his services. Quite apart from the whole
question. of unemployment in general, it is
obviously much more difficult for a man in the
lowest social stratum to offer his services, or
even to think of so doing, as a scientist, say,
or a poet, than it is for a man from a middleor upper-class home.

Finally, on the question of the free play of
competition, let us remember that the free
play of competition takes place inside the
social environment. This may not be
deliberately controlled (although already
there is in many countries a considerable
amount of conscious control) but it is unconsciously very much controlled and determined by the prevalent type of economic and
social system. One type of social environment will encourage one type of man, and
another, a different type.

On the broadest biological lines, the one
real distinction which exists between man
and the lower organisms is in the power of
consciously envisaging a situation and making a decision ; in other words, the power of
deliberate knowledge and conscious control.
It seems to me, on the whole, that a deliberate control of social environment, instead of
leaving it to the free play of an unconsciously
biased type of competition, is the ideal that
we should aim at.

Mrs. HorAacE FArRQuHARSON: I should
like to ask Dr. Churchill if she was not
making a mis-statement when she said.that
the socialists were the people who had done
the most on the question of birth-control ?
Mr. Wheatley was a most retrogressive
person, because he made it impossible for the
workers, both voluntary and paid, at the
various baby clinics, to give information
which was desirable to mothers in certain
conditions. Mr. Wheatley absolutely forbade
it. It was not until 1931 that the prohibition
was removed.

Dr. CHURCHILL: What I was referring to
was the great agitation going on within the
Labour Party itself to have birth-control
taught to mothers at clinics. Mr. Wheatley

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

was a Roman Catholic and opposed to birthcontrol.

Dr. AIKMAN : I was very interested in Dr.
Churchill’s remarks. I understood that the
determination of the social problem group
was considered a most admirable bit of work,
and if a socialist of Dr. Churchill’s eminence
cannot accept such work as a basis for a
eugenic programme, I think it stultifies the
whole of the socialist movement, and I do
not think we can expect anything practical
from the eugenic point of view from any
socialist government.

When we come to consider conservatism, it
is based essentially upon the idea of aristocracy and that some people are superior to
others. That is entirely contrary to socialism.
Therefore, theoretically we should expect
conservatism to be better from the eugenic
point of view. One idea of the superiority of
certain people certainly supports the conservative—the idea of family pride and
affection—whereas if anyone believed that
his children were equal to the very worst type
of children he saw in the country, he would
have no family pride at all, and would not
take the trouble to have children to support
the family pride. To equalize environment,
children would have to be removed from
their parents at the earliest moment, that
is at birth. I believe that the removal of
such children from their parents at a very
early moment will destroy the parents’ pride
and interest in the family to a very large
extent, and therefore would be extremely
detrimental to that family pride which is
essential really for practical eugenics.

I think it is just possible that the conservative party might support a practical
eugenics scheme with family allowances,
which would definitely be a help to positive
eugenics, but I cannot imagine any socialist
party supporting such a scheme, or even
introducing it, because it would be entirely
contrary to their conception of equality.
When we come to negative eugenics, I think
that the conservatives are more likely to put
a policy into practice than are the socialists,
for the reason that the socialist refuses to
envisage the idea that some people are
EUGENICS, SOCIALISM AND CAPITALISM

inferior and that therefore a scheme of
negative eugenics is necessary.

Another thing in socialism is that it
preaches class hatred, and I believe that class
hatred makes it impossible to carry out any
logical, scientific scheme of positive eugenics.
And I am afraid the socialists will avoid any
real scheme of negative eugenics because
there are no votes in it.

I believe, from the results of the last
socialist government, that yet another would
lead to a deterioration of the standard of
living throughout the country. We saw,
during the War, that restriction on food had
a very detrimental effect on those who were
delicate and weakly. Many people in institutions who would have survived in peace-time
undoubtedly met what might be considered
an untimely end. I believe that a socialist
government coming in in that way would
practise a certain amount of negative
eugenics, and destroy many of those unfortunates in institutions. I am afraid that the
socialists even when carrying out environmentally a measure of negative eugenics
would cause such deterioration in the general
health of the population as would more than
counterbalance it. I believe the conservative
policy is more favourable to eugenics.

Dr. CAROLINE MAuLE: I think Professor
Huxley mentioned that fundamentally
eugenics depends upon what is in the cell
itself ; environment affects the ability to
express what is there.

I feel that socialism is the form of society
under which we will get the very best people
and the best brains, because, unlike the last
speaker, socialists want equal opportunity
for everybody. There will be competition:
we have an official socialist state in Russia ;
yet there is competition there. How can you
tell, as Professor Huxley said in a much
better way than I can state it, whether a
person has the values and the qualities under
this particular system if you only associate
with people who have had all the opportunities that a good economic condition gives ?
You have no idea when you never really
meet the others who have not the like opportunities. I fear that many of those who are

Cc

II5

conservative do not realize what socialism
really is.

Captain PitT Rivers: I feel very tempted
to recall that William Cobbett died a hundred years ago. I think if there was one thing
he stood for, it was for a vigorous denunciation and contempt for labels which were
meaningless. He has been described as a
tory ; he has been described as a radical; he
has been described as a socialist. I think one
thing that was conspicuous about him was his

almost equal contempt for people who

flourished all those labels.

Looking at the countryside to-day, and
living in the countryside and studying the
problems of the agricultural worker and the
farmer, as to some extent I am privileged
to do, and to represent their problems, I feel,
as William Cobbett felt one hundred years
ago, that the real social and political division
in this country and in most other European
cour-tries is between the country, agricultural
interests and the urban, industrial—I will
not say interests, but articulate interests.
That certainly is a feeling that is increasing
among producers in the countryside, that
they are largely sacrificed to the urban
industrial chaos.

I can say dogmatically that the true
countryman has an equal contempt for the
urban politician, whether he calls himself
conservative or whether he calls himself
socialist. The socialist represents to them
the glib-speaking young man from Oxford
who lately has been touring the countryside
in the vacations, preaching the gospel of
socialism. It does not touch their problems ;
it has no meaning to them, and the speaker
usually gets a rough house. That, I suggest, is
the real division, which is not represented in
the political party labels which are bandied
about. That recalls what was once said—
Christianity, equality of rights, liberty,
democracy have no meaning in reality whatsoever, but are only used as weapons, as
catch-cries in a fight.

Dr. Duntop: This is a very involved
question. In the first place, to hear Dr.
Drysdale, some would say he was a hardhearted man. Remember, if he is right, it
means that in the long run he is going to
116

leave a better condition of affairs in the
world than those who at present may be
regarded as noble and kind-hearted people.
We have to look ahead. Those who are taking stern, strict views, to the best of their
ability, and facing what they consider are the
facts, may be bringing about a far better
condition in the future.

We have Russia and Japan side by side.
Russia is a great socialist country, but, so far
as I know, paying no attention whatever to
eugenics. There is no restriction of families ;
that is to say, there is no suggestion that the
less efficient should have smaller families, so
I feel that the probability is that there is
deterioration going on in Russia. Stern, hard
Japan, alongside, is probably having the
eugenic selection that Dr. Drysdale spoke of,
and if that is so, they will, in the long run,
spread over Russia and wipe out an inferior
race, owing to their stronger mental and
physical qualities. That is a sort of example.

I want you to realize that you have not
simply got kind-hearted people on the one
side and hard-hearted people on the other.
It isnot that. Iam concerned about eugenics.
I feel that it is a fundamental question. One
feels that socialism may be coming, and I say
to my socialist friends: What are you going
to do about it ? One thing I have discovered
is that there is nothing the socialist hates
more than the word “ eugenics.”

The birth-rate must be limited—some get
as far as that, but “‘ eugenics ”’ does stick in
their throats. I am thrown back to thinking
out for myself: How would you manage
eugenics in a socialist State? It seems to me
that you must base your society on the
principle that your lowest grade has the
smallest family. It seems to me that you
must build. I always start off on the twochild basis. I do not mind people having
children provided they do not have more than
two at the bottom, and then your other
grades would have larger families. Would
that not mean that you would have a eugenic
selection always going on? There is an idea
for both of the openers. Would Dr. Churchill
concede that it might be done, although
there is no suggestion of it in Russia?
Would that be possible? Would Dr. Drys
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

dale agree that would be possible, and would
Dr. Drysdale agree that you must work in a
socialist State on that principle? We may
be having socialism, and I am concerned
with the question: Can we have a socialist
State always working on eugenic selection ?
It is not a question merely of eliminating a
handful of gross defectives ; it is a question
of the sub-normal, below-average people.

Mrs. TYSSEN-GEE : I should like to ask Dr.
Churchill if she considered it a very great
kindness not to allow the poorest classes to
have the privilege of practising what the
middle classes have practised for generations ?

Dr. CHURCHILL: I tried to make it clear
that socialists are very anxious to limit families where the members of the families wish
it and where there are any reasons why it is
undesirable to have more children. You will
find a more eugenic frame of mind among
socialists to-day than you found some years
ago.

With regard to the question about Russia,
I have not been there, and I am loath to
express any opinion about the population.
Everybody agrees on one thing, that in
Russia prostitution is abolished, and I think
that is one of the signs of a eugenic ideal in
sex relations. Once you start ‘that, you are
going to have a very much better state of
affairs with regard to heredity.

The CHAIRMAN : I am going to speak a few
words from the point of view of a plague on
both of your houses! It seems to me that
what really matters is the attitude of the
citizens and the State towards the interest of
future generations.

Both the upholders of socialism and of
capitalism, as we see them to-day, are mainly
concerned with the welfare of the present
generation, that is with their own interests,
our own interests, to the exclusion of the
welfare of posterity. Thus the question for
us is: Which form of State organization is
the most likely to foster in the minds of the
citizens interest in future—i.e. racial—
welfare. If we believe (as eugenists) that
eugenics, or, as I like to put it, changing
human nature for the better on biological
lines, is the great problem of our time, then
EUGENICS, SOCIALISM AND CAPITALISM

we must try to find out what type of society,
or social organization, is the most likely to
promote such eugenic practice, first, by
including adequate biological instruction in
its scheme of national education, and
secondly, by arousing and fostering a “‘ racial
conscience ”’ in the minds of its citizens. The
great need, as it seems to me, is for eugenically-minded leaders and a_ eugenicallyminded public. But this does not necessarily, or mainly, depend on the political or
economic questions which form the main
distinctions between a capitalist and @
socialist society.

Dr. DrysDALE : I had hoped to follow Dr.
Churchill rather than to lead in this debate,
as I have not kept in touch with socialist
thought during the last few years, and was
anxious to know if there had been any
advance in its attitude. But, after following
her remarks attentively, I have been quite
unable to detect any such advance, and I can
abate nothing from my opening contentions.
She has simply reiterated the old diatribes
against the competitive industrial system,
alleging that it favours the worst types and
causes huge waste of human material, and
that it has completely broken down. She
asserts that the majority of the children of
the poor are sound and healthy at birth and
that their later deficiencies are due to poor
environment; and she calls at least for
equality of opportunity for all who are born.

May I say that I heartily agree with our
chairman in deploring any importation of
party or class spirit into questions which
vitally affect the welfare of the community
and of future generations. But we must have
a sound scientific foundation for directing our
practical policy, and if I oppose socialism, it
is in no partisan spirit, but because a careful
study of its principles and policy has convinced me that it is totally destitute of such
a foundation; and that, owing to its disregard of the doctrines of Malthus and Darwin, it is perpetuating and must perpetuate
the very evils which it seeks to cure.

A word first about the breakdown of the
capitalist industrial system. Certainly it has
broken down in the sense that it has failed to
bring about comfort and security for all, but

117

why? Our pioneer British economists who
advocated this system were under no illusions concerning its limitations. They were
convinced of the importance of the Malthusian doctrine, and John Stuart Mill
expressly stated that no advance in the
condition of the mass of the people could be
hoped for from any advances in production
until restriction of births was adopted. Our
great Professor Huxley declared even more
emphatically that no “fiddle faddling ”’
with the distribution of wealth would do
anything but intensify the disparities between
the rich and poor, without limitation of
births. The following simple facts will at
least help to show the matter in its true light.

After the Norman Conquest of 1066, King
William compiled the famous Domesday
Book which contained the first enumeration
of the population of this country, and which
gave it as about two and three-quarter
millions. From that time to the beginning of
the nineteenth century it rose to only about
nine millions, or by roughly six millions in
seven centuries. Then came the industrial
revolution and in the single century which
followed, the population of England and
Wales rose from nine to thirty-two millions,
so that this much decried capitalist industrial
system provided the means of existence for
twenty-three additional millions in one century, and the average standard of existence
was materially improved, as shown by the
fall of the death-rate from about twenty-two
to eighteen per thousand. It should especially be noted, however, that the fall of the
death-rate did not become definitely established until the fall of the birth-rate commenced from 1876.

Nothing can do away with the fact that
the competitive industrial system did provide
for the twenty-three million additional
mouths, and the simple reason why it could
not provide comfort and security was because
even this was far short of the needs of unrestricted reproduction. We now know from
the actual records of different countries that
an unrestricted birth-rate would be at least
fifty per thousand, and that the death-rate
of a well-fed community would be less than
ten per thousand, leaving an excess of births
118

over deaths of over forty per thousand, or
4 per cent. per annum, which would cause
the population to double in every seventeen
and a half years, or increase fiftyfold in each
century.

To cope with unrestricted population,
therefore, the social system would have
needed to provide for an increase of numbers
from nine to 450 millions during last century.
Of course it failed as every other system
must have failed; but because we totally
ignored the economists who told us that we
could only realize its benefits by restricting
births, its wonderful achievement in providing for such an enormous number has been
completely disregarded, and we are now
denouncing and doing our best to overthrow
the system which effected such a remarkable
advance, and which did improve the standard of existence as soon as restriction of
births commenced.

This may not seem germane to the question of eugenics, but it is fundamental, as we
cannot come to any rational conclusions concerning eugenics or any other large social
problems, as Darwin has told us with respect
to all biological problems, unless we keep the
principle of the constant struggle for existence which inevitably follows unrestricted
reproduction constantly in mind. The Malthusian and Darwinian doctrines are as essential for the proper understanding of social
phenomena as Newton’s law of gravitation is
for astronomy, and the opinions of those who
betray ignorance of or hostility to those
doctrines are valueless.

First, as regards the wastage of life. This
is not the result of a particular social system,
but is inherent in all Nature. If there is one
thing Nature is prodigal of it is life. Millions
of eggs are produced by many fish for every
one which reaches maturity. There is not a
single type of plant or animal which does not
reproduce far more rapidly than its means of
subsistence. Although the preservation and
comfort of all human beings who are born
should be the highest aim of society, it is a
hopelessly unattainable one if the birth-rate
is not controlled to about a third of its
unrestricted value.

Secondly, as regards the types which

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

should be favoured, it is obvious that they
should be those which tend to increase the
available necessaries and comforts of existence of the community. In these days of
cheap power, mere physical health and
strength is of little social value. The total
muscular effort of a strong man working for
ten hours a day is only one horse-power hour,
which an oil engine will provide for one penny.
Hence we may say that the whole value of an
individual in modern society lies in his intellectual powers, and it is in these that such
enormous inherent and hereditary differences
exist, not only as tested by examinations, but
in capacity for leadership and seizing opportunities, which only freedom in a competitive
social system can develop and appraise. Dr.
Churchill truly claims that such capacity is
often exercised anti-socially, and instances
the ruin caused by dishonest financiers ; but
the social service rendered by many great
captains of finance and industry is immense,
and if the mass of the people had higher
intelligence they would not rush to invest in
bubble schemes. If we attempt to protect all
fools from their folly by curbing all initiative,
we shall breed a race of fools. Dr. J. A.
Hobson, who is the only socialist writer I
know of who has frankly faced this difficulty,
wrote a book entitled Incentives in the New
Industrial Order in which he was forced to
end with the pious but not too sanguine hope
that some solution would arise.

Lastly, as regards equality of opportunity
for the coming generation, this is an ideal
which all humanitarians must ardently
desire, and none more than myself, but even
such approach to it as we have already
attained, together with all the other costly
“social services,”” has only been rendered
possible by the reduction of the birth-rate
which the individualist economists advocated; and it cannot be realised without a
considerable reduction of the reproduction of
the less successful types. There is no equality
of opportunity in Nature between the child
who is born in the frozen steppes of Siberia
and the one who is born in the fertile plains
of New Zealand. If our birth-rate of thirtysix per thousand, which existed before 1876,
had been maintained to the present day it
EUGENICS, SOCIALISM AND CAPITALISM

would mean nearly a million and a half
additional children each year, and the only
equality of opportunity we could give them
would be equality of misery. Even as it is,
the efforts which have been made for the
preservation and fostering of the weakly
children are having disastrous results, as the
medical authorities are being forced to
recognize. Dr. Gifford, the Deputy Medical
Superintendent of the Lancashire County
Hospital, has just reported that the halving
of the infantile mortality has been accompanied with an alarming increase in physical
and mental defect. ‘“‘ Mental deficiency,
bronchitis, and dyspepsia are increasing.’
‘“‘ One in every ten of our people is too dull or
too sickly to earn a living unaided. One in
200 is, or has been, mentally afflicted. One
in 120 is feeble-minded.”’ This is the direct
and inevitable result of socialistic and sentimental care for the weak, and it is our bounden duty as eugenists who care for posterity
to point out the evil of this course, and to
insist that such types should be discouraged
from reproduction.

The one and only feature of Dr. Churchill’s
remarks which gives any encouragement, is
her statement that the Labour Party is now
the only party which is demanding due
provision of birth-control instruction at all
Public Health Centres (although she made no
allusion to the vote of the House of Lords in
its favour some years ago). In my opinion,
as I have repeatedly urged to this Soczety,
this is the most important of all eugenic
measures, and I am devoutly thankful to
hear of it, after my painful past experience of
the strong opposition of practically all the
socialists toit. Fortunately, birth-control can
be exercised by individuals according to their
own common sense and self-interest, irrespective of political dogmas ; and we still have
a sufficient remnant of individual competition
left to guide them in the right direction. But

119

the guidance and incentive of competition is
indispensable, and we can only make a reasonably rapid advance towards race improvement by reversing our present policy of
stifling it, and by reviving our old British
individualistic doctrines of liberty, efficient
work and thrift, and parental responsibility.

Dr. STELLA CHURCHILL: I find it difficult
to follow Dr. Drysdale over the wide field of
his summing-up. I will deal briefly with two
points only. He said he admitted the
capitalist system had broken down because,
I take it, the natural methods of birth-control
had not been sufficient—if objection outside
is Nature, and contraception is Nature, too—
therefore Nature is producing too many
people at the present time.

Industrialism has increased production, in
many respects a thousandfold. We all know
that milk is poured into the gutters, fish put
back into the sea, coffee burned and wheat
burned and ships sunk so that we shall not
get food. It is not a question of underproduction, but a question of bad distribution.

I end on a most cheerful note for all who
sympathize with him. If Nature, or whatever is the force, contmues to work at the
present rate, the population in England and
Wales in 1975 will be halved, and if it continues on at the present rate, in 200 years it
will be reduced again to the number of six
millions. Those are not my own views, but
based on the work of Dr. Kuczynski, of the
London School of Economics.

I should like to thank you all for bearing so
patiently with me in what I know is an
inadequate presentation of a very good
cause.

The CHAIRMAN: I am sure you wish me
to thank Dr. Drysdale and Dr. Churchill for
their kindness in coming here this afternoon
and presenting the case from each point of
view. (Applause.)

———&$$_$_{_*<*—[_[ii——_$_{_————

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVII, No. 2
