EUGENIC CONSIDERATIONS IN
LEGISLATION.

THe Eugenics Education Society have for the last three years urged
that the _ Income Tax should be so assessed as to lessen at all events the
extent to which marriage and parenthood are penalised in the Income Tax
paying classes. A special discussion was held on May 13th between
members of the Council and various prominent economists, at which three
amendments to the Finance Bill were formulated, and these were afterwards unanimously agreed to by the Council.

We are most grateful to those prominent Members of Parliament,
who, finding that their views coincided with those thus formulated, put
down amendments on these lines and advocated them in Committee. The
sincere thanks of all Eugenists are due especially to Colonel Sir Hamar
Greenwood and Mr. J. F. P. Rawlinson.

The amendment which stood in Mr. Rawlinson’s name covered almost
the same ground as that moved by Mr. Peto, which was accepted in
principle.

As we feel that this whole debate is of intense interest to Eugenists,
we reproduce it im extenso.

With reference to Clause 28, Subsection (1), of the Finance Act,
1916, which gives relief from income tax in respect of children to those
whose total incomes do not exceed £800, Mr. Peto (Member for Devizes)
moved “to insert the words ‘and any individual whose income exceeds
eight hunderd pounds but does not exceed one thousand pounds shall be
entitled to the like abatement on each child above the number of two.’

“It will not be necessary to argue in favour of this amendment. It
is a very small extension of the principle of a graduated amount for
children. It has the additional merit of being some encouragement to
have a reasonable British family of a more old-fashioned kind than those
which are so commonly prevalent at the present time.”

With reference to Subsection (2) of the same Clause, which gives
relief in respect of dependent relatives other than a wife or children, Mr.
Rawlinson (Member for Cambridge University) and Sir G. Coates (Member for Wimbledon) moved a similar amendment.

Colonel Sir Hamar Greenwood (Member for Sunderland) proposed
the following new Clause :—

NEw Cuause.--(/ncome Tax Assessment on Married Persons.)

Any individual who claims and proves in manner provided by this Act that
he is married shall be entitled to be assessed for Income Tax purposes under
this Act in the following manner :—

(1) if such individual is living with his wife and with his children who
may be under the age of twenty-one years at the date of the passing of
this Act, then his income shall be divided into equal shares, each share being
deemed to be the income of the husband, wife, or child;

(2) if such individual is living apart from his wife then the party having
the custody of the children as aforesaid, and who is liable for their maintenance, shall be entitled to have his income treated for the purposes of
assessment to Income Tax, as set out in Subsection (1) of this Section;

and the amount of Income Tax payable shall be arrived at as though such

incomes were separately assessed for the purposes of this Act, and the amount
payable by the said individual shall be assessed accordingly:

The provisions of this Section shall apply to a widower or widow with
children dependent as aforesaid.—[Colonel Sir H. Greenwood.]

Brought up and read the first time.
86 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Colonel Sir H. Greenwood: I beg to move, “ That this Clause be
read a second time.”

I believe I am in order in moving this new Clause, which should
have been moved a little earlier in the Debate. I am sure that the
Leader of the House would be the last Member of this House to curtail
the rights of private Members. Further, I must apologise to the Committee and to the Chair for not being in my place when the Clause was
called. But the Bill was got through with such rapidity, which is the
greatest compliment which could be paid to the Leader of the House,
that I am sure the Committee will not deny me the privilege of explaining in a very short speech what I consider one of the most important
Clauses on the Paper. This Clause continues logically the principle
already admitted to the Chancellor of the Exchequer, that is the giving
of a preference to married persons as against bachelors and spinsters in
the assessment of Income Tax. The Clause standing in my name, if
adopted, would mean that if there were father, mother, and three
children in a family, making five units, and the total income of that
household was £1,000, under the Clause the’ assessment would be fer
capita ‘£200 for each member of the family, instead of £1,000 as it is
now. This would be a direct encouragement to the family, and the
family man is unquestionably the man who has maintained the race, and
who alone, in my mind, should have preference in the levying of Income
Tax. Let me give a case or two that have happened. First of all,
remember that the underlying principle of the Clause I am now moving
is that it is an endeavour to assess the Income Tax according to ability
of the Income Tax payers to pay. It deals with those who pay Income
Tax, and the taxpayers now include a large percentage of energetic,
thrifty, and ambitious persons of all classes and of both sexes. It is vital
that they should be encouraged to marry and have children. As the
law stands at present, there is a direct discouragement of marriage and
of parenthood, and a direct encouragement to bachelordom and spinsterhood. I have a case which I should like to bring to the attention of the
Committee, a case sent to me a couple of days ago. In a certain community where there are six doctors, one doctor has eight children, and
the other doctors are childless or bachelors. This doctor’s income is
about equal to the average. One of his boys has gone to the front and
has been killed, another is in an officers’ training corps; and a third
(seventeen) will certainly be in this War. The other five children are
youngsters.

I put it to the Committee whether a man in this position should pay
Income Tax at the same rate as his fellow-practitioners in the same
locality, that you put this burden upon one member of the profession in
that community who has done his duty by the State, who has supplied
one soldier, and is giving two others from his family, while preference
is given to bachelors and childless men as against the ‘family man. I
might remind the Committee that this is not the first time this question
has been raised. It was a favourite topic of discussion in ancient days,
both in Sparta and in Rome. I will merely give a quotation, that may
impress the Chancellor of the Exchequer, from the Daily Telegraph :—

““Males in the ancient city of Sparta who remained unmarried, after a

certain age, were regarded as poor citizens, and various penalties were inflicted
upon them. While they were still young they were debarred from watching the
EUGENIC CONSIDERATIONS IN LEGISLATION. 87

games of the maidens; and they had periodically to march in the depth of
winter, with the scantiest of clothing or none at all, round the market place,
chanting a song directed against themselves, and confessing the justice of their
punishment.”

I should have all those men who are unmarried to go through exactly a
similar punishment. As the law stands now, and I wish to emphasise
this, you are discouraging the continuance of the race. I admit that
there would be a loss of revenue if there were not a readjustment of the
Income Tax in regard to the bachelor and the spinster, and that it is but
justice that what you lose by this fev capita system of taxing the family
should be made up by increased taxation of the bachelor and spinster.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer could increase his revenue by lightening
the unfair burden which is now on fathers and mothers, and replacing
the deficit by taxing bachelors and spinsters. The present system of
income tax undoubtedly makes for restriction of families. There is no
use pointing to the fact that constant economic pressure is leading to a
decline of the birth-rate, and drying up the sources of the race to which
we belong. The Income Tax system particularly affects all classes, who
fix a high standard of education for their children, and who deny themselves of everything, work hard, and make every sacrifice for the wellbeing of their boys and girls. The present burden of Income Tax hits
them hard, because they want their children to be well educated and well
started in life. I will not for a moment say anything against the bachelor
and the spinster, who in many cases are to be commiserated; certainly I
am not one to condemn them, but they must maintain the race, for the
family is essential to the progress of civilised races. The greater the
burden and the difficulty in bringing up a family, the heavier the penalty
on the father and mother. Not only do families suffer through Income
Tax assessment as at present levied, but they also suffer through the
payment of indirect taxes by every member of the family. The family
constantly acts as a drag downwards in economic life as it grows larger,
unless the income is very great indeed. The frightful havoc of the War
has compelled every person, every thoughtful person, to think of the
future of our race. This Amendment is a practical suggestion of a way
to encourage marriage and parenthood. At present the Income Tax is
a heavy penalty on parenthood. It is really cruel to think that the birth
of an innocent babe is at present treated by the State as an economic
crime in tens of thousands of houses. The future of our race is in the
cradle. It is the first duty of the Government to encourage healthy men
and women to marry and multiply. The adoption of this Amendment
would have that effect, and would also relieve parents of the present day
of an unjust burden. I commend the Clause to the sympathetic consideration of the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and of the Committee.

Mr. Bonar Law: I have great sympathy with this amendment, but I
cannot hold out any hope of being able to accept it now. ... I quite
admit that this is one of the aspects of taxation that ought to be considered. We have begun that already, but what we are doing is done in a
haphazard manner, but I do quite realise that it is one of the elements
in the consideration of putting the Income Tax on a proper basis. I hope
that with this expression of sympathy my hon. and gallant friend will
be satisfied.

Motion and Clause, by leave, withdrawn.
