SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC FACTORS IN
PSYCHIATRY*

“By W. LINDESAY NEUSTATTER, M.D., M.R.C.P.

(Physician in charge of the Dept. of Psychological Medicine, Queen Mary's Hospital
for the East End)

HE environment in which we live is
so intertwined with our reactions to it,
that it is no easy matter to determine
how far it may be playing a causal réle.
Clinical instances of psychiatric disorders at
times of external stress there are in plenty.
But the difficult question always arises as
to how far such circumstances are the cause
of the disorder, how far coincidental, and
how far actually made by the patient. Only
large scale studies on the incidence of
neurosis and psychosis in relation to the
social and economic environment can hope
effectively to answer these questions. This
is a study which has been surprisingly
neglected, especially in this country. More
attention appears to have been paid to
mental defect and delinquency. The latter is
not dealt with here but poor economic
conditions are considered in relation to
mental defect, psychosis and neurosis.

Mental Defect

It is generally held that intelligence is an
innate quality, uninfluenced by circumstances. Cattell draws attention to the fact
that the I.Q. remains constant irrespective of
environment or learning. A series of observations, taken several years apart, on the same
children showed only a 4 to 5 point difference
either up or down. Nor does the I.Q. vary
in a change from elementary to secondary
schools.

Rogers, Darling and McBride tested and
retested 62 girls committed to good institutional care after living in bad surroundings,
but found no change in their intelligence,
although changes in personality occurred.
Similar findings obtained for children moved

* A paper read at the Royal Society of Medicine.

55

from bad Glasgow slums to good housing
estates. But these results are open to the
objection that such moves, entailing extra
rent, may mean that there is less money for
food, and thus a rechetion in the total
standard of living.

Cattell is of the opinion that although good
nourishment may favour muscular development, happiness, activity and freedom from
fatigue, it does not influence mentality. But
he draws attention to the fact that malnutrition and low I.Q. may be correlated,
because in families of low intelligence both
father and mother are likely to be of poor
intellect, and malnutrition results from the
poor earnings of the one and the unwise
spending of the other.

Backwardness

Although the weight of evidence is against
sociological conditions influencing innate
intelligence, Burt states that backwardness
in performance can be definitely influenced
by a poor environment. He does not believe
it is due to bad feeding, but draws attention
to the effects of lack of sleep. Anyone who
has worked in the slums knows how late
most of the children go to bed and how drawn
and tired they often look. And as poor
children often have to work at home as well
as at school this causes additional fatigue.
The lack of sleep is of course directly dependent on the conditions in which poor families
live. I remember vividly one case of a little
girl whose sleep was disturbed because the
family lived in one room and slept in one
bed. Being the youngest, she had to sleep
across the foot of the bed, and was wakened
by each member of the family in turn as they
came to bed. Although this is an exception56 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ally bad case, the sharing of bedrooms and
beds is extremely common.

Burt cites an interesting experiment on |

two groups of children. One group was cared
for so that it had adequate sleep, the other
was given special coaching. The results
showed that the former group did considerably better at their work than the controls.

Nutrition only affects backward children
indirectly.

Neurosis and Psychosis.

Before turning to the wider aspects of the
subject, a word may be said about the
compensation neuroses. Mapother and Lewis
draw attention to the paradox that many of
these neuroses have resulted from the
humane legislation designed to deal with
industrial accidents. I take it they refer to
the working of the legislation rather than the
principle; for my impression is that all
compensation cases are not necessarily so
simple as the desire to get “‘ something for
nothing,’’ which some seem to regard as the
sole motive. Some of the occupations involve
very real anxiety. I recall two cases of railway employees who were receiving benefit
for neurosis. One, aged 55, who became
anxious after an accident, had worked for
many years on a siding where he had seen
several nien killed, and was genuinely afraid
to return to work. The other drove a train,
had a slight accident and became anxious,
and had a perfectly comprehensible fear of
returning to such responsible work. In both
these cases the receipt of compensation
appeared to be only a subsidiary factor.

Social insecurity is a powerful factor in
making men prefer illness—even on a small
allowance—to the risk of unemployment.
The behaviour of some firms is also a factor,
for they will take a man back if he says he
is fit, employ him for a week, and then dismiss
him if he shows any incapacity, after which
he has lost all legal redress for compensation.

Undoubtedly other than purely economic
factors enter into the matter. The nature of
the work, a grudge against the foreman or
firm (sometimes with justification, e.g.
believing that they have not taken adequate
precautions against accidents) also influence

the desire to ‘‘ make the firm pay,” in both
senses of the word.

American Survey

Interesting and able investigations have
been made in Chicago and Providence, R.I.,
on the distribution of mental disorders in
relation to the sociological districts into which
these towns can be divided. The psychoses
—excepting cyclothymia which is distributed at random and tends to come from
the higher cultural levels—have their greatest incidence in the poor disorganised part of
the communities. So have the psychoneuroses, but the figures for the latter may
be invalidated, for neurotics are found more
in private than in public mental hospitals.
In regard to manic-depressive insanity the
authors, though admitting the possibility of
diagnostic errors as high as 40 per cent, claim
that they had enough cases for their findings
to be valid. The remaining psychoses follow
the same distribution as unemployment,

infantile mortality, juvenile delinquency,
‘adult crime, suicide and general mortality,

for all of which the rates are highest in the
poorest areas.

That organic psychoses should follow this
pattern perhaps requires comment. Alcohol- .
ism might be expected to occur in such communities, as might the spread of venereal
diseases. But senile and arteriosclerotic disorders are harder to explain unless they are
the result of wear and tear. Alternately they
may find their way into institutions more
readily where care is difficult to obtain.

It is in regard to the greater prevalence of
schizophrenia, in the poor districts, that the
problem becomes most interesting. To begin
with, different types have an odd distribution.
The paranoid variety is commonest in the
boarding-house districts, whereas the catatonic mainly affects the foreign-born, negroes,
and newcomers. The authors think that the
development of a catatonic reaction in these
groups can be explained on the assumption
that it is more likely to occur in the unintelligent and the ignorant, a certain degree
of intelligence being needed to construct a
paranoid system.

Be this as it may, what is interesting is the
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC FACTORS IN PSYCHIATRY

correlation of schizophrenia with the other
factors enumerated, especially juvenile
delinquency. For it is the opinion of C.
Shaw, Dunbar, etc., that juvenile delinquency in this environment is not to be
regarded as pathological, but as a more or
less normal response of healthy adolescents.
In fact, a study by Dunbar of Court records
in Chicago shows that schizophrenics have
rarely appeared more than once before the
Courts ; and in the majority of these cases
acts of violence have been the beginning of a
catatonic episode, with no previous delinquencies. There is, then, in the same area,
an apposition of the largest number of an
extremely ‘‘ tough ’’ element with the largest
number of those who are characteristically
opposite, i.e. the schizophrenics, and the
possible explanation of this may be that the
introverted, solitary type of character, so
frequently found in the pre-schizophrenic, is
driven more and more into himself by having
to mix with more than usually aggressive
associates. That is to say, the hostile environment makes the normal more aggressive,
and, in contrast, the solitary, shy individual,
is driven even farther into himself. This is
further accentuated where there is little or
only casual work, necessitating the development of a thrustful technique for securing
employment, the introverted type being not
only unsuited to such exertions but driven
further into himself by his failures.
Another important question is: does the
schizophrenic get into the poorest area
because he sinks, or does he fail to rise?
The latter appears to be the case ; at least in
the investigation referred to the schizophrenics appear to have been born in the
area. In that case, have these economic
factors brought out a latent schizophrenia
or is it a “ process *’ which has run its inevitable course ? To postulate this exclusively
would be to ignore all external precipitating
factors, and to omit any explanation of why
schizophrenia concentrates in these areas.
Finally, why do manic-depressive psychotics alone escape the general distribution ?
One explanation is that these are more
assertive individuals, who are likely to have
done well and risen in the social scale. In

é

57

that case, why not those who develop general
paralysis, who are also frequently assertive
individuals ?

This briefly summarises some of the main
points of these workers’ findings. I will next
turn to my own, derived from three investigations made from Guy’s Hospital.

London Investigations

In all these I adopted a procedure which
was much the same throughout. Either a
social worker or myself interviewed the
mother of the child, and obtained a full
history of the size of the family, the income,
housing conditions and health of the parents,
and whether they were intemperate, bad
tempered, anxious or depressed, and whether
concerned about their social conditions.

In regard to the children, I inquired into
(1) irritability in the first year of life and
difficulties at school age; (2) anxiety symptoms, i.e. fears, night terrors, restless sleep ;
(3) instability of mood, depression and listlessness ; and (4) personality traits in the way of
timidity, shyness, unusual aggressiveness or
obstinacy or behaviour problems. Subsequently, without the parental history in
front of me, I saw the child alone and
enquired into fears of the dark, noise,
teacher, parents, punishment, and worries,
particularly about work or examinations. I
also asked the child whether it noticed if the
parents were depressed or worried. These
were the main questions.

Finally, as a result of the history obtained
from the parents and my interview with the
child, I classified children as “ definitely
nervous’ or “definitely not nervous.” or,
if in doubt, as “ partially nervous.” Of the
three categories, the ‘ definitely not nervous’ struck me as the most accurately
classified. It indicated either an entire
absence of nervous features, or the presence
of only some minor symptom, such as
transient fear of the dark.

In my first investigation, concerned primarily with nervousness in rheumatic children,
I found that there was far less nervousness
in a control group of children of good
physique than in another control group of
58

poor physique. (I return to this in connection with my third investigation.)

This finding made me wonder whether
poor social conditions generally and neurosis
were related, and in what way. I therefore
investigated three groups composed as
follows, using the same questionnaire already
described.

Group I was composed of 50 poor workingclass families in South-East London, picked
at random. Of these, 41 had ‘less than Ios.
per head per week, and the other 9g less than
15s. per week gross income ; 35 of the 50 had
not enough money for the B.M.A. minimum
dietary requirements, and 19 out of 20 of
these (selected at random) had not’ the
minimum caloric requirements ;- 20 of the
50 were badly housed.

Group 2 was drawn from the parents of
children attending two council schoolsserving
“better”? areas in South-East London.
The families mainly comprised artisan
workers whose gross income fell between
55s. and {5 per week.*

Group 3 was a group of “ well-to-do”
families from a North-West London suburb.
The parents were “‘ middle-class ’’—1.e. professional workers, in business, etc.

The following is a summary of the results
of the investigations.

1. In the poor group only 20 per cent of
the children were nervous, compared to

38 per cent nervous in the well-to-do group,

while 56 per cent were not nervous in the

* TI shall not deal further with the second group. It
did not sufficiently suit my purpose, for instead of
getting into the small professional group as I had
wished, I found myself dealing with the artisan class,
which did not furnish the desired sociological contrasts.

The latter are described by Stephen Taylor, in his
paper on the “Suburban Neurosis,” in which he
discusses the effects of insufficient interests, resulting in
boredom, and financial and other worries in maintaining
a home on small means, and the gradual disillusion
which overtakes women living under conditions which
do not correspond to a false and glamorous set of values.
In regard to children, we all know from clinical experience that the need for the black-coated worker to
maintain his fagade of respectability tends to make an
atmosphere of “ don'ts,” * hush,” and ‘‘ what will the
people next door think.”” But this constitutes a different
social problem to those resulting from poverty. Stephen
Taylor’s paper draws attention to the danger of overlooking the difficulty of the black-coated worker, who,
while not earning very much more than the labourer,
has to keep up appearances.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

poor group compared to 36 per cent in the
latter. Therefore, poor social conditions
were not in themselves a direct determinant
of nervousness in children.

2. Even very bad social conditions left
children unaffected psychologically, provided
that the psychological home situation was
good. It follows that such conditions had
no direct psychological effect.

3. At times, however, social conditions
affected the children indirectly, by making
life difficult for the parents, but this generally
occurred when the parents were also nervously predisposed.

4. Irrespective of class there was a
statistically valid relationship between
nervousness in the children and nervous
parents.

But the puzzling feature was that there
was a greater prevalence of bad physique
among the poor children, and yet a greater
freedom from nervousness, which was in
contrast to the findings of the first investigation.

I therefore investigated a further 50
elementary schoolchildren of the very worst
physique but without any definite malady,
in conjunction with 30 of the very best. The
object of the inquiry was (1) to seek further
evidence of a relationship between nervousness and physique, and (2) to see how far
poor physique was related to social conditions
and to bad nutrition.

The first part of the investigation was
completed, with the results as shown in
Tables 1 to 4.

Table 1. The ‘‘uneqtial”’ results are
rather as one would expect. Most noticeable
are (a) the differences in average size of
family between those of good and bad
physique, which I also found in my rheumatism investigation, (5) the difference in
incomes of the two groups.

Difficult to explain is why the parents of
children of poor physique should be more
anxious and irritable than those of good
physique, and yet both suffer equally from
depression? And why financial worries
should differ so in the fathers and not the
mothers ?
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC FACTORS IN PSYCHIATRY 59

TABLE I

FINDINGS IN 50 PooR PHYSIQUE AND 30 Goop
PHYSIQUE CHILDREN
_ Poor Physique Good Physique
6

_ Size of Family 4°3
Gross Income per Head gs. 1d. 15s.
Approximately
Unequal Equal —
Poor Good Poor Good
Physique Physique
Percentages
Father

Unemployed... wee 52 30

Anxious and Irritable .... 52 20

Worries about Money ... 24 3

Depressed eee wee 22 17

Mother

‘Anxious and Irritable ... 82 64

Big and Fit vas ws 24 66

Tired... we .-» 36 7

Ill-health san _ 6 7

Worries Generally a 5 48 47

Depression $8 ss 50 44.

Worries about Money wes 40 44

Table 2. The two groups showed little
difference in early development, except that
poor health (which was comparatively rare
in both groups) and “ various manifestations
before 5’ were about twice as common in
the “poor physique” as in the “ good
physique ” group. Under this latter heading
I have included a variety of findings which
cannot be classified, but which show that
something was wrong, e.g., ‘‘ premature,
D. & V.,” “contented till bronchitis at 3
months—never recovered good temper,”
“* miserable, ailing till 2.”

Most striking is 18 per cent of nervous in
the children of poor physique compared to
63 per cent in those of good physique.

{ tried as a matter of interest to analyse
‘my results, relating income, size of family
and parental characteristics to the nervous
and not nervous children, but the results
were negative.

Table 3. This shows the totals for the
present investigation and the previous one
on rheumatic children, comprising in all go
of poor and 70 of good physique. Here again
it will be noticed that certain nervous
symptoms predominate in those of poor
physique, while complete absence is higher,
though not so markedly higher as before, in
those of good physique.

Before proceeding farther, I should like to
discuss a frequent tendency to confuse the

TABLE II
Findings A
approx. 0%.
whoqual Daal
Percentages
Poor Good Poor Good
Physique Physique
Early Development of Child
Poor Health... 18* 7
“ Various Manifesta- .
tions ’’ before 5 years 82*  40* ;
Feeding Difficulties... . 8 o
Restless in ist Year... 18 13
Physical Ailments before
5 years 28* 23*
Nervous Manifestations
before I year .. 30 20
Parental Description of C hild .
Timid ... 40 4
Obstinate wae we. 40 13
Depressed _ -» 30 13
Swings of Mood ..- 48 13 .
Fears... 32 23
Night Terrors and Rest- :
less Sleep wae 58 40
Interview with Child
Worries ... = we. 20 o
Fears Dark vee «.. 20 7
Fears Teacher ... aes 50 40
Fears Punishment ss. «20 9
Estimated nervous 28 28 13
Not nervous 18 63
* On basis of 80 
Remainder on basis of 40 
reactions of normal persons to difficult
situations, -e.g. depression and worry, with
specific disorders, e.g. agorophobia or schizophrenia, which are essentially determined by
intrinsic causes, though they may be precipitated by external circumstances. A
reaction may be considered to be within
normal limits when it has the following
attributes : (x) it is brought about by situations which are acknowledged to produce it in
persons who show no outstanding peculiarities, e.g. worry due to financial difficulties ;
(2) it disappears when the causal situation is
removed ; (3) it does not tend to increase,
and may even diminish, in the presence of the
causal situation, as the individual becomes
adapted to it, e.g. settling down in the Army.

An abnormal reaction, on the other hand,
is one which (1) has no apparently rational
basis, e.g. a manic-depressive attack or
claustrophobia ; or (2) if caused by an outside
stimulus, outlasts it considerably, and/or is
disproportionately severe.

It is of considerable importance in studying
the reactions to environment to separate the
60 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

two. To include the former as evidence of
neurosis resulting from environment is
clearly fallacious, and information about the
former is primarily of sociological, about the
latter essentially of psychiatric interest.

Unfortunately at the time of the investigation I did not have these ideas in mind, but
what information I have on what might be
termed commonplace disagreeable reactions,
I have collected in table 4.

TABLE III
SYMPTOMS IN 90 CHILDREN OF PooR PHYSIQUE AND
70 OF GooD PHYSIQUE
(Fyrom Investigations 1 and 3)
Poor Physique Good Physique

Percentages

Timid... _ wee 35* 10°
Restless Sleep wee eee 33* 20
Night Terrors ... wet 22 15
Swings of Mood 55* 10
Worries ... . eee 57* 15

Nervous ... wee 30 15

Not Nervous wee 30 50

* On basis of 80
Remainder on basis of 40

Table 4. Most noticeable is the prevalence
of worry about money among poor mothers,
le. 40 per cent as against 18 per cent,

though among the fathers it is about the ©

same. The difference between the mothers
in the two groups possibly results from more
household money being regularly available
in the well-to-do group.

The fact that 21 out of 71 children felt
there was not enough to eat, and 11 worried
lest there should not be enough to eat, may
be allowed to speak for itself.

TABLE IV
Father Mother Child
Poor Weil- Poor Wellto-do to-do
Worried about Social
Conditions wee I2 6 16
Depressed by Social
Conditions we «=T4 4 °
Resentful of Social
Conditions rr | Oo 6
Worried about
Money 12(20*) 24 14(40*)
‘Worried about Debts o oO oO

Felt there was not os
enough toeat ... 21
Worried lest there
might not be
enough toeat ... 11
* On basis of 80
Remainder on basis of 40

Discussion. The findings of my second
investigation, namely the lower incidence of
nervousness in the poorest group of children,
are, as already pointed out, difficult to reconcile with the findings of my other investigations, which showed a higher incidence of
nervous features in those of poor than in
those of good physique. The only explanation I can offer is that I got children of
particularly bad physique in the first and
third investigations, where I was deliberately
selecting them. However, even here there
are anomalies, for some of the children of the
very worst physique were completely devoid
of nervousness.

Really poor physique being so rare in
children of the well-to-do classes, perhaps
one should only compare this group with a
group of children of good physique in the
poor—which would still further accentuate
the difference in nervousness. The explanation
of this difference is possibly a combination of
heredity and the over attention which the
children of the well-to-do are apt to receive.

The association of nervousness and frailty
in poor children may be due to the weakly
child feeling inferior and timid; a more
likely explanation is that there is a constitutional factor common to both, producing
both nervousness and poor physique, especially where nutrition is marginal.

There is also the difficulty of accounting
for the difference between my results and
those in Chicago, where the poor social
environment definitely appeared to have
produced more mental disorder. Possibly
personality disorders (a term under which
schizophrenia can be included) are more
likely to result from environmental difficulties than symptoms of anxiety, which were
most conspicuous amongst my cases. (At
school medical inspections, of which I have
done large numbers, I saw few personality
disorders compared to anxiety states.)

The question also arises whether there is
not a great difference between the social
conditions in London slums and those in
Chicago. Poor though conditions in some of
our slums are, there is in them an element of
stability which is probably lacking in
Chicago. Farris and Dunham refer to the
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC FACTORS IN PSYCHIATRY 61

social isolation which occurs there. The child,
being brought up in two cultures—one at
school and the other at home—becomes unsettled, and ultimately often comes to despise
its parents. It may acquire a feeling of
inferiority on account of its race, the more so
if it has racial characteristics which draw
attention to itself ; and any kind of organisation of the mind in the highly mobile “‘ habohouse ”’ districts of Chicago is most difficult.
All this would fit in with my findings,
namely, that poverty alone is not enough,

but that it is only where bad social conditions
are productive of a difficult psychological
situation that they are important in causing
neurosis. And as none of the above factors
are operative in London, this may account
for the difference.

[These researches were carried out with funds
from the Rockefeller Foundation and York Trust,
received through the Department of Psychological Medicine at Guy’s Hospital, and I wish to
thank Dr. R. D. Gillespie for his permission to
make use of the material.]

C. B.C.
CONSTRUCTIVE BIRTH CONTROL

SOCIETY AND CLINIC FOUNDED BY Dr. Marie STOPES IN 1921

The oldest Birth Control Clinic, the first to establish Birth Control
Case Sheets and collect scientific data; C.B.C. Clinics are still the
only free clinics: the only birth control clinics dealing from the first
with all aspects of birth control, i.e. prevention of detrimental births,

spacing of healthy births and inducing potentially desirable pregnancy
in sterile women, and general marital help.

THE PIONEERS OF THE CLINIC MOVEMENT
Library, Museum and Clintes open daily, 10-6 (except Sats.)
Books and Racial supplies may be obtained direct.
TECHNICAL DEMONSTRATIONS for MEMBERS of the MEDICAL PROFESSION
First Thursday each month

Applications to The Hon. Secretary, Headquarters Clinic,
106 Whitfield Street, W.1

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. KXXIV, No. 2.
