SOME ASPECTS OF WORLD POPULATION
AND FOOD RESOURCES*
By LORD SIMON OF WYTHENSHAWE, LL.D.

I. INTRODUCTION

HE subject of my address today is : the
race between world population and
| world food supplies. Nearly all the
countries in the world have normally aimed
at an ever-increasing population and an everrising standard of living. The West (Europe,
North America and Oceania) has been remarkably successful in this over the last
century or two, with the result that most
people believe that this happy state of affairs
can continue indefinitely.

For some months now a strong group of
PEP, of which I have the honour to be chairman, has been studying this matter and has
produced a Broadsheet—World Population
and Resources. The group is producing a
second Broadsheet giving its recommendations as to action in time to submit to
the UN conference on population at Rome
in September ; a few months after that we
hope to publish a thorough and full-length
report on the whole matter.

My address is based almost entirely on the
work of the PEP group, but I alone am responsible for the statements of fact and for
any conclusions in, this article.

I should like to begin by paying a tribute
to the United Nations. The work of their
special agencies, particularly the Population
Division and the Food and Agriculture
Organization, in collecting and assessing
statistics from all over the world has provided the great bulk of the basic data on
which our group has worked.

The Optimists

There’is a great and crucial race between
the increase of population and the increase of
food supplies, and although the importance
of the subject is not yet widely realized there
are many groups who are passionately concerned. it is a field in which for some reason

* A paper read at a members’ meeting of the Eugenics
Society on May 26th, 1954.

g!I

emotions have great importance. There are
any amount of books generally either confidently optimistic or very pessimistic.

Most of the optimists base themselves on
faith in the marvels of science. The wisest
and most experienced of the scientific optimists is probably Sir John Russell, who, in a
bookf shortly to appear, examines the technical possibilities of increasing food supplies
of all kinds in all countries. He is optimistic
as to the possibilities of very large increases
if, and only if, human beings take something
like full advantage of the scientific possibilities.

An American geochemist, Harrison Brown,
in a new book The Challenge of Man’s Futuret
looks much further ahead than Sir John
Russell and is very optimistic indeed that if
technology continues to develop at an increasing rate and if full advantage is taken
of the possibilities, almost anything can be
achieved. For instance, he believes that in
the long run it should be possible to produce
on this earth twenty-five times the present
weight of food, and in the ultimate analysis
he believes that a large human population
could live on the ingredients that can be
obtained from the air, from sea water, and
from granite; all present in permanently unlimited supplies. On the other hand, Harrison Brown is exceedingly pessimistic about
the probability of human beings making
any effective use of these breathtakmg
possibilities.

There is a considerable tendency among
laymen to accept the scientific possibilities
and to forget the human difficulties. For
instance, in November 1953, Sir Winston
Churchill spoke as follows :

There is no doubt that if the human race
are to have their dearest wish and be free
from the dread of mass destruction, they

¢ World Population and World Food Supplies. Allen
& Unwin.
t New York. The Viking Press.
g2- THE EUGENICS REVIEW

could have, as an alternative, what many
of them might prefer, namely, the swiftest
expansion of material well-being that has
ever been within their reach, or even within
their dreams. . . . These majestic possibilities ought to gleam, and be made to gleam,
‘before the eyes of the toilers in every land,
and they ought to inspire the actions of all
who bear responsibility for their guidance.

There was a debate in the House of Lords
on April 28th when a dozen peers made
speeches on world population and resources.
The tone was set by Lord Samuel who quoted
many cases where scientists hold out possibilities of large increases of food. He was very
optimistic : he explained the facts about the
large quantities of plankton in the sea and
concluded that plankton “‘ can be had for the
asking.’’ But in fact there is no certainty yet
that it will ever be possible to collect it in
large quantities at a sufficiently low cost.

It is true that with the help of the
marvels of science and by bringing into
cultivation the new lands of North America
and Oceania, and others, the West has for
200 years achieved a steadily rising standard
of living while rapidly increasing its population. And I am afraid that the general effect
of the House of Lords debate was to indicate
that not only could the West continue to
enjoy an ever-rising standard of living, but
that the other four-fifths of the world could
in coming generations hope to have the same
sort of experience which the West has had in
recent generations.

The Pessimists |

That is the optimistic view of the possible
future of the human race if peace prevails.
Our President, Sir Charles Darwin, in his
briliant and suggestive book The Next
Mullion Years* takes a very different view.
He says that we are now living in a Golden
Age, in which we are recklessly consuming the
resources accumulated in the crust of the
earth over the last 500 million years, and at
the same time recklessly increasing the
world population. We have in this country
already used up a large proportion of our fuel

* Hart-Davis, 1952.

and mineral resources and have imported
much from other countries. The U.S.A. has
consumed far more. For instance, the President’s Material Policy Commission reported
in 1952 that “‘ the quantity of most metals
and mineral fuels used in the U.S.A. since the
first world war exceeds the total used
throughout the entire world in all of history
preceding 1914.”

Nature took perhaps 300 million years to
build up the world’s available resources of
coal and oil. We in our Golden Age are likely
to use them up in 300 years. Each year we
are consuming what Nature took a million
years to build. No wonder that our Golden
Age is beginning to be called a “‘ robber
economy.” The Golden Age cannot last ; we
in the West are giving no consideration to the
standard of living even of our great grandchildren, let alone of our descendants a few
thousand years hence.

Sir Charles Darwin does not believe that
mankind will ever be wise enough to plan its
population ; he is therefore most pessimistic
and gloomy about the future of the human
race. We should all be grateful to him for his
important and stimulating book but I hope
that most of us will not agree with his pessimistic conclusions, and that in this matter he
may in the long run prove to be completely
wrong.

Malthus was filled with gloom when he
wrote his famous essay about 1800: he
pointed out that population was increasing
in geometric ratio whereas food could only
increase in arithmetic ratio. The population
must . therefore inevitably” swamp food.
Malthus’s much criticized use of the phrase
‘“‘ geometric ratio ’’ for population; as it happens proved extraordinarily accurate for the
world as a whole. He wrote about 1800 ; in
the three succeeding periods of fifty years
world population increased by roughly 200
million, 400 million and 800 million, and it is
likely that it may increase by about 1,600
million during the fifty years constituting the
second half of the twentieth century. The
increase before 1800 was about 100 million
in fifty years ; it has almost exactly doubled
in each of the four succeeding periods. of
fifty years.
_ SOME ASPECTS OF WORLD POPULATION AND FOOD RESOURCES _ 93

Malthus was almost uncannily right about
the growth of world population in geometric
‘ratio. But he was wrong about future food
supplies for the West because he- could not
foresee either the great technical advances in
agriculture nor the immense quantities of
food that would soon be available from the
newly opened territories. Together these
two factors have provided the West with
ample supplies of food for the last century.

The result of all this was that though in
the first half of the nineteenth century there
was much pessimism about food supplies and
Malthus was held to be right, from about
1850 onwards food was freely available.
Most people have therefore assumed that
Malthus was completely wrong and that the
food problem was solved once and for all.

The Food and Agriculture Organization
Although most people are still optimistic,
realization of the difficulties of providing
food for the increasing population has been
growing rapidly in recent years. FAO (Food
and Agriculture Organization) may fairly be
said to have been established in a spirit of
fine optimism as a result of the Hot Springs
Conference in 1943. ‘‘ Recent discoveries and
developments,”’ it was declared, “‘ have made
it possible under certain conditions for all
men, and all nations to achieve freedom from
want.... The West is bound to move towards new levels of well-being which men
have hitherto thought unattainable.”
Unfortunately, these hopes have been
gravely disappointed. FAO were forced to
say in their 1952 Food Survey that, so far
from steadily rising standards of food “‘ not
only has there been an appreciable fall in the
average calorie supply of the world as a
whole, but also the large gap between the
better and worse fed nations has widened.”
They add that “‘the Far East, with its
immense population and acute under-nourishment, remains the centre of the world food
problem.” In the last twenty years, while food
production in the Far East has increased very
slowly, the population has increased by 24
per cent, so that the food production per
head in 1952 was only 83 per cent of what it
had been twenty years before. Indeed, the

Director-General ‘said in his foreword to the
1953report: ‘‘If allowance is made for quality
as well as calorie content, the average per
caput diets of North America, Oceania and
Western Europe are something like two or
three times those of most under-developed
regions.”

Which is right? Churchill’s gleam or

- Darwin’s gloom ? That is what we are trying

to answer in our PEP report; that is the
question which I am endeavouring to deal

with in a preliminary way today.

What I propose to do is to consider what
is called the ‘‘ population cycle ’’ in England
and Wales ; how and why the population has
grown during the last 200 years ; and to show
that there have been similar developments
in nearly all Western countries. And then to
try to consider on the basis of this what has
been happening and what is likely to happen
in two non-Western countries, Japan and
India.

|“ Il. THE POPULATION CYCLE IN

ENGLAND AND WALES

During the last 200 years there has been
an almost explosive increase in world popu-—
lation, especially in the West. Perhaps the
easiest way of explaining what has happened and why is to describe what is called
the population cycle. I propose to take the
case of England and Wales, where the facts
are available and as reliable as any.

The population cycle has four stages as
shown in Figure I.

Stage 1. Stage I represents the normal
state of mankind before the scientific and
industrial revolutions of the last 200 years ;
it was a period of high birth rates and high
death rates, both about 35 per thousand,
with very slow and irregular increase in
population. We call this the “‘ high fluctuating” stage of the population cycle.

Stage 2. About 1750 in England and
Wales the death rate began to decline rapidly,
while the birth rate remained constant for
another 130 years. In the latter part of that
period the birth rate was about 33 and the
death rate about 20, giving an annual excess
of births over deaths equivalent to about
O4- THE. EUGENICS REVIEW:
| THE POPULATION CYCLE
ENGLAND AND WALES
STAGEI } STAGE IL : STAGE | STAGE IV

EARLY EXPANDING "LATE EXPANDING | LOW FLUCTUATING
(HIGH BIRTH RATES, DECLINING DEATH RATES)! (DECLINING BIRTH ; (LOW BIRTH AND DEATH

HIGH FLUCTUATING:
(HIGH BIRTH AND DEATH !

RATES ) 40 :

 
 
  
      
 
    

RATE PER
THOUSAND

20

   
 

DATES 1750 1800.
POPULATION 6-5 9:1
(MILLIONS)

13 per thousand of the population. We call
this the ‘‘ early expanding ”’ stage. |

Stage 3. About the year 1880, the birth
rate quite suddenly began rapidly to decline ;
50 years later it had fallen by more than onehalf to about 16 per thousand. Meantime the
death rate continued to decline to about
12 per thousand. We call this the “late

expanding ”’ stage in the population cycle. |

During the 50 years the population increased
by over 50 per cent.

Stage 4. Stage 4 is the “ low fluctuating ”
stage, with births of about 16 and deaths

Fim on mans 1+BIRTH RATE

<«—_—__—_————— 130 YEARS ——————> :+ 50 YEARS:

POPL. INCREASE 300%

' AND DEATH RATES) 1 RATES)
4

      

ese same meenwmaeueweeaeanevewe se 2 ene, on ee eae SS ee oe ee

x
waeewewenwawanwafaaeawuewewwoenwaewenaoee

i(POPL.INCR.54%) |

1850 1880 1900 1930 1950
18 26. 325 40 ‘ 435

about 12. There was in England and Wales,
as well as in all other Western countries, a
baby boom after the war which did not last
long ; most countries seem now to havesettled
down to a rather steady and small increase
in population. Except the U.S.A., where
births are still surprisingly high. |

It will be remembered that during the
‘thirties it was feared that the fall in birth
rate was such that before long the population
would begin rapidly to decline: we should
reach what might be called stage 5, the stage
of declining population. This now seems
SOME ASPECTS OF WORLD POPULATION AND FOOD RESOURCES — 95

unlikely, at least within the next generation,
according to the figures given by the Royal
Commission on Population.

Results of the Population Cycle in England
and Wales

There have in Britain been four major

effects of the scientific and industrial
revolutions :

(a) Owing to the fall in the death rate, the
expectation of life at birth has increased from about 30 to about 70
years.

(ob) Owing to the reduction in the birth
rate, the average number of children
per family has been reduced from
about 6 to about 2.2.

(c) Owing to the time lag of 130 years in
the beginning of the reduction of birth
rates as against death rates, the population in 180 years has increased six
times, and in addition a number equal
to twice the population in 1750
‘emigrated.

(d@) Owing mainly to technical advances in
industry and agriculture, there has
been a steadily rising standard of living
throughout the 200 years. It has been
estimated that the standard of living
in 1950 may have been about six
times as high as that in 1750.

Reasons for Britain’s Success

(a2) Owing to our being an island we have
suffered no wars on our territory.

(b) Being just off the coast of Europe, we
learned much from the craftsmen of
the different Western European countries during the Middle Ages.

(c) We had command of the sea and a large
merchant navy.

(d@) We had already developed considerable
capital resources.

(ec) We had ample supplies of easily accessible coal and iron.

(f) Asa result of these, and no doubt other
causes such as the inventiveness and
enterprise of our people, we were the
first country in the world to develop an
industry of importance based on power
and technology.

(zg) By emigration to the empty. lands,
specially North America and Oceania,
we were able to found the British
Empire, and to help to develop immense areas of fertile land.

The result of all these factors added together is that we managed to achieve over
200 years an ever-increasing population at
an ever-rising standard of living. Our population was increased six times, our standard
of living was also increased probably about
six times. We have indeed lived through a
golden age unapproached previously in
history.

Ill. THE GOLDEN AGE OF THE WEST

The population cycle throughout the West
has been generally similar to that in England
and Wales, though of course there are all
sorts of variations, mainly in what may fairly
be called detail.

Why is this ? It is clear that the population
cycle depends exclusively on two things : the
decline in the death rate and the decline in
the birth rate, and in particular on the dates
when these two movements begin, the speed
with which they develop and the distance to
which they go.

In the early stages the decline in mortality
was started by changes in agriculture and
communications which improved food supplies both in quantity and quality and which

‘rendered periods of dearth increasingly rare.

Later on, death rates were reduced further
by public health policies and the development of medical science, which resulted in
particularly striking falls of mortality in
childhood and young adult life.

The reasons for the decline in birth rate
are complex and not fully understood. A
major factor was no doubt that in primitive
days children were an economic asset to the
family : as countries became wealthier and
the period of education was extended, children became an increasingly heavy burden
on the family budget. At the same time, the
emancipation of women caused an increasing
revolt against excessive domestic drudgery ;
and whereas in early days it was necessary to
have about six children if two were to

E
96 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

survive, this became gradually more and
more unnecessary. | |

From the point of view of population increase the vital factor is the lag in the fall of
births as against deaths. We have seen that
in England and Wales births only began to
fall 130 years after the decline in the death
rate had begun. The period varies, but in all
Western countries the delay has been substantial; least of all in France, where the
early decline in birth rate greatly reduced the
increase in population, and indeed threatened a declining population a generation ago.

It should be noted that death control has
always been exercised by Governments ; all
Governments have made efforts to secure
health for their people. Birth control has in

the past never been due to Governments:

Governments have in the vast majority of
cases either been neutral or have made efforts
to prevent it; and organized religion has
almost invariably been against, sometimes
very strongly against, any use of contraceptive methods. Birth control has been exclusively due to voluntary action by parents.

To sum up, during the last 200 years the
West has taken full advantage of its opportunities. In Europe the population has been
multiplied by about five or six. The West
has developed a very powerful technology
which will undoubtedly become more and
more effective ; it has attained a very. high
standard of living on the material plane. In
the West as a whole there are still considerable reserves of land not yet completely
exploited, chiefly in the new countries ; there
are in the world large reserves of minerals on

which the West is likely to continue to have

the first call.

The population in the West is still increasing at a relatively modest rate; the annual
increase is estimated at about seven per
thousand. The West has learnt to control
both deaths and births, and any country that
really wanted to could prevent further increase of population, or indeed could reduce
the present population. |

Given peace and a limited population, the
prospects for a steadily rising standard of
living in the West alone would appear to be
good for perhaps another generation.

IV. JAPAN

Turning now to consider the rest of the
world, I should like to begin by referring
very shortly to Japan as an example of a
dangerously over-populated country. Japan,
as an island off the coast of Asia, is in many
ways comparable to Britain. When the
country was opened in 1868 the Government
decided to make every effort toadopt Western
methods of science and technology, to
develop their industry, and their military
strength. But Japan had great disadvantages as compared with Britain. She was a
hundred years later in entering the industrial
field ; she has an almost negligible amount
of iron and only produces a fifth as much coal
as Britain ; there were no longer any empty
lands available to her for emigration. On
the other hand, she had Western technology
(already well developed) to draw on; she
tackled her problems with outstanding
energy, ability and efficiency.

By 1902 she was strong enough to make an
alliance on roughly equal terms with Britain.
She defeated the Russians and attacked
China ; by 1940 she dominated Korea, Formosa, Manchuria, Inner Mongolia and much
of North China. Her strong and ambitious
Government had worked steadily for industrial development and military power and
had managed to secure loyal and devoted
support from the people. In seventy years
Japan had made herself into a first-class
industrial nation and a very powerful one.
It was a remarkable achievement, both
industrially and militarily.

Owing to her defeat in World War II,
Japan has now lost the whole of her Empire.

Population and Resources

Japan’s population increased between
1868 and 1953 from 35 million to 86 million : two and a half times. This is about the same
rate as the population of Britain increased in
the first century of her population cycle.

Japan is approaching the end of her cycle ;
her death rate is about equal to the average
Western death rate but her birth rate,
which is declining rapidly, is still an intermediate one, giving an annual increase in
population of 14 per cent or-1} million people.
SOME ASPECTS OF WORLD POPULATION AND FOOD RESOURCES 97

To feed these people Japan has only 124
million acres of cultivated Jand and in
addition 3 million acres of permanent pasture.
Seven and a half million acres of cultivated
land are under rice and are so skilfully and
scientifically worked that they provide the
necessary calories forover six persons per acre,
at the Japanese level of about 2,000 calories
per person per day. In Britain, from each
cultivated acre we feed one person at a
standard of living which, allowing for quality
as well as quantity, is probably about twice
as high as the Japanese.

In spite of the relatively small quantity of
food consumed per head and of the great
intensity of their agriculture, Japan is forced
to import considerable quantities of food.
There is no reasonable prospect either of
lowering the consumption per head or of
increasing agricultural output substantially.
As her population increases she will be forced
to import more or go relatively hungry.

Population Policy

Up to Pearl Harbour the Japanese
Government aimed at a population of 100
million as being suitable for a strong imperialist Power. After the war this policy was
changed and the Government has encouraged
birth control. Owing no doubt to the great
difficulty of rapidly making birth-control
methods effective, it is understood that there
are about one million abortions every year ;
even so, the annual population increase remains at 1} million. Naturally the Japanese
desire emigration, but it seems very unlikely
that any countries will be willing to
accept any substantial amount of Japanese
immigration.

The only hope at the moment would seem
to be an immense expansion of industry in
order to provide the exports necessary to pay
for increased imports of food which are
needed to raise standards of nutrition to
those prevailing in the West. There can be
no doubt that the greatest energy will be
devoted to this end.

Britain has to import a much larger proportion of her food than Japan. She is doing
this without undue difficulty. She has settled
down happily with a population of about

50 million and with fair prospects of a continued rise in the standard of living. It is
impossible to see a corresponding future for
Japan : Japan is undoubtedly the most hopelessly over-populated great and powerful
country there has ever been. Warren
Thompson, a distinguished American demographer, wrote in June 1949 (Hungry People
and Empty Lands, p. 127): ‘‘ In my judgment there is no physical possibility of preventing the crowded people of the world
taking the empty lands sooner or later.”

V. THE UNDER-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
—INDIA

The problem of population in the West is
for the time being neither urgent nor very
important, at least as regards food. The
position in the so-called ‘‘ under-developed
countries,’ which include three-fifths of the
human race, is very different. The population problem in many of these countries is of
overwhelming and almost desperately urgent
importance.

By “ under-developed ’’ I do not mean
people who are in any way inferior. From
the point of view of morals, culture and religion, they may be superior to us, but they
have not gone through our two scientific
revolutions : first, the revolution of industry
and agriculture and public services—the
revolution that leads to wealth; and
secondly, the medical revolution which leads
to health. About half a billion of the world
population have been through those two
revolutions, but about one and a half billion
people in the under-developed countries have
hardly begun to enter into them.

India is perhaps the best example to quote.
One reason for this is that we have valuable
information about India in the first FiveYear Plan published in 1952 and in the
Registrar-General’s Report on the I9g51
Census, which, after dealing with the Census,
makes a courageous forecast of the probable
rate of increase of population and of available food up to 1981. These two documents
show that India is tackling problems of the
greatest difficulty with outstanding courage
and imagination.

The other reason is that India has a
98 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW |

particularly difficult task in front of her in
endeavouring to apply modern science so as
to secure for her people health and wealth
equal to that in the leading Western countries.

India has just begun her population cycle.
The last thirty years in India correspond
roughly with the first thirty years of declining death rates which began in Britain 200
years ago and required 180 years for their
completion. But India suffers grave disadvantages as against our position at that time.
First, she is very poor ; her standard of living
is substantially below what ours was in 1750.
Secondly, her population is immense ; fifty
times what ours was at that date, and she has
relatively little additional land which she can
bring under cultivation. Thirdly, there are
no empty lands in the world to which India
can emigrate in large numbers as we emigrated to the North American continent and

Oceania from 1750 onwards. They have been

seized by whites, and are not available for
coloured immigration. Fourthly, whereas we
have been able to buy all the food we have
needed from food exporting countries at
prices we could afford to pay, there is no such
prospect in front of India. Fifthly, in industrial development India has a far more
difficult problem than we had; she has to
compete against the very efficient leading
Western industrial countries who have had a
long start.

Finally, India’s problem is made still more
difficult by the fact that the one aspect of
Western science which can be most quickly
applied in under-developed countries is the
control of death by medical and sanitary
knowledge. Recent inventions like DDT
and penicillin have in the last few years,
helped by the UN technical aid service, produced most remarkable results. They are
already saving an untold number of lives and,
of course, every Government is doing its
utmost to continue and strengthen this good
work in its own country with a great deal of
help from the West. But this means that the
East can reduce its death rate, with all these
advantages of modern science, much more
quickly than the West was able to do one or
two hundred years ago.*

The recent rapid increase in the Indian

population has already created _ serious
trouble. The population has increased during
the last thirty years by 45 per cent, from 250
million to 360 million, or by a total of no
less than 110 million. The production of
food has not increased at the same rate and,
as the Registrar-General points out in his
report on the 1951 Census, the food consumed
per capita has therefore been steadily declining.

And the rate of population increase is still
accelerating ; it now amounts to nearly five
million each year. If death control should
be made as effective in India as it has been
in Ceylon, the annual increase would be not
five million but ten million. But, without
allowing anything for this accelerated death
control, even if birth and death rates pursued
a course in India similar to what occurred
not only in Britain but in all Western industrial countries, the population would, at the
end of the 200-year period, be about 14
billion. It is obvious that widespread starvation would begin long before such a point
was approached.

The Five-Year Plan

In 1952 Mr. Nehru introduced the first
Indian Five-Year Plan. Like all such plans,
its main aim was to raise the standard of
living by planned development of industry
and agriculture and public services. But,
unlike any other country, the Plan then goes
on to deal with population problems, and
states: “‘ The recent increase in the population of India and the pressure exercised on

‘the limited resources of the country have

brought to the forefront the urgency of
family planning and population control. The
application of medical knowledge and social

* Probably the most striking example has been the
almost complete abolition of malaria in Ceylon by
the use of DDT. Birth rates in Ceylon have not begun
to fall; the death rate has fallen in the last few years
right down to the Western level. The result is that the
population is increasing at the rate of about 2:7 per
cent per annum, about double the maximum rate of
increase which ever occurred in Britain; this means,
if it continues, that the population would double in
thirty years. This flood of population is, bound to
face the Ceylonese Government with very serious and,
indeed, insoluble problems unless birth control is
effectively applied.
SOME ASPECTS. OF WORLD POPULATION AND FOOD RESOURCES — 99

care has lowered the death rate while the
birth rate remains fairly constant. ... Population control can be achieved only by the
reduction of the birth rate to the extent
necessary to stabilize the population at a
level consistent with the requirements of
national economy... .”

_ All experience shows that population increases slow down only with the development of industry, wealth, urbanization,
education, and the emancipation of women,
and in a country like India the development
of industry is the essential basis of this process. But this process cannot be effective in
raising standards of living if the increase of
population swamps the increased industrial
output. As the chairman of the great Tata
Iron and Steel Company said at the annual
meeting.in September 1953:

Our population is increasing at the rate
of nearly five million a year. Even if we
sought only to maintain the existing population on its present low standard, we
would have to find work each year for an
additional two and a half million men and
women. As the land is already overburdened with manpower, employment would
have to be found for them outside agriculture, i.e. in industry and services... the

financial and other requirements would be
well beyond our present means.

But if it were possible for the next
twenty-five or fifty years to keep our
population static or at least to reduce the
rate of its growth ...the whole picture
would change and every successive advance in our economic output would result
in some improvement in the living stand
__ ards of our people.
We are indebted to the Registrar-General

for supplementing his 1951 Census Report.

with a full and authoritative discussion as to
how much the population is likely to increase
in the next thirty years and what the
prospects are of providing enough food to
maintain the present standard of living.

He estimates that if present conditions as
regards food supply continue to prevail, the
population will by 1981 have increased from
360 million to 520 million, and he proceeds
to consider whether India can provide the

food for so immense a population without
lowering standards.

The present level of food production in
India is about 70 million tons annually. The
Registrar-General examines in some detail
what additional output can reasonably be
hoped for in the next thirty years through
great additional irrigation schemes, through
better farming methods (use of fertilizers,
better seeds, etc.), and by a large extension
of the*crop area through double cropping
and bringing waste lands under cultivation.

He comes to the conclusion that the maximum additional food which can be produced
in foreseeable time is 24 million tons, making
a total of 94 million tons annual output. This
would be sufficient to meet the needs of a
population of 450 million, but not more. If
this number is exceeded he warns that the
food supply might break down as it did at
the time of the Bengal famine in 1943. He
even talks of the possibility of ‘ catastrophe’’’ with “famine and epidemic diseases on the scale which prevailed in the last
decade of the nineteenth century.”’

He concludes that the twin policies of
economic development and reduction of»
births must be simultaneously pursued. If
these two points are accorded equal priority
and rank higher than all other development
targets, they can be attained before the population increases beyond 450 million: the
total population will then become substantially stationary round about 450 million.

The Indian Government is, I believe, the
first in the world to recognize officially that
rising standards of living and of health will
only be possible if the population increase is
limited. Mr. Nehru is certainly the first Prime
Minister who has said: “ We would be a
much more advanced nation if our population was about half what it is.’ Definite
steps towards this limitation are taken in the
Five-Year Plan; half a million pounds are
provided to initiate the necessary action.

The Indian Government has shown wisdom and courage in introducing its comprehensive first Five-Year Plan. Work on the
Plan has made a good beginning but the
difficulties are immense and might well be
regarded as overwhelming.
I00o

VI. CONCLUSION

I am relatively new to this vast and
baffling subject but certain conclusions of
the first importance seem to me to emerge
and I put them forward tentatively as purely
personal views.

1. The World. The world population is just
under 24 billion. If present increase of 14
per cent per annum continues, it will double
in fifty-two years. World resources as regards
land, minerals and fuels are all limited? Many
of these resources are scarce ; all of them will
grow scarcer as the population increases.
Slower increase in population will give more
time for technology to produce alternative
supplies. |

There is no positive advantage in a larger
world population ; there are many disadvantages. THE CONCLUSION IS INESCAPABLE THAT
EVERY EFFORT SHOULD BE MADE TO REDUCE
THE RATE OF INCREASE OF POPULATION, AND
IF POSSIBLE TO STABILIZE WORLD POPULATION
AS A WHOLE AT A REASONABLY EARLY DATE.

2. The West. The West is the great robber
of Nature’s reserves; the lower the total
population of the West, the longer the
reserves will last. I believe that the aim of
the West should be to stabilize the population in all countries at reasonable levels ;
taken as a whole, perhaps the wisest policy
might be that the population of the West
should be stabilized at about the present level.

3. The Good Life. Hitherto I have only
considered the desirable size of population in
relation to the standard of living and military
strength. But there are other considerations.
Dr. Bertram has said: “‘ Many feel that
material wealth and power afford an incomplete and inadequate basis for human
advance. What is the ultimate goal of man
on earth? Many people will agree that it is
a state of affairs in which every individual
shall have the opportunity to develop to the
full all the talents with which he is endowed,
physical, mental and spiritual. This may
well affect the desirable population. For
instance, many persons will always demand
opportunities for solitude.”

4. The Under-developed countries. India,
like every under-developed and overcrowded
country, faces a task of the utmost difficulty

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to achieve Western health and wealth. At the
best it will certainly take several generations.
India is tackling the matter with energy
and imagination. There are three main lines
of attack. May I consider in conclusion how
far the West can help with each of these ?

(a) The first line of attack is to increase
the production of agriculture and industry.
The West is already helping by technical
assistance and by capital loans ; I hope that
it will be possible to increase this help.

(b) Death control, or the improvement of
health, has made a substantial beginning.
Western science and “know-how ”’ is fully

' available ; much remains to be done among

the half-million villages of India.
(c) If death control is increasingly success
‘ful, the population will increase more and

more rapidly unless birth is correspondingly
controlled. Death control without birth control, as the Registrar-General of India
pointed out, would lead to catastrophe—
starvation and epidemics.

Birth control is without doubt the most
important and difficult of the three tasks.
before the Government of India. Can
Western science help to achieve more effectively planned parenthood in India ? Western
countries have been successful in balancing
death control with birth control, but the
methods suitable to the West are not suitable
for the Eastern peasant woman; they are
expensive and need educated skill and care.

It is widely agreed that what is needed
more than anything else is the “ perfect
pill’ ; a pill which taken orally by a woman
will prevent conception for a month or perhaps a longer period. To be widely used, it
must be very cheap and must, of course, not
be harmful in any way. Nobody knows
whether such a pill can be produced, but
there is increasing confidence among authorities in the U.S.A. and Britain that, if tackled
energetically by the ablest physiologists with
ample means for large-scale research, there
is a good chance that the problem would be
solved in a few years. Nothing else we can
do in the West would be of anything like
equal value to the crowded and underdeveloped countries of the world compared
with success in this research.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVI, No. 2
