DISEASE AND DEFECT
2.—Amentia Pedigrees from an English Urban District

. T ONE now knows where is Albert
Hops, nor what are his procreative
activities. It is only sure that he is

31, and that he was once in Garnett Mental
Hospital—as his brother Bertram, a year
younger, is now in Cramelton House,
awaiting certification under the Mental
Deficiency Act.

These two are the first children of the
first marriage of Mother Beer, whose two
families are given on Chart I. By her first
husband, Hops, who was consumptive and
died at 39, she had six children—the two

mentioned, as well as Charles (28)
and David (23), who are both at Oneship
Colony under the Mental Deficiency Act,
Edgar (20), who lives at home and whose
intellect sent him to Bath Street Special
School, and Florence, who is also at home
and the only one of the six to be apparently
normal.

The mother herself is mentally normal
and appears to be physically strong. But
she has curious tastes, since she married a
second consumptive after the death of the
first, and bore him four further children—
George Beer, aged 12, and Doris Helen,
aged 10, who are both at Wavemead House
under the M.D. Act, and Henry and Ivy,
aged 9 and 7 respectively, who appear so
far to be normal.

Beyond the consumption and death of her
first, and the consumption and very delicate health of her sécond, nothing is known
against her two husbands.

This family and those that follow have
been described as unusually glaring instances, by a particularly efficient local
urban authority for the care of child aments.
It was Doris Helen who, being under care,
caused the investigation of her family.

It should be noted that these families are
not typical, but exceptionally bad, instances
known to this authority. But in view of the
selection which is inevitably exercised by
institutions and care committees, it is diffi
cult to say whether or not they exaggerate
the characteristics of the families of all
aments in the mass. This group, indeed, is
very like that which was described in our
April issue of last year (Vol. XXII, No. 1),
and which was considered fairly representative of the problem confronting that rural
authority. As then, all names have here
been changed, both of persons and places,
while for the sake of verisimilitude an
effort has again been made to find pseu
donyms which correspond to the real
names.

NONE NORMAL IN THIRTEEN

The Luttrell family constitutes Chart 2.
The father here appears to be normal, and
is so described in the chart; but our informants also say that he is ‘‘ alcoholic,’’
a term which is subject to too many interpretations to be used in evidence against
him. He chose, however, a feeble-minded
wife, and between them they have produced
an amazing record of fertiiity and failure.
Besides two miscarriages, there have been
thirteen children in all, five of whom are
already dead—three at nine months, one at
22 months, and one (of consumption) at 15
years. All these are given on the far right
of the chart, since their places in the family
are not known.

Of the remaining eight children, the
eldest, Jenny (34), is feeble-minded and at
Cokemound Hall under the M.D. Act. Her
following sisters, Kate (33) and Lucy (31),
are both feeble-minded, and the next child,
Martin (29), is described as of ‘‘ weak intellect, though not designated as feebleminded.’? His younger sister, Susan Jane
Dolly (26), who was the starting-point of
the investigation, is feeble-minded and at
Sheepton State Institution under the M.D.
Act. The last three of the family,
Nathaniel (20), Oswald (18), and Percy

(16), are all like their brother Martin in

53
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

 

“Spnys oq] jo yuod-Bunsz8ys 042 soueoiPUl
"(pegHse jou) siyoqTy Eom =] MM “Peperareiqees = ‘Wd “(2pts3 Sus) eapo 05 oP

‘SLUVHO

 

Aiea one ‘Wa ‘Wa ‘WA

ean et ‘aL
[wsuem=qry ‘Asde;yde=-q—: sjoqui{s 0) say
DISEASE AND DEFECT

being of ‘‘ weak intellect but not designated
as feeble-minded.’’

THREE AMENTS AND SIX DEATHS

Neither Mother nor Father Boxmead, on
Chart 3, could probably be described as
feeble-minded within the meaning of the
Act, but the intelligence of both is very
low, and he has done no regular work for
years. Their fertility is very nearly as
high as that of the Luttrell’s, and the death
rate among their children is even higher.
Only six out of twelve survive, three having died as infants, one at 6 years old, and
ancther at ten, while one lived to be 27.

Cf the six surviving children, the first
two, Queenie (32) and Ronnie (28), are
normal. Their brother Samuel (25), however, is feeble-minded and at Cokemound
Hall under the M.D. Act, and his younger
sister Dora (24), who was the starting-point
of the investigation, is also feeble-minded,
being at Oneship Colony. ‘Trixie (22) is
the third feeble-minded child and inhabits
another institution, Hampton House. The
last surviving child, Una, is 15 and normal.

A MORE DIFFICULT GENETIC TYPE

The Tiller family (Chart 4) affords an
instance, rarer than is sometimes thought,
of a whole family of defectives springing
from parents who really ‘‘ appear quite
normal.’’ Thomas (20), their eldest son and
the starting-point of the investigation, is
at Oneship Colony under the Act, and his
two younger brothers, Victor (15) and William (11), are both attending the Bath
Street Special School for Mentally Defective Children. Another brother, Alfred,
who died at the age of 12, attended the
same school. ,

The Lorrams (Chart 5) are typical of
the large and mainly defective families
which spring from parents of a very undesirable sort. Mother Lorram is a feebleminded epileptic and now an inmate of
Cramelton House; of her husband nothing
is known, not even his whereabouts—which,
considering the burden he has left the
community to bear, argues that he is either
a feckless vagrant or without conscience as

35

father, husband, or citizen. Of the eight
children, three died in infancy, and their
places in the family are not known. Of
the survivors, Bertha (28), Daniel (26), and
Sally (16), the starting-point of the study,
are all inmates of Oneship Colony under
the Act. Chris (27) and Edith, who may
be either a little older or a little younger
than Sally, both appear to be normal.

RURAL AND URBAN CONTRASTS

The pedigrees we printed last April
were both longer (four generations) and
much more detailed than these. But they
came from a remote rural district, where
every individual is comparatively wellknown and where most families have been
rooted for many generations. Those presented here, however, are from a densely
populated industrial town where few know
their neighbours, and where there is constant migration.

As it is, with but two generations of each
family, it is impossible to do more than
guess at the genetic factors involved. Only
one thing is fairly certain, that each family
is the victim of its own individual type of
morbid inheritance. The Tillers alone
suggest that amentia is a simple recessive
—and knowledge of the parentage and sibs
of the father and mother might well prove
inconsistent with such an interpretation.

In the Hops-Beer family the mother
seems to be solely responsible for the state
of her children, to whom she appears to
have transmitted a defective factor, but not
the dominant inhibitor which she herself
also carries. The fact that both her husbands were consumptive may be an instance
of sexual selection—perhaps she was the
only woman such weaklings could secure to
look after them—and it may be pure coincidence. It is doubtful whether their pulmonary weakness has any essential connection with the mental weakness of their
children. On the other hand, it is possible
that such physical weaklings lack the full
‘dose’ of an inhibiting factor which is
present in most people, such as their wife,
and which would have prevented the appearance of amentia in their children.
56

Tuberculosis is certainly very much commoner in ament families than in the general
population; and it is therefore possible
that amentia is in part caused, or at least
not inhibited, by a general lack of vitality.

Carrying both epilepsy and amentia,
Mother Luttrell would be expected to produce an unfortunate type of family, even if
she had married a thoroughly sound man.
Considering, therefore, that her husband
also is not too sound, it is not surprising
to find an unrelieved record of defect in
their family.

The high death rate among the Boxmead
children, as well as the constant doubt
about the interpretation of ‘‘ normal,’’
make it impossible even to guess at the
factors at work, but they certainly do not
suggest a simple recessive. Both here and
in the Luttrells the deficiency, whatever it
is, seems frequently to be lethal. Even the
Tiller family is less indicative of the mating
of two heterozygous ‘ carriers,’ than of the
transmission by one parent of some defect
which is usually dominant, but which was
inhibited in the transmitter by some other
factor.

The Lorrams, like the Boxmeads, suggest a genetic factor which is more potent
than any ordinary recessive, and which is
in some circumstances lethal.

THE PRACTICAL ASPECTS

This article, like that of last April, has
two authors—the welfare agency which supplied the facts, and the present writer who
has only recounted them and considered their
genetic interpretation. The latter, however,
is entirely responsible for the following
discussion of the practical aspects, since the
welfare agency cannot agree with the stockbreeder’s attitude he adopts.

The important question the eugenist
must be prepared to answer is: ‘‘ What
effect would sterilization, or other equally
effective policy, have had if it had been in
force before these parents were married ?’’

To that question there is more than one
answer. If the standards of diagnosis and
certification were then what they are now,
the existence of the whole of the Luttrell

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

family, twelve in all, would have been prevented, since the mother would

have been sterilized and possibly also the
father. It is quite probable that the same
would have happened to the Boxmeads,
whose parents are admittedly border-line
cases. The Lorrams, too, would now be
non-existent, since the mother would surely
have been sterilized, if not also the unknown
father (it may be remarked, parenthetically,
that ament women are much more dan
racially than ament men, since the latter
find it hard to get wives who are not also
defective, whereas the former, when young,
can frequently attract a low type of
normal man).

With such a policy, therefore, only the
Tillers and the Hops-Beer group would
now be in existence, and the country would
have to support only eleven aments and
three apparent normals of this generation,
instead of the total burden it now carries
of twenty-one aments, four border-line
cases, and eight normals, to say nothing of
the fourteen useless births which ended in
early death.

If the policy were supplemented by that
of the progeny test employed by the most
successful breeders of stock, Mrs. Hops’s
output would probably have been reduced
from ten children to two, and the Tillers
from four to two.

If the general policy adopted were the
ideal practical one of both taking account
also of the family history of potential
parents, and of encouraging sterility among
the weakly as well as among the definitely
defective, it is probable that not one of all
these forty-seven children would Have been
born. The reader will note, incidentally,
that these forty-seven, reduced to thirtythree by early deaths, are the gross product
of eleven parents.

Not many to-day, of course, will murmur
at the risk of thus preventing the appearance of a few normal children—eight in a
total of forty-seven—since some, at least,
would in all probability prove carriers of
undesirable genetic qualities. And, as one
has to repeat again and again in face of the
misleading statements of the non-biological,
DISEASE AND DEFECT 57

of these people are the progeny, if not cannot be confined to the individual himimmediate children, of defective ances- self, but must take his family into account,
, and are likewise the potential progeni- so a scientific prognosis of descendants
of similarly defective descendants. must look further than the immediate
as a scientific diagnosis of normality children. E. M.

geaRE

THE ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING

will be held at
THE ROOMS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY
BURLINGTON HOUSE, PICCADILLY }
On Wednesday, May 13th, at 4 p.m.

The Meetin3, will be followed by
an Address by

LORD SALVESEN

DIVORCE AND MARRIAGE LAW REFORM

Tea will be provided

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 1.
