 

)PULATION INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE
| 7 : --— Seeond Annual Report
2 | / - : 7 : January 1st, 1938—November 30th, 1938

AIMS OF COMMITTEE
| HE Committee has been formed to
| | - examine the trends of population in
| J. Great Britain and the Colonies and to
in vestigate the causes of these trends, with
special reference to the fall of the birth-rate.
It is not a propagandist Commitee and is not
concerned. with advocating any social
measures with. the object of influencing the
movement of:populations. It will be impossible to adopt social measures without fuller
information than we possess at present, and
it can be taken as certain that any policy
which, at a later date, the Government may
see fit to adopt, will be influenced by the
findings of the new inquiries of the General
Register Office, and by the findings of the
Committee. — ,
ORIGINS OF COMMITTEE

The Committee had its origin in the
Annual’ Galton Lecture entitled ‘‘ Eugenics
in the Light of Population Trends ”’ given on
February 16th, 1935, to the Eugenics

octety by Professor A. M. Carr-Saunders.

Acting upon a suggestion contained in this
lecture, the Council of the Eugenics Society
ook the initiative in calling the Population
Investigation Committee together. |
The Committee, while made up of representatives of various organizations, and of
ertain individuals elected in a private
capacity, is‘an ‘autonomous body. It is in no
way subordinate to any of the organizations
represented upon it. The Committee has
power to add to its numbers as it thinks
pit. ae |

Poputation (Statistics) Act |
_ It was. stated in the Committee’s First
annual Report:that, in the course of the year
1937, three conferences were held at Somerset House between -representatives of the

Committee and the Registrar General, and that
the latter gave sympathetic consideration to
the Committee’s views as to what changes
were desirable in the system of vital registration. With one exception, all of the Committee’s suggestions were taken into account,
during the course of the year under review,

in the Government’s amendments to the

Population (Statistics) Act which became
effective on July ist, 1938. The exception
relates to the occupation of the father, a
question as to which was made possible in
the Bill as originally drafted, but which was
dropped in the Government’s amendments
when a less searching question as to rank or
profession was substituted. When the
amended Population (Statistics) Bill came
up before a Committee of the whole House on
February rst, 1938, and discussion was
raised on this point, Sir Kingsley Wood, who
was then Minister of Health, explained that
the scope of the phrase “‘ Rank or Profession,”’
now used on the birth certificate, could be
defined more precisely without recourse to
fresh legislation. He pointed out that, under
Section 44 of the Registration Act of 1874,
provision had been made for alterations of
this kind. The Committee has been informed
that the undertaking given by the Minister
of Health in this connection still stands, and
that the necessary steps will be put into
operation as soon as possible. The Committee wishes to record its appreciation of
the consideration which it has received at
the hands of the Registrar General.

CENSUS IQ4I _

The Committee holds it to be important
that questions on fertility be included in the
1941 census. The Registrar General has
given an assurance that the Committee will
be given an opportunity of putting its views
before him. Oo

269
270

DEMOGRAPHIC PROBLEMS OF THE CRowN :

COLONIES

A grant of £1,155 9s. 9d. has been received
from the Carnegie Corporation of New
York, which is to be applied to an investigation of the demographic problems of the
Crown Colonies. The Committee will prepare
a Demographic Handbook of the Colonial
Empire and will later promote a special study
of population problems in the West Indies.
Dr. R. R. Kuczynski has already begun work
on the preparation of the handbook.

DEMOGRAPHIC. ASPECTS OF THE HOUSING
PROBLEM

A grant of {500 has been received from
the Carnegie Trust, renewable for a second
year, which is to be applied to an investigation of the demographic aspects of the housing problem. Contact has been made with
organizations concerned with housing and
it is hoped shortly to appoint one or more
research workers.

THE APPROACH TO MARRIAGE

In many callings there exist specific
regulations or else unwritten conventions
which have the effect of delaying and sometimes prohibiting marriage. These have
never been collectively investigated nor have
their effects been assessed. The Eugenics
Society has devoted one of its Darwin
Research Fellowships to an enquiry on this
matter and has requested the Committee to
supervise the work. The Fellowship has been
awarded to Mr. R. H. Pear.

THE Costs oF EDUCATION

The costs of education vary within very
wide limits in the United Kingdom, and in
many occupations and callings form part of
the complex of economic deterrents from
parenthood. Under the Committee’s guidance the subject has been investigated
during the past year by Miss Grace Leybourne, M.A., Ph.D., B.Sc.. The following
is a list of her publications : |

““ The Movement of the Birth Rate and the
Probable Effects on the Boys’ School
Population.” Proceedings of the H. cadmasters’
Conference, December 1937.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tions, January 1938.

io

“The Tnifidence. of the Cost of. Education
on the'Size of the Family.’ Proceedings of thy

Annual Conference of Educational Associa.

   

‘““Movements of. the Birth Rate and
Numbers in Girls’ Schools.” Proceedings of
Conference of Association of Headmistresses of
Boarding Schools, February 1938.

“A Declining. Birth Rate and the Cost g
Education.” Eugenics Review, April 1938.

“The Growth of Education in Englang
and its Influence on the.Size of the Family.” "
Eugenics Review, October. 1938.

“¢ Diminishing Population and the vost of
Education.”’ . Two ‘short ‘articles in Th
Journal of C aveers, February and May 10938,

‘‘ The Birth Rate and School Populations,”
Two short articles in School M anagement,
January and February 1938.

Miss Leybourne is now engaged in | writing
a book which will be published i in 1939 by the
Oxford University Press.

Miss Leybourne also gave. addresses. to the
following organizations :

December 1937. The Headmasters’ Conference at Winchester (Pub.
lished in their Proceedings),
The Conference of Educational Associations in Lon
don (Published in their
Proceedings).

The Conference of the Association of Headmistresses
of Boarding Schools (In
their Proceedings). —

The Birth Control Clinic in

. Winchester. on ‘‘ Recent
Population Movements.”’

_A meeting of the Eugenics
Society (Published in the
Eugenics — October |
1938).

INTER-DEPARTMENTAL ComMITrer ON
ABORTION

On June 28th, 1938, the Research Secretary
gave evidence in person before this Committee on the: prevalence of abortion in-other
countries: and: on the effectiveness of their
laws in restricting or suppressing the practice.

January 1938
February 1938.

March 1938.

June 1938.
 

YVESTIGATION COMMITTEE

  

e substanice of.’amemorandum prepared
py him for 48 ¢ -Inter-Dep

mittee has been published and the reference

s given below. :
ACTIVITIES OF RESEARCH SECRETARY
As noted: above the Research Secretary
brepared a..memorandum for. the InterDepartmental Committee on Abortion. This
memorandum. was'later extended and pubished in the September issue of The Modern
Law Review under the title ‘‘ The Effectiveness of Abortion Legislation in Six Countries.”
n addition a short memorandum was
prepared for the Royal Commission on the
eographical Distribution of Industry. As
egards other work published by the Research
Secretary, the following papers appeared
juring the course.of the year:
“Fertility and Economic Status in LonHon,” Eugenics Review, July 1938.
‘Population Policies in Scandinavia,”
ugenics Review, July 1938. |
‘Gross Reproduction Rates of the Départements of France, 1891-1931,” Eugenics
Review, October 1938.

\ detailed study of European population
ovements and policies is nearing completion

and it is hoped that it will be published in

book form in the spring of 1939. |

COMMITTEE’S QUESTIONNAIRE

The Committee has prepared a questionaire designed to throw light on problems of
ertility. It is to be filled in by doctors,
idwives and nurses. A preliminary sample
pf 500 of these questionnaires has been
illed in by Dr. P. T. Cooper, M.B., M.R.C.P.;
of Tonbridge, and. has been analysed by
Mr. E. A. Shrimpton, late Statistician to the
Henry Lester Institute of Medical Research,
shanghai. The experience thus gained of the
nerits and defects of the questionnaire will
pe of value in preparing a final version for
peneral use. Contact has been established
ith the British :‘Tabulating Machine Company, and the Hollerith system has been used

1 coding and. ‘analysing the material. The

ommittee is deeply indebted ‘to Mrs.

Nowell Smith (till lately Miss Marion.

ental ‘Com
2gt

Crichton) for much valuable help, voluntarily

given, in coding the data provided by this

sample. |

NATIONAL BirtH CONTROL ASSOCIATION

This Association has expressed willingness
to help the Committee, and a revised version
of the case sheet used in the clinics affiliated
to the Association is being prepared. This
case sheet includes many of the questions
contained in the Committee’s questionnaire.

POPULATION AND FERTILITY

A small book with this title has been
written by Mr. D. V. Glass and Dr. C. P.
Blacker and is on sale at the price of 3s.
Its chief object is to show what are the
advantages and limitations of the new
information which will be obtained from the
working of the Population (Statistics) Act.
Population pyramids for the Dominions and
for other countries have also been included.
The project of the book was suggested by the
course of the debates in the House of Commons on the Population (Statistics) Bill.

COMMITTEE’S PAMPHLET

A second edition of the pamphlet The
Future of our Population ? by Dr. Blacker
and Mr. Glass has been produced, the first
edition having been sold out. The last two
chapters have been rewritten and a new
Figure has been added showing the course of
birth and death rates since 187 5. The Figure
showing population pyramids for England
and Wales for 1911 and 1931 has been redrawn. |

POPULATION PoLicres COMMITTEE

As stated above, the Committee is concerned with the investigation of problems of

‘population and not with policies designed to

modify recent trends. The task of devising
appropriate policies directed to raising
fertility has been undertaken by a Population Policies Committee which is jointly
administered and financed by the Eugenics
Socvety and PEP. The Population Investigation Committee and the Population
Policies Committee have several members in
common, including Mr. A. M. Carr-Saunders,
272

the Chairman of the Investigation Committee, Mr. N. F. Hall, the Chairman of the
Policies Committee, Mrs. E. M. Hubback,
Mr. D. V. Glass and Dr. C. P. Blacker.

ELECTIONS TO THE COMMITTEE

The following have been appointed to the
Committee :

Sir Henry Brackenbury, M.D., LL.D.,
representing the British Medical Association.

Mr. N. F. Hall, M.A., representing the
National Institute of Social and Economic Research.

Miss W. Burt, S.C.M., A.I.H.A., has
replaced Miss Liddiard as a representative of the Midwives’ Institute.

Miss G. B. Carter, B.Sc.(Econ.), S.R.N.,
S.C.M., has replaced Miss F. Frederick
as the representative of the College of
Nursing.

. oF . ew ' WRAERP A by ry
. ‘THE EUGENICS: REVIEW «>
' st ee - ; oe Cs nat YE . dig a a,

  
   
 
    
  
   

. oa | Finances’ wee
A Separate. banking accoutit was Openg
on behalf of the Committee on April 6%,
1938. The audited report which folly,
therefore covers the period April tst ,
November 3oth, ‘1938. The Committee ;
much indebted to the persons and organi;
tions named in the balance sheet below fy
generous donations.
In addition, the following: donations Wwe
received between ey Ist and April Is
1938 :

£ sj
Mr. B. S. Bramwell + 008 " @ee . eve 3 3 ;
Major Leonard Darwin ... ... vee 50 0
Mr. D. McLachlan soo eee ae I 0

The following grants and donations ha
been promised ° |

8. |
The Carnegie United Kingdom ‘Trust

BALANCE SHEET, NOVEMBER 3078, 1938

£ 8s. d. £ s. d.

SUNDRY CREDITORS ae

INCOME AND EXPENDITURE
ACCOUNT :

Balance at March 31st, 1938

Note : Up to March 31st,
1938, the funds of this
Committee were controlled by the Eugenics
Society, and this balance represents the
excess of Income over
Expenditure from the
inception of the Fund
to that date.

Add: Excess of Income
over Expenditure for
the eight months ended
November 30th, 1938

662 o 6

1,773 12 3
nnn 62,435 12 9

£2,452 3 2
na

16-10 5 | CasH:

(renewable for a second year} §00 0
The Eugenics Society ae . .  §00 oO}
Lord Trent ees oe ww» 180 oO

£ sd. £ 8.

In Hand... ro 6

At Bank :

General Account... 794 6 3
uestionnaire Fund... 474 18 oO
lonial Research Fund 155 7 9
Colonial Research Fund

Deposit Account ... 1,000 0 Oo

2,425 12

PAYMENTS IN ADVANCE ... 26 10

£2,452 3

We have audited the above Balance Sheet with the books and vouchers of the Committee, and certify |
same to be in accordance therewith, and, in our opinion, correct. —

8 New Court,
Lincoln’s Inn, W.C.z2.

December 15th, 1938.

. ‘West &. DRAKE,
(Chartered Accountants.
sayetiends ates ahealtore “POP eo.

 

TION INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE

273
sme out ND ‘EXPENDITURE ACCOUNT FOR THE EIGHT MONTHS ENDED
oO OVEMBER 301fH, 1938
a . gaa. £ 8s. d.{ Cr. £ s.d.
esearch : —— 7 . PY Sabaoriptt see vee vee +++ 2,062 16 6
' Salaries oe O13 124 » Subscriptions ... eee eee eee 13 0 Oo
Travelling and ‘Sundry 69 16 , 4 Sonepat Sal see 500 O °
: xpenses « 16 I amphle es. wee nes as 2 3
= ————————- 681 8 5
xpenses :
ee eas 18 15 Oo
Printing, Stationery
uplicatin g- 3014 8
sundry Expenses 2 13-—«6 2 302
eve  §«©3—rd« 58 7s 8
Repunts a eee oes 12 8 6
—— 70 16 2
Balance, being excess of
Income over Expenditure, carried to Bal- |
ance Sheet ...  —... 1,773 12 3
£2,578 oO oO £2,578 90 Oo
be Ee

 

  

 

STATISTICAL STUDIES IN GENETICS
AND HUMAN INHERITANCE

ANNALS OF EUGENICS

‘Edited by R. A. FISHER
(Founded by K. PEARSON)
Volume [X, Part I, will contain

Frontispiece W. S. GOSSET and articles by

R. A. FISHER W. L. STEVENS

G. L. TAYLOR and A. M. PRIOR G. HARTMANN

5 R. SAVUR | R. M. FLEMING
REVIEWS

on, in advance, 50/- per volume. Four quarterly parts
ot separately at 15/- each from Galton Laboratory, University
College, Gower Street, London, W.C.|}.

 

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. xxx, No. 4.
