THE EUGENIC HYPOTHESIS*

Ga) Positive Eugenics

By FREDERICK OSBORN

OST large families in the United States
today are found among people who
are isolated and outside the main

currents of American life. Those in the remote
rural areas, whose isolation is geographic, do
not present a eugenic problem. They are
simply following the customs of their group,
and there is not any evidence to indicate
that these people or any other large population groups differ from other people in the
average of their genetic possibilities.

But there is a serious eugenic as well as
social problem with respect to the large
families which are found scattered throughout the industrial and urban populations.
Too often the children in such families do
not receive the care, nor the food, nor the
education which we think of as the American
heritage. At the same time, in the same
sections of the population, the parents who
give their children the best opportunities for
sound growth rear on the average no more
than two children.

This uneven distribution of births within
each sectional and social group is generally
considered a handicap to the improvement
of society. A large proportion of each new
generation has to be re-educated to higher
standards than those of its parents. If
present differentials were reversed, and a
majority of children benefited from the best
parental care, as well as from the advances
in the American’ environment, social
improvement would then more certainly
have a cumulative effect, each generation
better than the last.

Society is even more handicapped if,
as at present may well be the case, the next
generation is being bred in too large a

proportion from parents who have less than |

average genetic potential for intelligence and
for other socially valuable characteristics.
If this process should continue, we would be

* See page 8.

31

slowly drying up all social advance at its
source. The outlook for what we believe to
be our advanced form of civilization would
then be dismal indeed. It is this genetic
aspect of present birth differentials which is
so disturbing to the eugenist.

The present situation is not fair to either
group of parents. Some lack the knowledge
and the means for restricting the size of their
families, and others, who are now in the
majority and may want more children,
cannot have more than one or two without
a very serious fall in their level of living,
unless they have inherited wealth. __

Fortunately this situation is changing,
though all too slowly. The proportion of
parents in a position to restrict the number
of their children to those they actually plan
for is increasing as contraceptives become
more available and more effective, as
voluntary sterilization is increasingly used
to prevent the perpetuation of transmissable
hereditary defects or to safeguard health,
and as the change to family limitation
becomes more nearly universal.

There is also today a trend toward helping
parents meet the cost of raising children, as’
shown in public recreation, free school
lunches, income-tax reductions for each
child, scholarships for the higher education
of able children, etc. It is reasonable to hope
that this trend can be given much further
impetus that the financial and personal
hardships of raising a family of four or five or
more children will be substantially reduced.

Among the limited number of people who
are living under conditions of a generally
freer choice as to the number of children they
will have, there is frequently a reversal of
the usual birth differentials. As examples,
people at the highest rental levels have more
children than people at the rental levels
immediately below them. The most successful college graduates have more children than
do college graduates who are less successful.
32 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

College presidents have more children than
do college professors.

There is also evidence that the parents
with the larger number of children in the
above examples provide, in general, an
above-average bringing up, and there is some
evidence to indicate (and none opposed) that
they give their children the probability of a
genetic inheritance capable of a better than
average response to the environment.

It appears that under conditions which at
present affect only a small proportion of the
population, a eugenic selection of births may
actually be taking place, wholly voluntary,
the result of a new type of environmental
pressures.

There is certainly a possibility that these
pressures can be given better direction and
can be brought to bear on a majority of the
population instead of only on a minority.

The Eugenic Hypothesis

It is possible to develop in the United
States a social and economic environment
in which individual parents will plan and
have children in numbers proportional to the
ability of the parents to provide a favourable
environment for child nurture and development. Such a situation would also make for
a eugenic selection of births, because parents
who had the ability to provide a favourable
home environment would tend also to possess
and pass on a better than average genetic
endowment. These favourable selective
forces would operate through individual
choices within each community, within each
ethnic group and within each social class.

Under such conditions, each generation
of Americans would see a substantial reduction in the proportion of defect and a
substantial increase in the proportion of
men and women of a high order of socially
valuable characteristics.

Making the Eugenic Hypothesis a Reality
We cannot even test the eugenic hypothesis effectively until a much larger number
of people than at present are actually living
under conditions of real freedom to have
as many or as few children as they want,
and until a larger proportion of them are

subject to the social and psychological
pressures favourable to having children.

The eugenist wants, therefore, to see those
conditions brought about and is justified
in trying to further them. If his efforts were
in conflict with other socially desirable ends,
he would have to wait for more evidence
as to the importance of what he wants to do,
for it would be difficult to decide which was
the more important, the immediate needs
of the present generation or the long-term
needs of future generations.

Fortunately the first steps to be taken are
not in conflict with present social needs.
Important changes are already under way
because the public has recognized their
desirability for other than eugenic reasons.
The extension of birth control to the whole
population has not had to wait on proof of its
eugenic desirability. The desire to help
parents meet the cost of rearing children
springs from the recognition of the entirely
new conditions which result from the
industrial revolution and the fact that
children no longer contribute to the family
economy but create an almost intolerable
economic burden for the average family if
there are more than one or two. The eugenist
can with confidence join in the work of
changing these conditions.

The final task, that of creating social and
psychological pressures such that parents
most able to contribute to society will have
the larger families, must be approached with
caution. But here, too, the social and
eugenic needs seem to be very similar. It is
essential to satisfactory social progress that
in each generation the major proportion of
children should be born to parents who are
most fitted to pass on the best of the social
heritage; and there is a great deal of
evidence to indicate that these same parents
are the ones most likely to pass on to their
children a superior genetic potential.

Both social and eugenic considerations
therefore demand that society develop to its
utmost all those influences which will make
the job of having and rearing children
compete successfully with all the other
interesting and valuable jobs which now
offer themselves to able and ambitious
THE EUGENIC HYPOTHESIS 33

people. It is a matter of keeping clear the
normal emotional channels, and of keeping
through all the early years a sound balance
between the satisfactions provided by
children and the satisfactions to be found in
other interests. If this can be done, then the
conflict between having more children or
having more material possessions will probably resolve itself in the majority of cases.

The dangerous effects of the uneven spread
of birth control are already recognized.
Probably no further proof is needed that this
condition should be remedied as rapidly as
possible. The almost impossible burden
which modern conditions put on the average
family if it has more than one or two children
are so evident from various recent studies
that the effort to lessen the economic burden
of larger families should be expected to
receive strong public support. There may,

however, be controversy as to proper means
of promoting this goal.

Psychological changes to influence the
attitudes of parents are less well understood.
They will have to be introduced with caution
and continuously tested. The idea of training
young people in the attitudes and interests
which will increase their feeling for children
is likely to be generally acceptable. But the
relation of this idea to other goals and
procedures in education is more complex.

The major aim of eugenics is to increase
the proportion of children born with a high
hereditary potential for being good and able
citizens. The eugenist believes that by acting
on the eugenic hypothesis this aim may be
attained, and that by the same measure our
social heritage of attitudes, beliefs and
knowledge will be vastly improved.

POPULATION STUDIES

Edited by D. V. GLASS

Vol. V. No. 3

CONTENTS

March 1952

H. B. M. Murpeuy. The Assimilation of Refugee Immigrants in Australia

ELIZABETH STADULB. The Resettlement of Displaced Persons in the United Kingdom

G. W. Roserts. A Life Table for a West Indian Slave Population

Jerzy Berent. Fertility and Social Mobility

C. Watson. Birth Control and Abortion in France since 1939

SUBSCRIPTION : 30s. net per volume of three parts

Published for the PoPULATION INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE

by the CampripGE UNIVERSITY Press, 200 Euston Roap, Lonpon, N.W.1.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLIV, No. 1
