REPLIES TO Dr. CREWS ARGUMENTS.

IN the issue of the REVIEW which appeared last October there is a remarkable article, by Dr. F. A. E. Crew, entitled “A Biologist in a New
Environment.” In this article Dr. Crew relates the change in his beliefs
occasioned by his experiences whilst serving in the war. He entered on
the war, he tells us, as a convinced eugenist, a conviction not attained by
him previous to the war—although he was, he states, “a biologist by
occupation ”—but drilled into him by the training he received when preparing to become a soldier. During the war however all his views changed,
largely owing to contact with the American forces, whom he depicts as
lofty-souled idealists imbued with an enthusiasm for “making the world
safe for democracy.” The Germans he regards as the embodiment of
Darwin’s doctrine of the “survival of the fittest.” Since Germany was
‘beaten he arrives at the following conclusions :—

(1) The Darwinian doctrine of the survival of the strongest is false.

{2) The factors of environment and function are responsible for the
exhibition of mental and moral qualities which cannot be regarded as
having been inborn.

(3) The greatest of the “agencies under social control that may
improve or impair the racial qualities of future generations ” is that of
social inheritance, an environmental factor acquired by the individuals of
each generation through the medium of the mind during education.

Now no one holding these views has any right to style himself a
eugenist, and if they are well founded the whole aim of the Eugenics
Education Society is a mistaken one; for in the view of our Society mental
qualities as well as physical ones are inborn and are transmitted by
heredity: and further, we hold that the struggle for existence, which has
selected the fittest among animals to propagate their kind, is likewise
operative in the human sphere; and that endeavours to encourage the
multiplication of the unfit are disastrous to Society. It behoves us therefore to look closely into the reasoning which has conducted Dr. Crew to
his extraordinary conclusions.

(1) Even if, as Dr. Crew assumes, the Germans adopted with enthusiasm the doctrine of natural selection and incorporated it in their
education and so changed the whole outlook of their people in a generation,
the defeat of the Germans would not prove that this doctrine was false,
unless they had been defeated by people who in inborn characters were
physically and mentally their inferiors, and who owed their victory to their
education. But nothing is further from the truth than such an assumption, The Germans were defeated by people physically and mentally their
superiors, and people, moreover, who had attained that eminence by
natural selection. Let us grant for the moment that the advent of the
Americans was the cause of this defeat—a view which we do not ourselves
share. Then it is to be remarked that in no country has natural selection
and the dependence on individual initiative had more unchecked sway
42 EUGENICS REVIEW.

than in America. For not only is it a country without poorhouses, or other
demoralising pauperising agencies, but within the lifetime of living
Americans a large part of its population were still on what may be called
the ragged edge of things, z.e., engaged in a ceaseless struggle with as
yet untamed nature. The contrast between this nation of pioneers, and
the methodically guarded and drilled Germans, whose lives consisted
largely of routine performances prescribed by custom and authority, needs
only to be mentioned to be realised. The same remarks as apply to
Americans, are equally true of Canadians and to a considerable extent of
Australians also,. |

Further, to represent America as entering the war from idealistic motives
is grossly to misread the facts of the case. If America had entered the
war two years earlier thousands of millions of money and millions of lives
would have been saved. But Mr. Wilson was re-elected President in 1916
on the distinct understanding that he would keep America out of the war.
He only entered the war when Germany announced her intention of sinking
at sight American ships on the high seas; and even then he would not
have been able to carry his supporters with him, if his secret service had
not opportunely discovered a German plot to induce the Mexicans to attack
America in the flank. For in no country is the feeling of race superiority—
the mark of all conquering progressive races—more deeply ingrained than
in America, however much their public utterances and their written constitution may appear to contradict it. One has to live amongst them to
realise their intense dislike and contempt for people like the Mexicans, who
are to them miserable “greasers ” and “dagoes.”

Lastly, whilst no doubt the Germans adopted the doctrine of natural
selection—and they were fully justified in so doing, for it is true—it is
not the case that their whole mental outlook was thereby altered in a
generation. For the policy pursued by the Germans in this war was
nothing but the traditional policy pursued by the Prussians for hundreds
of years, long before anyone had breathed the words “matural selection.”

(2) No eugenist will deny the importance of environment or, in a word,
of education ; for in its absence many admirable qualities may remain latent,
even though the capacity to develop them may be present. But all history
proves that stock is all important, and to the inborn qualities of each stock
corresponds a certain grade of culture. Lower races can be made to adopt
the customs of a higher civilisation so long as they are under the guidance
and control of the higher race, but when left to themselves they steadily
regress to their appropriate level, as the history of states like Hayti,
Liberia and Mexico itself abundantly proves. Further, if we distinguish
strains within the same race the same fact stares us in the face. The
researches on the inheritance of mental deficiency show that a large proportion of our prostitution, habitual drunkenness and crime is actually
inherited. For vice and crime are both due in the last resort to want
of self-control—the latest acquired of all the virtues and the most decisive
in the struggle for existence—and mental deficiency shows itself above
all in the lack of self-control. No permanent improvement can be effected
in any society so long as such types are allowed to breed, and money
expended on their education is largely thrown away. Amongst ancient
virile peoples they were ruthlessly eliminated.
REPLIES TO DR. CREW’S ARGUMENTS. 43

Dr. Crew argues that all sorts of men passed into the army were
imbued by military training with the same outlook and, as he seems to
imply, made equally efficient soldiers. Others who, equally with Dr.
Crew, have had an inner and practical acquaintance with the army as a
fighting machine utterly deny such an implication. All regiments were
mot equally efficient or brave, and the stocks which gave us our fighting
men in the past were equally distinguished in the late war for the material
which they provided.

(3) The all-importance of the “social inheritance,” by which is meant
the complex of customs and traditions amidst which the child grows up,
will be at once admitted by every eugenist. But what Dr. Crew forgets is that
this “social inheritance ” is due to the reaction of the inborn mental qualities of the race which possesses it, and it is extremely doubtful whether the
“social inheritance ” of one race can be in any degree grafted on to another.
Dr. Crew thinks otherwise and cites the case of Japan as proof of his
point. But the Japanese have always been a warlike people living under
a feudal system closely similar to our own, and there is no evidence that
their mental outlook has been sensibly altered by their contact with
western civilisation. Of course if Dr. Crew includes actual knowledge
of arts and sciences in social inheritance, then not only every eugenist
but every anthropologist will readily concede that these things may be
transmitted from one race to another. There is strong evidence to show
that the art of making bronze tools was discovered in Egypt amongst the
Mediterranean race, but was exploited by the Central European or Alpine
race, which, strengthened by this new art, swept in a broad band across
Europe, subjugating primitive Mediterranean peoples in their course. A
quick-witted and intelligent race like the Japanese have exploited the discoveries of European and American science, with what result remains as
yet to be seen; but discoveries and inventions do not alter the mental
character of a people.

Dr. Crew concludes his article by a rhapsody in which he calls for
the rejection of the Darwinian conception of the “fittest animal” as a
standard of the individual as a member of society, and for the substitution
for it of the Christ-like man set up again as a model. On this statement
we should like to make two remarks :—

(2) Darwin did not regard the “fittest animal,” by which Dr. Crew means
the physically best developed, as the standard individual in human society.
He was far too wise not to have recognised the decisive importance of
the moral qualities in the struggle between tribe and tribe; and in his
concluding remarks in the “Descent of Man” he actually suggests that
wives should be sought on account of their mental and moral qualities,
with a view to improving the race. For in the contest of tribe with tribe
nothing contributes to victory like tribal loyalty and cohesion, and it is
precisely this faithfulness of brother to brother which is enforced by the
laws of morality. One of the causes that contributed largely to the final
collapse of the German armies was the want of sympathy between their
officers and their men. We may suggest to Dr. Crew that a denunciation
of Darwinian doctrine should be preceded by a study of Darwin’s works.

(b) We agree with Dr. Crew in thinking that in the extension of the
Christian ideal lies the great hope for the future of our race. But with
44 EUGENICS REVIEW.

respect to this subject there is something which is painful to say, but which,
nevertheless, in the interests of truth should be clearly stated; and that
is that the Christian ideal as originally propounded requires considerable
modification before it can be adopted as the permanent rule to govern a
stable and progressive society. For from the words, as recorded, of both
the Founder and his principal disciple St. Paul, it is abundantly clear that
their rules and teaching were intended to serve not as guides to a society
which was to last 2,000 years, but as rules for the interim state of affairs
which was to precede the setting up on earth of a supernatural heavenly
kingdom ; and this state of affairs was estimated by them both as not likely
to last more than fifty years. Thus we find the Founder saying that there
were some of those listening to him who would not taste death till they
had seen the coming of the Kingdom, and St. Paul warning his converts
that the time was short and that those who had wives should be as those
who had none. Further we are told by the Founder himself that in the
new Kingdom there will be neither marrying nor giving in marriage. We,
unfortunately, have to worry along in a world where marrying and giving
in marriage is the sole means of prolonging our race, and we have to face
the stubborn fact that in man, as in other species of animals, the increase
of population tends to outrun food supply, and that every race tends to
spread beyond its original borders, a circumstance which inevitably brings
it into collision with other races. Adopting another mode of expression
we may say that there 1s not room in the world for everybody’s children,
especially if everybody has children; that selection somehow must be
practised ; that every race is called on to fight for its right to maintain
itself: and that within each race the right to have children should be the
prize of successful service and not conceded to every incompetent who
is able to sit up and take nourishment. The whole contention of the
Eugenics Education Society is that only by such selection can the quality
of any society be progressively improved.

In closing let us address one word of caution to Dr. Crew and sentimentalists like him. Let them not imagine that because Germany has
been defeated in the late war either the German nation or the German
thought is finally disposed of. The military caste into whose hands the
Germans committed their fate made colossal blunders and finally lost the
war, largely owing to their being starved out through our blockade, but the
contrast between the German people on the one hand, maintaining their
unity after this crushing defeat, establishing a stable government and
settling down to hard systematic work, and our quondam allies the
Russians, on the other hand, relapsing into primeval savagery, must strike
every impartial observer. The power of systematic work is one of the
latest acquisitions of civilisation, and it is a deadly weapon in the struggle
for existence. Germany and Russia are separated by an imaginary line
on a flat plain, and it seems to us that no power on earth can prevent
the entry of the Germans into Russia within a few years and their reorganisation of that vast territory, in which case their gains in the east will
more than compensate them for their losses in the west, and they will
become again our powerful rivals in trade and commerce and competitors
for the means of existence.

E. W. MACBRIDE.
REPLIES TO DR. CREW’S ARGUMENTS. 45

I HAVE been asked by the Editor of the REVIEW to make some observations
upon Dr. Crew’s article, “A Biologist in a New Environment.”

Dr. Crew holds that Germany was reared in a school of nationalism,
militarism and materialism, and that these ideals are the legitimate
offspring of the Darwinian conception of evolution. He fears that, in
spite of the issue of the war, we are in danger of falling under the influence
of the false ideals which have been the ruin of Germany. “Heckel,
Nietzsche, Karl Marx, and Treitschke were no more daringly dogmatic
than were Herbert Spencer, Galton, Karl Pearson and Bateson. And
their doctrines were the same—biological predestination, biological justification for aggressive war in the spheres of international and domestic
policy; the Darwinian standard of efficiency of the animal as the standard
of fitness for the survival of individuals and races in a civilised world; the
new conception of the nature of the mental and moral character and their
transmission through heredity ; superior races and classes ; and the absolute
right of the State founded on force and responsibility to none.” Professors
Pearson and Bateson may be left to say whether this is a fair summary
of their views, but Mr. Crew does not seem to have studied Herbert
Spencer to full advantage. Spencer as a militarist is a surprising apparition. I commend to Dr. Crew’s attention the following passage from the
works of that eminent thinker: “Anyone who wishes to aid social advance
should devote all his energy to showing that no fundamental and permanent progress in social life can be made while warlike activities and the
social organisation appropriate to them continue.”

Nietzsche has been generally supposed to be one of the chief inspirers
of the modern German mentality, and some of his doctrines lend colour
to this view. But Nietzsche was essentially cosmopolitan. He believed
himself to be of Slav blood, and he hated Germany and despised German
culture. He affirmed that “he who has once sickened on Hegel and
Schleiermacher never completely recovers.” He loathed the doctrine of
State supremacy, and held that the State aims at the suppression of the
exceptionally strong and the exceptionally gifted, of everything that 1s
extraordinary, powerful, inmdependent—hence of the genius, the superman.
Those who represent Nietzsche as the spiritual parent of Treitschke and
Bernhardi should refresh their memory of his works. They may find there
much to condemn, but they will search in vain for the evangel of Prussian
Junkerdom.

In contending that the Darwinian standard of efficiency for the individual, as he conceives it, is not the true standard for society, Dr. Crew
is allowing himself to be misled by terms like “the struggle for existence ”
and “the survival of the fittest.” These, undoubtedly, have tended to place
the biological factor of race survival in the forefront, but no careful student
of evolution holds that this is the only factor at work. Physical fitness is
primary and essential, but it is not the exclusive element, nor is it purely
egotistic in operation in either the earlier or the later stages of civilisation.
Greece owed her vast influence over civilisation less to the handsome faces
and vigorous frames of the youths who contended in the palestra than to
her genius for science, literature, art and philosophy. Rome ruled the
western world in part, no doubt, by the martial quality of her legions,
but hardly less by her capacity for law, government and administration.
England owes her success as a colonising power less to brawn and muscle
46 EUGENICS REVIEW.

than to her reputation for fair dealing and her comprehension of the
psychology of inferior races. The Cromagnons of palzolithic times were
a magnificent race physically, but they died out and left no descendants.
In concluding that mental and moral qualities are mainly the result
of environment, Dr. Crew has neglected many considerations that incline
both biologists and sociologists to attribute them to heredity. The truth,
no doubt, is that both these factors are of vast importance, and that it is
not possible in the present state of our knowledge to adjust the balance
between them. It is easy to point to facts which favour the influence of
heredity and to other facts which favour the influence of environment. It
does not help us to look only at one side of the shield, and to avert our
gaze from the other side. Kant said “Die Erziehung macht alles aus dem
Menschen.” Schopenhauer was of precisely the opposite opinion, holding
that “Die Erziehung macht nichts aus dem Menschen.” Locke and Herbart
agreed with Kant; Helvetius and Hallam agreed with Schopenhauer.
Experience shows that practical ability and aptitude for life, and their
opposites, are inherent in certain stocks. Many forms of mental defect—
insanity, weakmindedness, the criminal bias—are profoundly under the
influence of heredity. Athens was famed for genius and learning. The
Boeotians, on the other side of the mountains, were dullards. The environment was practically the same. We must assume an innate racial
aptitude. The American negro has been for many generations in contact
with a higher civilisation, but he remains low in the scale of morality
and social efficiency. The Italian, the Spaniard and the Slav in the New
World are easily outstripped by the Englishman and the German, yet the
environment is the same. The subject might be illustrated indefinitely.
As examples of his contention that it is possible to change the mental
constitution of a nation in a brief space of time, Dr. Crew mentions the
Germans, the Japanese and the Maoris. The last example is the weakest.
The modern Maori has put on a veneer of civilisation, but he is still
loquacious, theatrical, lazy and incapable of founding a city or organising
a great industry. If he no longer fights, it is more from lack of opportunity
than from want of inclination. Germany seems, on a superficial view,
to have developed a new mentality since the days of Kant, Herder, Lessing,
Goethe and Schiller. But are we quite sure that the virus of Prussianism
has really permeated the whole nation, and is not rather the infection of
the Junker breed and the military caste? Before the war more than three
million votes were cast for Socialists in the elections for the Reichstag.
Under the tide of war moderate opinion in Germany was temporarily submerged, but it is beginning to reappear. Japan has shown a remarkable
faculty of adaptation to the ideals of western civilisation, but it does not
follow that the national psychology is essentially changed. Plato said that.
perjury was rife in the Athenian courts. The reputation of the modern
Greek for truthfulness does not stand as high in the Levant as lovers of
Greece would desire. Tacitus in his “Germania” describes qualities in
the German tribes of the first century which are strikingly characteristic
of the Germans of to-day. Czsar paints the Gauls of his time in terms
which can be applied with little modification to the modern Frenchman. The Irish Celt shows an obstinate adhesion to primitive ideals. So
far from the psychology of a nation changing rapidly, the precise contrary
is the truth. Nothing is so tenacious, so inveterate, so resistant to circumREPLIES TO DR. CREW’S ARGUMENTS. 47

stances and environment as the inherited qualities, aptitudes, defects and
ideals of a race. The science of anthropology teaches this lesson emphatically.

While Dr. Crew’s science seems open to serious criticism, his ideals
for the future are admirable. He wants a new social organisation, based
upon ethical rather than physical principles. He wants a new interpretation of religion. He wants to create a new Britain. He is not quite clear
how these desirable changes are to be effected, but seems to imply that
education is the means to these ends. That is probably true, but progress
will not be promoted by ignoring the limitations of race, or the plain teaching of heredity and of its latest expression—the science of eugenics.

J. A. LINDsay.
