  
  
  
 
   
  
 
  
 
  
   
  
 
   
   
 
  
   
  
   
  
  
   
 
   
   
  
   
   
  
  

“HERE was a record attendance of
__ Fellows, Members and guests at the
‘mm Galton Dinner which was held at the
‘aldorf Hotel on Tuesday, February 16th,
Bth Lord Horder, President of the Eugenics
besefy, in the Chair. Among the guests of
Society were Mr. R. Cartland, Mr. Colin
ark, Mr. Arnold Forster, Viscount Gage,
. D. V. Glass, Mr. Wilson Harris, Mr.
Ki ;F. Harrod, Mr. H. D. Henderson, Mr.
aglas Jay, Mrs. J. M. Keynes, Dr. R. R.
ezynski, Sir Walter and Lady Langdon, sir Walter Layton, Miss Layton,
; .E. "M. H. Lloyd, Lord and Lady Milne,
Fc. Porter, Mr. H. E. Raynes, the Bishop
&.Rochester, Sir Arthur Salter, Lord and
mdy Wardington, Mr. H. G. Wells, Lady
Rhys) Williams, Dr. Kent Wright, and Prosor James Young.
kintroducing the Galton Lecturer, Mr.
BMf. Keynes, Lord Horder said: We are
7 familiar with the Chairman who says he
is yot going to make a speech, and proceeds
make one. We are equally familiar with
p Chairman who is sure it 1s unnecessary
mintroduce the speaker and proceeds to do
s This evening I propose to be as good as
py. word—Mr. Keynes.
xr. Keynes's lecture on “‘ Some Economic
pasequences of a Declining Population ”’ is
3 ished on page 13.
wr Walter Layton, editor of the Economist
§ chairmen of the News Chronicle, proposis the vote of thanks to the lecturer, said :
BY hen I was asked some time ago to
fepose the vote of thanks to Mr. Keynes,
cepted with alacrity partly because it
Melee interesting to hear what Mr.
nes has to say, and partly because
. as glad to have the opportunity to say
kword about him. It always seems to me
. gh a pity to wait until a man is dead before
¥ & say what you think of him.
there are some people whom one meets
ife whose friendship is at once a stimulus
an inspiration—Mr. Keynes is one of
mem. I first made his acquaintance in Promeor Marshall’s lecture room a generation

rr
- Mm §
Cd 3

= i

, SPEECHES AT THE GALTON DINNER *

ago. He had just taken his degree—and
there was a bad moment when he contemplated taking the new economic tripos as a
sideshow—for it is obvious that if he had sat
for the tripos he would have set so high a
standard that my chance of a First would
have gone west. Fortunately he decided to
take the Civil Service Examination instead,
so all was well, and the war found us lecturing together at Cambridge.

That chapter was ended on August the
fourth or fifth. I recall meeting him at the
corner of Silver Street in the wicker sidecar of a motor-bicycle driven by his brotherin-law, Professor Hill. As they pulled up at
the corner, he told me that he was driving up
to London as he had been telegraphed for by
the Treasury.

If there are any civil servants present,
they will appreciate that the consequence of
that journey was a saving to the nation of
perhaps hundreds of millions as a result of
Keynes’s work during the war, and everyone knows how at the end of it he leapt
into fame with his Economic Consequences
of the Peace. The rest of the story is public
property.

Mr. Keynes is not everybody’s meat. On
some of his qualities there is complete
agreement. His activities are immensely
varied and range from the Russian ballet
and cinema management to trust-company
investment and the control of college estates.
Again, everyone who has read any of his
writings must appreciate his rare literary
gift which is displayed not only in his
sketches, but bursts out occasionally in
purple patches in the most technical of his
books. Some of his phrases have greatly
influenced public opinion. Consider, for
example, the cunning in the word “ reflation,’ which skilfully avoids all the bad
connotations attached to the word “ inflation.”’ “‘ Managed currency ”’ again contains
a very subtle flattery to those who have the
responsibility of management. Indeed,
though it has taken a very long time to
accustom the City of London to the idea,

33
34

I think that the conception has now got
such a hold that it would require a great
upheaval to induce them to surrender the
privileges of ““ management.’”

But on his contribution to opinion, his
judgment on policy and his forecast of
events, there are sharp differences of opinion ;
for Mr. Keynes is one of those who always
contrive to be a centre of controversy. He
is a redoubtable antagonist and most people
think twice before crossing swords with him.
It is said with some truth that he is an
iconoclast, for there is no man who takes
more delight in exploding comfortable orthodoxy. Others point to cases where his
judgment of events has been wrong. No
man is infallible and Keynes himself would
not claim that he has always been right.
But I venture to think that the verdict of
history will be that he has correctly forecast
important economic developments more often
than any contemporary economist or politician of his generation.

It is not my purpose, however, to give a
considered verdict of Mr. Keynes’s career ;
it is rather to say that those who think of him
only as a man of brilliant intellect, as an
accomplished literary stylist, as a hardheaded administrator or as a walking encyclopzedia of the current price of stocks and
shares, only know half the man. The other
half is a very human one. Many here know
him as a loyal friend. He is one of those who
take the greatest trouble in helping the
young men with whom he is in touch at
Cambridge in starting on their future
careers. And for my own part, I know of no
one whom it is more easy to interest in cases
of hardship or of injustice.

Moreover these emotional qualities are
aroused not for individuals merely, but they
colour his political outlook. For he has given
unstintedly of time, money and effort to
causes in which he believes.

Those who can read between the lines will
see this trait revealing itself in the lecture
which he has just delivered. On some points
in his economic argument there will be
differences of opinion. This is hardly an
appropriate occasion to discuss these matters
in detail, but it may well strike this audience

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

    
   
  
  
   
 
  
  
 
  
   
 
   
  
  
   
  
  

as something of a paradox that Mr. Keyng
should be so much perturbed by the posst
bility of unemployment in circumstances a
a stationary or declining population. For t@
the plain man, the phenomenon of unemplo 4
ment would seem to be most threate
when the population is increasing fast.
would add in parentheses, however, that th@
numbers of occupiable males of adult agd
will continue to increase long after the pop
lation has become stationary.)

But Mr. Keynes is right, I think, in saying
that with a stationary or declining population
there must be important economic changes
if the process of adjustment is to take place
without causing dislocation which in turn
would create unemployment. The most!
important of these changes is a reduction off
the proportion of the national income that:
is saved and an increase in the proportion o
the national income that is consumed ; and
these conditions are not consonant in thé
long run with a high rate of interest. ;

Some may think that the results Mr.
Keynes desires will tend to come about of
themselves and that his fears are exaggerated.
But Mr. Keynes sees the possible danger that:
business tradition, financial and industrial
power, and possibly even national policy,
may thwart the beneficent tendency towards high consumption and low interest;
rates. This is a prospect calculated to rouse:
Mr. Keynes’s inbred radicalism ; and I feel:
sure that his intellect and his emotional’
sense of justice were in harmony when he.
penned those words in which he expresses’
the hope that hereafter we may get the best
of both worlds and “ maintain the liberties
and independence of our present system,
while its more signal faults gradually suffer
euthanasia as the importance of capital
accumulation and the rewards attaching to:
it, fall into their proper position in the social
scheme.”’

Many other questions will doubtless have
been present in the minds of Mr. Keynes’s
listeners while he spoke. Is it certain that
the population will decline and if so when
will the process begin? What will be its
political effects both from the point of view
of social structure and of national defence ?
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
      

definitely scientific questions will also
» to be considered, such as preventing
yi propagation of the unfit. All these
Metions are linked inextricably together,
; ‘heredity and environment combine to
Bermine the characteristics of the nation.
ye accept the proposition that quality not
Mntity is to be desired, the prospect of a
; ; or declining population is not
Beething to be feared. But it is one which
_ assuredly raise new problems. Mr.
Riynes’s economic demand is one, though
sorte, of the primary conditions that will
p to produce the ideal nation. It is in this
wwe that his thesis is related to the essential
matiples of this Soczety.
wis, H. D. Henderson: I have much
Masre in seconding this vote of thanks;
git consider that the Eugenics Society has
formed a valuable service in inducing
=’ Keynes to direct his mind to what I
e long felt to be the leading economic
i eocial question of the day and of the
i generation. Like Sir Walter Layton, I
» had a long personal association with
Keynes ; and having been not only a
7 vague but a pupil of Mr. Keynes, I can
mify to the justice of Sir Walter’s phrase as
Mabe stimulus and inspiration which Mr.
br nes has always been to those associated
Bh him. But I hope to have many more
; nities before Mr. Keynes is dead of
Ming what I think of him; and I shall
Mtefore devote my remarks this evening
: ome comments upon his address.
kam in substantial agreement with the
> “main propositions which Mr. Keynes
put-forward, at any rate if I may restate
at @ as follows: first, that the substitution
re } stationary for a rapidly expanding
ae lation offers a potentiality of a more
; 4 improvement in the standard of life
4 hitherto ; secondly, that it is only too
that that potentiality will in practice
sted. But I doubt if the favourable
wrtiality, having regard to the population
Miook that actually confronts us, is as
eke as Mr. Keynes implies ; and I should
p stress on rather different considerations
Ser the second heading. Mr. Keynes has
of fined himself to elaborating one danger,

 

1°0,8°F.

 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 

a,
, alate
7 oe

SPEECHES AT THE GALTON DINNER 35

namely that there may be a prevailing
tendency to save in excess of our investment
needs, and that as a consequence there may
be what he calls a “‘ breakdown of effective
demand.”’ As a practical problem for the
next generation I am not so worried as
Mr. Keynes about that particular danger ;
and I’m disposed to emphasize rather the
concrete difficulties of industrial readjustment which are likely to arise. Before very
long, for example, we shall not need nearly
as many new houses as we do to-day; we
shall not- require nearly as many workpeople in the housebuilding industry, and
it may become necessary accordingly to
transfer many of the workpeople now engaged
in building houses to other industries. It is
never an easy task to transfer people from
one industry to another, and it is the more
difficult to do so the older those people are.
Now I am afraid, though I must not stop to
develop the argument, that we shall have
to shift people from one industry to another
more frequently and on a larger scale when
numbers are stationary or declining than we
had to when numbers were expanding
rapidly. Moreover, a larger proportion of
the people we shall have to shift will be
middle-aged or elderly persons. It is for
reasons of this kind that I expect that we
shall waste a considerable part of our growing productive power per head in the form
of unemployment.

But there is quite a different way in
which we may waste our resources, namely
in the form of heavy expenditure upon
armaments, and as matters are drifting, it
looks as though that is what we shall do.
Of course that depends upon international
political developments which are outside
our scope this evening. But if we are to be
realistic in our speculations as to the future
we must take this likelihood into account.
The prospect of a new international regime
under which peace is felt to be securely
established must unfortunately be regarded
as a distant one; and until that prospect is
realized, it seems to me that we must expect
armament expenditure on a scale that will
make a very big hole in the potentiality of
a rising standard of life. The larger that
36 } THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that potentiality is, the larger is the armament expenditure that nations can afford
without actually reducing their standards of
life ; and the larger accordingly, under the
pressure of competition and of technical
developments, is their armament expenditure
likely to become. It is for that reason that
I feel less concerned than Mr. Keynes about
the rate of interest and effective demand.
Armament expenditure has always made an
important contribution to the aggregate
demand for capital; and I thought that
Mr. Keynes in his references to the Defence
Loan minimized unduly the importance of
the contribution it is likely to make in
future. It is not to be measured by the sums
that the Government may borrow. Armament manufacturers at every stage of
production will require additional capital ;
and I suggest that the total demand for
capital arising in one way or another from
armament expenditure is likely to be very
large. Though I can well believe that
eventually, under more settled international
conditions, the problem stated by Mr.
Keynes will assume real and serious importance, I very much doubt whether over
the next generation on the average of years
the demand for capital, including capital for
armament purposes, will prove insufficient
to carry off our savings, diminished as those
will be by inevitably higher taxation. On
the other hand, this means that the chance
of realizing a large improvement in the
standard of life 1s not so good as it might
otherwise be for about a generation to come.

If we look further ahead, there is another
consideration to be borne in mind, which
brings me to my final observation. Mr.
Keynes threw out almost parenthetically at
the end of his address the admission that it
was possible that the population might
decline too fast. But the prospect with
which we are actually confronted is that of
a population which will eventually decline
very rapidly indeed unless there is an
increase in the average size of the family,
and which, before it declines rapidly, will
age rapidly. Now it is important, I think,
to appreciate that a large part of the potential
advantage to the standard of life from a

declining population accrues in an earl
phase of the movement, in the phase if whicj
we are now, when the proportion of deper
dent children is abnormally low, and whe
the proportion of people in the prime of liff
is abnormally high. The working populatio: Os
of to-day have fewer dependants to suppor
per head than they have ever had to supporg
before, or than they are ever likely to hav
to support again. In a generation’s tim¢
there will be many more elderly persons
either retired or unfit for work, or unem
ployed because demand has shifted from thé
industries in which they are skilled, who will!
have to be supported, directly or indirectly, ;

    
  
  
  

by the labours of a much smaller population:

in the prime of life. By that time, too, I
think it is not unlikely that public opinion:
may have become thoroughly alarmed by
the prospect of a rapid decline in numbers,
so that the size of the family may be increasing once more, and there may be more
dependent children per head. Thus, a
generation hence, the population in the!
prime of life may have to sustain a double:
addition to the burden of dependants that:
is borne by the present generation. In other
words, we are enjoying now in large measure
the jam, such as it is, associated with a
decline in numbers, and incidentally we are
showing what a mess we can make of that
jam. The powder remains for the next
generation.

However black the devil of Malthus may
have deserved to be painted, I suggest that
it is clear that the fall of the birth-rate in
Western countries has already gone too far,
indeed dangerously far. There is no advantage to: the standard of living, not even a
potential advantage, still less one likely to
be realized, in a declining population as
contrasted with a stationary population.
There are many and serious disadvantages
in an ageing population, and it is immediately
for an ageing, and ultimately for a rapidly
declining, population that we are heading
on the basis of our existing fertility rates
which have probably not yet reached their
minimum. I emphasize that, because I feel
there is some danger that Mr. Keynes’s treatment might lead people to underestimate
SPEECHES AT THE GALTON DINNER | | 37

he very real gravity of the situation that allow me to judge at what point the eulogism
mctually confronts us. ceased and the discussion began, so that I
m Lord Horder: We have departed a little was unable to save you from what I hope
rom the tradition of the Galton Dinner in you finally en] joyed. But the resolution really
Milding a discussion of the Galton Lecture. is a vote of thanks; if that has quite been
aay own knowledge of economics does not forgotten I should like to put it from the Chair.

  
  
 
 
 
 

aS .
«
* °
oN
a m
De >
.
aa oe %;
«
cary
at.
* ‘
£
7 >
Se
>
aa
~e
- «
ae Ca
.
x

 
 
 
 
  
 
    
  
  
 
 
   
  
  

JOURNAL OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION
AND INTERNATIONAL LAW

ay TRD SERIES VoL. XIX. Part I FEBRUARY 1937

4 }, ARTICLES — CONTENTS
7 n the Statuality of Law. Contributed by Professor Giorgio Del Vecchio.
e Doctrine of Evasion of the Law in England and America. Contributed by Ronald H. Graveson, Esq.,

4 mt Modifications of French Company Law. Contributed by Maitre Camille Denoyer.
Eympetition and the Law. Contributed by E. Wyndham White, Esq., LL.B.

Comparative Study of the Anti-Trust Laws of the British Dominions and of their Administration, IT.
Contributed by Philip Strickland, Esq., B.A., LL.B.

sibility for Piracy in the Middle Ages. Contributed by Edward Lewis, Esq., M.A.
‘cma and Undefined Crimes. Contributed by Dr. jur. Paul Weidenbaum.

3 wrnational Arbitral Tribunals and the Mexican Claims Commissions. Contributed by Sir John H.
Be Percival, K.B.E.
“ees on Imperial Constitutional Law. Contributed by Professor A. Berriedale Keith, D.C.L., LL.D.

ENOTES. 3. NOTICES OF BOOKS.
_ Annual Subscription, One Guinea.

<a

—— SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION, 1 Elm Court, Temple, E.C.4.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIX, No. 1.

 
