CORRESPONDENCE

The Eugenics Society is not responsible for opinions expressed by correspondents

CORRECTION
Internal Factors in Evolution by L. L. Whyte

Mr. Whyte twice misquoted his reviewer in
the letter which was printed in these columns in
December (1965, 57, 208-9): “‘or of sickle trait”
should read “or for the sickle-cell trait’. “‘It
would have been better if this book had never
been published’”’ should read “It would have
been better if this book had not been published”’.
The reviewer does not maintain that the book
would never have been useful in the past, only
that is not useful at the present time.

It is much regretted that these misquotations
were not corrected before Mr. Whyte’s letter was
printed EDITOR

THE POPULATION EXPLOSION

To the Editor, The Eugenics Review

Sir,—Under the general heading of ““The Population Explosion” two articles by Professor
Richard Titmuss appeared in The Times last
October. The first was entitled ““Child Endowment Reappraisal?” and the second “Plan for
Children in Poverty’. Professor Titmuss, a
member of the Eugenics Society’s Council, had
two theses of much interest to eugenists. One
thesis, that of the second article, was the need
for further help for children in low income
families. He wrote:

Quantitatively, the underprivileged family
of to-day is predominantly the family of three,
four or five children. The primary cause of
their hardships is to found in low earnings.
A secondary cause of child poverty is due to
the absence of a father, or to the fact that the
father or mother is disabled, seriously handicapped, or chronically ill.

and went on to propose that:

One possible answer might be to reduce tax
allowances by stages and to increase family
allowances. But could the latter be raised to
levels adequate for poorer families without
the cost to the Exchequer becoming prohibitive? An alternative approach is to extend the
benefit of the tax allowance to those below
the tax-paying level, and to accompany this
measure with a series of other changes in the
structure of benefits and subsidies.

Almost all members of the Society will agree
with this thesis and welcome Professor Titmuss’s
initiative. The correct principle is that once a
child is born the community must do its best
to minimize any medical, social or educational
handicaps to which the child is prone because
of either genes or family environment.

Professor Titmuss’s second and more controversial thesis, mainly set out in the first
article, is that the present system of tax allowances for children is not in the public interest.
It encourages those with larger incomes to have

_larger families and this is undesirable at a time

53

when Britian is experiencing a western-type population explosion. Such families tend to set the
fashion. He wrote:

All the evidence points in fact to a rise in
the average ultimate family-size of women
married at all ages under forty-five. What may
also be significant is that fertility rates have
increased most sharply in the more middleclass, non-manual regions of the country,
and among women married over the age of
twenty-five. In the taxable income range of
£5,000 and over in 1962-63 about 22 per cent
of all children for whom tax allowances were
claimed were in families of four or more.
Nearly half were in families of three or more.
On the face of it, these seem high proportions
for the upper-income classes. They are
probably surprising figures to those who, in
the 1940s and early 1950s were deploring the
decline in family size among these classes.

In consequence the projected increase in population for the next thirty-six years was two-anda-half times as large as in the last thirty-six years.
He continues:

For this to happen in one of the most
densely-populated and congested countries of
the world could present any government with
appalling problems of urban planning and
renewal, land use, housing and traffic management, to say nothing of the difficulties of
staffing the schools, the hospitals and many
other services. The physical and psychological
disciplines required to maintain any semblance
of environmental and social order might well
diminish the applicability of market principles
in various sectors of the economy. There can
therefore be few thoughtful observers preCORRESPONDENCE

pared to support public policies to encourage

larger familes—particularly among those sec
tions of the population who tend to set
standards of family building habits.

As has been pointed out in the editorial columns of the REVIEW the word “explosion” is an
exaggeration. The long term excess fertility is
perhaps of the order of 10 per cent, an average
family size of 2-4 to 2:5 instead of 2-2. This is
about 100,000 births per year. Gross emigration,
welcome to Australia and Canada, is now of the
order of 200,000 individuals per year, balanced by
an immigration of much the same order. Much
of the excess fertility could, if this was thought
desirable, be simply met by a more restrictive
immigration policy. Most members of the

Society will, in contrast to Professor Titmuss,

welcome the modest increase in average family
size in the middle class (an increase which even
now is perhaps only sufficient to raise their
fertility to replacement level) and will reject the
implication that the more fortunately situated
have been wrong to have more children. The
tax allowance figures Professor Titmuss quotes
are compatible with an average family size of
only 2:2, if, as is probably the case, most families
are complete by the time the father achieves a
taxable income of £5,000 a year. The 1961 Census
fertility tabulations, when these are at last published, will show what the real state of affairs 1s;
but the additional cost to the Exchequer of the
modest increase in family size in the middle
classes should be comparatively trivial.

Much more important is that the children in
these largely successful professional families
will be helping out of all proportion to their
numbers to solve “‘the difficulties of staffing the
schools, the hospitals and many other services’’.
It is very much in the public interest that those
parents, whether “‘better-off” or not, who have
the will and the gifts to raise two sons to become
a good engineer and doctor, and two daughters
to be a good school-teacher and nurse, should
not be discouraged from making the attempt.

It is, however, unlikely that resourceful parents
would be much influenced in their family planning by any reduction in tax allowances for
children. The fears that have been expressed
that an increase in the family allowances to the
poor would lead to an increase in the size of
their families are probably likewise not justified.
The eugenically and socially desirable, and ethically correct, way of achieving a reduction in
average family size is to bring family planning
services, as part of the National Health Service

54

(where necessary by domiciliary visiting on the
lines pioneered by Dr. Peberdy and Dr. Morgan)
to all. This will extend to the poorest the knowledge already available to the more privileged,
and enable all parents to decide the size of their
families. Once all families are planned, it is to
be hoped that average size will be close to replacement rate; but it is also very much to be
hoped that the quartile of the population most
competent as parents, whether their income is
high or low, should plan a family size well above
replacement rate. C. O. CARTER

Institute of Child Health,
Guilford Street, London, WC1

GERMINAL CHOICE
To the Editor, The Eugenics Review

Sir,—With all due respect for Dr. H. J. Muller’s
great ability and contributions and as a fellow
geneticist who is well aware that genetic betterment of our species is both possible and desirable, I would like to make a few comments
bearing on the thesis expressed by him in the
letter originally written for The Scientific American
and printed in THE EUGENICS REVIEW 57, 101104.

The crucial points are: (1) what qualities are
desirable and should be selected for? (2) what
is the genetic basis for these qualities? (3) how
can these qualities be assessed quantitatively?

(1) It is by no means self-evident that the list
given by Muller: fellow feeling, wisdom, mental
and bodily vigour and longevity are the most
important or most useful, however attractive in
a humanitarian kind of way they may appear.
What are we aiming at? Peace on earth, less
suffering, full bellies all round, high living
standards, high creative output, increasing
control of our immediate and distant environment, more techniques, technicians and technologists and many other goals could be mentioned. They demand different approaches and
selection for different qualities which in some
instances may be radically opposite in nature.
There is, further, another character which may
be of great importance, that of plasticity or
behavioural flexibility. Individuals possessing
this character in well-developed measure, would
be more than normally trainable and/or retrainable. This would clearly be of importance in, for
example, a society where automation was continually replacing men.

(2) With the exception of intelligence we know
rather little about the personality characteristics
