SOCIAL PROBLEM FAMILIES IN THE LIMELIGHT

eyes from subjects: of more immediate
import. Galton himself prepared a list of
such topics which we hope will not be.
ignored by the Foundation which carries his
name.* One of these is called “ Co-operation ’’ and calls for “‘ the influence of eugenic

i

117

students in stimulating others.” Is this what
Professor Penrose would class, and stigmatize, as propaganda ?

* “Studies in National Eugenics,” included in the
symposium Essays in Eugentcs, by Francis Galton,
1909.

SOCIAL PROBLEM FAMILIES
IN THE LIMELIGHT
By C. P. BLACKER

HE social problem group, always
of interest to eugenists, has been

A periodically exposed to the limelight
of publicity.

Charles Booth’s Life and Labour of the
People of London (1889), The Royal Commission on the Poor Law (1909), the Royal
Commission on the Care and Control of the
Feeble-minded (1912), the Mental Deficiency
Committee (1930), the Brock Committee
(1934), all provided phases of illumination.
But this is not the place to describe the
effects of these reports. Two recent events
have thrown new light on the subject. The
first was the war-time evacuation of children ;
the second was the Beveridge Report—the
midwife of twins whose comprehensive
growth will transform the internal structure
of our society. J refer to the new Health
Services and to National Insurance.

“The effect of evacuation,” says the
author of an important report which has
had a wide influence (11) ‘‘ was to flood the
dark places with light and to bring home to
the national consciousness that the ‘ submerged tenth’ described by Charles Booth
still exists in our towns like a hidden sore,
poor, dirty, and crude in its habits, an in
tolerable and degrading burden to decent
people forced by poverty to neighbour with
it. Within this group are the ‘ problem
families,’ always on the edge of pauperism
and crime, riddled with mental and physical
defects, in and out of the Courts for child
neglect, a menace to the community, of
which the gravity is gut of.all proportion
to their numbers. It is a serious matter
that no study of this class of the population
exists, and if this book serves only to focus
attention upon the need for one, the authors
will be well satisfied.”’

Comprehensive medical services and comprehensive National Insurance will necessarily draw further attention to this group.
Indeed, investigations of the kind demanded
by the author of the report just quoted are
already in evidence. Five papers by medical
officers of health have been published in the
last two years (I) (3) (4) (8) (9); another
investigation (12) promoted by Dr. Frederick
Grundy, M.O.H. of Luton, and ably carried
out by Mr. Charles G. Tomlinson, senior
Administrative Officer of the Public Health
Department of that town, has just been
published ; and the Council of the Eugenscs
Soctety has recently awarded a sixth Darwin
118

Research Fellowship to facilitate a further
inquiry.
The object of this article is to summarize
the recent investigations and to discuss some
of the problems which may arise from them.
What, in the first place, do we mean when
we talk about a “ social problem group ”
about “‘ social problem families ”’ ?

Definitions

Four tentative definitions have been
advanced by the authors mentioned above.
Mr. Tomlinson (12) designates the families
in question as

Those who, for their own well-being and the
well-being of others require a substantially
greater degree of supervision and help over
longer periods than is usually provided by
existing services.

Dr. C. O. Stallybrass (3), Deputy M.O.H.,
City and Port of Liverpool, tentatively
defines them as

Families presenting an abnormal amount of
subnormal behaviour over prolonged periods
with a marked tendency to backsliding.

Dr. S. W. Savage, County Medical Officer
for Herefordshire, defines the ‘“ problem
mother ”’ in these terms :

A ‘‘ Problem Mother ”’ is a woman who does
not give her children at least the minimum of
care, and refuses to co-operate with the health
visitors and make effective use of the technical
advice available to her.

Dr. R. C. Wofinden (8), Acting Deputy
M.O.H. and V.D. Officer, Rotherham C.B.}
writes :

It is difficult to define such families, but one
is tempted to borrow from a description of
feeble-mindedness and to call them those

families ‘‘ with social defectiveness of such a
degree that they require care, supervision and
control for their own well-being and the wellbeing of others’; one might add “and the
removal of children belonging to such families
to a more satisfactory environment would be in
their interest and the interest of the community.

This author gives a vivid description of a
typical Social Problem Family on page 128.
Another definition, never precisely formulated, but emerging from the experience of
the Wood, Committee (1929) might stress the
fact that these families present mulitple

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

social problems to the various agencies concerned . with education and with social
services.

The Brock Report has the following statement ;:

From some points of view it may be true
that the economic residuum of the population
must always constitute a social problem, but
it is contended that, within this fraction, there
is a smaller, perhaps a much smaller group,
which constitutes a far more acute problem than
the remainder.

Characteristics

The Brock Committee contended that,
within the circle of problem families composing the ‘‘ economic residuum of the popu
lation ’’ (within the problem families viewed
in a statistical perspective), there is to be

found a small and refractory sub-group with

special characteristics. This contention is
supported by several of the writers above
mentioned. Here are some of the features
of the sub-group.

The parents are often of subnormal
mentality, the father being a ne’er-do-well,
the mother a conspicuously incompetent
housewife. Distinguishable from the mental
subnormality, which does not usually amount
to mental deficiency in the legally defined
sense, there is often present in either or both
parents, but commonly in the mother, a
temperamental instability which expresses
itself in fecklessness, irresponsibility, improvidence and indiscipline in the home
wherein chaos reigns. The same quality,
if evinced by the father, may produce occupational instability or long-term unemployment, alcoholic intemperance, gambling
habits, and recidivism (frequent relapse into
petty crime), thus bringing the family into
trouble outside the home. Illegitimacy,
promiscuity, and, among the females, prostitution are common.

The combination of mental backwardness
and temperamental instability, sometimes
coupled with inebriety, results in the birth
of numerous and unwanted children, as well
as in high wastage rates (miscarriage and
still-births). The same combination results
in the parents being very difficult to reeducate. This characteristic of intractable
SOCIAL PROBLEM FAMILIES IN THE LIMELIGHT

ineducability impressed itself on the Pacifist
Service Units (5) who, during the recent war,
set themselves the task of reclaiming such
families in Liverpool, Manchester and Stepney. The records of these units, edited by
Tom Stephens, contain the following remark : .
The number of families who have shown
themselves capable, with the assistance provided
for them, of rising far above their original low
standard of life is not large. Of the families
encountered by the Units, barely more than onetenth have responded in this way (page 9). —

Mental backwardness, temperamental instability, and ineducability are then conspicuous qualities in the small sub-group
distinguished by the Brock Committee as
constituting, within the ‘economic residuum of the population,” a far more acute
problem than the remainder.

A word about these three features. Mental
subnormality alone is not enough to produce
the typical picture. Most mentally subnormal (but not certifiably defective) persons
are educable, though the educative process
is laborious and pains have to be taken over
it. Many such persons hold down simple
jobs in field and factory ; indeed, they often
make reliable and stable workers. They
may even lead harmonious married lives
provided that they do not have many
children.

Temperamentally unstable persons occur
in all classes of society and are of every
degree of intelligence. Many artists and not
a few geniuses are temperamentally unstable.
These persons present problems to their
parents, to their wives or husbands and to
their children, to whom they cause much
stress and unhappiness. But they do not
often fall into complete financial destitution.
Their families come to the rescue in various
ways. They become family rather than
social problems. Many highly intelligent
criminals have unstable characters. They
may make a success of crime, and may end
by organizing it on a large scale. They may
form round themselves rings and gangs and,
in troubled times, may acquire political
power. Their capacity for evil is then great
—far greater than that of the down-and
119

out and ne’er-do-well head of a problem
family. The astute criminal who, perhaps
in association with others like himself,
systematically preys on society, is manifestly a more undesirable, because a more
dangerous, person than the petty recidivist
of low intelligence who is continuously
chargeable. But he belongs to a different
social category. The problem he presents
calls for different methods of diagnosis and
different remedies from the one now under
consideration.

Plenty of socially undesirable individuals
and associations of individuals are to be
found outside the social problem group. ~

The ineducability of problem families is
usually the result both of their mental
subnormality and of their weak and vacillating characters; but in some families the
dullness is the more conspicuous feature,
while in others it is the fecklessness. The
dullness is measurable by tests such as those
applied by Dr. S. W. Savage (4). The temperamental defects are not subject to
measurement ; but they can be roughly
assessed by the history of the individual and
by his reactions to efforts to educate and
reclaim him.

Every investigator of social problem
families pleads for further systematized
study. Some, Dr. A. E. Martin (10) and Mr.
N. R. Tillett (6), for example, think that
these families should be the concern of the
Ministry of Health or the Ministry of Education. But how should they be investigated? We can learn much from the inquiries mentioned above.

Recorded Surveys

The starting-point in most cases was a
specific group which in one way or another
was causing difficulties. Dr. S. W. Savage,
whose definition of the problem mother was
quoted above, approached his group vza the
children, whose unsatisfactory condition was
reported to him by school medical officers,
health visitors, school nurses, and the
N.S.P.C.C. Eighty-nine families were reported. “In all these cases,” he writes,
“the homes were visited and the mothers
IZ20

were instructed by the health visitors.
When the mothers persistently failed to take
advantage of the teaching, and continued
in their inefficient domestic practices, the
family was recorded in the problem group.”
Where there was doubt, a special visit was
made by the supervisor of the health visiting
staff. Dr. Savage himself personally visited
most of the families.

Dr. C. F. Brockington, M.O.H. of the West
Riding of Yorkshire, used as the starting
point of his inquiry children who, for various
causes, had been removed from their homes
or had become homeless (1). These he calls
‘“unparented children.” Of a total of 1,195
children from three parts of the country,
some two-thirds were removed from their
parents on the initiative of the local authorities or by order of the magistrates because
of the unsuitability of their surroundings.

Dr. R. C. Wofinden has co-ordinated information about 243 families in Rotherham,
the names being supplied to him by health
visitors and school nurses during the years
1939-44 (8). These 243 families comprised
85 who were persistently verminous, 51 who
were persistently scabietic, and 96 who were
referred to the N.S.P.C.C. The figures,
which are only an approximation, showed
that the 243 families included gor children.

Mr. N. R. Tillett’s report on derelict
families was based on the records of sanitary
inspectors and health visitors, which were
included in the Public Health Department’s
files (6).

Mr. C. G. Tomlinson says of his investigation (12): “Certain outstanding cases, including those which constituted a hard core
of persistent and recurring lousiness, were
already well known to the senior officers of
the Public Health Department, and these
formed the nucleus round which the basic
data for the survey were accumulated.”
Health visitors, district midwives and sanitary inspectors were then asked to submit
particulars of all families known to them
which fell within a definition based upon
that quoted below (p. 127) by Dr. Wofinden.
At a later stage, school inquiry officers, the
borough treasurer, the probation officer, the
relieving officer, and the N.S.P.C.C. in
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

spector were invited to submit lists of suspect
problem families. |

We may here consider earlier and more
comprehensive inquiries. Dr. E. O. Lewis,
the investigator of the Mental Deficiency
(Wood) Committee, took as his starting
point mentally defective persons, for the
most part children. In the process of ascertaining the presence of these in his six
sample areas, he made inquiries of such
statutory and voluntary bodies as might be
in a position to give information. . He found
that the names of the same families were
supplied by more than one of the agencies,
and was thus led to the conception of a
group which presented multiple social problems. |

Mr. E. J. Lidbetter* was concerned with
families and persons who were in receipt of
public assistance. The records he investigated were very complete and went back
for more than a century. He was led into
an ever-widening maze of interrelated
families of high fertility which exhibited
much insanity, mental defect, and hereditary physical disease as well as heavy
wastage rates. Mr. Lidbetter’s families were
more than the isolated units consisting of
parents and children which are described as
“families”? by most other investigators ;
they were broadly ramifying and ascending
connections comprising many parent-child
units. His is a unique genealogical study
covering three or four generations.

A book I edited, published in 1937, contains papers by various authors on aspects
of the social problem group. Each author
approached the group from a special angle
—mental retardation in children, mental
disorder, epilepsy, inebriety, recidivism,
prostitution, etc.

What questions are raised by these investigators? The first is quantitative.
What are the dimensions of the problem
group? How many problem families are

* Heredity and thé Sovial Problem Group, Edward
Arnold, 1933.

t A Social Problem Group? Qxford University
Press, 1937.
SOCIAL PROBLEM FAMILIES IN THE LIMELIGHT

there in a town, a county or other administrative unit? The Wood Committee tentatively suggested that they comprised as
much as 10 per cent of the whole country’s
population. Many to-day regard this estimate as too large. As remarked above, the
Brock Committee distinguished a sub-group
within the group. Their views are borne out
by several of the recent investigators, Dr.
A. Querido, the Director of Mental Hygiene
of the City Medical Service of Amsterdam,
distinguishes three groups of problem famiconditional-unsocial and the unconditionalunsocial (2), The first is easily reclaimed ;
the second founders without outside help;
of the third he writes: “ social assistance is
powerless to prevent their deterioration.”
Dr. Savage excluded from his original list of
families those who responded to the instructions of health visitors (4). And Mr.
Tomlinson (12) removed from his first list of
451 problem families no less than 84, wherein
the misfortunes which had plunged them into
dependency were outside their control.
some of these families he classified as ‘‘ social
and biological casualties’; others displayed problems which were resolved in the
course of the inquiry. After the subtraction of these and certain other categories, there remained 167 families whose

predicaments were partly or even largely

home-made.

Dr. A. E. Martin (9) discusses three groups
of parents who neglect their children. The
first group is characterized by ignorance,
the second by wilful neglect, the third by
mental defect in one or both parents. The
third group is the most intractable: ‘‘ it is
a nightmare to all concerned.’ Dr. Martin’s
second group—that showing “ wilful neglect ’—is marked by what I have above
called temperamental instability rather than
by mental subnormality. The parents here
comprised are in many cases ‘‘ aware of the
neglect, but are either too lazy to look after
their children properly or, alternatively,
allow their time, energy or money to be
frittered away on outside interests—alcohol,
gambling, excessive visits to entertainments,
and immoral living.”

121

Here then are four authorities who discern,
within a large statistically conceived problem
group, a smaller sub-group displaying what
might be described as innately inferior
qualities.

However satisfactory our definition of a
social problem family, difficulties of interpretation will arise in the borderline case.
The demarcations of the group, like the
frontiers of neurosis and of mental deficiency,
depend on where one draws the line, A
small difference in standards may make a
big difference to the numbers included in a
category arbitrarily drawn within a con~
tinuous series.

Apart from difficulties. of definition and
interpretation, there are further uncer.
tainties introduced by varying environmental factors. The extreme case is little
affected by fluctuations of his surroundings.
But there are many marginal cases where
such changes have noteworthy effects.

A severe cycle of unemployment may
blight the industries of an area, throwing
many families into the extremities of want.
Conversely, a favourable trade cycle or local
development of industry may bring prosperity, lifting many families.out of penury.
A rapidly expanding and prosperous town
with good social services will show different
features from old-established cities like
Liverpool or Glasgow which are pock-marked
with age-old slums. London with its densely
populated boroughs in the East End and
elsewhere, containing relatively static populations, probably has unique features.

Rural populations again differ from urban.
Life is more stable and less exacting in
country districts. There are fewer distractions and temptations to unwise spending and immoral behaviour. There is
probably more neighbourliness and goodwill.
The idiot who is kindly treated in a village,
where he may be accepted almost as an institution,: would be lost in an urban or
metropolitan slum.

These considerations make it difficult to
answer what I have called the quantitative
question-—how large is the social problem
group? But they do not make the question
meaningless. The question continuously
I22

obtrudes itself whenever a problem family
impinges on the educational and social
services.

A last comment on the quantitative problem. One can, I think, safely predict that
the frontiers of the group will become more
widely embracing in the measure that our
educational and social services improve and
our consciences become more discriminating.
Such has been the development in the three
comparable fields of mental disorder, mental
defect and crime.

The frontiers of mental disorder are rapidly
widening. A hundred years ago none but the
grossest form of lunacy was a public concern ;
now local authorities may provide clinics for
the treatment of neuroses and psychopathic
personalities.

The frontiers of mental defect were formerly drawn by legal definitions of certifiable
groups; now they include subnormal or
retarded persons who are far from certifiable.
Indeed, the Wood Committee proposed to
bracket together in a single educational
category feeble-minded .and_ retarded
children.

In our dealings with crime, we are no longer
solely preoccupied with detecting and punishing the criminal. We now concern ourselves with the juvenile delinquent, whom, by
means of the probation system, the Borstal
Institutions and the approved schools, we
do our best to reclaim. The demarcations
of the social problem group may similarly
widen as we progress in social enlightenment. ;

A ‘word, parenthetically, about the high
fertilities of these families, as to which
misunderstanding can easily arise. Their
high fertility 1s the cause of many, perhaps
of most, of their problems. Problem families
are selected as such largely as a result of this
feature. Without the high fertility, many
of the relevant predicaments would not arise.
There can be no cruelty, neglect, lousiness,
homelessness and mental defect of children
if there are no children. On the day I write
these lines I saw in a psychiatric clinic a
woman of low mentality whose husband was
a tramp. There were complications after
her first pregnancy, and her womb was re
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

moved. Had she not been thus sterilized,
she would almost certainly have had a
sequence of unwanted pregnancies and her
large family would have presented multiple
social problems. As things are, she may
well escape unfavourable notice. The fertility of social problem families is therefore
not to be treated as on a par with the fertility
of, say, miners, agricultural workers, or even
the Registrar-General’s Group V.
Agricultural workers, for example, become
subjects of demographic study solely because
they are agricultural workers. Their fertility has nothing to do with their becoming
such subjects. Not so the social problem
families. It is therefore hardly surprising,
it is indeed almost inevitable from the design
of the inquiry, that their fertility should be

high.
Methods of Inquiry

From the quantitative problem I now turn
to the connected question of method. Social
problem families are well recognized by the
authorities of our educational, medical and
social services as well as by voluntary
agencies. Such families are a thorn in the
flesh of the M.O.H.; they are responsible
for ugly blots in the copy-book which he is
concerned to make neat and clean.

What can we learn from the recorded
investigations above noted? Each was
concerned with a special problem—Dr.
Martin with child neglect, Dr. Savage with
intelligence and infant mortality in problem
families, Dr. Brockington with homelessness
in children, Mr. Tomlinson with families in
trouble of different’ kinds, Dr. E. O. Lewis
with mental defectives, Mr. Lidbetter with
families in receipt of relief. We may note
in passing the preoccupation with children’s
problems. By these different approaches,
the separate investigators were led into the
same “* waste land ’’—that inhabited by the
problem families. But the methods used in
the separate inquiries had a common feature.
Statutory and voluntary .bodies were approached, and asked for a list of names of
families which had caused trouble. The
search might be for mental defect, for homelessness, for lousiness, for child neglect, for
SOCIAL PROBLEM FAMILIES IN THE LIMELIGHT

infahtile mortality, for cruelty. Whatever
the search, much the same authorities were
approached. Let us first consider the problems and then the authorities concerned, with
them.

List A : Social Problems

1. Families containing juvenile
quents.

2. Families from which it has been necessary to remove children—i.e. families
containing “‘ unparented children’’ (1).

3. Families containing lousy, scabietic,
dirty or neglected children (8).

. 4, Families wherein parents are known by
the N.S.P.C.C. to have ill-treated their
children.

5. Families with high miscarriage, stillbirth and infantile mortality rates (4).

6. Families which have been chronically
dependent on public funds (“chronic
dependency ”’ could be defined).

7. Families which exhibit the features
mentioned in the Wood Report as
characterizing the social problem
group—i.e. mental defect and retardation, mental disorder, epilepsy, inebriety, prostitution, unemployability,
and crime or recidivism.

delin
By a “family ”’ is here meant either a
married couple and their children or else a
sibship and its dependants. Thus a father,
mother and dependent children would constitute a family. So would a sibship of
grown-up persons with dependent children.

In the first five of the above categories,
the circumstances which bring the families
into notice all relate to children. A list of
families, based on these five categories,
would therefore be very likely to contain
families of high fertility. Childless families
would be automatically excluded. But they
would not be so excluded from the sixth
and seventh categories.

Here is a list (which could easily be
expanded) of some of the officers of statutory
and voluntary bodies who might be asked
to give particulars of families notorious to
them in respect of any of the seven features
or groups of features mentioned above :

123
list B: Authorities concerned with Social
Problems

r. Medical Officers of Health and, if the
posts are established, Medical Officers
of Mental Health. |

. Head Teachers of Schools.

. School Medical Officers.

. School Nurses.

. School Attendance Officers.

. N.S.P.C.C. Inspectors and heads of
other voluntary organizations, of which
there may be many; among them the
Family Welfare Association, till lately
the Charity Organization Society.

7. Health Visitors.
8. Sanitary Inspectors.
g. District Nurses and Midwives.

10. Public Assistance Officers.

II. Probation Officers.

12. Relieving Officers.

13. Chief Constables.

14. Borough Treasurers.

15. Directors and Social Workers of Child

Guidance and Child Psychiatric clinics.

16. Directors and Social Workers of Psychiatric Clinics for adults.

17. Superintendents and Social Workers of.
‘Mental Hospitals and Certified Institutions.

18. Officials of Labour Exchanges.

Aum & GO dN

Of the eighteen groups of persons above
mentioned, the first six are specially concerned with children ; and so are several of
the remaining twelve. The social problems
with which most of these eighteen officers
would be concerned are obvious. The

borough treasurer, whose help was invoked

by Mr. C. G. Tomlinson in Luton, was able
to throw light on the indebtedness of some
of the families. The chief constable and the
probation officer could throw light on crime,
recidivism, juvenile delinquency, inebriety
and prostitution. Health visitors, sanitary
inspectors and district nurses and midwives
know what the homes are like from the in- |
side, and are in a good position to make a
general assessment of the tenants.

Having decided what are the family
problems on which he wants information,
and having settled what agencies he is going
124

to approach, the investigator can proceed in
one or two ways. Firstly, he might build
on a selected group as a starting point ; or
secondly he might conduct his inquiry on a
broad front, without special preoccupation
with a single group. |

According to the first method, the investigator might compile a list of families
exhibiting some specific problem (see List A),
such as mental defect (E. O. Lewis), homelessness (C. F. Brockington), chargeability
to public funds (E. J. Lidbetter), etc.

The first assemblage of names the investigator might call his “‘ primary list.” This
list could then be circulated to as many of
the authorities in List B as he felt inclined
to consult, asking them to give brief particulars of any family mentioned in the list
which had been brought to their notice, and
further requesting that they should add to
the list the names ef any other families which
were to them notorious. Several lists of
families would result ; the lists would be as
numerous as the authorities in List B who
had been consulted. |

According to the second possible method
of inquiry above mentioned, the investigator
dispenses with what was above called a
‘ primary list.’”” He might designate some
or all of the social problems mentioned in
List A, and invite some or all of the persons
mentioned in List B to give him the names
of families which they connected with these
problems. Again there would result a
number of different lists.

Something can, I think, be said in favour
of both methods of inquiry. The first,
wherein a “ ptimary list” is prepared and
circulated, gives to the authorities in List B
something to bite on, thus exciting their
interest and enlisting early their co-opera
tion in the inquiry. But at the same time,

the “‘primary list” might provide an
element of bias by drawing special attention
to the families whose names are mentioned.
The second method, wherein no “ primary
list ’’ is prepared and the inquiry is carried
forward on a broad front, may put a severe
strain on busy people. The spontaneous
preparation, without aids, of a long and
difficult list may call for more time than could

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

be readily spared, and co-operativeness might
be lost.

But whichever method is followed, there
will eventually result a number of lists.
These should be analyzed with a view to
determining the frequency with which the
members of the.same families occur on more
than one list. This frequency will reflect
the multiplicity of the social problems presented which could be shown on a consolidated list. The more numerous the mentions of a family, the mofe eligible would
it become for recognition as a problem family.
The investigator, when in possession of his
consolidated and classified list, might think
it worth while to call a conference of as many
as possible of the persons consulted in
List B, and to go through the consolidated
list with them so that their various views
could be compared. A penultimate list of
families to be visited by a psychiatric social
worker, health visitor or other competent
investigator could thus be prepared by
appropriate consultation. Some investigators might wish still further to prune this
list as a result of later experience. Thus,
Dr. Savage (4) included among his 89
problem families only those wherein “ the
mothers persistently failed to take advantage of the instruction and teaching of his
health visitors’’; and Mr. Tomlinson removed from his penultimate list 84 families
among whom were included those who were
deemed to be “ biological and social casualties,” those whose problems were resolved
in the course of the inquiry, and those who,
on being visited, were found to be outside
the spirit of his definition. The final list
would therefore comprise families which
exhibited multiple social problems and whose
home conditions, as seen by an investigator,
conformed with such definitions as had been
laid down as guiding the inquiry. The
object of an assessment of the family by an
investigator who visits the home is to
separate the reclaimable from the irreclaimable families; the distinction is practically
important because the two groups require
quite different handling.

If different surveys—of whole counties, of
industrial areas, of agricultural areas, of
SOCIAL PROBLEM FAMILIES IN THE LIMELIGHT

urban areas—were uridertaken and _ their
findings compared, a general similarity of
method should be attainable. Minor variations in standards of assessment could hardly
be avoided ; but in due course an estimate
of the national dimensions of the social
problem group should be possible.

In attempting to standardize a method of
investigation, it would probably be wise to
begin with a small administrative area with
a population of under a hundred thousand.
The thorough inquiry here possible should
enable us to develop the right technique for
use in large towns which provide the real
setting of the social problem group.

Disposal

It is clear that ascertainment logically
precedes disposal; nevertheless disposal is
discussed in the recent articles above considered. Two main proposals only will here
be mentioned.

Here is the first. Three writers propound
closely similar suggestions as to the allocation of responsibilities for problem families.
These responsibilities, they believe, should
be vested in an accredited individual or
authority. Many persons and agencies, remarks Dr. C. O. Stallybrass (3), take cognizance of problem families. “‘ Should there
not be,” he asks, “‘some specific body
entrusted with the duty of bringing first-aid
[to these families], to whom this information
can be brought?” Of a city of some
100,000 inhabitants with a very good health
record, Mr. N. R. Tillett wrote in April
1945 (6) : - .

One new valuable approach to the problem
has been made. ... Some eighteen months
ago the Council appointed a ‘‘ Home Adviser ”
with the spécial task of visiting derelict and
near-derelict households and endeavouring by
advice and persuasion to rescue them.

Dr. A. E. Martin (9) writes :

The first essential of any scheme is that thére
would be some person on the central staff of the
Health Authority to whom all cases may be
reported, who is available for advice, and who
can devote a portion of his time to the administration and supervision of the scheme... .
For convenience of description, this person will
be termed ‘‘ the administrative medical officer,”

£25

@iid it will be shown how the whole scheme will

revolve around him, and depend fof its success

upon the energy and enthusiasm with which
he is able to inspiré his colleagues and assistants.

These three suggestions, which contain the
same essential idea, surely reflect common
sense. The obvious way of dealing with
any obtrusive social problem is to make some
designated person responsible.

€ second main proposal mentioned
above is one advanced by Dr. A. Querido as
a result of experience in Holland. This is a
bold proposal. It amounts to no less than
that we should be empowered to place whole
families, as we do single individuals, under
supervision and restraint. Dr. Querido
says (2): “ The idea of curing the family,
as the individual mental patient is cured,
seems to me the only solution.” He proposes first that the obstinately refractory
family should be placed in an observation
camp—a place analogous to the observation
ward.

“Hete a psychiatric, medical and social investigation will take place, in order to obtain
an accurate analysis and diagnosis. It will be
decided whether the family will remain together
or whether some members, especially the older
children, will be educatéd elsewhere. During
the observation, the family is isolated from soc
contact outside the camp.

After the necessary period of observation,
during which a diagnosis (or rather an
assessment) of the family’s condition has
been made, the family is transferred from a
place with a diagnostic to one with a therapeutic orientation. This is the education
camp. “These are small camps, richly
differentiated, situated throughout the
country and each providing for about fifteen
families.” ‘Contact with the outside world
is here encouraged. The children go to the
local schools; work is provided in farm,
factory ard development scheme ; furniture
and utensils are provided. In short, the
family undergoes a supervised course of
social rehabilitation which has some of the
features of a system of probation. If the
family responds appropriately, it is returned
to its native town or village, where it still
remains under supervision for a time. If
all goes well, the supervision is abrogated by
126

the judge. Dr. Querido’s article ends with
these words :

The course proposed involves a serious infringement of personal liberty and offers possibilities of abuse. On the other hand, the
problem family offers serious dangers, is an infectional focus to society and presents an intolerable state of human indignity, so that
strong measures are justified.

Dr. Wofinden’s definition, quoted above,
of a social problem family was borrowed from
the legal definition of feeble-mindedness.
Here is the germ of the idea, carried to its
logical conclusion by Dr. Querido, of applying to “‘ sociopathic ”’ families the system of
probation and perhaps of restraint which we
are by law entitled to apply to psychopathic
and psychotic individuals. The idea is one
which the social therapist may find worth
while to bearin mind. .

Eugenic Considerations

It will have been noted that, in the above
discussion, stress has been laid upon the
tribulations of children. Children are the
special concern of eugenists, for they are the
only visible embodiments of posterity. In

the Society’s statement of Aims and Objects,

and in the Memorandum of evidence it submitted to the Royal Commission on Population, reasons were given for thinking that
eugenically valuable qualities were especially to be found among parents who produced, by intention and design, numerous
children and provided for them happy and
healthy homes. _

But this picture has a converse. What
about parents who, through fecklessness and
stupidity, misbeget a sequence of unwanted
children who are then so ill-treated or neglected that they have to be removed from
their parents’ homes ? Are not such parents
the best available examples of the eugenically undesirable type ?

We estimate the eugenic value of parents
indirectly by the way they discharge their
responsibilities as parents ; and we assess it
directly by the qualities of their children.
The indirect assessment can be made earlier
in the lifetime of the parent than the direct ;
for a happy and healthy home can be dis
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tinguished from a brutal and squalid home
however young the children; while the
qualities of the children cannot be adequately
assessed at the earliest till they have reached
school age.

The approach to the problem family vza
its children is therefore one which should
commend itself to us on eugenic grounds.
That it also commends itself on humanitarian grounds bears out the principle, so
often stressed by Galton, that eugenics
substitutes for the intrinsic ruthlessness and
cruelty of nature the quality of foresight, the
ideal of co-operativeness and the spirit of
compassion which he regarded as among the
prerogatives of man.

I am indebted to Mr. D. Caradog Jones,
to Dr. E. O. Lewis, to Professor A. J. Lewis,
and to Dr. D. V. Glass, for helpful criticisms
of an early draft of this article.

Recent Papers on the Social Problem Group
(Sence 1943)

I give the following publications in the
order of their recency, number 12, the most
recent, being out of order. An impression is
received that the subject is exciting a widening interest. The month given is that of
publication.

I. June 1946. ‘‘ Homelessness in Children,’’ by
C. F. Brockington, M.D. Camb., D.P.H., Barristerat-Law, M.O.H. West Riding of Yorkshire.—
Lancet.

2. May 1946. ‘“‘ The Problem Family in the
Netherlands,’’ by Dr. A. Querido, Director,
Department of Mental Hygiene, City Medical
Services, Amsterdam.—The Medical Officer.

3. March 1946. ‘‘ Problem Families,’” by C. O.
Stallybrass, M.D., D.P.H., Deputy M.O.H., City
and Port of Liverpool. —The Medical Officer.

4. January 1946. ‘“‘ Intelligence and Infant
Mortality in Problem Families,” by S. W. Savage,
M.D., D.P.H., County M.O. H. Herefordshire.—
British Medical Journal.

5. Undated 1945. ‘‘ Problem Families. An
experiment in Social Rehabilitation.’’ Edited by
Tom Stephens, Pacifist Service Units, 6 Endsleigh

Street, London, W.C.1.

6. April 1945. ‘‘ The Derelict Family,” by N. R.
Tillett.—New Statesman and Nation.
PROBLEM

3. March 1945. “ The Social Problem Group :
Poverty and sub-normality of Intelligence,” by
D. Caradog Jones, M.A. Reprinted from the
Canadian Bar Review. Published by the Canadian
Bar Association, Osgoode Law School, Tororto,
Canada.

8. September 1944. ‘“‘ Problem Families,’ by
k. C. Wofinden, M.D., B.S., D.P.H., Acting
Deputy M.O.H. and V.D. Medical Officer, Rotherham C.B.—Public Health.

9. Summer 1944. “ Child Neglect. A Problem
of Social Administration,’”’ by A. E. Martin, M.D.,
D.P.H., Assistant County M.O.H., Leicestershire
County Council.—Public Administration Summer
Number.

PROBLEM

FAMILIES 127

10. Undated 1944. “ The Care of Negtected
Children.”” Special Report by the Assistant School
Medical Officer. Leaflet by A. E. Martin, MLD.,
D.P.H.

II. 1943. ‘‘ Our Towns: AClose-up.’”” Women’s
Group on Public Welfare (in association with the
National Council for Social Service}.~Oxford
University Press. Booklet.

12. The paper just published (Oct. 1946) of Mr.
Charles G. Tomlinson, B.A. (Admin.), Senior.
Administrative Officer, Public Health Department,
Luton, is entitled: ‘‘ Families in Trouble: An
Inquiry into Problem Families in Luton.”

FA MILIES*

By R. C. WOFINDEN, M_.D., D.P.H.
Acting Deputy M.O.H., Rotherham.

life during the recent war and the

newly awakened interest in social
medicine has served to focus attention once
again on a section of the population origtnally described by Charles Booth as the
“submerged tenth.’’ Withm this section
are the problem families. These families for
one reason or another have not kept pace
with social progress and are a brake on the
wheels. They are the despair of health departments, education authorities, N.S.P.C.C.
inspectors, and, until recently, of anyone
who attempted to improve their lot m life.
They masquerade under a variety of names
—problem families, social problem families,
derelict families, handicapped families and
unsatisfactory households.

Definition
In spite of the mmltiplicity of names no
accepted definition of such families has yet

"| ie tremendous upheaval in family

* An address delivered at a conference on ‘‘ Problem
Families,’’ held at Manchester on June 22nd, 1946.

been produced. In 1944 I defined them as
“families with social defectiveness of such
a degree that they require care, supervision
and control for thetr own well-being and
for the well-being of others.” Dr. Burn,
Medical Officer of Health of Salford, has
suggested as a working definition ‘‘ families
where the standards of home life are so
gravely defective as to damage the normal
development of children ”’ ; and Dr. Stallybrass, Deputy Medical Officer of Health of
Liverpool, has suggested “‘ famihes presenting
an abnormal amount of subnorma! behaviour
over prolonged periods with a marked tendency to backsliding.” AIl these definitions
suffer from a certain vagueness which, from
the point of view of comparative study, is a
distinct handicap. The Pacifist Service
Units have also pointed out the disadvantages arising from the lack of a suitable
definition, and the families of their study
have been selected merely by the fact of
their being referred for assistance.

But does it really matter that a definition,
