 

The Eugenics Bducation Society.

' ‘President: Mayor Lzonarp Darwin.
Hon. Secretarics: Mrs. A. C. Gotro. Dr, E. ScHustsEr. ‘on. Treasuret: Mk. VON FLEISCHL,
‘bon. Members:

THE Rr. Hon. A. J. BALrour, P.C., F.R.S. SIR ARCHIBALD GEIKIE, K.C.B., F.R.S.:
HER GRACE, THE DUCHESS OF MARLBOROUGH. PROFESSOR A. WEISMANN.
Vice=Presidents :

Dr. RICHARD ARTHUR, M.L.A., President, New South Wales Branch.
Sin JAMES Barr, President, Liverpool Branch. _ Dr. BENHAM, President, Dunedin Branch, New Zealand.
- Mr. H. W. BisHop, S.M., President, Christchurch Branch, New Zealand. -- ,
Sir JAMES CRICHTON-BRowng, F. RS., Ex-President, 1908 to 1909. —
BisHor D’Arcy, President, Belfast Branch.
ProF. STARR JORDAN, Chairman, Education Committee, American Genetic ‘Association.
PRoFEssSOR H. B. Kirk, M.A., President, Wellington Branch.
Mr. W. C. MARSHALL, M.A., ” President, Haslemere Branch.
THe RIGHT Hon. Lorp Mouton, P.C., F.R.S., President, Birmingham Heredity Society.
Mr. J. L. Orrer, J.P., President, Brighton Branch.
M. EDMOND PERRIER, President, Société Francaise d’Eugénique.
Dr. A. PLOETZ, President, Internationale Gesellschaft fir Rassen Hygiene.
PROFESSOR E. B. PouLTON, F.R.S., President, Oxford Branch.
ProFr. SERGI, President, Comitato Italiano per gli Studi di Eugenica.
Pror. SEWARD, F.R.S., President, Cambridge Eugenics Society. ~
BisHOP WELLDON, President, Manchester Branch.

f _ 7 Members of Council:
Mr. CROFTON BLACK. Mrs. HENDERSON. Dr. ARCHDALL REID,
Sir E. BRABROOK, C.B. - Major HIttxs, F.R.S. Mr. JOHN RUSSELL,
Mrs. THEODORE CHAMBERS. - VERY REV. W. R. INGE, D.D.,; Mr. F. C. S. ScHitigr, D.Sc.
Hon. Sir J. Cocksurn, K.C.M.G. Dean of St. Paul’s. _ Pror. A. ScHusteEr, F.R.S.
Mr. R. NEwTON-CRANE. Miss KIRBY. Mr. Epcar SCHUSTER, D.Sc.
Mr. A. E. CRAWLEY. Mr. ERNEST Lang, F.R.C.S. Dr. C. G. SELIGMANN.
Sir H. CUNNINGHAM, K.C.I.E. Pror. MACBRIDE. Pror. C, SPEARMAN.
Dr. LANGDON Down. LaDy OWEN-MACKENZIE. Pror. J. A. THOMSON. .
Mr. ‘HAVELOCK ELLIs. Mr. Ropert Monp. Dr. A. F. TREDGOLD, .
ProF. J. FINDLAY.. Dr. F. W. Mott, F.R.S. Mrs. ALEC TWEEDIE.
Mr. E. G. WHELER GALTON. Mr. G. P. MupGE. Mr. W. C. D. WHETHAM, F.R.S.
Mr. M. GREENWOOD JUN. M.R.C.S. Mrs. G. PooLry. Dr. DOUGLAS WHITE. ~
Dr. W. HADLEY. Mr. W. Rea, M.P. Dr. FLORENCE WILLEY.
; . Branch Representatives on the General Council, 1914-15.
| Birmingbam:
Mr. Carzy GILSON, Mr. HUMPHREY HUMPHREYS. ' Mr. PeRcIvVAL MILLs.
Liverpool:
Mr. R. T. BODEY, Mr. R. D. LAuRIE. ALD. T. R. BULLEY.
Dbaslemere : Manchester ; weltast:
Mr. W. C MARSHALL. DR. MUMFORD. ProF. J. A. LINDSAY,
Rew Zealand: “Orford:
THe Yon. T. A. MACKENZIE, - , Dr. E. SCHUSTER.
Rew South Wales: Brighton:
(70 be appointed. } - - Mr. A. J. Harn. ~
Research Committee : _ Education Committee:
"Mr. Epcar Scuuster, D.Sc., Chairman. — Mrs. T. CHAMBERS, Secretary,
Mr. A. M. Carr-SAUNDERS, ‘Secretary, _ Pror. J. A. THOMSON.
- Pror. MACBRIDE. Pror. FINDLAY.
Pror. SPEARMAN. mo Miss BULCRAIG. /
Dr. TREDGOLD. Miss TRENCH.
Dr. GREENWOOD. Mr. Drxon KINGHAM.
Mr. LIDBETTER. Mrs. GOTTO.
Mrs. GOTTO. :

Publication Committee: This Committee consists of the Executive Officers of the Society, Chairmen and Secretaries of Sub-Committees and
Branch representatives.

N.B.—Other Committees are appointed” from time to time for special purposes.
“ Eugenics ts the study of agencies under social control that may improve or impair
the racial qualities of future generations either physically or mentally.”
Sa AR rl Sa Pe EIR CA I SL SO
OBJECTS. ,
I. .—Persistently to set forth the National Importance of Eugenics in order to modify public opinion, and create a sense of respon
-sibili the res of bringing all matters pertaining to human parenthood under the domination of Eugenic ideals.
™ tt mT Spread a knowledge of the Lave’ of Heredity so far as they are surely known, and so far as that knowledge may.affect he

improvement of the race.
11I1.—To further Eugenic Teaching, at home, in the schools, and elsewhere.
° , "SUBSCRIPTION. ome Gul ,
Membershi - = = . One. nea per Annum.
Associate Membership - - Five Shillings per Annum.
PRIVILEGES.

Attendance. at: Lectures, Discussions, and General Meetings, Use of Library.
, Members only receive THE EUGENICS REVIEW free.
- ° Forms of Application for Membership and Associate Membership and full particular o! the Society
i can be obtained of t ae Hon. Secretaries.

OFFICES: Kingswa w.c.
OFFICE HOURS: 10.30 a.m. t ey pin. Saturdaye 10.50 a.m, to 1 pm.
NOTES AND COMMENTS.

Eugenics and War.—The subject of ‘‘ Eugenics and the
War ’”’ has been treated from many and various points of view,
in many parts of the country, and by different speakers; the
articles on the subject, of both-a scientific and popular nature,
one and all bear witness to the fact that we are alive to the
present situation and to the effect it cannot fail to have on the
quality of future generations. Professor Arthur Thomson
lectured before the Belfast branch of the Society early in April;
Dr. Ethel Williams spoke in Newcastle a few days later, taking
eugenics as the subject for one of the lectures in an educational
course given to the Newcastle Society for Women’s Suffrage.
A course of three public lectures was given in Brighton under the
Chadwick Trust by Dr. C. W. Saleeby on ‘‘ Racial Hygiene
and the Wastage of War.’’ Lectures have also been given by
representatives of the Society to the Workers Educational
Association, and other bodies.

The War must inevitably prove disastrous as regards the
aims and hopes of eugenists; for many social reforms, almost
within sight a few months ago, will be postponed probably for
years. It therefore behoves those who have the interests
of the race at heart to do all in their power to continue to spread
a knowledge of eugenics, in order that those social readyjustments that must follow the War may be calculated to follow the
lines desired, and also that facts and figures now available
may be collected and tabulated for future service.

‘‘War Babies” and Eugenics.—The problem of ‘“* war
babies ’’ assumed enormous proportions in the Press early in
April, but, to the great relief of all, the evidence gradually
coming to hand from those organisations in direct touch with
the girls and young women of the country show that matters
were grossly exaggerated. People who had expected an
illegitimate birth-rate of several hundreds of thousands during
the year realise that there will not be any necessity of
putting into effect any of the drastic schemes they had
132 EUGENICS REVIEW.

proposed. Those who called attention to the problem will
have done no mean service, however, even though the
numbers should prove to be not very much above those of
normal years. Social workers, being forewarned, have been
made alive to the dangers inherent in the present abnormal
state of the country, and in consequence a proper enquiry has
been started both as to the prevalence of the expectant
unmarried mother, and also as to the amount of free and
adequate accommodation available for her in the various
districts. Opinions may vary as to the treatment of the mother
by the community, but all can meet on the common ground of
providing suitable treatment at birth and during the immediate
ante and post-natal periods.

If the numbers of illegitimate births prove to be but little
larger than in normal years the problem will be one more of
social than of eugenic interest; for in the main the parents of
illegitimate children, in normal times, consists of the less
desirable members of the community. If, however, it had been
shown that the abnormal conditions of war had led to a very
large increase of illegitimacy among the physically fitter men
and women, it would have been a difficult eugenic problem to
determine how to retain the stability of monogamous marriage
unimpaired—the most important plank in the eugenic platform—
and yet to re-establish the self-respect and to promote the
economic efficiency of a large number of unmarried mothers.
140 EUGENICS REVIEW.

adolescents or adults upon the subject of venereal diseases. Definite,
protective instruction can be given without imperilling the adolescent’s
ideal. There are some chapters which are more suitable for instruction of adults than for placing directly in the hands of boys and
girls, and, on the whole, one would be inclined to value the book more
as a suggestion to instructors of youth on how to give simplified information on the physiology of inheritance, than for use as a text-book by the
boy or girl unprepared for the subject: though, undoubtedly, to the late
adolescent, nearly approaching adulthood, the book would have its very
effective value.

_ _ The author is to bé congratulated upon the ground covered in this
little volume, and upon the skill with which the main facts of our
information on the subject of inheritance are presented in a brief form.

N. MARCH.

OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS.

SEVENTY-SIXTH ANNUAL REPORT OF THE REGISTRAR-GENERAL OF BIRTHS,
DEATHS AND MARRIAGES IN ENGLAND AND WALES (1913). [Cd.
7780.| Price 5s. 4d.

This Report was issued in May last: the Registrar-General apologises
for the lateness of the issue, but this was an inevitable result of the war
which simultaneously depleted his staff and increased the amount of work
to be done. In normal] circumstances it is hoped that Reports will be
issued within twelve months of the period to which they refer.

An important alteration of method has been made in this Report
bearing on the relative mortalities of the sexes. Ordinary standardised
death-rates, it will be remembered, are calculated on the basis of the
population of England and Wales at the Census of 1901. Supposing
that we wish to compare the relative incidence of some disease on males
and on females, and work out a standardised death-rate for males on the
population of males in 1go1, and a standardised death-rate for females
on the population of females in 1901, these two death-rates will be no
more truly comparable than the original crude death-rates, because the
standard populations are not the same. But this is the process that has
been used in former Reports, though attention was directed to the fallacy
in the last issue (footnote p. xxxvii.). To avoid the difficulty, whenever,
in the present Report, a comparison is made of the mortality of the two
sexes, the age-distribution of “persons” in 1go1 is used as the standard
population for each sex, cf. the footnote on p. xx. Where the results of
the two processes can be compared the alteration made is sometimes considerable. Thus the excess of the general mortality of males over that of
females, where the correct process of standardisation is employed, is some
23 per cent. (1913), not 14 per cent. as by the old process (1912). The
standardised mortalities from diphtheria and croup in 1906-10 were given
as 169 per million for males and 168 for females in the last Report,
these are now altered to 164 for males and 173 for females. For the same
period the standardised rates for cancer were 770 and 986, these are now
altered to 814 and 944.

With the Report for 1911 a scheme was initiated under which a certain
number of causes of death have been taken each year for tabulation under
combinations of causes, so as to indicate as fully as possible the complete statement of the cause of death. In the Report for 1912 the causes
so dealt with included Nos. 20-38 of the detailed international list, which
covered tuberculosis and syphilis. This year the causes similarly treated
are Nos. 39-46—cancer and other tumours. The resulting extensive
tables (pp. 548-587) which are based on the deaths registered in 1912 could
OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS. I4I

only be adequately discussed by a medical man. Dr. Stevenson, however,
in his review of the statistics of the year, also devotes special attention
to the subject of cancer, and has prepared a very interesting table to
show the influence of marital condition on the mortality of females from
cancer of the ovary, uterus and breast. The table itself gives death-rates
at quinquennial age-groups, and also rates at all ages over 15,
standardised to the distribution of persons in 1901. The standardised

rates per million living are as shown below :—
Standardised death-rates
per million.

Unmarried. Married or widowed.
Cancer of the ovary vee _ 60 31
an uterus om _ 169 203
breast 346 238

53 wt we
Thus cancer of the ovary and of the breast bears most hardly on the
unmarried : cancer of the uterus on the married. These relations, it is
stated, differ very considerably from some of those deduced from their
material by surgical writers, but so far as can be ascertained no comparison
has hitherto been published based either on such extensive records, or on
rates correctly standardised.

The following are the most important rates for the five years up
to 1913 :—

Persons married Births Standardised Deaths of Infants

Year. per rooo, per 1000 death-rate under one year
per 1000, per 1000 births.

1909 wee 14°7 25°8 14°3 109
I9IO ene 15°0 2571 132 105
1QII vee 15°2 24°4 14°3 130
1912 ves 15°5 238 12°9 95
1913 ate 15'5 23°9 133 108

G. U. Y.
PERIODICAL LITERATURE.
ENGLISH.

NATURE, MarRCH 11th, 1915. British Association Discussion of the
Nature and Origin of Species. Pp. 49-50. An important feature of the
Melbourne meeting was the debate on the nature and origin of species
in which sections K and D (Botany and Zoology) joined. Dr. Rendle
referred to the need of a working unit for the classification of the world’s
flora. He showed himself to be thoroughly in agreement with the wellknown Darwinian explanation of the origin of species by natural
‘selection. The living organism is eminently adapted to its environment.
Slight gradual changes in the organism due to internal causes, influenced
or not by slight changes in environment, accumulate and become inherited.
He could not accept the theory offered by De Vries and others of the
origin of species by mutation, viz., by the inheritance of striking changes
suddenly appearing, z.e., discontinuous variations, as distinguished from
the non-heritable fluctuations of slight degree. The inheritance of the
discontinuous variations gives rise by a process of segregation to the
elementary species of De Vries. The Darwinian species arise, on the
contrary, by selection of an aggregation of slight gradual epharmonic
changes. Professor A. Dendy considered that species arise by a process
of fundamental evolution, in which environment plays a leading part,
and that the adaptations are inherited. The epigenetic characters are,
however, modified by sexual reproduction, giving permutations and combinations following Mendelian laws, which are superposed on the modifications due to Darwinian evolution. Professor W. Bateson (President
of the Association) did not attach so much importance to the standardisation of the term species. He thought it hopeless to expect definite
conclusions as to the nature and origin of species along the lines advocated
by Dr. Rendle. The reason that unquestionable judgments could not be
reached was obviously that the physiological nature of specific difference
was still unknown. [In the absence of this knowledge the delimitation of
species must be arbitrary. Professor Poulton agreed with Professor
Dendy in laying stress on the importance of sexuality in producing new
patterns by the endless combinations of units.

MAN, May, 1915. Vol. xv., No. 5. Fluctuations in the Population
of Irrigated Countries. By K. A. C. Creswell. This article is intended
to be complementary to one by Professor J. L. Myres in Vol. vii. of the
EUGENICS REVIEW, entitled “ The Causes of Rise and Fall in the Population of the Ancient World.” The latter article dealt with the relation
borne by population to local natural water supply, and the field of study
was limited to the Mediterranean basin. Mr. Creswell carries the enquiry
to localities and conditions in which the dependence of humanity upon
water is more accentuated, that is, to districts irrigated by canals and
conduits. He points out that as man’s existence is a resultant of continued
irrigation, and the irrigation is a consequence of man’s existence, a failure
of either would mean the end of both. Mesopotamia, Persia, and Central
Asia form the region selected by Mr, Creswell. It is shown that the
irrigation system is everywhere vulnerable; in Persia even more than in
Mesopotamia, for in the region first named the water supply is chiefly
by way of underground baked clay pipes, likely to silt up or be destroyed
very readily. Wars, by withdrawing labour, and so involving neglect,
would result in land reverting to the desert state, and—as a fact—it has
so reverted. Gibbon is quoted as to the work of centuries not sufficing to
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 143

repair mischief wrought by wars. Localities are adduced as topographical
samples, for each is exemplary of fertility made barren. The far-reaching
influence of man is shown by the fact that when wars had led to the
neglect of the dykes which had stayed the spreading of the Great Swamp,
the very course of the Tigris was changed, and the land it had watered
became a desert. The influence of arboriculture on rainfall is illustrated
by figures, and the truth that “To him that hath shall be given” is
curiously shown by the fact that irrigated countries get an increased
rainfall.

OURNAL OF THE ROYAL STATISTICAL SOCIETY, May, 1915. Vol. 78, Part
3. ote on the Future Population of the Self-governing Portion of the
British Empire. By E. C. Snow, M.A., D.Sc. There are, Dr. Snow
reminds us, two methods of calculating future population: one is by
applying the popularly accepted rate of increase; the other is by finding
and using a “formula” which, for any locality, or country, or group of
countries, shall represent the rate of growth; that is, which shall form a
“constant.” Such a formula Dr. Snow finds by tracing the cohort from
a previous census when it was in a younger age-group. The rate of
decrease of this cohort between census “2” and census “3” approximates
generally to that of the corresponding cohort of equal age between census
“1” and census “2,” ten years earlier. In the March issue of the
Statistical Journal Dr. Snow gave diagrams illustrating these, and allied
facts. The present article considers whether any extension of such a
method is possible. The writer believes that under special conditions it
is, and that the best means thereto is to eliminate errors due to migration
and mortality, or to reduce them toa negligible quantity. Dr. Snow affirms
that by taking a group of countries, such as the self-governing British
Colonies, he is dealing-—so far as migration is concerned—with a nonvariant, for, broadly speaking, it means transference only. The Imperial
death-rate he finds to be stable. In brief, the fluctuations of population
affect the Empire but little. Calculations are made dealing with the
United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand—that is, nearly
98 per cent. of the self-governing portion of the Empire. These gave the
estimates for 1921, and the same factors applied to these gave the results
for 1931. All figures were taken at face-value, no effort being made to
correct for errors due to mis-statement of age. Some of the results are
interesting. Thus, in the year 1921 the males of the self-governing lands
will total thirty-one millions, and the females thirty-two millions. By
1931 the males will have increased to thirty-four millions, and the females
to thirty-five. Fractions of a million are omitted in this abstract. Dr.
Snow is sceptical of the “ unfailing increase of fertility ” after great wars.
a admits that the present conflict introduces a new and very doubtful
actor.

THE JOURNAL OF GENETICS for January (Vol. iv., No. 3) contains two
papers. F. C. Miles writes on Aldinism in Maize, and finds that the
several degrees of albinism behave as simple recessives to the type. The
investigation of the behaviour of variegated leaves, which possibly behave
differently, and of the relations of the various kinds of albinism to each
other, is not yet complete, but it appears that two factors are required
for the production of full green, the absence of one of which produces
pure white (complete lack of plastids), while the absence of the other
gives yellowish-white (with few very small plastids). The distribution of
plastids in the various forms is described.

H. M. Fuchs contributes an important paper on the Physiology of
Fertilisation in Ciona (Tunicata). In the first part he investigates the
conditions of self-fertilisation in this Ascidian, which, as is well-known, is
usually self-sterile. His chief conclusions are that (1) an increase of concentration of sperm-suspension causes an increase in the proportion of
144 EUGENICS REVIEW.

eggs self-fertilised, but that a greater concentration is usually needed to
cause any self-fertilisation than would fertilise 100 per cent. of “ foreign”
eggs. (2) The proportion of eggs self-fertilised increases to a maximum
and then falls, according to the length of time the eggs and sperm have
been in sea-water. The cross-fertilisation percentages fall continuously as
the time during which the eggs and sperm lie in sea-water increases. (3)
Contact with “own” sperm decreases the ease with which eggs can
subsequently be cross-fertilised. (4) Self-fertilised eggs develop at first as
fast as cross-fertilised, but hatch later. The larve frequently fail to
settle down, and almost always die in a few days. These results are compared and contrasted with those of Morgan and Castle on the same
species, and of Darwin, Compton and Correns on self-sterile plants. It is
evident that self-sterility in Ciona is a phenomenon of a different nature
to that found in plants. The second part of the paper deals with the
action of egg-secretions on the fertilising power of sperm. He concludes
that eggs of Ascidians and Echinoids secrete substances in the sea-water
which increase the fertilisine power of sperm-suspensions, not only of
their own species, but of species of other groups of animals to an equal
extent. This result contradicts the results obtained by Lillie. LB

THE JOURNAL OF GENETICS for April, 1915 (Vol. iv., No. 4), contains
several interesting papers.

R. P. Gregory, in a short note, shows that in the wild primrose the
“pin-eye” is recessive to the “thrum-eye,” as in Primula sinensis, and
in a longer paper he deals with the transmission of variegation in
primulas. A yellow or variegated plant crossed with a normal green
gives all yellow or variegated when used as the female parent, all purebreeding green when used as male parent. The explanation is that the
yellow colour depends on defective plastids, and these are derived directly
from the plastids of the mother. The plastids are thus independent cellorgans, always derived from pre-existing plastids, and therefore never
inherited through the pollen-parent.

H. Drinkwater describes a second British family showing Major
Brachydactyly, in which the abnormality is transmitted exactly as in the
previously known cases as a Mendelian dominant. The condition of the
digits, and of the bodily structure generally, is illustrated with excellent
photographs and radiographs, which add considerably to the previously
published figures of this condition. An interesting point is that it has
been possible to trace this family as being directly descended from a
crene ver of the American Brachydactylous family originally described by

arabee.

Dr. C. J. Bond describes abnormal flowers in Begonia, in which there
is more or less complete development of the organs of both sexes, and
discusses the bearing of his observations on the origin of the moncecious
condition in plants, and the relation between “secondary sexual characters” in flowers (number and arrangement of petals, etc.) with the
presence or absence of the male and female organs of reproduction. The
paper raises a number of interesting points in plant morphology and
physiology.

R. R. Gates replies effectively to G. H. Shull’s criticisms published in
his paper on A Peculiar Negative Correlation in Cnothera Hybrids
(Journal Genetics, iv., p. 83).

Finally, A. E. Everest and Miss M. Wheldale contribute two papers
on the chemistry of the Anthocyan pigments of flowers; both give many
of the same facts, but interpret them somewhat differently, so that each
paper contains criticism of the other. L. DONCASTER.

THE JOURNAL OF STATE MEDICINE, February, 1915. Vol. xxiii., No. 2.
Housing Conditions in their Relation to the Spread of Tuberculosis. By
A. Maxwell Williamson, M.D., B.Sc., Medical Officer of Health to the
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 145

City of Edinburgh. Pp. 33-43 (and pp. 81-92 of the March issue). The
author first of all brings forward evidence to prove that the number of
cases of pulmonary tuberculosis in any district is almost precisely in
direct proportion to the number of houses of one and of two apartments
which exist in it. Calculating the rate of incidence per 1,000 of the
population for the City of Edinburgh, it has been found that 1 per 1,000
are affected by the disease in houses of four and more apartments, 2°1 in
houses of three rooms, 3°4 in houses of two rooms, and 6'1 in houses of one
room. The figures given are supported by maps and charts, and also by
photographs of the localities. To the author it seems obvious, therefore,
that if the evidence regarding the influence of housing on the origin and
spread of tuberculous disease be correct, and that 60 per cent. of the total
notifications of pulmonary tuberculosis are connected with cases which
occur in houses of one and two rooms, recent legislation, in the absence
of sweeping schemes of housing reform, is insufficient to meet the urgency
of the situation so far as tuberculosis is concerned. The author remarks
that it has been claimed that the key to the situation lies largely, if not
wholly, in carrying out the provisions of the recent Insurance Act, especially so far as dispensary, domiciliary and sanatorium benefit are concerned, and arguments in favour of this course have been based on figures
applicable to recent times. These undoubtedly show a fall in the incidence
and death-rates of tuberculous disease, and this practically all over the
world; but the author points out that the same facts apply to all other
forms of infectious disease, and that this is due to preventive measures
which have characterised public health administration during the past
twenty or thirty years. He thinks it will be well to consider how far the
provision of sanatoria and dispensaries will further the crusade against
tuberculosis, if these are not backed by provision for dealing directly
with the cause of the disease. The majority of tuberculous patients
having been removed from the smaller class of houses for treatment at the
sanatoria must, of necessity, return there after treatment. The author
contends that the key to the situation lies in the housing question.

CuILp Stupy, February, 1915. Vol. viii, No. 1. Binet’s Mental
Tests. WII. (continued). By W. H. Winch, M.A. Pp. 1-8. The Third
Lest for Eight-year-old Children deals with the Naming of Colours. The
author remarks that Binet rightly draws a distinction between the naming
of colours and the sensation and discrimination of colours. The test is
carried out by means of strips of coloured paper, red, green, blue and
yellow, fastened on a piece of white cardboard. In this test 84 per cent.
of the children in the five-year class distinguished the colours correctly,
and in the six-year class every child named the colours correctly without
hesitation. The Fourth Lest for Eight-year-old Children is a test in
Counting Backwards, and to some extent, as Binet says, involves school
instruction. The results mark this definitely as a test suitable for sevenyear-old children in English schools, 76 per cent. of the children at this
age being able to pass this test, viz., counting backwards from 20 to 1.
The Fifth Test for Eight-year-old Children is a test in Writing from
Dictation. Here again the results mark the test as one suited for sevenyear-old children in English schools, but the author remarks “I have
ruled it out altogether as a mental test. It seems to me so very dependent
upon school instruction.” The Sixth Test for Eight-year-old Children is a
comparision of two things from memory, 7.¢., if a child having called to
mind two things can think of a difference between them. The terms
chosen for comparison in the English school were “milk and water,”
“wood and iron,” “a cow and a sheep.” Binet considered this a very
important test, because it depends not on school instruction but on natural
good sense. Judging by the number of passes obtained among seven-yearold children, the author considers the test suited for children of this age
in English schools, the passes equalling about 80 per cent.
146 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Mental Tests. By Cyril Burt, M.A. Pp. 8-13. The object of this
paper is to urge the necessity of research and co-operation in child-study
and to indicate how these ends may be obtained. The author remarks
that the Binet tests have aroused great interest in this country owing to
recent legislation dealing with the mentally deficient, but contends that it
would be a mistake to treat the Binet scale as a finished instrument, ready
for application to British children without modification or re-standardisation. Binet himself only regarded his scale as tentative, and was revising
it at the time of his death. Besides inborn general ability, the author
suggests the testing of acquired general knowledge, and indicates the
lines on which such a test might be framed. He considers that tests and
norms of more specific subjects need also to be determined, and that
specific abilities like attention, memory, fatiguability, call for tests quite
as much as specific knowledge. He also points out that the work of Freud
and his school is demonstrating to us that the moral or emotional side of
a child’s life is even more important than the mental side, and instances
an emotional test of great value which the school has provided, viz., the
associative reaction test. A list of words, for the most part designed to
strike emotional complexes, is presented to the subject. He responds to
each by uttering the first word that it suggests. The nature of these
replies, together with other symptoms manifested in the course of the
experiment, is found to throw light upon the person’s emotional tendencies
and experiences. He thinks that this test might well be adapted for use
with children, but first a suitable list of stimulus words is required for
the experiment; secondly, a table of all the common replies to the words
with their approximate frequency; thirdly, we need to know the significance of the unusual or exceptional replies. The author concludes with
a: reference to “vocational” tests, and points to the series of researches
upon motor drivers, telegraph girls, and cycle factory hands, by which
Professor Munsterberg has attempted to devise a scheme of tests which
will eliminate at the very outset all those who are not suitable for the
work required in these positions. The author’s opinion is that these
decisions should, as a rule, be made in the school rather than in the
factory. The ultimate aim of this co-operative research should, he thinks,
tend to a psychographic scheme, 7.e., a formulated system of points for
observation, together with instructions for making comparable records or
carrying out reliable tests, which should enable any competent persons to
draw up a reliable inventory of the mental characteristics of any given
child, whether normal or abnormal.

CHILD STuDY, March, 1915. Vol. viii., No.2. SBinet’s Mental Tests:
What they are and what we can do with them. VIII. (continued). By
W. H. Winch, M.A. The author continues to detail the results obtained
in infant schools with Binet’s Tests for Nine-year-old Children. The
first of these tests deals with a child’s knowledge of a day of the week
and its date. The second is also a chronological test, but deals with the
days of the week. The third test is an arithmetical one, or as English
teachers would describe it, an exercise in fractical arithmetic, consisting
of “giving change.” The results, as in former tests, proves definitely that
the English child, age for age, is definitely ahead of his French confréres
in all except the linguistic aspects of knowledge.

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ETHICS, October, 1914. Vol. xxv., No. 1.
Divorce and Morality. By E.S. P. Haynes. Pp. 87-93. The author deals
with the following points: (1) The point of view of the State. (2) The
point of view of the moralist. (3) The interaction of law and morality in
this particular connection. As to the point of view of the State, the author
conceives that it is the universally approved object of all divorce facilities
to promote, where necessary, the welfare (a) of the family, including
parents and children; (0) where there are no children, of the spouses
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 147

themselves; (c) of the State itself; and these aspects he discusses. As to
the second point, that of the moralist, he remarks that in the older
civilisations of the world, France, Italy, Spain, as also in countries like
China and Japan, the moralist concerns himself mainly with the questions
of family obligations and human happiness, and not with the questions
of sexual laxity fer se. In English-speaking countries the question of
sexual laxity fills the foreground of the discussion; the opponents of
divorce are at pains to assert that it increases, its supporters that it
diminishes, sexual laxity, as if this decided the whole question. The
English-speaking races are often accused of hypocrisy because they profoundly believe in “suggestion” as the best means of promoting good
conduct and particularly what they call “ purity.” The author describes
the word moralist in its ordinary sense as the man who defends the moral
code of his own time, because he is unable to think of anything better
than that to which he has been accustomed. The conservative instinct of
the moralist is responsible for a certain interaction of law and morality,
because even lawyers and legislators are occasionally in advance of their
time. In the United States the tendency to experimental law-making
frequently stimulates the ethical discussion of problems first presented
as legal problems or even as new statutes, and adds, “there can be no
doubt that if Lord Palmerston had invoked a referendum on his great
Divorce Statute in 1857 1t would have been strangled in its cradle. The
acceptance of divorce as a fact for the richer sections of the middle class
undoubtedly affected the moral code of England, and in no way more
than in the new ideas that began to grow in regard to the rights and
duties of married women. Yet the broad fact remains, that if the statute
had been opposed to the main stream of ethical ideas it would hav

remained a dead letter.”

THE INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ETHICS, October, 1914. Vol. xxv.,
No. 1. Class Distinctions. By H. O. Meredith. Pp. 33-53. Referring to
the way in which class differences have expressed themselves, the author
remarks that sometimes this has been enforced by law and custom
assigning to different classes special economic fields or peculiar political
privileges. At other times—and broadly speaking, this refers to our own
times—the power of the State and of the Church has been used to minimise,
as far as possible, the distinctions drawn by society. Where this has
been done the barriers between classes have become fluid, but differentiation has nevertheless continued. The author considers the fundamental
fact of class distinction to be that members of different classes resent,
and in the main refuse, any personal relation with each other; and in
particular they abhor intermarriage, marriage being the most intimate of
personal relations. In examining the reasons why members of different
classes are repelled by the notion of intimacy with one another, he
remarks that on a superficial view the root of the difference might appear
to be economic, that difference of wealth is the main obstacle to intermarriage, particularly where marriages are arranged by the parents.
The author thinks this is a mistaken view, although in a more profound
sense differences of wealth are the main determinant of class distinctions.
Yet the tendency to demand some approach to equality of means is based
largely on idealistic grounds. Wealth is not wanted merely for itself,
but because certain standards of refinement and civilised intercourse
cannot be maintained without it. In promoting or encouraging marriages,
a class will look rather to the maintenance of its cultural standards than
to the acquisition of material wealth. By culture the author wishes to be
understood the living expression in act and word of ideas and ideals
ethical, esthetic, and intellectual. In discussing the part which economic
conditions play in producing social class differentiation, the author
remarks that the culture of any class must be determined either by the
ante-natal or by the post-natal history of the mass of its members, or by
148 EUGENICS REVIEW.

both; their individual lives are shaped by heredity and by environment,
and one or both of these forces must account for that part of their lives
which expresses itself in their class culture. As regards the former, he
remarks that there is no opinion so deeply rooted as that which connects
the culture of classes with heredity. The very term “breeding” is an
outcome of this opinion, and of its prevalence in our own day we find
abundant traces; but though differences between individuals of the same
class are largely due to heredity, differences between different classes
are not, in the main, due to the same cause. While prepared to admit
that the hereditary endowment of the upper classes is, generally speaking,
somewhat better on the average than that of the lower, the author thinks
that there is not any reason to suppose the difference great. He is of
opinion that ante-natal causes play but a small part in producing the
diversities of class culture, and that we are therefore thrown back for an
explanation upon nurture, environment and education. Each class has its
traditional tastes and habits, and the children of the class, and of all
entrants to it, are reared in these traditions. If we ignore as trivial, or
as, perhaps, non-existent, hereditary differences between the normal
members of different classes, the author considers that there are only two
fundamental differences—the difference of income and the difference of
the processes by which income is acquired. These he designates the t2come
difference and the occupational difference. Of the two he considers the
former by far the more important. Wealth is, at least, a prime necessity
for the development of artistic and intellectual tastes. The wealthy classes,
who have always most developed these tastes, do not owe their wealth
to their tastes, and cannot, therefore, be supposed on any theory to be
better gifted in this respect than the mass of their countrymen. Historically, the great ages of art and literature have been dependent upon the
fostering care of aristocracies whose members were lifted above the level
of bare or merely comfortable subsistence. The author remarks that the
only serious difficulty which might lead us to doubt this assertion is the
fact that the enormous increase of wealth in our own days has not brought
to birth a culture in all respects demonstrably superior to the civilisation
of the 18th century, which it has destroyed. As to the part which the
method in which the income is obtained plays in determining class
standards, the author remarks that it must remain doubtful in what
degree the work of the world is capable of being intellectualised. It may
be pointed out that there is no satisfactory evidence that the average man
would prefer intellectual to physical labour, given equality of pay and
general amenity. Still less self-evident is the view that the intellectualising of labour really promotes a high standard of culture. One of the
main difficulties of the present day is the fact that the class which is
rich enough to be cultivated is so exhaused by intellectual labour that it
tolerates out of working hours nothing but golf, and bridge, and the
music-hall. Another reason for distrusting the occupational factor is the
part played by women and children in determining class standards. The
author notices especially that in all classes of society the differences
between the occupations of the husbands seem to have little power in
keeping people apart as compared with the force of the wives to draw
them together owing to their common occupation, namely, housework.
Thus there seems to be at least this much connection between wealth and
culture, that where culture is there must be wealth in some degree. In
conclusion, the author remarks that there are two things to-day which
are hostile to culture as they were not hostile in the same degree years
ago. The first of these is distinction of classes. In the old days this
did not matter much, because each class was sufficiently stable to develop
a valuable culture of its own. Now this is impossible. The barriers
between classes are broken: there is in every class a continuous struggle
between the standards of the class itself, the standards of the class above
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 149

it, and the standards of the class below it. Without being able to restore
class rigidity, that is, to re-establish the class system on a hereditary
basis, you cannot escape from these struggles and the confusion which
they generate; the main culture of every nation must be vulgar and.
confused until it has constituted itself into one single class. Another
difficulty is that as productive power and processes now alter rapidly
instead of slowly, we cannot rely, as in the past, upon blind evolution
to generate culture. If such a thing as national civilisation ever again
exists, it will be based upon a conscious critical insight, a conscious taste.
This the author considers impossible so long as the existing distinctions
of class and income are maintained.

CHARITY ORGANISATION REVIEW, February, 1915. Vol. xxxvii., N.S.,
No. 218. National Health Insurance. By C. Osborn. Pp. 82-91. The
author discusses some of the difficult points raised in the Report of the
Departmental Committee appointed to inquire into the alleged excessive
sickness claims under the National Health Insurance scheme. The
author remarks that the anticipations of the actuaries with regard to the
extent of sickness amongst insured persons, especially among women,
appear to have been exceedingly sanguine. With regard to men’s societies
the Committee are of opinion that “taken as a whole, the experience of
men’s societies as regards sickness benefit justifies the actuaries’ estimates.”
But, as the author remarks, the financial solvency of a large number of
independent societies cannot be considered as a whole, and it is evident
that a fair number even of men’s societies are suffering from an excess of
claims, and this during a period of full employment and particularly
good trade. The Committee came to the conclusion that there is not
much evidence of “ malingering ” among insured persons; still, there is in
many cases a distinct unwillingness to declare off the funds, particularly
in the case of married women, who find great advantage in being entitled
to sick pay while doing their housework. One of the most important
factors in connection with the excess of women’s sickness is the amount
of illness due to pregnancy, so strangely overlooked by the official
advisers of the Chancellor of the Exchequer. The Committee refer with
regret to the evanescence of the old Friendly Society spirit. This has
brought about a readiness to receive benefit whenever a case can be made
out for being placed on the funds. To this must be added the natural
desire of the medical profession to deal with disease at the earliest
moment it becomes apparent and to secure for patients the opportunity of
abstaining from work.

NINETEENTH CENTURY AND AFTER, March, 1915. No. 457. The Professional Classes, the War, and the Birth-rate. By A. M. Richardson.
Pp. 603-608. The object of the author is to point out that if, after the
War, the upper, middle and professional classes, whom she regards as
“the backbone of England,” are to assist in arresting the decline in our
birth-rate, then England will have to devise some means of financial
relief for these classes. An increased birth-rate will be to them a counsel
of perfection, unless the burden of living is in some measure lifted from
their shoulders, as it has, in ever-increasing measure, been lifted from the
shoulders of the lower class during the last fifty years. The writer
maintains that the birth-rate among the professional classes, if low, is so
not on account of any shrinking from pain or trouble or owing to motives
of self-indulgence or love of pleasure; it is due to diffdence in bringing
into the world children to whom, from lack of means, they cannot afford
to give the best that life has to offer.

The Passing of the Child. By W. A. Brend, M.A., M.B. Pp. 584-602.
This article is intended to emphasise the importance of maintaining the
population of these islands at as high a rate as possible in order to be
able to hold advantages which we may secure in the present War. The
author thinks that changes have occurred and are still operative in regard
150 EUGENICS REVIEW.

to population which give evidence that the population of Germany will
tend to outstrip ours at an increasing rate. Dealing with the decline of
legitimate fertility in these islands, he shows that it has steadily dropped
from 293 per 1,000 of the married female population (15 to 45 years of
age)—the average for the years 1876-80—down to 191.8 in the year 1912.
The cause of this decline he refers primarily to prevention of conception
by artificial means, but also to the decrease in the proportion of married
persons in the population, and to the postponement of marriage. The
author supplies the rates for nine large social classes, textile workers
showing the smallest families and miners the largest in the group. The
infant mortality rate (England and Wales) per 1,000 births in 1912 was:
Males, 106; females, 84. For both, 95. Probably this is the only year
in which the rate has fallen below 100. A comparative table giving vital
statistics for European countries shows Russia to have the highest birthrate, being, for 1912, 44 per 1,000 population, while that of England for
the same year was 23.9, and that of Germany (1911) was 28.6.

NINETEENTH CENTURY AND AFTER, April, 1915. No. 458. The Truth
about Birth- and Death-rates. By Binnie Dunlop, M.B., Ch.B. Pp.
841-847. In this paper the author ascribes to the spread of the doctrine of
Neomalthusianism in a large degree the results to which Dr. Brend calls
attention in his article, 7ke Passing of the Child. The pamphlet issued
by Dr. Knowlton in 1832 was responsible, the author claims, for the
spread of the Neomalthusian doctrine—“ Early marriage and small
families ”—and for the decline of the birth-rate in England, Germany,
Austria, Holland and Belgium, which followed its publication. He refers
to the fact that though the birth-rates were falling steadily year by year
as restriction extended, the populations continued to increase as fast as
before, because the death-rates fell with the birth-rates, as had been
predicted. The only satisfactory explanation, the author remarks, of the
very remarkable way in which the death-rates follow the birth-rates, 7.e.,
the striking correlation between these rates, is the Malthusian one that
in every country of the world (except New Zealand, and perhaps
Australia) the birth-rates, in varying degrees, are still excessive, and
that the population in these varying degrees are all pressing on their
means of subsistence. No table of comparative figures for the average
duration of life in the various countries seems yet to have been published,
and the author has attempted to supply one. The table is based on the
mean of the years 1910-11-12, and gives (1) birth-rate, (2) death-rate, (3)
natural increase, (4) average duration of life. Read in this order the
rates for the United Kingdom and Germany are as follows :—(1) U.K.
24.4, G. 29.8; (2) U.K. 14.2, G. 16.9; (3) U.K. 10.2, G. 12.9; (4) U.K. 53.8,
G. 43.9. With regard to birth-rate, the author remarks that whereas ours
has been decreasing by about .3 per thousand per annum, that of Germany
has in recent years been falling by over 1 per thousand, thrice as fast as
ours, and the fastest in the world. The poverty which must follow her
tremendous expenditure of money in the War will accelerate the decline
of the birth-rate, so that it will overtake ours in three or four years time.
Germany’s rate of natural increase will probably fall below 7 per thousand, while ours, if we do not exceed our present rate of casualties, is
likely to continue at its present rate of 10.

BRITISH JOURNAL OF INEBRIETY, January, 1915. Vol. xii., No. 3. Drug
Addiction in Relation to Mental Disorder. By Robert Armstrong-Jones,
M.D., F.R.C.P., F.R.C.S., Resident Physician, London County Council
Asylum, Claybury. In this paper, which was read before the Society for
the Study of Inebriety on October 13th, 1914, Dr. Robert Armstrong-Jones
gives his experience and the clinical details of more than 40 cases of
the drug habit which have reached the asylum. The author remarks that the evidence of physicians, as well as of general
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. I5!

practitioners, is clear as to the extensive and disastrous effects following
the indiscriminate use of strong drugs, and adds that it is mainly amongst
the educated and cultured that these cases are seen. He states, for
instance, that there are many cases of doctors, nurses, journalists, authors,
barristers and literary men and women whose mental breakdown has
resulted from the drug habit. The power to draw ideas from the subconscious field into the focus of consciousness by the help of drugs proves
too great a temptation for many brain-workers. Black coffee and green
tea are the most familiar and common examples. The author’s own cases
at the asylum included 6 medical men, 3 nurses, a dentist, 2 chemists and
druggists, 2 teachers, 3 journalists, and 3 authors, as well as other representatives of the professional class. It is suggested that propinquity to
sedatives and a knowledge of their use, with opportunities for indulgence,
are causes of addiction, and it is encouraging to believe that legislation
of a restrictive character may prove a bar to self-indulgence, as those who
have no access to a drug are least commonly affected. The form of drug
taken is most commonly an opium derivative: morphia, chlorodyne or
opium; cocaine, and the new synthetic drugs, veronal, trional and
sulphonal, are also extensively used, as well as sedatives such as “ sleeping draughts,” “nerve tonics,” and “headache powders.” Chloral,
paraldehyde, and the bromides were considered to be the cause of mental
breakdown in five of the cases. The average age of the cases quoted when
brought to the asylum was 4o years for males, and 43 for females, an
age when the struggle to maintain the position reached was the most
severe and the keenest. It is of interest that there is a family history of
insanity, epilepsy or paralysis, or an inheritance of phthisis or cancer in
the families of considerably over 70 per cent. of the total number of cases
that came under the care of the author. This shows the distinctly
neurotic temperament of the drug victims, and suggests the question
whether drug-takers are not primarily insane rather than that the drug
habit induces insanity. In 75 per cent. of the cases melancholia or
insanity of the depressed type was the form of mental disorder. With
regard to recovery, much depends on the firmness, tact and skill of those
who have charge of a patient. If the drug is withheld and liberal nourishment insisted on, the prognosis on the whole is favourable. Of the 41
cases under the author’s treatment, 22 recovered and two were improved.
The inferences which the author draws from his own experience are as
follows :—

1. Drugs and the habit of drug-taking are a cause of insanity and are
a public danger.

2. The symptoms are a serious injury to health and a deterioration
of all the elements of the mind, but mainly of the moral faculties.

3. The victims are mostly among the cultured, the artistic, and the
best brain-workers of the community.

4. Such a destruction of the ablest and best minds is preventable.

5. Restriction- of the sale of dangerous drugs is urgently needed in
the public interest.

> The attention of the Privy Council should be called to this pressing
need.

FOREIGN.

THE JOURNAL OF HEREDITY, February, 1915. Vol. vi., No. 2. Two
Classes of Hybrids. By O. F. Cook, Bureau of Plant Industry, U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Washington. Pp. 55-56. The author puts
forward a plea for the use of distinctive names for the two principal
classes of hybrids (¢.¢., the first generation, and the second and succeeding
generations), owing to their widely different characters. He considers that
the original designations, “first generation hybrids,” “second generation
hybrids,” etc., are cumbersome and confusing; and that the Mendelian
152 EUGENICS REVIEW.

symbols “F,,” “F,,” etc., while serving for technical purposes, are
awkward typographically, and are not understood by the general reader.
After explaining the nature of “conjugation” the author points out that
the usual object of experiments with hybrids is to analyse and reconstrue
the characters of the parental types, and for this purpose at least two
generations must be produced. “As the so-called first generation of a
hybrid is developed while the conjugation begun by the parental germcells is still in progress, it can be described as the Conjugate generation.
The so-called second, or ‘F,,’ generation is really the first generation
that can be considered as a complete product of the conjugation that was
begun by the original germ-cells. The name Perjugate seems appropriate
because the nuclear element represented in the second and later generations of a hybrid may be said to have passed through conjugation.” The
author therefore suggests the use of the terms “Conjugate” (meaning
yoked together) for the first generation hybrids, and “ Perjugate” (signifying through the yoke) for the second and following generations. The
fact that it 1s often possible to secure conjugates from hybrid combinations
that do not produce perjugates is itself evidence, the author considers,
that the two generations represent widely different phenomena of reproduction.

Perjugate Cotton Hybrids. Pp. 57-64. Mr. Charles G. Marshall,
also of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, treats the same subject as
Mr. Cook. He shows that an amazing diversity characterises the second
generation after cross, and affects all the characters of the plants, while
the first or conjugate generation shows great uniformity.

The Chromosome Hypothesis of Heredity. By John Billing, Florida
Agricultural Experiment Station. P. 67. The author enumerates the
advantages and the chief objections to the chromosome hypothesis, and
remarks that an experimenter does not usually question whether the
hypothesis he uses is true or false, but whether it is useful or barren in
leading to new experiments or connecting up facts. Actual practice will
soon show whether it is good or bad. The author considers the advantages
in the use of the chromosome hypothesis to be as follows :—“ (1) Bateson’s
counter hypothesis of somatic segregation has proved barren, and appears
to be contradicted by certain facts. (2) Strasburger’s unrivalled experience
found the chromosome hypothesis to fit the facts of plant cytology as well
as those of inheritance. (3) The chromosome hypothesis fits the breeding
facts of the Cambridge School even better than their own hypothesis. (4)
It has been used as a fertile working hypothesis by Morgan and his
fellow-workers in their unique experiments at Columbia University. (5)
It seems to be coming more and more into use in accounts of research in
plant breeding.” The author gives the chief objections to the chromosome
hypothesis, so far as he has been able to gather them, as follows :—“ (r)
The English pioneer Bateson used instead the working hypothesis of
somatic segregation. (2) The chromosome hypothesis does not appeal to
physiologists and chemists. (3) The affairs of the chromosomes may be
regarded as a consequence instead of as a cause. (4) Many of the changes
of chromosomes and nucleus are still uncertain. (5) The chromosome
hypothesis was discredited by Weismann’s extensive and” (he says)
“untested speculations.” He considers that the chromosome hypothesis
has no serious rival, and that it has come to stay.

Jersey Angus Cattle. Pp. 68-72. By Arthur H. Kuhlman, Department of Animal Husbandry, University of Wisconsin. In this article the
author gives an account of the application of Mendelian principles in
producing a herd of cattle, adapted to local conditions, by Mr. F. B.
Samuelson, of Thirsk. Five pure-bred Jersey cows were mated with a
pure-bred Aberdeen-Angus bull. Five F, females obtained from this cross
were in turn mated with an F, bull. The F, heifers were then mated with
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 153

an F, bull. The F, generation has many of the outward signs of the
Angus, being black or dun in colour, polled, and rather beefy in conformation. The cows show a high yield of milk or butter fat. They are also
more hardy than their dams. Among the F, progeny four heifers and a
bull are black, a bull and a heifer are brindled fawn, and two heifers are
very dark fawn with light fawn marking around muzzle, ears and inner
thighs. Six of the F, heifers are distinctly polled like the Angus. Thus,
while the F, generation shows much uniformity the F, individuals show
marked variations in conformation and colour, indicating a segregation
and re-combination of the characters of the original parents. The same
experiment was begun in the Department of Experimental Breeding,
University of Wisconsin, in 1912, Jersey cows being mated with an Angus
bull and Angus cows with a Jersey bull. The object is to study the
segregation and behaviour of the characters of these two breeds, which
differ so markedly in conformation, type and function.

The Peopling of America. Pp. 79-91. By Dr. Ales Hrdlicka, Division
of Physical Anthropology, National Museum, Washington. The author
considers that the result of research dealing with the racial affinity and
the place or places of origin of the American Aborigines goes to prove
that these Aborigines represent the Yellow-brown race of Asia and Polynesia who reached the Continent at a relatively recent period. Regarding
the harsh treatment and unconcern for the Indians evinced by the early
Spanish settlers, it has been recorded that this was due to the fact that
as no mention was made concerning the American people in Hebrew
traditions they could not strictly be regarded as men equivalent to those
named in Biblical accounts. The author gives the opinions held by the
different investigators and authorities as to the origin of the American
Aborigines from the time of Las Casas, the article being well illustrated
with “types.” He states that in the light of present knowledge it may be
declared, with a fair degree of positiveness, that (1) There is no acceptable
evidence that man originated on the Continent of America. (2) Man did
not reach America until attaining a development superior to that of the
late Pleistocene man in Europe and after having undergone advanced and
thorough stem and even racial and tribal differentiation. (3) While man,
since the peopling of the American Continent commenced, has developed
numerous secondary sub-racial, localised structural modifications, these
modifications cannot yet be regarded as fixed, and in no important feature
have they obliterated the old type and sub-types of the people. The
author further remarks that notwithstanding the various secondary
physical modifications referred to, the American natives, barring the more
distantly related Eskimo, present throughout the Western Hemisphere
numerous important features in common which mark them plainly as
one stem of humanity. These features relate to the colour of the skin, the
hair, characteristic odour, the eyes, the nose, the teeth, the neck, the
hands and feet. From the physical anthropologists’ point of view everything indicates that the origin of the American Indian is to be sought
among the yellowish-brown peoples mentioned, but difficulties arise in
assigning the origin to some particular branch of the yellowish-brown
population. It is found that he stands quite as closely related to some of
the Malaysian peoples as to a part of the Tibetans, or some of the North.
eastern Asiatics. As to Polynesian migrations within the Pacific, such
were, so far as can be determined, all relatively recent, having taken
place when America doubtless had already a large population and had
developed several native cultures.

The Early Marriage Question. Pp. 92-95. This article is a consideration of the results of early child-bearing and of the challenge
issued by Mr. Caper L. Redfield, of Chicago, to give a sum of 100 dollars
to the American Genetic Association if it can be shown that any superior
individual was ever produced by breeding human beings as rapidly as
154 EUGENICS REVIEW.

four generations to the century. Mr. Redfield further agreed to give the
100 dollars if there could be found more than three cases in which the
intellectually superior person has as many as four generations in a
century in the tail-male line alone. Many replies were sent to this offer,
details of one of the most interesting being given in the present article.
In this attempt to meet the challenge, Mr. J. B. Nicklin gives several
instances of five and even six generations within a century, Queen Victoria
being named in two of the genealogies. The Council of the American
Genetic Association decided that no one had submitted data fulfilling the
requirements of the offer. Professor R. H. Johnson, whose advocacy of
early marriage brought forth Mr. Redfield’s challenge, has sent in a note
in which he says: “ The mere lengthening of the generations of all stocks
will not change the ill-balanced production of the next generation. It is
necessary to increase the reproduction of the superior relative to the
inferior, no matter to what other device resort may be made. Later
marriage of the superior as compared with the inferior is therefore
necessarily dysgenic.” Assuming that the children of young parents are
inferior, the question arises: Are they inferior because their parents are
young, or merely because they are first-born children? The English
Biometric School are of the latter opinion; others are strongly opposed
to this theory. To settle the point the Italian Anthropological Society are
making an investigation on a scale which they hope will afford adequate
ground for holding an opinion as to the superiority or inferiority of the
first-born.

THE JOURNAL OF HEREDITY, March, 1915. Vol. vi., No. 3. On the
Nature of Mutations. By R. Ruggles Gates. Pp. 99-108. The author
expresses the view that the changes which give rise to mutations are due
to a chemical rather than a morphological change in some chromosome,
and supports his view by evidence obtained from the Evening Primroses.
He remarks that investigators have for the most part assumed that the
main point to be discovered is the manner of inheritance of the Mendelian
differences found in animals and plants, and they have failed to observe
that the origin of these differences is an entirely different question. The
author illustrates his point of view by investigations carried out with
three mutants of @nothera Lamarckiana, viz., Lata, Gigas and Rubricalyx, the last-named being a secondary mutation, which originated
directly from Rubrinervis, itself a mutant from C. Lamarckiana. Of
@. Lata the author remarks that the mutation is a nuclear change, which
is represented in every cell of the organism. These are germinal changes
of such a nature as to be represented in every cell, having been propagated by mitosis from the fertilised egg. Of @. Gigas he says that
this mutant represents another kind of germinal change, tetraploidy—the
nuclei contain 28 instead of 14 chromosomes. The doubling in the
chromosome number, however it has taken place, is a process distinct
from the irregular chromosome distribution which gives rise to the Lata
type of mutation, for in this case the whole chromosome series has been
doubled. Here again the change is a cell change, propagated by mitosis
to every part of the organism. In Rubricalyx, the type of change is
entirely diverse from the foregoing. The author remarks that any theory
which will explain the origin of @. Rubricalyx will explain also the
origin of all Mendelian differences, for this is inherited in simple Mendelian fashion, wholly unlike either Lata or Gigas. If we assume that
one member of a pair of chromosomes has undergone a chemical change
to lead to the greatly increased pigment productions, we can explain at
the same time the origin and inheritance of this mutant. The author
therefore concludes in general that simple Mendelian characters arise
through an alteration on the part of a chromosome, analogous to the
mutations which are known to occur in certain bacteria. The change is
fundamentally chemical rather than morphological in nature, the chromoPERIODICAL LITERATURE. 155

somes in G@. Rubricalyx numbering 14, as in G@. Lamarckiana and CG.
Rubrinervis.

Conditions of Mendelian Inheritance. By John Belling, Florida Agricultural Experimental Station. P. 108. If we take “ Mendelian inheritance” to signify the mode of inheritance Mendel found to prevail in his
researches on seven differentiating characters in peas (except that perfect
dominance need not be present), the following are some of the complications which must be absent in order that simple Mendelian inheritance
may appear :—

“(1) Each single factor must pass indifferently into half of the
pollen-grains and half of the embryo-sacs. There must be no_ such
multiplication of factors as occurs in the origin of some giant primulas
and Cnotheras. (2) There must be no such coupling or repulsion
between the factors as has been found in sweet peas, primulas, snapdragons, peas, and velvet beans. (3) There is usually some elimination
of pollen-grains and embryo-sacs; but there must be no elimination that
has any relation to any of the factors in question, such as occurs in certain
Stizolobium hybrids, and doubtless in @notheras. (4) There must be no
inherited difference in the fertilising power of different ‘good’ pollengrains from the same anther. If a definite fraction of the pollen-grains
fail to fertilise the ovules (as Correns found in mirabilis), then a selective
partial self-sterility, or partial incompatibility occurs, which may complicate the results. (5) The death of certain embryos within the ovules or
young seeds (which seem to occur in most plants) must not be due to any
inherited weakness of these particular embryos. (6) There must be no
such differential viability of the seeds as has been found in double stocks
by Saunders, and in Q@nothera Lamarckiana by De Vries. (7) If a definite
fraction of the young seedlings perish unnoted, this will make abnormal
ratios, as occurred in Baur’s first experiments with the golden-leaved snapdragon. (8) Plants which die before maturity must not do so from
inherited weakness, or the final ratios may not be typical.”

German Zodtechny. Review of a book by Georg Wilsdorf, General
Director of the German Genetic Association. Pp. 109-116. Germany has
made large contributions to the science of genetics during the last halfcentury, especially in plant breeding, but the present state of the science
of animal breeding in the German Empire is not so well known. The
live-stock industry now surpasses in importance the agricultural and
horticultural industries, the animal industry amounting to about
£335,000,000, aS against £260,000,000 for the produce of fields and
gardens. The author points out that the immense strides made by the
live-stock industry are largely due to the science of genetics—in fact to
line-breeding. The verdict of the older school of zodlogists had been
against it, but impartial examination of horse pedigree charts by Lehndorff
and others convinced them that much of the progress in the live-stock
industry was due to this method. Then the value of a “ genetic analysis ”
of each animal came to be realised. Testing theory by fact, de Chapeaurouge was able to prove that the stallion Nording produced- good colts
only when mated with mares with which he was related. The triumph
of scientific animal breeding has consisted in the suppression of natural
diversity and in breeding animals true to a fixed type.

JOURNAL OF HerepitTy, April, 1915. Vol. vi., No. 4. Education and
Race Suicide. By Robert J. Sprague, Professor of Economics and
Sociology, Massachusetts Agricultural College. Pp. 158-162. From
information collected by the State of Massachusetts, the author is able to
assert that during the 25 years from 1887-1911 the deaths among the
native-born population of the State exceeded the births among the nativeborn by an aggregate of 269,918. During the same period the births in
families having foreign-born parents exceeded the deaths by 526,987. An
156 EUGENICS REVIEW.

investigation of 260 families of the Massachusetts Agricultural College
students shows that out of 832 women over 4o years of age 751 (91 per
cent.) have married, leaving 9 per cent. spinsters. This, and other
observations, indicate that the daughters of farmers marry more generally
than those of some other classes. Dealing with the graduates of Women’s
Colleges, the author gives the following facts: “Mount Holyoake
College, the oldest great college for the higher education of women in
this country, has collected the following statistics on the marital tendencies
of its graduates :—

Decade ot °/o remaining °/» marrying. Children per Children per

graduation. single. married graduate. graduate.
1842-49 wn 146 85°4 2°77 2°37
1850-59 vee 24'S 75°'5 3°38 2°55
1860-69 wee 391 60°9 2°64 1°60
1870-79 wns 40°6 59°4 2°75 1°63
1880-89 eat 42°4 57°6 2°54 1°46
1890-92 50°0 50°0 Ig! 0°95

“Bryn Mawr College.—Between 1888 and 1900 this college graduated
376 alumnz. Up to January, 1913, 165 or 43'9 per cent. of these had
married and had given birth to 138 children, an average of ‘84 per
married graduate, or ‘37 per graduate in all classes up to 1900.” The
statistics in regard to other Women’s Colleges offer much the same
results,

The author asks, “Is the woman’s college as now conducted a force
which acts for or against the survival of the race which patronizes it?”
and remarks that there is needed (1) a campaign of public education
through church, school and legislation to strengthen the ideals and
economic foundations of the family. (2) More strong men on the staffs
of public schools and women’s colleges, and in all these institutions more
married instructors of both sexes are desirable. As to co-education, which
has been propounded as a solution, he is doubtful, being of opinion that
if by co-education we merely enable the women to get a man’s education
and prepare for a man’s work, that does not offer a full solution.

Eugenics and Immigration. By Dr. L. E. Cofer, U.S. Public Health
Service, Washington. Pp. 170-174. The attempt to improve human
stocks of all kinds during recent years has taken form, so far as it relates
to immigration in preventing unfit persons from coming into the country,
either by being born into it or by being brought into it by immigration.
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries Europe attempted to improve
its racial stocks by the deportation of the less desirable individuals. Each
country had its penal colonies, and in addition used the United States as
a dumping ground. At the present day immigrants enter the United
States at 88 different places, and the number of immigrants examined
ranges from one a year at the port of Aguadilla, P.R., to 1,009,000 at the
port of New York. During the fiscal year ended June, 1914, the total
number landed was 1,485,957. Of this number 41,250 were certified as
unfit, including 3,051 for trachoma, 1,040 for syphilis, and 1,360 for
mental deficiency.

The White Leghorn. By Philip B. Hadley, Agricultural Experiment Station, Rhode Island State College, Kingston, R.I. Pp. 147151.
In this article the author gives the results of genetic breeding between the
White Leghorn and other breeds, both white and black, and emphasises
the need for new standards, telling not how fowls ought to look but how
they ought to breed. Experiments have proved that the White Leghorn,
generally considered a “ pure breed,” is very far from being a pure breed
from a genetic point of view. The germ-cells contain a factor for
barring, so that barred fowls can be produced from certain matings of
pure white fowls, ¢.g., by mating a White Leghorn male and a White
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 157

Plymouth Rock female. When the F, progeny are mated a definite
proportion of the F, (12 in 64) are barred. The author adds that it must
be assumed that the Leghorn white (a dominant white) is due to some
positive inhibiting factor which in some way neutralizes the black
pigment, not only in its own somatic cells, which would otherwise show
black, but also with other black breeds. When the inhibiting factor (I)
is present in homozygous condition, black pigmentation is held completely
in control; when I is present in a heterozygous condition, as in the F,,
cross-breeds, the effect is diminished. In addition to these inhibitors of
black pigmentation the White Leghorn also possesses inhibitors for buff
and red.

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTE. Report of Secretary for year ending June
30th, 1913. P. 119. This report, dealing with the operations of the
Smithsonian Institution and its branches during the fiscal year, states
under the head Bureau of American Ethnology, that studies were continued in the investigation of Indian population, the research covering the
whole period from the first occupancy of the country by white people to
the present time, and including the entire territory from the Rio Grande
to the Arctic Ocean. Notable Epidemics, Vital Statistics, and Race Admixture are amongst the subjects dealt with.

THE TRAINING SCHOOL BULLETIN, January, 1915. Vol. xi., No. 9.
Delinquent and Criminal Boys Tested by the Binet Scale. By H. B.
Hickman. Pp. 159-164. The results of these tests show that out of 229
boys only about 63 will be able to go out and take a normal station in
society, at least 45 will be unfit for anything but institution life, and the
remainder will always require assistance of some kind to make a living.
The question is raised whether defective delinquents shall be cared for
in the schools for feeble-minded, in the reformatory institutions, or
whether special institutions are necessary. An analysis of Dr. Hickman’s
study, by E. A. Doll, is given on pp. 165-168.

The First Psychopathic Laboratory in @ Prison. By Alexander
Johnson. P. 169. So far as is known, the State of Kansas is the first
to establish a prison laboratory for the study of the physical and mental
condition of prisoners. During the year ending August 17th, 1914,
325 men were examined, 224 being white and 101 coloured. Of the white
men 33, OF 14.75 per cent., were normal mentally; of the 101 negroes
only 3.96 per cent. were normal. Seventy-five per cent. of the white men
and go per cent. of the negroes belong to that class known as “ morons.”

THE TRAINING SCHOOL BULLETIN, February, 1915. Vol. xi., No. to.
Editorial. P. 181. In the editorial notes it is suggested that it would
be distinctly beneficial if some parts of the tracts of land used for forestry
or game preserves in the different States were turned over to a Board for
a colony for the feeble-minded, as these people can do a great deal, such
as reforestation and caring for stock, and under supervision do it most
faithfully.

Lhe Adaptation Board as a Measure of Intelligence. By H. Goddard,
Ph.D. Pp. 182-188. One of the most marked characteristics of the feebleminded is their lack of ability to adapt themselves to changed conditions.
Since the power to make such adaptation is essential to any kind of
independent existence in modern society, its absence becomes a serious
handicap. With the idea of measuring this power of adaptation, the
following device, called for convenience the “adaptation board,” was
brought into use. It consists of a piece of half-inch wood, 22x28 cm.
Through this are bored four holes, the centres of which are about 55 mm.
from the sides and 70 mm. from the ends of the board. Three of the
holes have a diameter of 63 mm., the fourth has a diameter of 65 mm.
A circular piece of wood is prepared, in diameter 64 mm., so that it will
fit easily into the larger hole, but not into the other three holes. In
158 EUGENICS REVIEW.

making the test the examiner says to the child: “ The block will only
fit into one of these holes; find which one.” After finding the hole, the
child is again asked to repeat the operation until he can place it without
hesitation. The examiner then turns the board over from left to right,
doing it slowly while the child is watching—and having done so, asks the
child to place the block in the only hole it will fit—and so altering the
position of the board, the examination continues. Results for feebleminded and normal children are given in the form of tables and curves.

POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY, March, 1915. Vol. ixxxvi., No. 3.
The Biological Laboratories of the Pacific Coast. By Professor William
E. Ritter, pp. 223-232. The author gives particulars of the scope of the
biological laboratories established on the Coast of California. At the
extreme north the University of Washington, in conjunction with other
institutions, has a laboratory at Friday Harbour, on San Juan Island.
On Monterey Bay, Central California, the Timothy Hopkin’s Laboratory,
belonging to Leland Stanford Junior University, has been established for
23 years; near by is the Herzstein Laboratory, owned by the University
of California. At La Jolla, near San Diego, is the Scripp’s Institution,
also owned by the University of California; and in the vicinity of Los
Angelos, at Venice and Laguna Beach, are laboratories attached to the
University of Southern California and Pomona College respectively.
The Herzstein Laboratory and the Scripp’s Institution are research
laboratories.

Extinct Faunas of the Mohave Desert, their Significance tn a Study
of the Origin and Evolution of Life in America. By Professor John C.
Merriam. Pp. 245-264. The Mohave Desert area lies in the south-east
of the Pacific Coast Province of California. The collections brought
together at various times have opened a view of the mammalian life of
the Mohave Desert in three periods: the Barstow fauna of Upper Miocene
age, the Ricardo fauna of Early Phocene stage, and the Manix fauna
from the Pleistocene. The Miocene and Phocene faunas occur in an
accumulation of strata amounting to not less than 7,000-8,o00 feet in
thickness. The oldest fossil-bearing beds of this area rest upon a basement consisting in part of granite and metamorphosed or altered rocks of
pre-tertiary age. The fauna include about thirty species, the larger part
of the collection consisting of the remains of horses and camels. The
author supplies a comparative table showing the known history of the
mammalian faunas in this area, and remarks that, fragmentary as the
record is, it offers significant evidence regarding the origin, evolution and
migration of important mammal groups; furnishes information concerning the climatic history of the Mohave; and shows the magnitude of the
faunal changes and their apparent definite trend towards the life of to-day.

Eugenic Legislation: A Review. Pp. 142-144. This paper deals
with the bulletin (No. 82) of the University of Washington which contains a summary of the laws of the several United States governing (1)
Marriage and divorce of the feeble-minded, the epileptic and the insane;
(2) Asexualization; (3) Institutional commitment and discharge of the
feeble-minded and the epileptic. The bulletin contains a discussion of the
entire subject of legislation intended to prevent the breeding of a
degenerate race in the United States, and points out that in some respects
the legislation discussed is so out of date, from a biological point of view,
that it is worse than useless. The review concludes with the following
quotation, “In supposing that eugenic laws cannot be enforced, critics
doubtless have in mind what they regard as analogous cases of laws which
were enacted and became dead letters because the public did not feel
their importance. ... Much eugenic legislation is not prohibitory in
character, but is permissive of certain powers on the part of the Courts or
of Commissions appointed for a definite purpose. It is this sort of
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 159

legislation that must necessarily work best, as it is not subject to violation,
and will continue to be used as long as even a few people are intelligently
interested in it.”

SCIENTIA, February, 1915. Vol. xvii., N. (XL-2). Les lots de
Vhybridation et Vaction du milieu. J. Constantin. Pp. 145-163. The
author reviews the field of biological investigation since the year 1g1o and
discusses the rise of the mendelian doctrine since its acclamation in 1906
at the Genetic Conference held in London. He refers to the observations
of M. Zeijlstra, a pupil of De Vries, on Gnothera nanella and his discovery of a bacteria (Micrococcus) which forms Zoogloeal in the
wood fibres, producing swellings of the leaves, shortening of the petals
and twisting of the stalks. Mutation, therefore, in this case apparently is
due to a parasite. The results attained by M. Zeijlstra and others lead
us to believe, he remarks, that the influence of exterior factors exercises a
very important function in the phenomena of mutation, and in the very
considerable changes which appear both in the exterior characteristics of
living matter and in their nuclear constitution. Heredity acquired under
the influence of cosmic environment is bound to have a preponderating
réle in evolution. In his summary the author remarks of heredity in
mutation, that it is a phenomenon, at the same time very stable and very
unstable, since change of country causes the loss of some property which
appeared to be firmly established in other countries. These variations
appear, besides, in accordance with the variations of the nuclear cytology.
In a word, there seems to be a very great difference beween the new
heredity of mutation and the old heredity established by the lengthy
influence of environment.

RIVISTA ITALIANA DI SOCIOLOGIA. May-August, 1914. Rome. This
number contains a very useful paper by P. Consiglio on the facts which
underlie the case for eugenics. The essentials of the eugenic problem
are clearly brought out, but, perhaps, the influence of Lombroso is too
apparent. The writer is deeply impressed with the growth of the
abnormal and degenerate elements of humanity, and argues that just as
national and even international action has been taken against tuberculosis
and alcoholism so State action is necessary to deal with the more complex
problem of eugenics. Army statistics are drawn upon to prove the
increase of degeneracy, and the urgent necessity of checking the reproduction of badly tainted stock is emphasised. The oft repeated objection
that by such proceedings the supply of genius would be cut off is ably met.

H. R.

REVUE ANTHROPOLOGIQUE, May, 1915. Paris. This contains (1) an
anthropometric study of the Jews of the Dobrudscha by Eugene Pittard,
who examined 74 males, and now publishes the figures, showing height,
cephalic index, facial measurements, size of nose, ear, mouth, form of
nose, and colour of hair. If their ancestry were traced back to the 6th-oth
centuries these Jews would be found to be descended in part from
Germanic, Slav, and even Tartar races, and, like the great majority of
European Jews, they share with those of pure race only the name and
the religious observances. While black hair is the rule with the true Jew,
in this particular set the browns and the chestnuts are much more
common. Their mean stature is 1 m. 656, or 5 ft. 5 in., and they belon
mostly to the sub-brachycephalic group, dolicocephalism being a usua
characteristic of the pure Jew. In the towns they are occupied in retail
and wholesale trade, and in the rare cases in which they are found in
country districts their activities lie not in the domain of agriculture, but in
the commercial exploitation of the peasants. M. Pittard points out the
need for research to determine the hereditary dominance in mixed races of
various ethnic traits, and hopes, in the near future, to give an outline
of some results he has himself already obtained.
160 EUGENICS REVIEW.

(2) A detailed account by Dr. Marcel Baudouin, Secretary of the
French Prehistoric Society, of certain skeletons belonging to the neolithic
period originally buried in earth and discovered in the course of excavations at the Dolmen de la Planche a Puare, a l’Ile d’Yeu (Vendée). The
text is illustrated by photos and a sketch map of the site of the “ find.”

(3) An interesting account by M. Mahoudeau of the discovery, in 1589,
of the Pongo (or Gorilla) by an English sailor, one Andrew Battell, who
studied it in its own habitat, under exceptional circumstances. The writer
protests against this probable progenitor of mankind being treated as an
animal to be hunted down, and urges that steps should be taken to verify
Battell’s assertions before the Gorilla’s existence in the natural state is a
thing of the past.

(4) A brief description of the Touaregs, who dwell in the southern
portion of the Sahara, with six photos. H. RAND.

NOTES AND NOTICES.

Leetures.—Professor Arthur Thomson lectured on “ Eugenics and the
War” before the members of the Belfast Branch of the Eugenics Education Society at the Carlton Hall, Donegal Place, on April 13th. Professor Lindsay presided. The lecture followed the lines of the paper by
Professor Thomson published in the April number of this REVIEW.

Dr. Ethel Williams lectured on “War and Eugenics” before the
Newcastle Society for Women’s Suffrage on April 1sth. The lecture
formed part of an educational course, and emphasised the danger to the
race of modern methods of warfare.

Under the Chadwick Trust a course of three lectures on, “ Practical
Hygiene and the Wastage of War” was given at the Permanent Art
Gallery by Dr. C. W. Saleeby. The first lecture, on Tuesday, May 4th,
dealt with “The Past—National Decadence.” The Mayor, Mr. J. L.
Otter, President of the Brighton Branch of the Eugenics Education
Society, presided. The second lecture, “ The Present—the Dysgenics of
War,” took place on May 11th, Sir James Crichton-Browne presiding.
The third, on May 18th, on “Imperial Eugenics,” at which SurgeonColonel Niel Campbell, I.M.S., C.B., presided. In this course the danger
of the selective death-rate of the fit in modern warfare, and its inevitable
result on the quality of the race, was pointed out, and as a constructive
eugenic policy the lecturer advocated an encouragement of marriages
among members of the fighting forces. Intra Imperial migration with a
view to equalising the distribution of the sexes after the War. A strong
opposition on the part of eugenists to any policy calculated to weaken
the stability of monogamous marriage, and public attention focussed on
the education and care of the potential and actual mother.

Soeiéetie d’Eugenique Franeaise.—We hear from Mr. Lucien March,
Secretary of the Comité D’Eugenique Francaise, and Registrar-General of
France, that the War has necessitated the work of the Comité remaining
in abeyance. He himself, and most of his colleagues, are serving with the
Army. We learn with great regret that the well-known eugenist who
attended the International Eugenic Congress in 1912, M. le Docteur
Raoul Dupuy, met his death attending the wounded in the trenches.
QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.

CENTRAL SOCIETY.

May sth.—At the Grafton Galleries, 5.15 p.m., Professor W.
Ridgeway on “ The Problem of our Racial and National Safety.” Chairman, Major L. Darwin. The paper was followed by an animated
discussion. ;

June 3rd.—At the Grafton Galleries, 5.15 p.m., Professor Elliott
Smith on “ The Influence of Racial Admixture in Egypt.” Chairman,
Major L. Darwin.

MEETINGS.

April 22nd.—Mr. C. S. Stock lectured on “ Eugenics and the War,”
before the Educational Association (London Branch).

COMMITTEES.
June 1st.—Executive Council Meeting.

BELFAST BRANCH.

April 13th.—Professor A. J. Thomson delivered a lecture on
“Eugenics and the War” before a large and appreciative audience. Professor J. A. Lindsay presided.

The other branches of the Society are not holding meetings during
the present session owing to the war.

NEW SOUTH WALES BRANCH.

On January 11th.—Mr. J. C. Eldridge lectured on “ Eugenics” before
the Sydney branch of the Workers’ Educational Association. This lecture
may result in study circles being formed, and a course of eugenic lectures
being given on similar lines to that delivered under the auspices of the
Society in London last year. The Government of Victoria recently
appointed a Royal Commission, consisting of members of the Legislative
Assembly and the Legislative Council, to inquire into and report on the
housing problem. The Hon. Secretary of the New South Wales branch
gave evidence, in the course of which he emphasised the influence of
heredity, and pointed out that improvement of housing conditions would
not by itself be sufficient to ensure the improvement of the race, but that
the quality of the stock should be considered, especially in relation to
immigration questions.

On April 7th, 1915, the Conference of the Parents’ and Citizens’
Association met in Sydney and considered various educational subjects.
The association is formed of representatives from organisations connected
with the schools, which have been formed to awaken and maintain
public interest on the part of local parents and others in each school and
in the education of the children attending it. As there are 300 such
associations in the State it is obvious that such a body is extremely
influential in shaping public opinion. This year the subject of eugenics
was introduced for the first time. It is of interest to note that the following
resolution was passed and forwarded to the Government Department :
“ That it is desirable that instruction in certain matters connected with sex
should be given to all the older boys in public schools.”

The following encouraging reply has since been received from the
authorities: “The Department realises the importance of this work, but
its difficulty and delicacy have up to the present deterred the Department
from any action. It is hoped that by the time of your next conference the
Department will be in a position to take some definite action in the matter.”

On April 18th the Hon. Secretary addressed an audience of 400
members of the Australasian Socialist Party on Eugenics. The subject
was well received and aroused great interest.
