THE RHYTHM METHOD: TWO INDIAN
EXPERIMENTS

By C. P. BLACKER

Part [ *

Y most non-Catholic people in this
Bets who are concerned in the family
planning movement, the rhythm
method is regarded with little favour. It is
held to be widely unacceptable and, by
most couples, impracticable; and when found
practicable it is declared to be unreliable.
The method is also said to run counter
to nature in that it prohibits intercourse
during the days of the cycle when it is most
desired by the woman. The human female
is believed to conform with the mammalian
rule that desire is greatest at the time when
the chances of conception are greatest, her
psychology being adjusted to her physiology.
Hence the rhythm method is commonly
dismissed with something like contempt.

Importance in the World of Rhythm Method

Yet from the standpoint of world population the matter is important. The rhythm
method is, for practical purposes, the only
one permitted by the Roman Catholic Church
to which about 430 millions owe allegiance.
The South American continent, where numbers are increasing faster than in any other
continent, is almost wholly Catholic. Several
European countries are likewise placed and
others contain united and sometimes powerful Catholic minorities. These minorities
may, as in Canada, have a higher fertility
than the non-Catholic majority.

The value (in terms of practicability and
effectiveness) of the rhythm method is therefore a matter of high general importance. To
individual Catholic parents the matter has
the same significance as to parents of other
denominations who want to plan their fami
* Part II will appear in the October number of the
EUGENICS REVIEW.

93

lies. And there is the same scale of needs.
At one end is the healthy couple who wish
to space their children; at the other the
woman who is told that she may die if she
again becomes pregnant.

In these circumstances it is strange that
the Roman Catholic Church has not sponsored an impartial and comprehensive
inquiry into the rhythm method. Many
books have been written about it by Catholic
authors—several jointly by doctors and
priests. These books vary within fairly wide
limits in approach and language; but in
none is there a record of a scientifically
designed and controlled inquiry.

For these reasons the Indian investigations
known as the Ramanagaram and Lodi
experiments deserve to be closely examined.
The final reportft is now available in two
cyclostyled volumes.

Briefly, these two volumes show that the
experiments were failures in the sense that
they provided but incomplete answers to the
rather searching questions which they were
designed to answer. But important experience
was nevertheless gained and some valuable lessons were learned. Indeed, the enterprise as a whole reflects much credit on the
Indian Government and on the persons
concerned with the inquiries. Certain
features (mentioned below) of the Report
suggest that both investigations were somewhat abruptly terminated when it became
clear that results on a sufficiently comprehensive scale could not be obtained. Indeed,.
if the inquiries had been carried but a little
further a picture clearer in certain important
details might have emerged.

+ Final Report on Pilot Studies in Family Planning.
Two volumes with 36 Appendices. Issued by the World

Health Organization (WHO) Regional Office for S.E.
Asia. New Delhi. September, 1954. No price given.
04 oo THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Background of the two Experiments

The two experiments were the outcome
of certain general considerations advanced
in India’s first Five-Year plan: (1947-1951)
and of some specific proposals contained in
her second Five-Year plan (1952-1956).
Shortly after acquiring independence in
1947, the designers of the first plan recognized
how the rapid growth of India’s population
could impede the aims of the miscellaneous
economic, health and welfare schemes which
were being prepared with a view to raising
the standard of living.

The pressure of population in India, they said,
is already so high that a reduction in the rate of
growth must be regarded as a major desideratum.
To some extent improvement in living standards
and more widespread education, especially
among women, will themselves tend to lower the
rate. But positive measures are also necessary for
inculcation of the need and techniques of family
planning. (My italics.)

Such were the considerations in the minds
of the designers of the first plan. The proposals advanced in the second plan were
at the same time simple, definite and
comprehensive. They were to:

(a) obtain an accurate picture of the factors contributing to the rapid population increase in
India;

(b) discover suitable techniques of family
planning and devise methods by which
knowledge of these techniques can be widely
disseminated; and

(c) make advice on family planning an integral
part of the services of Government hospitals
and public health agencies.

In response to these proposals, the Indian
Ministry of Health drew up a plan which,
in effect, ‘posed certain questions which were
concerned in different ways with principles
and methods. These questions, which relate
to specifically Indian conditions, can be
summarized under six headings which are
‘most conveniently arranged in the following
order :

(1) How far is the principle of family planning
stillalien to or unacceptable by different Indian
populations? Do cultural or ethical difficulties still block the way? For example an
attitude of fatalism—that fertility is predestined and outside human control; or the

feeling that attempts at such control are
impious or hubristic and therefore likely to be
followed by retributive misfortunes or to
bring bad luck.

(2) If the principle is unacceptable, how can it be
made acceptable by education?

(3) If the principle is found to be, or becomes,
acceptable, what methods are:

most acceptable to men and women of
different creeds, cultural patterns and
degrees of education; and
most practicable in the living conditions
of village, small town or city?

(4) How far are methods which are culturally
acceptable and domestically (under prevailing
living conditions) practicable, also effective in
regulating conceptions according to plan?

(5) Can effective methods be made more acceptable and practicable by education or by
communal or state action?

(6) If none of the existing methods of family
planning satisfactorily meets the above
requirements of being culturally acceptable,
domestically practicable, and effective in
regulating: conception, can new methods
which better meet these requirements be
discovered by appropriate research?

These important and necessary questions,
some of which are more relevant to undeveloped than to developed: countries, can
only be answered by field studies, social and
administrative experiments, and research.

We are told that, early in 1951, the Indian
Ministry of Health decided to inaugurate
studies in the use and effectiveness of the
rhythm method among village and urban
populations. The rhythm method was
selected by the Government because (in the
words of the Report) :

(a) its practice would involve no expense to the

couples;

(b) its practice would not necessarily require

medical supervision; and

(c) it appeared to be consonant with the Indian

traditions of self-control and, in particular,
was acceptable to Gandhian thought.

This last condition is culturally important
in India and should not be overlooked by
westerners. The report says that “a major
assumption in propagating the rhythm
method in India is that the cultural background of its people has made them accustomed to follow some pattern of abstinence
for socially accepted reasons ”’.
THE RHYTHM METHOD: TWO INDIAN EXPERIMENTS ~ 95.

In August of the same year (1951), the
Indian Government, through its Health
Ministry, applied to the World Health
Organization (WHO) for help in the organiza
tion and conduct of field studies in the .

rhythm method. The Government wisely
asked for the assistance, as an organizer of
the studies, of Dr. Abraham Stone, a leading
American authority on problems of birth
control and fertility who is well known to
readers of this REVIEW ; they also asked for
two field workers to assist in the administration of the experiments.

These were Mrs. Taylor (formerly Miss
Mary Langford) and Miss Margaret Snyder.

The first took charge of the Ramanagaram, ©
and the second of the Lodi experiments.

The United Nations was indirectly concerned : at the request of the Indian Government it made available the services of such
distinguished men as Dr. C. Chandrasekaran
and Dr. Sten A. W. Wahlund whose memoranda on the three applications of the rhythm
method (mentioned below) are given prominence in the two volumes. Dr. Wahlund was
present in India on two technical assistance
missions for an aggregate period of about
seven months during the years 1952 and
1953. Dr. Kingsley Davis and Dr. P. K.
Whelpton, both eminent demographers, were
also concerned.

Five aveas were originally considered as
suitable for the experiments. These were
situated in the north (Delhi state and New
Delhi) east (Bengal) and south (Mysore and
Madras) of India. Two of these areas were
finally selected. Ramanagaram, in the state
of Mysore, is situated in the southern
extremity of the Indian peninsula; Lodi
colony, some eleven hundred miles north of
Mysore, is on the outskirts of New Delhi.
As will be seen below, the populations in
these two areas were culturally different
and the designs of the two experiments were
also different.

The aims, drawn up beforehand, of the two
experiments were somewhat ambitious. In
the words of the Report :

Both studies have as their common aims the

measurement of:

(a) the acceptability of the rhythm method;

(b) the effectiveness of the rhythm method in
reducing the number of pregnancies among
those who undertake to use it. The Ramanagaram study has as an additional aim:

(c) the effectiveness of the rhythm method in

reducing the birth-rate of the community.

It will be seen below that the data which,
by the time the experiments were discontinued, had been laboriously and _painstakingly accumulated were quite insufficient
to provide an answer to the last of these
questions. The answer to the second, though
of little statistical value, could have been
formulated with more accuracy if, after the
closure, four cases of suspected pregnancy
had been followed up.

In the Conclusions of the Report, these
three questions are not formally raised and
answered. Nevertheless the answers are
there, and will be considered below.

It was mentioned above that a major
assumption underlying the two experiments
was that the cultural background of India’s
peoples had accustomed them to follow some
pattern of abstinence for socially accepted
reasons. The first and perhaps the foremost
question was whether this “pattern of
abstinence ’’ was such that an acceptance
of the rhythm method, which calls for regular periods of abstinence, could be built
upon it. We are told that, in order to throw
light on these patterns, an ad hoc survey was
conducted in October 1952, shortly after
main studies at Ramanagaram and Lodi had
been begun. :

I heard Dr. Chandrasekaran give a preliminary report on the findings of this inquiry
at the third International Conference on
Planned Parenthood held in Bombay at the
end of 1952. Ina discussion of the “ cultural
component ”’ of sexual abstinence in Indian
life, Dr. Chandrasekaran said: *

Avoidance of coitus associated with religious

festivals and fast days was quite common in both

Ramanagaram and Lodi Colony. Fifty per cent

of the persons interviewed reported such avoid
ance. The phase of the moon plays an important

role here. New moon days, full moon days and
Ekadashi, i.e. the eleventh day after the new or

* Proceedings of Third International Conference on
Planned Parenthood, 1952. Pp. 73-79. Obtainable from
International Planned Parenthood Federation, 69
Eccleston Square, London, S.W.1. Price ros. 6d.
96 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the full moon, were frequently mentioned in
Ramanagaram. Specific days of the week were
mentioned by some in this area, especially
Sunday, Monday and Saturday. The days when
a man has a shave and a bath, days of the sowing
of the fields, days of solar and lunar eclipses were
also mentioned in some cases.

The reasons for avoidance in Lodi Colony
related either to the phase of the moon or to
well-known festivals. The number of days of
avoidance for religious reasons mentioned by

' individuals ranged from two to 120 per year
in Ramanagaram and from one to seventy-nine
in Lodi Colony; the median was twenty-four
days in Ramanagaram and nineteen days in
Lodi Colony....

In both areas abstinence from coitus during
the wife’s pregnancy was reported. On an

average this abstinence began after about five ©

months in Ramanagaram and six months in
Lodi Colony. Abstinence during lactation was
also reported in both areas. In Ramanagaram
80 per cent of the cases reported such abstinence
for six months or more; in Lodi Colony the
period of abstinence seldom exceeded three
months.

Dr. Chandrasekaran further pointed out
in 1952 that traditional beliefs tend to result
in coitus taking place at the time when
conception is now known to be most probable. This matter is discussed in the Report.
We are there told that ‘‘an important
cultural practice which contributed to the
difficulties of teaching the Rhythm Method
was the avoidance of coitus for at least eight
days after the onset of menstruation. This
practice has been found to be practically
universal among the village couples. In a
few cases this avoidance continues for 12 to
15 days and in one case for 18 days ”’.

Commenting on _ this practice, Dr.
Chandrasekaran pointed out at Bombay
that :

Whatever the origins of the tradition, it
presents the inescapable fact that the rhythm
method can prove effective for many people in

these communities only in so far as they can be

brought to make certain revisions of their existing patterns of sexual union as they relate to
menstruation.

Dr. Chandrasekaran was careful to point
out “that these studies do not answer all
the questions raised by India’s cultural
‘diversity with respect to human reproduction. Additional studies will need to be

undertaken in various parts of the country ”’.
He was also careful to stress that the views
expressed in his paper were personal and
did not commit in any way the United
Nations which had made his collaboration
in the inquiries possible.

It will be seen below that, despite the
existence in both places of cultural patterns
favourable to abstinence, the results of the
Ramanagaram and Lodi experiments suggest
that the rhythm method often makes excessive demands on the willingness of Indian
husbands to practise abstinence for the
necessary periods.

Three Adaptations of the Rhythm Method

Three methods, a routine method and two
modifications, were tried.
(a) The Routine Method. Here information

about three and preferably six of the woman’s
cycles is necessary.

(b) The One-Cycle rule. Information about one
cycle only is here necessary.

(c) The Omnibus rule. Applicable when nothing
is known of the woman’s cycle.

The object of all three methods is to inform
the woman which are the days in her cycle
when conception is likely to occur (here
called the ‘‘ baby days’’) and which are
those when conception is unlikely (here
called the “ no baby days’, “ safe days’, or
the “‘ safe period’).

The rhythm method, when used for
purposes of avoiding pregnancy, requires
abstention. from intercourse during the
“ baby days”’.

For those unfamiliar with the method, a
brief outline of its theoretical basis, as
set out in this Report, may be helpful.
Ovulation normally occurs between the
twelfth and sixteenth day after the first
day (or onset) of menstruation, here and
throughout the Report called ‘‘ onset day”.
It is obvious that on the days in the middle
of the cycle, immediately before and immediately after ovulation, coitus is likely to be
followed by conception. These are the
“baby days’, during which abstinence
must be practised. In the calculation of the
“baby days’, allowances have to be made
THE RHYTHM METHOD: TWO INDIAN EXPERIMENTS 97

for two factors which are relatively unvarying and for one which is variable. The two
relatively unvarying factors are the length
of life in the woman’s genital tract of the
unfertilized ovum (about two days), and
the length of life of spermatozoa in the same
genital tract (about three days); the
variable factor is the length of the woman’s
cycle, which is mainly determined by when
ovulation takes place.

The woman’s cycle can, for this purpose,
be divided into two periods; the first (the
pre-ovulation phase) is the period elapsing
between the onset day (above defined) and

the day on which ovulation takes place ; the

second period (the post-ovulation phase) is
the period elapsing between the day of
ovulation and the next onset day. Variations
in the length of the total cycle are more
likely to be produced by irregularities in the
first of these two periods (the pre-ovulation
phase) than in the second (the post-ovulation
phase). Indeed it will be seen below that
one of the above-mentioned modifications
of the rhythm method, the One Cycle Rule,
is based upon the assumption that the last
seven days of the post-ovulation phase (the
seven days before onset day) can definitely
be counted as “safe”. By then ovulation
will almost certainly have occurred and the
ovum will no longer be fertilizable.

The central problem, then, of the rhythm
method is how to calculate which are the
woman’s ‘“‘ baby days’ (during which abstinence must be practised) while making due
allowances for possible variations in the
length of the expected cycles.

It follows that, in theory, the “no
baby ” days, or “‘ safe days’”’ occur at two
different times in the woman’s cycle, namely
before and after the ‘‘ baby days’. The
“early safe days’’ (before the baby days)
begin with the onset day ; the first three or
four are taken up with menstruation and
the number of the remainder varies with
the length of the established cycle. The
“late safe days ’’ follow the baby days and
end the day before onset. The shorter the
cycle, the fewer of these ‘‘ early safe days’,
the longer the cycle, the more of them. The
late safe days do not vary.

(a) The Routine Method

This method is based on the observation
of the length of the woman’s cycles over a
preliminary or “‘ observation ”’ period of six
months. No advice as to how to make use
of the rhythm method is imparted during the
first three months of this observation period.
But after four onset days (three cycles) have
been recorded preliminary “ rhythm advice”
is given. At this stage about twenty-one
days in the cycle are flagged as “ baby days ”’
—a long period calling for a considerable
exercise in abstinence.

Three months later when seven onset days
are recorded (covering six cycles) the rhythm
advice is revised and if possible fewer
baby days are assigned. The need for this
rather long period of observation is a definite
drawback to the rhythm method—a drawback which is not shared by the usual
appliance methods. It will be seen below
that many women became pregnant during
this ‘“‘ observation period ’’ and that others
lost interest.

In the course of the observation period
lasting six months, seven “ onset days ”’ are
recorded and the duration in days of the
longest and shortest of the six cycles is
noted. If the difference between the longest
and shortest cycle exceeds eight days (being
nine or more days) the rhythm method is not
recommended. This condition excludes a
proportion of women and is another drawback to the rhythm method compared to
others. —

The longest and shortest of the six cycles
having been determined the procedure is to
deduct eighteen from the number of days
of the shortest cycle and eleven from the
figure for the longest cycle. Suppose a
woman’s longest cycle were thirty-three days
and her shortest twenty-seven days—a
difference of six days. Twenty-seven minus
eighteen gives nine; thirty-three minus
eleven gives twenty-two. This woman’s
“baby days ”’ are from the gth to the 22nd
day of her cycle—in this case fourteen days.
The remaining days are “‘ no baby days ”’ or
“safe days’. If this woman’s menstrual
period lasted four days, the eight days after
onset being safe, she would have four
98 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

“early safe days ’’ during which intercourse
could take place immediately after menstruation has ceased ; she would also have in a
twenty-nine day cycle about eight “late
safe days’’ before it again began—in all
twelve “ safe days ’’ against fourteen “ baby
days”. The smaller the variation in the
length of the cycle the more numerous the
“safe days’’ and the fewer the “ baby
days’. Thus, if the woman’s six cycles, as
noted during the “ observation period ”’ of
six months, had all lasted thirty days, thirty
would be the figure from which both eighteen
and eleven would be subtracted. Thirty
minus eighteen gives twelve and minus
eleven gives nineteen. Her “ baby days”
would run from the 12th to the r9th day
inclusive—eight days. The “safe days”
would be correspondingly more numerous.
Briefly the longer the cycle and the less it
varies the fewer are the “ baby days” and
the longer the safe period. The gain in
length is effected by an increase in the postmenstrual or early safe days.

(b) The One-Cycle Rule

This application of the rhythm method is
used when it is regarded as urgent that
immediate guidance should be imparted and
when the duration of but a single cycle is
known.. How does the woman calculate the
probable length of the expected cycle on the
basis of knowledge of a single past cycle?
She does it by adding the figure 29 to the
number of days in the single recorded cycle
and dividing the total by two. Twenty-nine
days is the average length of the cycle. Thus
a woman whose single observed cycle covered

twenty-five days would have an expected.

cycle of twenty-seven days (25 plus 29
equals 54; 54 divided by two is 27). The
One-Cycle rule was tried in the fifteenth
village (Bannikuppe) in the area of the
Ramanagaram experiment which included
fourteen ‘“‘experimental’’ and _— sixteen
‘“control’’ villages (see below).
Cycle rule is only applicable when the single
known cycle: is not less than twenty or
more than forty days in length. If the cycle
falls outside these limits, the “rule” is
inapplicable.

The One-.

many couples.

The “rule” fixed seven pre-menstrual
days as “‘ safe’. The fifteen preceding days
are ‘‘ baby days’. Thus, of the twenty-one
days before onset day, the first fifteen will be
“baby days’’ and the last seven “ safe
days’. Hence, the longer a woman’s cycle,
the more fost-menstrual or “‘early’”’ safe
days will be available (the pve-menstrual or
“late ’’ safe days being fixed at seven).
A woman with an established twenty-one
day cycle would have no “ early ”’ safe days ;
one with an established cycle of thirty
days would have nine such days (including
those taken up by menstruation).

The One-Cycle rule is held to be less
dependable than the routine method of calculating the “ baby days’’, but it has the advan
_tage of shortening the observation period.

from six months to one.

(c) The Omnibus Rule

This “‘ rule’, which is less reliable than
the other two—Dr. Wahlund suggests that
it covers go per cent of cycles—is applicable
to women as to whose previous cycles nothing
is known. It assumes that the fifteen days
elapsing from the 8th to the 22nd days
after ‘‘ onset ’’ (the first day of menstruation)
are ‘‘ baby days’”’ and that the other days
in the cycle are “‘ safe days’. A small-scale
test of the Omnibus rule was made on an
illiterate but highly orthodox colony of
sweepers and peons at Aliganj, near Lodi
(see below).

One of the advantages of the routine over
the other two methods is that, for women
with regular cycles, the number of “ baby
days ’’ can be reduced. The method is, so to
speak, elastic. As mentioned above, a woman
who, for example, could report six unvarying
cycles of thirty days would have but eight
“baby days ” in each cycle ; about a week’s
abstinence would be demanded. But both
the One-Cycle and Omnibus rules invariably
prescribe fifteen baby days. Hence about a
fortnight’s abstinence is exacted. This long
period of abstinence was found difficult by
Thus in Aliganj, where the
small experiment in the Omnibus rule was
tried, the provisional conclusion was reached
that “few couples will adopt the Omnibus
THE RHYTHM METHOD: TWO INDIAN EXPERIMENTS 99

rule because of the long period of abstinence
which is required ”’.

Instructions to the Couple

We are told that; of the 811 ‘ willing to
learn ’’ couples observed in the fourteen
“experimental ”’ villages of Ramanagaram,
only 155 men (19 per cent) and nineteen
(2 per cent) of women reported that they
could read. Their powers of calculation
were correspondingly limited. Simple methods of instruction had therefore to be devised
in order to secure accuracy in the recording,
over six months, of the seven onset days the
precise dates of which were needed before
“ rhythm advice ”’ could be finalized.

An ingenious system of beads (in the form
of necklaces) was devised by Dr. Stone and
offered to all the co-operating couples in the
Ramanagaram experiment. The beads were
in three colours. A single red bead appropriately fixed the onset day. Green beads
indicated the “no baby.” or safe days;
black beads the ‘‘ baby days ”’ when abstinence was required. If the beads were
rejected, calendar cards were offered. These
were more acceptable to the men (among
whom there was more literacy) than to the

women. Some couples rejected both beads
and calendars. To these oral instructions
were given.

The use of the necklaces of beads presented
difficulties which give an idea of the problems
presented by educationally backward populations. Many women believed that the
beads had magical qualities and that the
mere act of manipulating the beads protected
them against pregnancy. In the words of
the Report ‘a major teaching problem was
convincing the woman that merely moving
the beads daily did not protect her from
pregnancy ’’. Other objections were that, if
handled during the days of menstruation,
the beads would become polluted ; and that
during certain religious festival days they
were unclean and should not be retained in
the house.. We are told that, on these occasions several women returned their beads
to the workers in the experiment. The
Report adds :

Both the women who accepted the beads, and
the men who accepted the calendar cards have
claimed to be too busy to check the item daily.
Most of the couples resorted to weekly checking.
A number of couples had no place in their houses
for keeping their aids safely from the curious eyes
of other members of the household. One woman
left her beads next door with a neighbour.

Such difficulties though doubtless discouraging to the organizers of the experiment are revealing. . They well illustrate
the need for the close study of cultural and
domestic factors before embarking on large
scale programmes of national scope.

The Ramanagaram Experiment
Of the two experiments this was the most

~ ambitious and much the most difficult. It

was also the most generously staffed. We
are told that at least fifty workers were
employed in it for varying periods. The
first batch of thirty-one field and four office
workers began work in May 1952. Many
of the difficulties arose from the scattered
distribution of the rural population in small
villages and hamlets each of which had to be
frequently visited. The Report tells us that
“only a few of the villages are located ona
‘pukka’ (paved) road. The others are
approachable by ‘kutcha’ (dirt) bullock
track roads. The majority of the hamlets
are reached only by cart tracks or footpaths ’’. The workers were confronted with
serious transport difficulties during certain
stages of the inquiry.

Two reasons are given for selecting
Ramanagaram as a suitable locality for this
experiment. The first is the fact that in
1936 the Rockefeller Foundation had established there a Health Training Centre which

may have familiarized the population with

health services. Indeed it seems possible
that as a result of this past experience the
experimental population of Ramanagaram
was more amenable to new ideas than other
rural populations might have been. The
second reason was the availability of census
data from Mysore’s State Census Office and
from certain population studies previously
conducted by Dr. Chandrasekaran.

The design of the experiment was ambitious. Thirty-one villages were included. Of
I00

these, fourteen were “ experimental’ and
sixteen “‘control”’ villages. A fifteenth
“experimental ’”’ village (Bannikuppe) was
later added for the special study of the OneCycle rule. The Report gives some particulars
of the demographic, occupational and climatic conditions of the experimental and
control areas. We are told that the population of the fourteen experimental villages
numbered 7,564. The birth rate in these
villages during the four years 1950-1953 was
high ; it varied between 45 and 54 per
thousand. Hence the number of births varied
during these years between about 330 and
405. These figures have a bearing on the
third question to which the experiment was
expected to provide an answer namely
“ the effectiveness of the rhythm method in
reducing the birth rate of the community ”
(see above).

There is little comparison in the Report
between the findings in the ‘‘ experimental ”’
and “‘ control ’’ villages. Indeed, little is said
about the control experiment.

A feature in which the Ramanagaram contrasted with the Lodi experiment was that
in the former both husbands and wives were
interviewed ; ‘in the latter, only the wives.
In Ramanagaram, lady workers interviewed
the wives and men workers the husbands,
if possible on the same day—not an easy
condition to translate into practice. The
WHO supervisor (Mrs. Taylor) and the workers had to surmount many obstacles and
frustrations. Two may here be mentioned,
namely ‘‘the intensity of the untimely
criticisms from various sources [which] at
times hampered the efforts of the workers
to conduct the study objectively” ; and the
gradual realization of the limitations of the
rhythm method. This difficulty is further
considered below.

The disappointing course of the inquiry
may now be generally indicated. An elaborately planned and ambitious investigation,
from which definite and substantial results
were clearly expected, was slowly found to
dwindle in scope and possibilities. As the
inquiry progressed, increasing numbers of
couples fell out or were dropped as unsuitable
and the number of couples whose experiences

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

could yield the desired information dwindled.
By miscellaneous processes of erosion, a
respectably sized mountain slowly shrank to
the dimensions of a mound. To 112 women
only was the rhythm method eventually
taught ; and of these but thirty-nine used it
sufficiently regularly for its reliability as a
birth control method to be assessed. Indeed,
the erosion of the mountain proceeded so
far that it is easy to understand why the
experiment was abruptly and_ perhaps
prematurely terminated.

It is notorious that all birth control
methods are difficult to assess according to
scientifically acceptable standards of accuracy in respect of their two most relevant
features, namely acceptability and effectiveness (reliability). Of no method, however,
are the difficulties of inquiry and assessment
greater than of the rhythm method. In what
follows, attention will be drawn to difficulties
in the Ramanagaram experiment which,
being specific to the rhythm method, would
not have arisen from other methods if these
had been under investigation instead of the
rhythm method. .

Preliminary Stages

The preliminary stage of the inquiry
included the preparation of a house list for
each village and its surrounding hamlets,
and the conduct of household surveys of the
houses in the villages of the experimental
and control areas (every other house was
surveyed in the control area). Detailed
personal particulars of all inmates were
obtained in these household surveys which
included the reproductive histories of women
who were, or had before been, married. In
this way it was ascertained how many households contained couples who could be
included in the inquiry—i.e. couples who
were sexually active, the wives being under
forty.

An “ Attitude Survey’’ was then ‘undertaken: this was designed to find out how
many couples wanted to learn a method of
family planning. As above mentioned, both
husbands and wives were questioned about
this matter by male and female workers
respectively, if possible on the same day.
THE RHYTHM METHOD: TWO INDIAN EXPERIMENTS

Case cards (a facsimile is reproduced in
volume 2 of the Report) were then filled in.
These case cards, on which was recorded
all the relevant preliminary information,
were designed for ‘‘ maintaining a running
record of the various contacts with the cooperating couple’. The information on these
cards provides the statistical material for
.the Report. A final feature of the preliminary
stage of the inquiry were two ad hoc studies,
obviously necessary in the general context
of the inquiry, which -were designed to
ascertain whether the village women recognized colours (cf. the necklaces of beads),
whether they knew the days of the week,
how they reckoned days, weeks and months,
and what counting system they used.

The figures which emerged from the preliminary stage of the experiment were as
follows :

The fourteen experimental villages contained
1,600 households; these households contained
1,301 couples, the wives being under forty.

Of these 1,301 couples, attitude surveys were
completed in respect of 1,088 couples and abandoned in respect of 213 couples. The reasons for
abandonment had nothing to do with the
rhythm method. Inability to interview both
partners (for which there were several causes)
and non-consummation of the marriage were
mainly responsible.

The results of the Attitude Survey (which
covered 1,088 couples) showed that one or
both partners of 8rz couples (75 per cent)
were willing to learn a method of birth
control, and that 277 (25 per cent) were
unwilling. The reasons for this unwillingness
again had nothing to do with the rhythm
method. A large fraction—103 women
(37 per cent)—had no surviving children. A
still larger fraction—127 women (45 per
cent)—had had children but wanted more ;
among these were twenty-three who had
had no male children. Five women gave
as a-:reason that they wished to obey their
elders, and another five that children were
gifts of God.

Instruction and Application Stages

So much for the preliminary stage
of the inquiry which included the attitude

Ior

surveys: these produced the highly
encouraging finding that three-quarters of
the couples interviewed expressed willingness to Jearn a birth control method—a
proportion which was closely matched by the
Bannikuppe and Lodi couples (see below).
The preliminary stage was followed by the
Instruction and Application stages of the
experiment. The results here were far from
encouraging. Indeed, the outcome was a
most drastic whittling down of numbers.

Of the 81z couples who were willing to
learn a birth control method, the wives of
247 couples (30 per cent) were reporting
menses and were theoretically eligible for
“rhythm advice’. But such advice was not
given to 135 of these 247 women for reasons
given below. The rhythm method was
actually taught to rz2 couples—to 14 per
cent of those willing to learn. The remaining
699 couples either became unwilling or
proved unsuitable for several reasons. Some
of these reasons are similar to those responsible for the exclusions already noted, and
have nothing to do with the rhythm method.
But others—and these are in a large majority
—are directly connected with difficulties
and defects presented by the rhythm method.

The Report does not distinguish between
these two groups of reasons, which is perhaps |
a pity. In what follows an attempt will be—
made to separate them.

Rhythm Method Not Taught : 699 among 811
‘¢ Willing to Learn ’’ Couples

The 699 couples who either became
unwilling to learn, or proved unsuitable for,
the rhythm method are classified by the
report in the following five groups :

Rhythm method not taught : 135 couples

These women were eligible for ‘“ rhythm
advice ’’ in the sense that they were reporting
menses. But two were temporarily away from
the village and the remaining 133 reported
either an insufficient number of cycles to be
eligible for instruction (ninety women) or they
reported three or more cycles with too great a
variation in their length to be suitable for the
rhythm method (forty-three women). All these
women were eligible to be taught the routine
appliance method, which only needs one or two
sessions of instruction.
102

Women pregnant : 83 women

Of these eighty-three women, seventy-six
became pregnant during the six months “ observation period’’ required before the rhythm
method was taught. Seven became pregnant
without menstruating. At least seventy-six out
of these eighty-three cases could theoretically
have been taught an appliance method before
they became pregnant.

Women not menstruating : 312 women

Lactation was the cause in 296 women. The
failure of the remaining sixteen to menstruate
was either due to illness or to the fact that they
had recently lost young children or had had stillbirths. All these women were theoretically
eligible to learn an appliance method. This subgroup of women is easily the largést of the five.

Unwilling to learn: 98 couples
“Shortly after the Instruction stage of the

study got under way ’’, the Report says, “a
number of couples began to change their minds
and became unwilling to learn the method.’’
The causes of this change are discussed at some
length. The reasons are generally similar to
those given by the 277 couples (a quarter of the
total) who, in the attitude survey, declared
themselves unwilling to learn a method. Among
these reasons a desire for more children and a
belief that no more children would be born
figure prominently. None of the reasons is
specifically related to the rhythm method.

Closed cases: 7I women

The causes of closure are closely similar to the
causes of the abandonment of the attitude
surveys (213 cases) above noted. The commonest
(thirty-five cases) was that the couple had moved
or had been separated from each other (in six
cases by death); and that the wife had reached
the menopause (twenty-seven women). None of
these causes is specifically connected with the
rhythm method.

If the inferences above drawn about the
eligibility of the first three of the above
five groups of women to learn an appliance
method is justified, about 500 of the 699
women who could not be taught the rhythm
method could have been taught another
method. Between seventy and eighty of
these women (those who became pregnant)
could have learned a method which might
have prevented an unwanted pregnancy.
But it should be noted that the majority
of women who might have been taught an
alternative method would not have been
eligible subjects for the basic inquiry. Thus

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

312 of the 699 women could not be taught the
rhythm method because they were lactating.
These women might have been taught an
appliance method which would have served
them when they again began to menstruate
or when their periods of lactation were over
—we are told that many women were
menstruating while lactating. (We are also
told that, in the attitude survey, many
women declared that they did not begin to
menstruate again till their child was eighteen
months old). But the experiences of these
lactating women would have been of little
use for the purposes of the survey which was
primarily concerned with the protection
afforded by the rhythm method to women
who were exposed to the risk of pregnancy.

Rhythm Method Taught: 112 among 811
‘*¢ Willing to Learn ’’ Couples

It was above mentioned that, of the 811
women who expressed willingness to learn a
method, the rhythm method was actually
taught to but 112. What were the experiences
of these 112 women? It will be seen that a
further whittling down of numbers occurred.

Method Abandoned or Outcome Unknown: 32
women

The follow-up inquiry lasted thirteen months
—from January 1953 to February 1954. By the
end of this period, information was lacking about
two women, and two more became ineligible
because their cycles became irregular after they
had been given advice. There remain twentyeight women who abandoned the method. We
are given particulars about these women. Four
gave up the method because of the menopause,
the death of a husband, and lactation. None
of these causes is specifically connected with the
rhythm method. Another ten gave it up for
miscellaneous reasons: five because they wanted
more children and another five for reasons of
which one was specifically connected with the
rhythm method (‘“ unable to abstain ’’) and of
which the other four may have been so connected
(in two cases criticism—perhaps arising from
the home visits—was feared’ and in the other
two co-operation was lacking). In the remaining
fourteen cases the woman became pregnant.
One of these pregnancies was wanted; the other
thirteen were, in one way or another, attributable to defects of the rhythm method. Two
women became pregnant when following the
method regularly, eight reported coitus during
THE RHYTHM METHOD: TWO INDIAN EXPERIMENTS

“baby days’’, one felt that ‘“‘ people were
making fun of them ’’, one experienced irregular
cycles and did not receive the revised rhythm
advice, and one was incorrectly advised by the
worker. Hence the abandonment of the rhythm
method was attributable in at least half of these
thirty-two cases to defects specific to the rhythm
method.

There remain eighty couples among the 112
who were taught the rhythm method. Of these
half—thirty-nine couples—were, by February
1954, using the method irregularly and the other
half—forty-one couples—were using it regularly.

Method Followed Irregularly ::39 women

We are not told much about these. At least
seven induced abortions were known to have
occurred among them.

Method Followed Regularly: 41 women

Of these we are given particulars of thirtynine. It is on the experience of these thirty-nine
women, to whom we are finally whittled down,
that an assessment of the reliability of the rhythm
method is possible. How far was the rhythm
method successful in controlling or postponing
pregnancy among these thirty-nine women? A
useful standard based on the general experience
of couples in the Ramanagaram area is given.
Outside the fourteen experimental villages, no
attempt is made to control conceptions but
“knowledge about abortions is widespread ’’.
We are told that the average period between
live-births occurring to women who make no use
of birth control methods is 42 months—34 years.
“ Deducting nine months for full-term pregnancies’’, the Report tells us, ‘‘ and allowing for
miscarriages and still-births, there are roughly
30 months between conceptions. About ten
months should be allowed for the lactation
period and the resumption of regular menses.
Twenty months of exposure per conception
remain.” (The figure might be less if due allowance were made for abortions.) To what extent
did the rhythm method, as regularly used by
these thirty-nine women, prolong this period of
exposure? The answer provided by the Report is
not precise. We are told that, by February
1954, when the experiment was wound up, two
of these thirty-nine women had become definitely
pregnant and that there were four further
suspected pregnancies. It would surely have
been a small task, in view of the scale of the

experiment, with its fifty or so workers and‘

sixteen control villages, to have definitely
ascertained whether these four women were or
were not pregnant. But for some reason this was
not done. Hence the important question of the
reliability of the rhythm method turns on
suppositions. On the assumption that only two
of six of the thirty-nine women who used this
method regularly were in fact pregnant, the

103

months of exposure per conception per couple is
given as 110°5, or five and a half times the
average expectation (20 months) for women in
the Ramanagaram area who use no birth control;
on the assumption that the four suspected
pregnancies were real (six out of the thirty-nine
women having become pregnant), the months of
exposure are reduced to 35-8 or a little less than
double the normal expectation. The nearest,
therefore, that the report on women in the
Ramanagaram experiment can take us to the
desired assessment of reliability is the statement
that ‘‘ the regular users of the method can hope
to postpone the next pregnancy from nearly
2 to 54 times as many months of exposure
as those who do not use the method, if the
above computations remain valid for a larger
number of couples for a longer period of time”’
(It may here be mentioned that the figure for
women in the Lodi experiment who regularly
used the rhythm method was 53 months of
exposure, which is roughly intermediate between
the two outside figures (110°5 and 35-8) for the
reported thirty-nine users of rhythm in the
Ramanagaram experiment).

Difficulties and Defects of Rhythm Method

These are well conveyed by a revised
enumeration of the 811 ‘ willing to learn ”’
couples which is contained in a final
summary.

Num- Per
bers cent
1. Couples following the method:
Regularly 41
Irregularly 39
Unknown 2 82 Io'l
2. Couples with too great variation in the woman’s cycles
for using the method 47 5°8
3. Couples reporting insufficient cycles for teaching the
method : go II-2

4. Couples with wife pregnant. (At. least 76 of the women
here became pregnant during the observation period of
six months, i.e. after reporting one onset date) . 97 «=«II'g

5. Couples unwilling to learn or to use the rhythm method 108 I13°4

6. Couples with wife not reporting menses (at least 296 of

these were lactating) . ais -- 3130 385
7. Closed cases: couples no longer available. oe os) 74 gl
81r 100-0

 

Groups 2 to 6 include women who could
not be taught the rhythm method because
of difficulties and defects which are characteristic of that method. These five groups
comprise 655 out of the 811 “ willing to
learn’’ women (over 80 per cent). The
great majority of these 655 women could
have been taught another method. The
lactating women contained in group 6, if
taught another method which might have
protected them advantageously in the future
(when they began to menstruate again or
ceased to lactate), could not have contributed
104

much information to the two main issues
of the experiment, namely the acceptability
and reliability of a method. These women
could have made a modest contribution to
the acceptability problem by their reactions
to an alternative method and their willinghess to learn it; but they could not put
the method into practice as long as they
continued to lactate : and they could provide
no information, as long as they were not
menstruating, on the method ’s reliability.

Ramanagaram Experiment: Summary of
Figures

For purposes of comparison with the
Bannikuppe and Lodi experiments, accounts
of which follow, a summary of the figures
above set forth may be helpful.

Total households in the fourteen experimental
villages of Ramanagaram. . 1,600
Number of couples in these 1,600 households
who were (supposedly) sexually active, the
wives being under forty .. 1,301
Number of couples, among the 1,301 as to whom
attitude surveys were completed. . 1,088
Number of couples, among the 1,088, who
were willing to learn a method of birth
control 811 (75 per cent)
Number of couples, among the 811, where the
women reported menses .. 247 (30 per cent)
Number of couples, among the 811, where the
women reported menses and to whom the
rhythm method was taught 112 (14 per cent)
Number of couples, among the 112, who, at the
end of the experiment, were regularly using
the rhythm method 41 (37 per cent)
Number of months exposure per conception per
couple among thirty-nine of forty-one regular
users of rhythm (the average number of
months of such exposure for women not
practising birth control in the area of Ram
anagaram being 20)—a figure somewhere
between 35°8 and 110°5.

The One-Cycle Rule : Bannikuppe

Something should briefly be said about this
relatively small experiment which was begun
late in July 1953 at the request of the
village leaders and which, in respect of the
acceptability seems to have been more successful than the main experiment. Bannikuppe is
a fifteenth village in the experimental area of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the Ramanagaram project and is larger
than any of the other fourteen. It contains
nearly fifteen hundred people.
The figures corresponding to those just given
are as follows:
Households in the village an Bar
Attitude survey included 181 couples and was
completed for 164 couples.
Number of couples where one or both partners
wished to learn a method.. 123 (75 per cent)

Of these 123 couples, the wife was pregnant in
twenty-nine, and neither pregnant nor menstruating in sixty; thirty-four (28 per cent) .
of the 123 wives reported menses and were
therefore eligible recipients of ‘rhythm
advice ’’.

By the end of February 1954, seven months after
the Bannikuppe experiment began, no less
than thirty-three out of these thirty-four
couples had learned the One-Cycle rule, and,
of these thirty-four couples, twenty-four were
using it regularly. The remaining nine were

_ using it irregularly or had given it up for
various reasons which included one case of
pregnancy and one in which, in addition to
the One-Cycle rule, the couple were practising
coitus interruptus during the baby days.

Even when due allowance is made for the
short period during which the Bannikuppe
experiment lasted, the figure of twenty-four
regular users of the rhythm method among
thirty-four to whom it had been taught
compares favourably with that for the
main experiment—forty-one regular users
among II2 such women.

The report comments on the following
favourable features of this small experiment :
at the outset Bannikuppe couples were
familiar with the idea of the rhythm method
and asked for it to be taught to them ; the
workers had gained in skill by the time the
experiment began ; it was advantageous to be
able to dispense with beads and calendars and
still more so with the long “ observation
period ”’ of six months ; the period of fifteen
baby days imposed by the One-Cycle rule
was more acceptable than the longer period
of about twenty-one days during which
couples in the fourteen other villages were
required to practise abstinence for the first
three months after rhythm advice was first
imparted (from the fourth to the seventh
onset day); and lastly fewer home visits
«THE RHYTHM METHOD: TWO INDIAN EXPERIMENTS

were necessary, thus conserving worker’s
time and avoiding possible resentment. We
are told that many couples in the other
villages “‘ did not wish their neighbours to
know that they were learning the rhythm
method and resented the great many visits
necessitated during the instruction stage’”’.

The reader is left in no doubt that the
One-Cycle rule, as taught at Bannikuppe,
is more acceptable to the Indian villagers of

105

the Ramanagaram area than the routine
method as taught at the other fourteen
villages. But whether the One-Cycle rule is
as reliable as the other is another matter.
The smaller experiment did not last long
enough for its reliability to be assessed, and
in any case the data as to reliability of the
routine method as reported in the other
fourteen villages are too meagre to provide a
standard of comparison.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVII, No. 2
