THE HEREDITARY TENDENCY
TO TWINNING, WITH SOME OBSERVATIONS
CONCERNING THE THEORY OF HEREDITY
GENERALLY

PaRT I[

By JAMES OLIVER, M.D., F.R.S. (Edin.), F.L.S.

HEREDITY, which is a subject of the deepest interest to
metaphysicians, statesmen, and social reformers alike, and
attracts daily more and more attention, implies the handing
on from generation to generation, from parent to offspring, of
specific and particulate characteristics, and it operates so constantly and so generally in the organic world under natural
conditions, that we are fully warranted in affirming that ‘‘like
begets like.”” With the truth of this axiom we are all in fact
so thoroughly imbued, that without pausing to think whether it
‘s or is not compatible with the much-vaunted doctrine regarding
(he origin of species, we feel confident, that not only the higher
out all the lower animals and even the micro-organisms breed,
and will continue to breed, true. On hatching the egg of a
domestic hen we should indeed be surprised if there stepped
forth life in any other form than that of a chick, and we should
have good reason to be discomposed, if, on incubating pure
cultures of the tubercle bacillus, we obtained any other microorganism than that which is pathogonomic of tubercle. If,
thoreover, it were not for the inflexible ruling of heredity in the
case of marine and fresh-water animals, where the ova and
spermatozoa of the majority are strewn broadcast in the waters,
and are afforded every facility for contracting irregular alliances,
©aos would reign supreme and biological science would vanish
into thin air.

At one time it very naturally was expected that hybridisation
would throw much valuable light on many of the problems connected with heredity, but unfortunately experiments undertaken

sit 7) ae Y
40 EUGENICS REVIEW J. Oliver

with this object are so seriously handicapped by sexuality, that
the results obtained by crossing animals of distantly as well as
nearly allied species have neither been satisfactory nor encouraging. The specific influence of sex is never a fixed quantity, and
it stamps itself on so many structures besides those immediately
concerned with reproduction, that, in crossing species, it is
impossible to conjecture how sexuality may disport itself, and in
what manner it may inhibit, or stop tendencies. At times, it
even behaves so remarkably, that we are now and again confronted with what is known as unilateral hybridity, that state
in which the ova of a species designated as A can be fertilised by
the spermatozoa of another species termed B, but where, for
some unknown reason, fertilisation in the inverse order cannot
be effected, because the ova of B refuse to commingle with the
spermatozoa of A. Again, hybridity in man even, where we
have three distinct races, the white or Caucasian, the yellow or
Mongolian, and the black or Ethiopian, furnishes us practically
with no material which is of any real service to us in our study
of heredity, and yet the characteristics of these races are very
pronounced. Nowhere in human hybridity do we note any
evidence of fixity or certainty of representation of the father or
the mother. According to Klaproth the crossing of a Caucasian
with a Mongolian gives offspring with a preponderance always of
Mongolian qualities no matter whether the Mongolian is the
father or the mother, but Levaillant on the other hand states
that the crossing of a Caucasian with a Hottentot produces offspring which exhibit invariably a preponderance of those
qualities, physical as well as mental, which characterise the race
_ to which the father belongs.

Furthermore, the phenomenon known as alternation of
generations, the condition in which there is a regular alternation
of sexual and asexual broods, and where the offspring is not
only unlike, but sometimes extremely unlike the parents, although
it does not contravene the principles of heredity, yet it, too,
increases rather than lessens our difficulty in interpreting
the subtle and devious workings of this force. Take, for
example, the remarkable behaviour of the tapeworm Taenia
soltum. The generations of this parasite differ in every respect
   
  
   
    
  
  
  
  
 
   
 
    
   
 
 
 
 
  
   
    
   
   
  
  

—& HEREDITARY TENDENCY TO TWINNING 41

erably from each other that they were only definitely
d cc related when the life-history of the animal was comsy means of experiments in which proglottides of this
al parasite were fed to animals which could act as hosts.
ler oe every probability, however, that twinning is likely
ve ve a fruitful subject for the study of many of the problems
C 2d with heredity, and the valuable light thrown on that
ymenon by recent experiments on animals carried out
ch Herbst, Loeb and others, will doubtless arouse fresh
n the matter. |
in early period of my out-patient work at the Hospital
a I was induced to investigate the question of an
ry tendency to twinning because, contrary to what one
, it appeared from desultory observation that both
: Band indirectly the male played not infrequently an
tant part in the causation of twins. A direct action of the
: at 9zoon in the process seems at first a difficult proposition
| eve in, but as we reflect upon what obtains every day in
Of the lower animals it becomes more and more easy of
‘eher sion. Take the case of the Bee. In this insect all
rtilis ed eggs produce females, whilst all the unfertilised ova
forth males, and these males, although they have had no
iate male parent, nevertheless generate spermatozoa.
n sc utinising my hospital records I learnt that out of every
sand five hundred out-patients that I saw twenty-four
rage had once or oftener given birth to twins, and that
any twenty-four group thus aggregated nearly ninety
it. furnished me with a history of twinning either amongst
Eo their husband’s relatives. Inadiagrammatic manner
tched the twinning histories taken from one of these
Z Be toups. So far as an hereditary tendency in the matter
srned the diagrams speak for themselves for it will be
at in only three of the cases did I fail to obtain any
bearing on the question, and I am disposed to
aie those three patients had only had a more intimate
ge of their own or their husband’s relatives my statistical
of the phenomenon would have been still more complete.
S. 1, 2, 3.
       

h
00 O@ Case IO CASE {1

:
MALE ano FEMALE CO-TWINS SuB-ceouPpIr

  
   
     

a ce
A oe Ss
& 2

   
   
   
 
 
    

6 we
H \/ w
Ot OO OO
Case i
™ F M S$ x
Ase A Case Ss
RLS
—" OO
Mi
FO co 08
No” CASES

MALE CO-TWINS Sus-GeouP IL,

“ & CORO
oy 00 GO wy " "06° "eh" a
: 4

oo" CASE { CASE 2 CASE S

 

H = HUSBAND M = MOTHER D= DAUGHTER
ae WIT B= BROTHER SMALL CIRCLES. |
F-FATHER Su SISTER REPRESENT TWINS”

ve
<i

a.
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

THE HEREDITARY TENDENCY TO TWINNING 43

[hese three divisions, constituting one group, furnish us
t ier with twenty-eight sets of twins, for one patient had
e twins on three occasions, whilst two others had each had
wice. The co-twins in thirteen instances are of opposite
1 twelve they are females; but in three only are they
In all we have twenty-eight confinements yielding
ty-seven females and nineteen males, that is, these births
‘met ted the population in the proportion of two females to
ry male. This, it may be noted, is fairly constantly the relaBee stonship of female to male births as a result of twin
ceptions, and I would incidentally remark that a very similar
: of affairs obtains in such uniparous animals as the mare,
P y and the sheep when twins are born to them. This
his undoubtedly a noteworthy fact, remains to be interpreted.
If we take the European countries and compute the
a aate and illegitimate births separately or together of any
a a, we find that the various populations are as a rule pretty
formly augmented at the rate of about one hundred and four
és to every one hundred females. In all European countries
fact there is an excess of male over female births. In England
id Wales, for example, during the year 1907 the total number
Q ale and female legitimate births were respectively 449,213
d 4. 9,640 and the total number of male and female illegitimate
tths were 18,515 and 17,674 respectively, or in each case prortic onally about 4 per cent. more males than females. Had it
en eee to estimate approximately the number of male and
. “ children respectively produced by multiple births and
> had been deducted from the aforesaid figures, then the
centage of male single births in excess of female single births
d have been still higher. Now the marked difference in the
e of the addition to all European populations which results
Be inaltiple as distinct from single births depends upon the
C diet in the case of twin births—the commonest variety of
ultip! birth—the co-twins are with almost equal frequency
ther bi-female or male and female: extremely rarely they are
-male. The marked disparity which is noted in the relative
quency of co-twin female and co-twin male births must of
urse be due to some well-regulated train of events, but of the
44 EUGENICS REVIEW J. Oliver :

nature of these we are as ignorant as we are of those influences
which play an all-important véle in maintaining throughout the
universe that varied numerical relationship of male to female
births which is such an astounding phenomenon.

Take the Tadpole. Inthe case of this animal the female
births largely exceed the male births: according to Pfluger the
relative proportions are about thirteen males to every one hundred
females. So too in some animals which reproduce parthenogenetically there is great disparity in the relative proportions of
male to female births. In the Crustacean Artemia, for instance,
males make their appearance only now and again.

In the matter of twinning I have come to the conclusion that
the tendency to this phenomenon may directly and indirectly be
inherited and transmitted about equally by the two sexes.
There is presumptive evidence, however, that a _ stronger
inherited influence is necessary for the production of co-twins of
opposite sex than for the production of female co-twins, and that
a very decided prepotency on the paternal side is requisite for the
production of co-twin males.

In man and the majority of animals and plants reproduction
is effected by the union of two germinal elements, one a sperm
cell derived from the male parent, and the other an egg cell
derived from the mother, and as each of these cells carries with
it the promise and potency of any offspring which may be
begotten of them, it is imperative that we should withou
trespassing unduly into the domain of embryology review briefly
the structure and demeanour of these cells as they reach maturity,
and recall to mind the phenomenal changes which take place
in the egg-cell when and shortly after conjugation is effected.

The ovum itself is usually microscopic, but the sperm cell.is
even still more minute. The latter is, as a rule, many thousand
times smaller than the former, and as we contemplate these
facts we very naturally find it exceedingly difficult to comprehend
how such infinitesimal objects earry and transmit the multitude
of ancestral and parental characteristics which they do.

Since the discovery of radium, however, our conception of
atoms has been very materially supplemented and extended,
and it is now quite possible to convinee anyone that an atom has
 

THE HEREDITARY TENDENCY TO TWINNING 45

indeed a veritable existence, and is no longer the hypothetical
thing it at one time was by many supposed to be. Without
hesitation we can accept the statement that the one-threethousand-millionth part of a grain of radium is easily recognisable, and to all and sundry it may be demonstrated ocularly that
half a grain of bromide of radium, which is made up of fifty
million billion separate atoms, gives off five thousand million of
its « particles every second. With the wonderful little instrument devised by Sir William Crookes, and named the spinthariscope, we are all familiar, and we learn that the needle of this
instrument, because it has merely touched a spot where radium
has been, belches forth « particles incessantly, and will continue
to do so for an indefinite length of time. Radium appears in
fact to be surfeited with an inexhaustible supply of energy, and
is subject to no known law. Now in consequence of the great
enlightenment which has resulted from the discovery of radium,
and which has followed also upon certain biological investigations made in connection with the study of immunity to infectious
diseases, it is highly probable that Darwin’s pangenetic theory
advanced to account for some of the phenomena of heredity, may
after all prove not so untenable as some scientists believe, for we
are informed that even the « particle of radium ionises extraneous
atoms with which it comes in contact, and charges at the same
time some with positive and others with negative electricity.
Regarding the germ ceils it is incumbent upon us to
remember that much of our knowledge concerning these cells is
derived from animals whose reproductive cells meet and coalesce
and eventually develop into new organisms outside the animal’s
body. Now life is impossible without metabolism, but it is very
evident that the metabolic state and disposition of a blastomere
constructed outside the animal body must be very different
to the metabolic inclinations of a blastomere which under
ordinary circumstances is not only formed in the material body,
but remains therein until foetal development and growth are
completed. Consider even what obtains in the case of the
domestic hen. In this animal the egg is fertilised in but hatched
outside the mother’s body. Here the mere commingling of the
sperm with the germ element is not all-sufficient to ensure
46 EUGENICS REVIEW J. Oliver :

development and growth, as appears to be the case with the
sea-urchin. If, in fact, the energising influence of a constant
and well-regulated heat be withheld from the fertilised egg of the
barn-door fowl then the metabolic processes distinctive of life
are never aroused, and sooner or later in their stead we witness
those chemical changes which characterise decay and death.
What the energising influences may be which are necessary to
arouse metabolism in the fertilised egg of the sea-urchin we
know not, but judging from the ease with which in this animal
fertilisation can be effected artificially and independently
of any spermatic intervention whatever, we may assume that the
energising influence cannot be of any great import or significance.

It has been computed that in each ovary of the mature
human female foetus there are not less than thirty or forty
thousand ova and it is generally believed that ova continue to
form for some time after birth. It is alleged that the law of
survival of the fittest is very much in evidence in the ovary and
it is suggested that the ova which reach maturity and are fitted
for perpetuating the race attain this distinction by devouring their

 

Fig. 4. Ovarian egg of Sea Urchin, g.s., germinal spot; g.v., germinal vesicle ;
s., spermatozoa—from The Cell in Development and Inheritance, by Dr. E. Wilson.!

1 Dr. E. Wilson very kindly gave the author permission to reproduce the
illustrations Nos. 4, 5,6 and 7 from the above mentioned book, published by Messrs.
Macmillan & Co.
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
   
 
  
  
  
   
   
 
   
  
   
   
   
 
 
  
   
  

THE HEREDITARY TENDENCY TOG TWINNING 47

: "competitors Be this as it may, the ripe ovarian cell consists of
| _ cytoplasm with anucleus or germinal vesicleembedded therein, and
/ within the nucleus there is commonly a nucleolus or germinal spot.
; (See Fig. 4.) The nucleus is supposed to be the all-important
_ structure and is the accredited basis of heredity. It contains a
st bstance distributed throughout it like a fine net and this sub‘ste nce because of its affinity for staining re-agents is known as
chromatin. As the egg-cel]l prepares for division whether for the
Benation of polar bodies simply or for the formation of segom entation cells, the chromatin substance loses its reticular
cd haracter and forms a more or less definite number of bodies
which assume generally a rod-like shape and these bodies are the
o-called chromosomes. In treating of the chromatin material,
E “Wilson says, ‘‘ the remarkable fact has now been established with
et igh probability that every species of plant or animal has a fixed
3 nd characteristic number of chromosomes which regularly
‘te ectrs in the division of all its cells; and in all forms arising by
ual reproduction the number is even.” We learn that man
Micadtnwed with sixteen chromosomes but if the number is of any
1 material import it seems more than strange that the ox and the
guinea-pig, two animals far removed from each other and from
man, should also possess the same number of chromosomes as
_ Atornear the time of fertilisation the structures knownas polar
: boc ies are formed by mitotic division. (See Fig. 5.) Now Weisme nn says:‘‘ The theory of heredity forces us to suppose that every —
fertilisation must be preceded by a reduction of the ancestral idiopl: sms present in the nucleus of the parent germ cell to one half
of their former number,” and this authority considers that the
e uction is effected through the agency of the second polar body.
[f however such an important duty devolves upon the second
polar body it seems most remarkable that it should be a matter
d mo consequence to subsequent events whether the polar bodies
are formed and got rid of before or after the entrance of the
xmatozoon. Moreover in parthenogenitic ova the polar bodies
) have in no fixed manner but disport themselves differently in
| le case of different animals. In the Aphides, for example, no
eduction in the chromosomes takes place and one polar body
48 EUGENICS REVIEW J. Oliver :

 

Fig.5. Diagrams showing the essential facts in the maturation of the egg. The
somatic number of Chromosomes is supposed to be four : p.b., Polar Bodies ;
c., Chromosomes—from page 237 of The Cell in Development and Inheritance.

only is formed, whereas in the Bee two polar bodies are formed
in the eggs which produce drones and although these eggs are
unfertilised they nevertheless produce functionally active males,
males which generate spermatozoa. Again in the Crustacean
Artemia, an animal in which males appear very rarely, the parthenogenetic ova may form either one or two polar bodies.
When however two are formed the second fulfils apparently
THE HEREDITARY TENDENCY TO TWINNING 49

some very important function, for instead of being expelled from
the egg cell it remains in it and behaves as a sperm nucleus
would. Regarding the function of the first polar body, Weismann
considers that it removes half the total mass of the chromatin
material and carries therewith the ovogenetic substance. From
a careful scrutiny of facts, however, it is very evident that we as
yet know nothing definite regarding the functions of either the
one or the other polar body, but whatever their functions may be
they are as a rule formed more or less rapidly one after the other
in the upper or animal pole of the ovum, and as in the majority
of instances the egg-cell seems thereafter to have no further need
of them they perish forthwith.

The spermatozoon for obvious reasons was discovered and
studied long before the egg-cell, but we really know much lessabout
it than the ovum. Its configuration is not thesame in all animals,
and some animals for no apparent reason are endowed with two
different kinds of spermatozoa. For descriptive purposes we may
take the human spermatozoon. (See Fig. 4.) It consists of a
head, a middle piece, and a tail. The head is crowned with an
apical body and from tip to tail the spermatozoon measures about
the one-five-hundredth part of an inch. The tail, which comparatively speaking is of enormous length—four-fifths the length
of the entire animalcule—is purely and simply an organ of
locomotion, and by the lashing movements of this appendage the
spermatozoon is enabled to make its way to and effect a union
with the more or less inactive egg-cell. The head, which constitutes the nucleus, is crammed with chromatin, and it is this
portion together with the middle piece in which is lodged
the material for the formation of the cleavage centrosome, which
are the structures immediately concerned in the fertilisation
process. Within the ovum the sperm nucleus rapidly increases
in size. Normally only one spermatozoon enters and unites
with the egg-cell and as the latter in the human female cannot
possibly evade approaching spermatozoa it is truly astounding
that so many millions should be required to ensure that one
spermatozoon may if possible fulfil its function. In treating of
spermatozoa Weismann says: ‘‘ the smaller the chances of any

single sperm-cell being successful the larger the number of such
4
50 EUGENICS REVIEW J. Oliver :

 

Fig. 6. Diagrams showing the prophases of mitosis, a, Amphiaster, C, Centrosome,
e.p., equitorial plate—from page 66 of The Cell in Development and Inheritance.

cells produced and the direct result of this increase in number
is a diminution in size.” As applied to man it is quite clear
that such a declaration is meaningless. If each spermatazoon
were functionally active and every ovum extruded from the ovary
were fit for fertilisation it is impossible to imagine how any
advantageously circumstanced ovum ever escapes, and yet the
great majority avoid fertilisation. Contrast this state of affairs
with what obtains in the domestic hen. In this animal the male
at one stroke very commonly effects the fertilisation of twelve or
 

THE HEREDITARY TENDENCY TO TWINNING 51

even fifteen egg-cells, and although many of these must at the
time of fertilisation have been in an immature state still the
greater number will if befittingly incubated produce healthy
chicks. It furthermore is most noteworthy that although the
last egg laid of such a batch was subjected after fecundation to a
steady and well-regulated heat in the mother’s body for twelve
or it may be fifteen days longer than the first egg laid, yet these
two eggs respectively require to be incubated for exactly the
same number of days—viz., twenty-one—outside the mother’s
body before the chick is hatched. Now it is facts like these and
others of an equally astounding and inexplicable nature which
should make us guard against framing conclusions regarding
some important reproductive phenomena in man based simply
and solely upon the results obtained by experimenting upon
animals low in the scale of life.

Before developmental changes can proceed in the egg-cell of
at least the majority of the higher animals a spermatozoon must
have penetrated into it, and by the union of the sperm with the
germ nucleus a segmentation nucleus must have beenformed. At
this time, the nuclear membrane having disappeared, the nucleus,
which is now composed of chromosomes derived equally from the
two parents, assumes the form of a spindle, and thereafter the cell
proceeds to divide, the process of division being dominated by the
centrosome. (See Figs.6and 7.) This cleavage centrosome, which
is a male structure present in the middle piece of the spermatozoon,
divides in the first instance into two portions. These two
portions diverge to opposite poles of the segmentation nucleus,
and speedily thereafter the egg-cell splits into two apparently
egual cells called blastomeres, and it is these first two segmentation cells which, when opportunely endowed, furnish us with
identical twins.

Within recent years Herbst, Driesch, Loeb and others have
demonstrated not only that enucleated eggs and fragments of
eggs can be fertilised by spermatozoa, but also that without the
intervention of any spermatic material at all, eggs may be
fertilised quite artificially by physico-chemical influences alone.
They have even shown that living larve can be obtained in the
case of sea-urchins, star-fishes, and some annelids as well as
52 EUGENICS REVIEW J. Oliver

 

—_ +

Fig. 7. Diagrams of the later phases of mitosis—from The Cell in Development and
Inheritance.

molluscs, simply and solely by the action of inorganic re-agents
upon the unfertilised eggs of these animals. In endeavouring,
however, to appraise at their true value the results of such
experiments it is well for us to remember that the unfertilised
eggs of some animals—possibly a larger number than we
are aware of—which are not expected to develop unless
fertilised, may nevertheless undergo segmentation and attempt
to produce new organisms, in spite of the fact that they have not
been subjected to the influence of any extraneous material at all.
The unfertilised eggs of the silk moth Bombyx Mori not
infrequently behave in this manner, but it may be noted that
although such eggs reach various stages of development, they
always abort eventually, and none so far has been known to
produce a new organism.

°
°

 
THE HEREDITARY TENDENCY TO TWINNING 53

We have already observed that the nucleus of the germ cell
is believed to play an important véle in heredity as well as in the
nutritive phenomena of the cell generally. On these points,
however, the evidence provided by experiments upon mutilated
eggs is far from conclusive or satisfactory. Delage, for instance,
informs us that under the microscope he has divided the minute
egg-cell of the sea-urchin in such a manner that one portion
contained the entire nucleus, whilst the other portion possessed
no nuclear material at all. He thereupon exposed these two
mutilated portions in company with a normal ovum to the
influence of sea-urchin spermatozoa, and strange to say, all
three egg-cell structures attracted spermatozoa equally well. All
three became fertilised, and all three produced living organisms.
In spite, however, of the fact that one of these embryos was
developed from an egg-structure possessing no nuclear material
at all, Delage nevertheless, found nuclei of apparently the same
constitution, and with the same number of chromosomes in the
somatic cells of all three embryos. Again, some observers have
fertilised enucleated eggs of the Echinus micro-tuberculatus by
spermatozoa of a totally different species, and obtained thereby
larve which displayed paternal characteristics only, whilst
Godlewski, on the other hand, states that he has fertilised
enucleated eggs of the sea-urchin by spermatozoa of a Crinoid
(sea lily), and obtained thus larve which exhibited no paternal,
but solely maternal characteristics. In spite, however, of such
experimental discrepancies, we nevertheless from our intimate
knowledge of the modes of multiplication in the protozoa are
fully justified in believing that every organism begotten of two
parents receives the total potentialities of both, including even a
bisexual equipment from each, but that characteristics may be
inhibited or accentuated in the offspring by the reciprocal action
and reaction of imparted parental influences.
