GALTON'S HEREDITARY GENIUS
REPRINT OF THE SECOND EDITION

Dr. J. A. Fraser Roberts writes :

IT is indeed welcome to have freely available
once again, and so well produced at such a
modest price, this classic of biological
literature. The asides, the brilliant and
lucid deductions, are as arresting and
amusing as ever. Who else could have written
so vividly of “‘ the race-destroying influence
of heiress-blood ’”’ ; or paused, when talking
of great commanders, to reflect that their
ability to leave offspring depended upon
survival and that in an age of bullets this was
proportional to the square root of the
product of their height and weight; or to
write these devastating words : “‘ I look upon
the peerage as a disastrous institution, owing
to its destructive effects on our valuable races.
The most highly gifted men are ennobled ;
their elder sons are tempted to marry heiresses, and their younger ones not to marry at
all, for these have not enough fortune to
support both a family and an aristocratical
position. So the side-shoots of the genealogical tree are hacked off, and the leading
shoot is blighted, and the breed is lost for
ever.”

The book is far more than a museum piece ;
after eighty years it still points the way to
experimental observations that have yet to
be made and which might lead to valuable
conclusions. Perhaps the most striking

feature of all is the preface to the edition of

1892. That vast intellect, that calm, highly
original and objective mind, was ready to
survey anything and dispassionately make
its deductions, not afraid to speculate and to
guess at probabilities, but always ready, as
the preface so clearly shows, to profit by
each advance in knowledge and to discard
ruthlessly what had been proved wrong. If
Galton could have written a new preface in
1950, it would be something that, one
ventures to say, no one now alive could
write. It is sad to contrast with this living
book the recent effort published under the

auspices of U.N.E.S.C.O., Statements by
Experts on Race Problems, setting out views
on race: a document that was not worth
publishing even once and whose life will
probably prove to be about three weeks.

The temptation to quote is irresistible. To
give just one example, could a better charter
than this be devised to-day ?>—

“ The best form of civilisation in respect
to the improvement of the race, would be
one in which society was not costly ; where
incomes were chiefly derived from professional sources, and not much through
inheritance ; where every lad had a chance
of showing his abilities and, if highly gifted,
was enabled to achieve a first-class education
and entrance into professional life, by the
liberal help of the exhibitions and scholarships which he had gained in his early youth;
where marriage was held in as high honour as
in ancient Jewish times; where the pride
of race was encouraged (of course I do not
refer to the nonsensical sentiment of the
present day, that goes under that name) :
where the weak could find a welcome and a
refuge in celibate monasteries or sisterhoods,
and lastly, where the better sort of emigrants
and refugees from other lands were invited
and welcomed, and their descendants
naturalized.”

But it should be unnecessary to make any
other selections, for this is a book that all
members of the Society should read and
enjoy.

J. A. FRASER ROBERTS.

Mr. Paul Bloomfield writes :

THE reissue of Galton’s Hereditary Genius
after twenty-five years has been received—
with no public acclamation whatever. The
present notices in the EUGENICS REVIEW may
be the first it has had ; certainly two months
after publication there had been none.

It may be said that one can hardly expect
for reprints the attention new books get.

21m1
212

But even the newsprint shortage does not
appear to me to justify editorial neglect of a
book so remarkable: a classic; now made
available after the quarter century during
which the importance of population questions
—of quality as well as quantity—has begun
to be generally recognized. In Hereditary
Genius Galton did two wonderful things,
among others. He focussed his cousin
Darwin’s biological telescope on the historic,
human details of our corner of the Creation.
Quick work, brilliantly done, in such a way
as to bring out the living interest of a subject
that had formerly been studied almost
entirely for reasons of family pride—the
gloating and restrospective sort. Genealogy
had been standing on its head ; Galton put
it on its feet and faced it forwards.

How fruitful the book is of suggestions
(many of which have been followed) for the
scientific pursuit of knowledge of mankind,
I am scarcely equipped to appreciate. I can
see that it helps us to understand some of the
essential Plans Planners will have to make
unless they want all their Planning to come
to nothing. And what good reading! Real
human interest. Here the chests of 5,700
Scotsmen are being measured; there we
learn that two Judges were barbers’ sons...
that noble families could hardly endanger
their line more surely than by getting the
heir to marry an heiress . . . that eminent
Divines of the Church of England have on
the whole been happily married but not
robust in health . . . many and various
indeed are the things we learn. But the
solid thinking that underlies it all, the
probing and measuring and weighing, the
hypotheses, the flashes of insight, the
sudden and severe tabulations, even the
touches of that naiveté without which hardly
any man can be great—all this unmistakably
trends in one direction. ‘‘ It seems to me
most essential,”’ says Galton towards the
end of the book, “ to the well-being of future
generations that the average standard of
ability of the present time should be raised.”’
This does not exactly sum up the book, still
less Galton’s entire euvre—he was interested
in other human characteristics besides ability
—but it helps to explain the interest he

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

showed in hereditary factors and the kind of
evidence he adduced for making his points.
... If only it would be widely read !

| PAUL BLOOMFIELD.

Mr. Cecil Binney writes :

WHAT impresses me most about Galton’s
Hereditary Genius is the extreme care and
accuracy shown by the author. Books whose
subject is persons like ourselves provoke
cynical comments which are not suggested
by books on other races or animals. A
member of the legal profession is tempted to
smile on first learning that the English
Judges are to be taken as examples of
hereditary genius, and on reading that
“ sterling ability is sure to make itself felt
and to lead to practice’ at the Bar. Yet
if one reads through Galton’s chapter on the
subject one discovers that in this as indeed
throughout the book he is most careful to
make allowances for all circumstances which
might seem to affect the validity of his
conclusions. There is nothing stated in the
book which is not clearly proved by evidence.

Galton did not use the word genius in the
restricted sense which since that time it has
come exclusively to bear. What he sought
to prove and did conclusively, prove, was that
unusual intellectual capacity, like unusual
physical strength, is to some extent hereditary and is not equally likely to occur in any
family taken at random. On discovering
that this is all which the author intends the
modern reader may remark that it did not
need so elaborate an argument to establish
so evident a proposition. But it did. Galton
wrote in the days of unrestricted free enterprise and self help when young people were
encouraged to believe that genius was an
infinite capacity for taking pains and that
industry, honesty and courage could achieve
anything.

Remarkable books of a scientific character
have a uniform fate. Whether on their
appearance they are regarded as the theories
of cranks, or whether their value is never
doubted, they enjoy a period in which their
views have found acceptance as the latest
NOTES AND

contribution to the subject, and every
intelligent person reads them. Very soon,
however, a new generation arises which has
been taught to accept such views as established and the books which for the first time

NOTES AND

Nominations to Council

FELLOWS are reminded that they have the
right to nominate any Fellow of the Soczety
to serve on the Council for the coming year.
If they wish to exercise this right, they
should apply to the office for a nomination
paper which must be completed by them and
lodged at the office before March Ist, 1951.
Each Fellow is entitled to propose not more
than two Fellows for election to vacancies
on the Council, and to second two other
Fellows. No Fellow shall be nominated
unless he has consented, if elected, to act.
Each nomination must be proposed and
seconded respectively by a Fellow of the
Society, and the nomination paper must be
signed by such proposer and seconder.

C. P. BLACKER.

The Galton Anniversary

THE Galton Lecture will be given by Dr.
G. C. L. Bertram, M.A., Ph.D., on Friday,
February 16th, 1951, at 5 p.m. at Manson
House, 26 Portland Place, London, W.1.

Tea will be served at 4.15 p.m. and Fellows
and Members, who may bring guests, are
asked to notify the Business Secretary, at
69 Eccleston Square, if they intend to be
present.

Members’ Meetings

On Tuesday, January 16th, 1951, at 5.30
p.m., ‘Congenital Malformations.’’ Speaker:
C. O. Carter, Esq., B.M., M.R.C.P.

MEMORANDA 213
enunciated them seem to be stating the
obvious. The modern reader, particularly
if he is familiar with eugenics, is apt to forget
how original Galton’s work was.

CeciL BINNEY.

MEMORANDA

This meeting will be held at the Rooms
of the Royal Society, Burlington House,
Piccadilly, W.r.

Publications Received

American Journal of Mental Deficiency. 55,2. 1950.

The British Journal of Delinquency. 1, 2. 1950.

Census of India. Paper No. 5. 1950. Age Tables—
Bihar 1941 on Y—Samble.

Centro de Estudos Demogrdficos Revista. Portugal
Instituto Nacional de Estatistica. No. 6.

Cuardernos de Politica Social. 1950. No. 7.

Davis, Dr. Kingsly and Isaac, Dr. Julius. People
on the Move. U.N.E.S.C.O. Food and People.
London, 1950. The Bureau of Current Affairs.
Pp. 47. Price 2s.

Endeavour. 9, 36. 1950.

Famiulles dans le Monde. 3, 3. 1950.

Fertility and Sterility. Official Journal of the
American Society for the Study of Sterility.
Vol. I. Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4.

Gregg, Pauline. A Social and Economic History of
Britain 1760-1950. London, 1950. George G.
Harrap & Co. Pp. 584. Price 18s.

Hagedoorn, A. L. Plant Breeding. London, 1950.
Crosby Lockwood & Son, Ltd. Pp. 233.
Price 12s. 6d.

Items. Social Science Research Council. 4, 3. 1950.

Maciver, R. M. and Page, Charles H. Society. An
Introductory Analysis. London, 1950. Macmillan & Co. Pp. xvii + 697. Price 25s.

Manhattan, Avro. The Catholic Church against the
Twentieth Century. London, 1950. .
Watts & Co. Pp. 470. Price 5s. (paper), ros.
(cloth).

The Marriage Society Review. 3, 3. 1950.

Modernization Programs in Relation to Human
Resources and Population Problems. Papers
presented at a Round Table at the 1949
Annual Conference of the Milbank Memorial
