NEUROTICISM IN TWINS*
By H. J. EYSENCK, D.Sc., Ph.D.

Psychology Department, Institute of Psychiatry, Maudsley Hospital, London

IR FRANCIS GALTON, in his descrip

tion of the eugenic Utopia, which he

called Kantsaywhere, pictured a country in which “a system of competitive
examination for girls, as well as for youths,
had been so developed. as to embrace every
important quality of mind and body.” The
status of the individual as well as the number
of children which he would be permitted to
raise depended on the results of this examination. It will be noticed that Galton did not
confine himself to the measurement of
intellectual qualities but also stressed traits
of character and temperament. In a short
paper published in this Journal a few years
ago! I tried to show to what extent psychology had succeeded in furnishing the type
of test which Galton would have required for
such a searching examination. It was concluded that while we had succeeded in
isolating and measuring some of the main
dimensions of personality, we knew little
about their genesis, their distribution in the
population and their connection with age,
sex, social status and birth order.

Of all these unknown variables the one
which is of most interest to eugenics is, of
course, the genetic one. It would not be true
to say that no research had been done into
the inheritance of personal qualities other
than cognitive ones ; elsewhere? I have given
a review of about a hundred studies dealing
with. precisely this problem. The results,
however, are unsatisfactory for a variety of
reasons. In the first place the investigations
using objective tests are mostly very limited
in scope, dealing with traits of a very low
order of complexity, such as scribbling, angle
of handwriting, eidetic imagery, reaction
times, spatial orientation. The interest in
the particular tests used is usually dependent
on the acceptance of a particular system of
typology ; thus eidetic imagery would be of
interest to the fcllowers of Jaensch, conditioned reflexes to the Pavlovians and details

of handwriting to the graphologists. In the
absence of any convincing proof that these
systems and typologies are of any great
value, the interest in the specific tests used
diminishes accordingly.

_ In the second place, it must be noted that
when an attempt is made to study higher
order concepts, such as criminal predisposition or mental abnormality, the concepts
chosen are of an ethical, sociological or
psychiatric, rather than of a psychological
nature, and the investigations usually proceed along lines far removed from the
objectivity of psychometric _ testing
procedures.

In the third place, the results of previous
studies are frequently difficult to interpret
for a variety of reasons. We often do not
know just what it is that a given test is
measuring. Many tests have very low
reliabilities, so that clear-cut results cannot
be expected. There are many experimental
errors (lack of proper statistical treatment ;
faulty sampling practices ; faulty diagnosis
of mono-zygoticity or di-zygoticity) which
may account for the frequent inexplicable
differences in the contributions of different
students, using what are apparently identical
tests and procedures.

More important than these faults, which
could be obviated by suitable statistical,
diagnostic and sampling techniques, is a
fundamental methodological error which
pervades nearly all the studies reported in the
literature. All these studies make use of the
so-called ‘‘twin method’ developed in
Germany, which consists in comparing the

average resemblance of identical twins with

79

* The study discussed in this paper was carried out
jointly by Mr. D. B. Prell and the author ; it was made
possible through a financial grant from the Eugenics
Society. A full account of the details of the experiment
and the numerical results is being published under the
title ‘“‘ Inheritance of Neuroticism: an experimental
study’ in the June issue of the Journal of Mental
Science.
80 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that of fraternal twins. The differences
between identical twins due to environment
alone are compared with the differences
between fraternal twins due to both heredity
and environment; if differences between
fraternal twins are much greater than differences between identical twins, heredity
appears to be a powerful causal influence,
while, if differences are small or non-existent,
the influence of heredity as a causal factor in
individual differences is discounted. The
assumption is made, of course, that the
influence is as similar for a pair of fraternal
as for a pair of identical twins ; this assumption, while it would be difficult to prove, is
not contradicted by such studies as have been
done in order to investigate it more closely.

This method of twin study has many
advantages, but it has led, in the past, to
certain unjustified conclusions because those
who have used it have tended to make a
quite unjustified intellectual jump which
may best be illustrated by reference to
studies in intelligence.

In a typical investigation, an experimenter
might give a certain test of intelligence, such
as the Binet, to groups of identical and
fraternal twins, show that the intra-class
correlation between identical twins was far
larger than that between fraternal twins, and
conclude that intelligence was inherited to
the extent of, say, 80 per cent. Even if we
assume that the assumptions underlying the
mathematical calculations are unexceptionable, it will be seen that somewherein the argument there is a jump from a given test (the
Binet) to the conclusion on the inheritance of
intelligence. Now it is well known that a test
like the Binet measures in addition to
intelligence a number of other factors, such
aS memory, visuo-spatial ability, verbal
ability, numerical ability, and so forth, as
well as certain specific factors which it does
not share with any other test. What is
inherited to the extent of 80 per cent is the
ability to do well on the B'net ; this ability is
only in part identical with intelligence and
there is no direct way of equating the two.

This mistake of drawing general conclusions from specific tests is so widespread as to
vitiate most twin investigations in the

psychological field. In these circumstances
we may be somewhat doubtful of the general
conclusions drawn by Newman, Freeman and
Holzinger* from their own investigations,
who maintained that* “the only group of
traits in which identical twins are not much
more alike (than fraternal twins) conszsts of
those commonly classed under the heading of
personality.... The difference in resemblance of the two classes of twins is not the
same in the different groups of traits. In
general the contrast is greatest in physical
traits, next in tests of general ability
(intelligence), less in achievement tests and
least in tests of personality or temperament.
In certain instances, viz....tapping, willtemperament and neurotic disposition, the
correlations of identical twins are but little
higher than those of fraternal twins.’”’ The
conclusion is appropriate not to traits of
personality but to the results of certain very
poorly chosen tests which may or may not
measure those traits to a degree which is
almost certainly very limited.

These doubts and criticisms have determined the set-up of an experiment radically
different from those mentioned above. We
have tried to investigate the inheritance not
of a given fest score but of certain important
underlying general traits. Again we can
clarify this idea by reference to intelligence.
Instead of giving one test of intelligence the
proper procedure would be to give a large
number of tests, intercorrelate these and
demonstrate by means of factor analysis the
existence of the different abilities which are
measured by them (general intelligence,
numerical ability, verbal ability, memory,
etc.). We could then derive, through suitable
mathematical procedures, an expression of
the ability of our twins, not for each fest, but
for each of these factors, and study the degree
of inheritance of general intelligence,
numerical ability, verbal ability, memory,
etc.

This is what has been done in the present
investigation. The trait investigated was
chosen because of its social importance, its
interest to eugenics and the availability of a

* Italics not in original.
NEUROTICISM IN TWINS 81

battery of tests known to measure it with a
fair degree of accuracy. Some of these tests
have been described in my previous paper in
this Journal,’ and it would therefore not be
worth while to describe them again, Suffice
it to say that seventeen tests in all were
given to twenty-five pairs of mono-zygotic
twins and twenty-five pairs of di-zygotic
twins born during the period 1935 to 1937
and discovered after searching through the
birth records for five boroughs in South
London for all twins of the same sex born
during that period. The diagnosis of
zygosity was established by means of fourteen criteria including : close resemblance of
ears, teeth and facial features ; iris pigmentation; standing height; the presence or
absence of mid-digital hair ; ability to taste
phenyl-thio-carbamide ; scapular shape ; and
blood groups A,A,BO, Rh, MNS, P, Lewis,
Kell and Lutheran. ‘All these children were
normal in the sense that they had never been
to a child-guidance clinic and had never had
any kind of psychiatric treatment.

In addition to these twins, twenty-one
children of a similar age were selected from
out-patients at the Maudsley Child Guidance
Clinic to constitute a neurotic control group.
Great care was taken to exclude children with
organic complications or with possible
psychiatric traits, or who were not considered
“unstable ’”’ by the examining psychiatrist.
The resulting sample approaches as closely
as is possible, at the present stage of psychiatric knowledge, to a “‘ pure ’’ neurotic group
with relatively little mixture of mental and
physical disorders.

The tests used were intercorrelated for the
total sample of twins, a factor analysis was
carried out, and a factor of “ neuroticism ”’
or emotional instability found. The interpretation of this factor was validated by
showing that those tests which had a high
saturation on the factor were also those tests
which gave the best discrimination between
our experimental group of normal twins and
our control group of neurotic children. Next
intra-class correlations were calculated for
the identical and fraternal twins separately
on each of the seventeen tests used ; we also
calculated the neuroticism score for all the

twins by suitably weighting all the test
scores by their factor saturations. Lastly the
percentage of heredity determination for
each test and for the neuroticism score was
calculated using Holzinger’s h? statistic.
This purports to give the degree to which a
given score is determined by inherited factors
as opposed to environmental factors and ip
spite of certain dubious assumptions made in
its derivation, this statistic does give a
quick and probably fairly accurate measure
of the degree of hereditary determination.

Using this statistic, it was found that for
the neuroticism score the correlation between
identical twins was :851, whereas that for the
fraternal twins was only -217 ; h4?=-810, and
if we accept Holzinger’s derivation we would
conclude that neuroticism or emotional
instability is inherited to the extent of 81 per
cent for the particular cultural conditions in
which this sample of children was brought up.

It is particularly interesting to note that
none of the individual tests have as high an
h? value as does the factor score of neuroticism ; this is important because it demonstrates conclusively a point which has often
been disputed, namely the fact that a factor
derived through statistical analysis need not
be a “statistical artefact ’’, but may have
biological reality.

We may summarize our results. Our first
step was to show that a battery of suitably
chosen tests defined a general factor of
neuroticism or emotional instability ; this
interpretation was validated by comparing
the scores on our tests of normal and
neurotic children. Our second step consisted in calculating scores on this factor of
neuroticism for identical and fraternal twins.
Our third step consisted in correlating these
scores for the two groups of twins separately
and to show that the correlation for identical
twins (-851) was considerably higher than
that for fraternal twins (-217), thus arguing
strongly in favour of the inheritance of this
particular trait. Our last step consisted in
the calculation of a statistic purporting to
show the percentage of hereditary determination of this trait, which worked out at 81 per
cent.

In view of the smallness of the sample
82 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

used and the doubtfulness of some of the
assumptions underlying the derivation of the
h® statistic, it would not be correct to attribute too much importance to the exact value
obtained for the degree of hereditary determination of neuroticism. There can, however, be little doubt that our study demonstrates the fact that individual differences in
emotional stability in our type of cultural
pattern are determined very strongly by
inherited genetic factors and to a very much
smaller extent by environmental influences
of one kind or another. It is hoped that this
experiment may be repeated soon with a

better selection ot tests than we were able to
make at the time this work was begun, and
using larger numbers of children than we
were able to use, so that we might be able to
verify our conclusions and to give a more
correct estimate of the exact degree to which
neuroticism is inherited in our society.

REFERENCES

1 Eysenck, H. J. ‘‘ The Measurement of Socially
Valuable Qualities.” EuGENiIcs REVIEW, 1947.

2 Eysenck, H. J. ‘‘ The Inheritance of Neuroticism :
An Experimental Study.” J. Ment. Science, 1951.

3 Newman, H. H.., e¢ al. ‘° Twins: A Study of Heredity
and Environment.’’ Chicago, 1937: Chicago University
Press.

POPULATION STUDIES

Edited by D. V. GLASS

Vol. IV. No. 4

March 1951

H. V. Muusam. Fertility and Reproduction of the Beduin

J. W. Comps, Jr., and Kinestey Davis. The Pattern of Puerto Rican Fertility

S. P. Brown. Analysis of a Hypothetical Stationary Population by Family Units—A Note

on some Experimental Calculations

Rutu Guass and F. G. Davipson. Household Structure and Housing Needs

Hannes Hyentus. Reproduction and Replacement
J. R. H. SHaut and C. A. L. Mysureu. Vital Statistics of the African Population of

Southern Rhodesia in 1948

N. K. Sarkar. A Note on Abridged Life Tables for Ceylon, 1900-1947

Subscription : 308. net per volume.

Published for the POPULATION INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE
by the Campripce University Press, 200 Euston Roap, Lonpon, N.W.1.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLII, No. 2
