THE EUGENICS SOCIETY’
By G. AIRD WHYTE, M.C., B.Sc.

O not let me startle you if I open
with the words “ Forefancy your
deathbed’! My father had a dramatic turn of phrase. This was one of his free
translations of the Latin motto ‘“ Ui
migraturus habita.’’ Another of his translations was, ‘Live, as though about to
depart.”” Why ? Why do I say this to you ?
Well, let me return to that in a moment.
Our Society is perhaps comparatively well
placed financially because our principal
benefactor was a rich Australian pasturalist,

the late Henry Twitchen, who left us a large

sum of money, of which, in the main, only
the income may be expended. There is a
proviso that we may spend some 6f the
capital, and this we have done and are doing
to a moderate extent.

Now do you see why I say “ Forefancy
your deathbed”’? If that is too shuddering
a thought, then let me say “ Take time by
the forelock.”

I take it that you are interested in eugenics,
that you regard much of what the Soczety
does as being of prime value to the nation

and to the world at large. Of course you do,

that is why you support the Society so
-actively—or do you? Whether you do, or
do not, please all do so in.the near, the very
near, future. Find a new member: “ Forefancy your deathbed,” that is, add a codicil
to your will and leave the Society £5, {£10
{100, or what? For we need now and shall
need in the future.

The Society would be very hard put to it
to achieve what it does and what it plans to
do but for Twitchen’s wisdom and forethought. Will you supplement this °
- I find that our late honorary treasurer,
Clinton Chance, with whom some of us have
worked so long and so closely, and whom we
shall greatly miss, had made use of a phrase
which has often been on my tongue in the

* Part of a symposium on “ The Future Activities
of the Eugenics Society,’’ at a Members’ Meeting on
Wednesday, November 18th, 1953.

past year or two: “‘ Eugenics in our time.”’
Translated into everyday usage, that means
stimulate worthwhile eugenic ideas today :
stimulate by thought, by word and by action
often in association with others of like mind
and by the use of such funds as may reasonably be expended. Our Soczety has in hand
a programme of work for the next two or
three years. We shall outrun the constable
and trench to a small extent on our capital
resources. The Council has given grave
thought to this course and has so decided,
wisely in my view.

What, then, are our immediately prospective activities and how do we propose to
put them into effect? Pilot inquiries and
trial runs have been a feature in the past
and will be in the future. The achievement of
results on a national scale is beyond our
power and our purse. Therefore, we believe
that we shall gain much by banding ourselves from time to time, with like-minded
groups, by providing expert knowledge from
within our ranks and with the addition of a
relatively small amount of money to meet

‘part of the costs, make possible an inquiry,

a piece of research, a trial on a practical
working scale. ,

That is how we proceed—now whither ?

Before the war we were for a time allied
to PEP—Political and Economic Planning
—in a population study. It is interesting to
note that the findings were very similar
indeed to those of the Royal Commission on
Population before which the Society placed
its evidence and its ideas. We are again,
this time perhaps more actively, associated
with PEP in another study with the simple,
if all-too-comprehensive, title ‘‘ World Population Policy.’’ Two members of our Council,
Dr. Bertram and Dr. Blacker, represent the
Society at the meetings, to which PEP has
also kindly invited me. Lord Simon of

Wythenshawe, who is also a member of our

Council, is chairman of this Study Group.
Our Society bears one-half of the cost. The

17
18 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

aim is to produce a report which will centre

around two principal aspects : |
firstly—prospective world sources of food, raw
materials and power in relation to prospective increases in world population, and

secondly—to review possible practical measures

of population control, particularly in areas

now contributing most markedly to population growth.

The general urgency of these problems is
only too well known to you all. The specific
value of such a report, at this moment of
time, has its cogency in the forthcoming
UNO World Population Conference to be
held in Rome in the autumn of 1954.
A sufficiently comprehensive factual volume,
such as we hope to produce, where none
today exists, might well form a handbook
and sourcebook for that Conference, or a
guide for the Governments concerned after
the event.

In August of this year the Soczety sent
two delegates to the Stockholm Conference
of the International Planned Parenthood
Federation. That was a natural sequence to
our support of the Bombay Conference in
1952, and of the Federation itself whose
central secretariat we now house in our
building at 69 Eccleston Square. In 1953-54
and in the two ensuing years we are also
engaged to give this useful and practical
body our financial support. Our Soczety is
represented on the Council of the Federation
by Dr. Blacker as vice-chairman and by
myself as joint honorary treasurer. The
eager interest which official and unofficial
Indian groups extended to the 1952 Bombay
Conference alone warrants all and every help
we can give to the International Federation.
Such immediate aid to practical work in the
field—and what a population field is India !
—is in its own way as useful and valuable
as the wider if more theoretical joint study
with PEP. Where India leads, maybe all
Asia will follow.

You wil) all recall our pilot inquiry—
“Problem . Families.” Here is a good
instance of the use of the Soczety’s expertize
and funds. By centralizing the knowledge
and experience of the various authorities,
Health, Education, Police and others, it was
possible, at small cost, to produce a volume

containing information never before readily

available, and much of it but partly known.
It then only required one question in Parliament to set the hive humming. The
Ministry of Health and the Home Office
instantly found in our report a valuable and
basic contribution giving a lead to the study
of these matters on a national scale. Copies
of the book found a ready sale amongst
various local health authorities, and we may
supplement, this by further direct distribution.

Today, we are on the threshold of another
such inquiry—in a manner of speaking the
counterpart to ‘‘ Problem Families ’’—
namely ‘‘ Promising Families.” We are
asking the question ‘‘ Is it possible to ascer
_ tain which families might best be encouraged

to reach adequate fulfilment?” In this
connection it is of particular interest to
recall Mr. Kenneth Hutton’s inquiry limited
to the families of Winchester scholars. This
inquiry had our support and the result was
published in the EuGEenics REvIEW of
January 1953, being his lecture at our
Member's Meeting a year ago. It may, we
hope, be extended to other schools. It might
in part answer the question—Do the higherintelligence groups in the community maintain an adequate reproduction rate ?

At one time we gave office accommodation
to the Family Planning Association. Today,
now that they have so greatly expanded
their manifold activities, and have moved
elsewhere, we are still closely interested in
all they do. That Association’s funds are
stretched to the limit. It therefore seemed
appropriate to our Council to support specific
research activities similar to those in which
in past years our Society had itself been
engaged. We have promised financial aid
for one year, renewable for a possible further
period of two years, to enable basic research
to be continued and extended, such research
being a background requisite to the Association’s Approved List of Contraceptives. The
ultimate and most desirable aim is that all
the control work, which the Association now
undertakes, should become the responsibility
of some central and authoritative body.
Thereby, all contraceptives offered for sale
THE EUGENICS SOCIETY | 1g

by reputable chemists would have to pass set
standards.

- The Association’s honorary secretary,
Mrs. Pyke, was elected an Honorary Life
Fellow of. our Society this summer. Mrs.
Rachel Conrad, a member of our Council, is
a member of the Association’s National
Executive Committee. From this you will
see that we have close and active linkages.

In another direction we have taken similar
action by banding ourselves with like-minded
people. The Society’s “Statement of
Objects’ sets forth the need for “ FivePurposes Parenthood Centres.’’ The “ Five
Purposes”’ are marriage guidances, premarital health examinations, advice on birth
control, treatment of infecundity and eugenic
prognosis. The long-established North Kensington Women’s Welfare Centre is now
changing its name to the more comprehensive North Kensington Marriage Welfare
Centre. It has as its far-sighted founder
and chairman, Mrs. Margery Spring-Rice.
Early this year we had useful and interesting
talks with her and her associates. That
original and pioneering centre already gives
effect to all and more than all our suggested
“ Five-Purposes ”’
nosis or guidance on eugenic problems both
before and after marriage.

- Our Council has approved a grant-in-aid,
$pread over three years, to enable the North
Kensington Centre to expand its work to
cover eugenic guidance, while we on our side

save only eugenic prog-'

will also provide, through Dr. Blacker and
Dr. Carter, the specific examinations and
advice to individuals, or guidance as to the
medical clinic or institution best suited to
advise the inquirer.

May I call your attention to our Statement
of Olyects, with its outline of origins, eugenic
studies and policies, and now particularly
call your attention to the paragraph dealing
with our policy concerning termination of
pregnancy.

A.L.R.A., The Abortion Law Reform
Association, is sponsoring a Bill to amend the
law of abortion as it stands today. Representatives of our Society have met those of
the Association, in order to discuss the terms
of the Bill. I must not pre-judge our own
Council’s decision in this matter; therefore,
suffice it to say that this Bill would seek to
codify what is largely accepted today as
general practice, and, it is hoped, will include
a clause of more definitely eugenic interest.
In any case, maybe all that can be achieved
at present, is more of a general educational
and propaganda value rather than necessarily
the outright expectation of early Parlia-.
mentary success.

From all this you will have gathered that
we have a fairly full programme ahead of us.
But eugenics is so wide a subject, so comprehensive, that each year new projects, or
extensions of old, will appear on our horizon.
So I know that each and all will render the
Society every possible aid.
