“STERILITY AND VITAMIN
DEFICIENCY."

Report of a Lecture by Dr. A. S. Parkes.

The subject that I have been asked to talk to you about
is one of extreme difficulty. In the first place, many people will
tell you that there is no conclusive evidence that vitamins exist at all,
and secondly, the accurate study of vitamins as they affect the reproductive processes is a matter of very recent years. Practically the whole of
the information available is contained in some half-dozen papers
which have been published during the last few years.

In the first place I should say something about vitamins themselves. The study of vitamins originally started some twenty-five
years ago with the discovery that beri-beri, a common Eastern disease,
and scurvy were diseases originating in dietary deficiency. It was
noticed that beri-beri only appeared when the diet consisted of nothing
but polished rice and that the addition of other food stuffs or of even
the husk of the rice itself stopped the appearance of the disease. In a
similar way it was noticed that scurvy only appeared when people were
fed for a considerable period on diets entirely deficient in fresh fruit.
These observations on the human subject were followed up by experimental work on animals and it was found that laboratory animals kept
entirely on chemically pure food stuffs, namely, proteins, carbohydrates, fats, and salts, which had hitherto been supposed to be an adequate dietary, exhibited various abnormalities. Chief among these
abnormalities was a failure to exhibit proper growth in the young, and
loss of weight and various nervous disease symptoms in the adult.
To cut a long story short, four or five accessory food factors have now
been discovered.

First there is the vitamin known as Vitamin A. This is present in
large quantities in cod liver oil, in milk fat, and in various other fats.
The absence of this factor in the young animal prohibits full growth and
the animal remains in a dwarfed condition. Secondly there is the vita min known as Vitamin B, and the absence of this results also in cessation of growth and in the appearance of acute nervous symptoms. Vitamin B. is contained in large quantities in yeast and in various yeast
extracts and is known as the anti-neuritic vitamin. Thirdly, there
is Vitamin C. which is found in various fresh fruits, the absence of
which is connected with the disease called scurvy. Scurvy, of course,
was very common on board the old sailing ships which were away from
port for a considerable time without fresh fruit or vegetables. It is
now prevented by the addition of fruit juices, particularly orange
and lemon juice, tothe diet. More recently, a further vitamin has
been determined, namely, a vitamin whose absence is connected with

 

*Printed as delivered except for verbal alterations and the omission of
lantern slide descriptions.
26 EUGENICS REVIEW.

the appearance of rickets in the young animal. Finally there is the
so-called Vitamin X. or, as it has been called during the last few
months, Vitamin E. It seems to be concerned solely with the reproductive processes, and I will talk about that in detail later.

Now I mention the salient points about sterility. It is obvious
that complete sterility, namely, the inability to produce living young,
falls into three main classes—firstly, the inability to produce germ
cells, secondly, the inability to effect fertilisation, and, thirdly, the
inability, relating to the female only, to perform gestation. It so
happens that vitamin deficiency—that is to say deficiency of one or
other of these vitamins—provides an interesting example of each type
of sterility. The first type of sterility, the inability to produce
gametes, is, of course, typically found in various diseases of the
gonads, non-descent of the testes, fatty degeneration of the ovary, and
various malignant diseases. Inability to effect fertilisation is often
reproduced for experimental purposes by such operations as vasectomy
in the case of the male and by salpingectomy, section of the Fallopian
tubes, inthe female. The third tyne of sterility, namely, the inability
to perform gestation, or the non-viability of the foetus, is often
found in nature quite apart from vitamin deficiency or any other
experimental cause. Ina great many of the rodents a large percentage
of the foetuses which are conceived do not survive to be born, and they
are removed by a process of autolysis and re-absorption. That is to
say if one foetus in a litter dies in an animal like the mouse, the whole
set of foetuses are not aborted, in fact the stimuli which are necessary
to bring about abortion are not set up andthe dead foetus autolyses and
is apparently entirely re-absorbed by the maternal organism. This
autolysis can be reproduced in the laboratory simply by _ incubating the foetus in a sterile medium at 37° C, namely, at body
temperature. Inaveryfew days the foetus will entirely liquify and
come to a condition in which it could be absorbed by the maternal organism. That form of sterility, the re-absroption of the foetus before
birth, is of importance from the point of view of vitamin work.

As regards vitamin sterility itself, the effects of Vitamin A.
deficiency may be dealt with first. The net result. of putting adult
animals on a diet deficient in Vitamin A. in the case of a rat, for
instance, is that no very obvious symptoms appear. Evans and
Bishop found that the oestrus cycle of the female may be disturbed
slightly and the actual cornification of the female genitalia which is
typical of the oestrus in a rat for some reason may persist for a good deal
longer than normally. Professor Drummond has carried the work
rather further and has shown that putting the young female animal on a
Vitamin A. deficiency diet, although it stops growth almost entirely,
does not inhibit the development of the primary organs of reproduction, namely the ovaries, or of the accessory organs, the uterus and the
vagina. The result is that you get the rather curious condition of
having a small stunted animal which should be an adult, weighing,
say , 60 or 70 grammes instead of 200 or 800, which has the reproductive
organs of anormal adult. It is quite a curious condition. In spite of
the fact that the genitalia are fairly normal no breeding takes place
STERILITY AND VITAMIN DEFICIENCY. 27°

among these animals. To endeavour to find a cause for this, reciprocal
matings were made between deficiency males and normal females, and
deficiency females and normal males. The results of these tests show
conclusively that. the cause of the sterility is not the inability to produce gonads in either case, but inability to effect fertilisation. The
animals apparently never mate. In the male, we find that much the
same sort of thing takes place. The arimal is equally stuntea after
two or three months of Vitamin A. deficiency diet, but at the same
time the testes are developed fairly well with regard to their size and
almost perfectly normal as regards the histology of their tubules.

Certain of these stunted animals were put on to a complete diet.
The result was that the animals of the sturted size of 60 or 70:
grammes suddenly shot up in weight and became the normal adult size.
They were then mated both among each other and with normals and the
result was that breeding took place in all three directions, namely,
ex-deficients with ex-deficients, and deficients with normals, and the.
young produced from those animals which had been recovered from the
deficiency condition were perfectly normal. The fertility was slightly
below normal but the sex ratio and the fecundity appeared to be quite.
normal. The actual growth of the young themselves was again normal,
and altogether it did not appear as if the previous deficiency of their
parents had had any effect on the quality of the voung.

To sum up, therefore, it may be said that as regards the secondary
sterility due to Vitamin A. deficiency the sterility is due not to the
failure to produce germ cells but to the failure to effect fertilisation
owing apparently to the fact that though the histological features of:
cestrus occur, the female fails to exhibit the normal breeding instincts.

As regards Vitamin B, Evans’ and Bishop’s original observations
on the effect of Vitamin B. on reproduction were made on the female,
and they showed quite conclusively that deficiency of Vitamin B., that
is, deficiency in the adult female, resulted in the entire cessation of the
ovarian function. The Graafian follicles degenerated and the cestrus
cycle stopped entirely, sc that those animals were sterile in the first
way I mentioned, namely inability to produce germ cells. To.
endeavour to extend that somewhat, Professor Drummond and I put a
number of male rats on the Vitamin B. deficiency diet with the
particular view of testing fecundity, fertility, sex ratio, and the weight
of the young at birth following Vitamin B. deficiency of the male
parent. From the beginning it was quite obvious that we could not
hope to do anything with entirely deficient Vitamin B. animals. Such
animals decline in weight very rapidly, and within a fortnight of going
on the diet the testes show signs of atrophy and it is quite impossible
for the animals to breed at all. Our main experiment, therefore, was
to keep the male rats on a graduated deficiency of Vitamin B. and to
observe the results on the fecundity, fertility, and sex-ratio. Our
criterion of Vitamin B. deficiency was the percentage of marmite,
which is a commercial extract of yeast, in the diet. Three or four per»
cent. of marmite added to the basic ration is sufficient to keep the
animal going for more or less indefinite periods, but below that per-.
centage the animal gets progressively lighter and progressively weaker,
and various organs, particularly the testes, show a gradual atrophy.
28 EUGENICS REVIEW.

The changes taking place in the testes may in such cases be
roughly divided into three stages. In the first stage the later products
of spermatogenesis, spermatozoa, spermatids and some spermatocytes,
tend to clump together in the lumen of the tubes. In the second stage
spermatozoa and spermatids have disappeared and most of the remaining germ cells come to form a solid core in the tubule. Later, this
core appears to be re-absorbed and in the third stage the only content :
of the tubules are a few spermatogonia or Sertoli cells.

With regard to the rats which were on the graduated deficiency o!
Vitamin B. these changes were observed very much in relation to the
degree of deficiency. The three or four per cent. of marmite rats
showed few of those changes. The two per cent. showed some of the
early changes, while the one per cent. marmite animals showed more
advanced atrophy and were not in all cases fertile. The half per cent.
and 0 per cent. groups showed the last stage of degeneration and were
mostly infertile after two or three weeks on the diet. The actual
figures of fecundity we found were as follows. Entire Vitamin B.
deficiency showed only 11 per cent. of pregnancies for matings, that is
to say only elven matings out of a hundred showed any offspring, and
the 11 per cent. were matings during the early stages of the deficiency.
The entirely B. deficient animals of course die within five or six weeks.
With half per cent. of yeast extract added the percentage of pregnancies
rose to 36; with one per cent. marmite to 39, and the three per
cent. marmite groups showed about the same fecundity. With
three and four per cent. marmite the percentage of pregnancies rose to
58, and the actual normal percentage of pregnancies was found to be 75.
Hence as regards fertility we can generalise, and say that the fecundity
is in the direct relation to the degree of vitamin deficiency.

Turning to fertility, by which I mean the number of young per
litter if litters are produced, the fertility showed no such correlation,
and for all these different grades of Vitamin B. deficiency the number
of young per litter remained very much the same, namely, between six
and seven, which is the normal for the rat. It is not hard to understand
why this is so. Ifa male is capable of fertilising a female at all it is
pretty obvious that he will produce enough spermatozoa to produce the
largest litter that can be carried by the female. The female rat rarely
produces more than nine or ten ova at a time, and if the male is capable
of producing progeny at all he will produce a great many more
spermatozoa than that. In the same way the fertility analysed according to the time on the diet shows nothing far from the normal. Similarly again, the frequency distribution for the size of the litter, that is to
say the scattering of the size of the litter round the mean, is not abnormal. As regards the sex ratio, however, some rather striking results
were found. In the case of animals receiving two per cent. or less of
marmite 276 young were produced and the male percentage in these
young was only 44—that is 44 males to 56 females. In the case of the
three per cent. marmite and more the sex ratio was practically normal
at 50:50 or very nearly 50:50. These differences were significant when
considered in relation to their probable error.

The sex ratio showed another rather striking variation, namely,
STERILITY AND VITAMIN DEFICIENCY. 29

that considered according to the time on diet for all grades of deficiency
the proportion of males gradually sank as the animals were kept longer
on the B. deficiency diet. It is extremely difficult to say why this
should be so, because the rat probably stores little or no Vitamin B.,
so that it cannot be a question of gradually exhausting some storage of
the vitamin. The most likely explanation we arrived at was to suppose
that the animals as they became more unhealthy and as they got a
greater distaste for their synthetic diet actually ate less of the diet and
took in less of the Vitamin B. The result of this would be that as time
went on the actual deficiency of Vitamin B. would become greater

The actual weight at birth of the young born from the graduated
deficiency males showed very little variation, which again is what you
would rather expect, because once fertilisation takes place the effect of
the deficiency more or less ends. Since the females were kept on a
perfectly natural diet, the foetuses were gestated under perfectly normal
dietary conditions ; and the fact that the actual young showed no variation according to the degree of vitamin deficiency in the father is not
very surprising, but it does suggest that the Vitamin B. deficiency had
not actually damaged the spermatozoa in cases where they were produced.

In this connection I might mention some unpublished work which
was done a little time ago by Professor Drummond with regard to the
effect of Vitamin B. deficiency on pregnancy. To test this it is necessary in the first place to keep the female on a perfectly natural diet and
allow her to mate in the normal way, and only then to put the female
on the deficiency diet. No breeding takes place if the female is put on
deficiency before mating, so you have to get pregnancy established
and then put the animal on the deficiency diet. It was found that
when this was done the pregnancy invariably came to an abrupt
termination, and this shows that even when implantation has taken
place the supply of Vitamin (in this case Vitamin B.) is essential to
maintain the pregnancy.

The effects, if any, of vitamin C. deficiency on reproduction is not
properly known, probably owing to the fact that this accessory factor
is more difficult to work with in reproduction experiments. I have,
however, sectioned the testes of a number of scurvy guinea pigs and
in each case degenerative changes were to be seen which seemed to be
very similar to those found in the case of Vitamin B. deficiency.

Finally, I turn to the so-called Vitamin X. Some time in 1922
Evans and Bishop noticed that animals kept on synthetic diets even
when given an adequate supply of all the then known vitamins refused
to produce living young in most cases. They went very carefully into
the origin of this and they found that in both sexes the germ cells were
produced in a perfectly normal manner. They also found that fertilisation and implantation took place, in spite of the fact that no young were
produced at birth except in rare cases. By various autopsies they
discovered that in these animals the foetuses were gestated perfectly
normally for about thirteen or fourteen days (out of a gestation period
of twenty-two days in the rat) and that the foetuses then died and were
re-absorbed after autolysis. Evans and Bishop having found that
30 EUGENICS REVIEW.

this invariably took place on their basic diet plus the then known
vitamins, proceeded to endeavour to find food stuffs which would
cure this disease. In various ways, by trying all the ordinary
laboratory food stuffs used for dietary work, they showed quite
conclusively I think—that is to say it is very hard to criticise
their work—that there is a further vitamin, which they called Vitamin
X, which is concerned solely with gestation. They have separated this
Vitamin X. from the previously known vitamins. For instance, milk
fat in small quantities does not stop re-absorption of the foetuses,
although milk fat even in small quantities contains adequate amounts
of Vitamin A. In the same way, the addition of yeast to the diet,
even in large amounts, did not stop the re-absorption of the foetus,
although the yeast provided abundant supplies of Vitamin B.

Similarly, again, the addition of orange or lemon juice to the diet
had no effect in curing the disease, so that this Vitamin X, or factor X.,
does not seem to have any connection with Vitamin C. In the same kind
of way it can be separated from Vitamin D. Evans and Bishop, therefore, in this'work seem to have located a further accessory food factor
which is not necessary for the production of the germ cells or for the
occurrence of fertilisation, but which is necessary to enable gestation to
proceed normally.

I suppose actually you all want to know how these various pieces
of research which I have more or less abstracted for you apply to
the human subject. It is well known, of course, how various
Vitamin deficiencies affect in general the human subject, but I am
afraid it is quite impracticable at the present time to tell you anything about the occurrence of vitamin sterility in the human being.
Any knowledge that can be obtained about this will, Iam afraid, be got
very slowly and very indirectly. Although it is quite obvious that
during recent years we have got to know a lot more about vitamins in
general and in partjcular about their influence on fertility and the
vigour of the young and about vitamin deficiency sterility in lower
animals, I fear that it will be in the somewhat distant future when
information will be available regarding the importance of vitamin
deficiencies as a cause of human sterility.

Replies to Questions and Comments.

I certainly do not /think any vitamin deficiency treatment is a
possible means of sterilising unfit human beings. The deficiency
necessary to produce absolute sterility is extremely injurious to the
organisation as a whole. Secondly, with regard to increasing the
fertility of the poor by increasing the amount of vitamin. I think the
ordinary diet of the average human being contains a supply of vitamins
adequate for fertility, and even if the amount of vitamins was consider ably increased I doubt whether any definite signs of increased fertility
would be produced.

With regard to the question of Vitamin X. and growth, the diets
deficient in this accessory factor are quite sufficient to produce
normal growth and every sign of normal health except the capacity on
the part of the female to carry gestation through.
STERILITY AND VITAMIN DEFICIENCY. 81

The very interesting point about the improvement in general health
which can be effected by sunlight and even by ultra violet ray treatment, reminded me of some work which has recently been done on
irradiating various chemical substances and then adding them to
deficiency diets. In certain cases apparent. vitamin effects have been
obtained. The irradiation of colesterol, for instance, has in some cases
conferred on the colesterol the capacity, apparently, to replace Vitamin A., so the possibility of converting other substances into Vitamin
A. by irradiation is presented. That, of course, is directly connected
with the influence of sunlight on general health and nutrition. The
further point about sterility owing to over fatness, is, of course,
well known. We come across it regularly in laboratory animals.
When rodents kept under ordinary conditions in the laboratory become
extremely fat they become actually sterile at a very early age.

I absolutely agree that vitamin deficiency is probably not a
prominent cause of sterility in the human subject. There are
many other causes of human sterility which are well known. Vitamin
deficiency may be a cause, but I should say it is not in the first ten
causes of human sterility. a
