Birth Control: a Discussion.

A meeting was held on Tuesday, October 19th, 1920, at Burlington
House, under the auspices of the Eugenics Education Society when the
problem of birth-control was discussed. Major Leonard Darwin was
in the chair.

In his opening remarks, the President explained that he had dealt
with this question in his annual address; and that, as it was a subject
on which a good deal of difference of opinion existed, it had been decided
by the council that an opportunity should be given to the members
to discuss it. The views he had expressed were personal to himself,
and did not constitute an authoritative expression of opinions of
the Society. There were two problems involved, the lessening of
fertility amongst the less fit, and the discouragement of birth control
amongst the more fit. He hoped that both subjects would be approached
by all without prejudice. Medical details would be ruled out of order,
though doubtless they should be fully discussed by medical men and
women on suitable occasions.

Dr. Kituick MiLtutarn, Medical Officer of Health for Leicester,
then opened the discussion with the following address :—

I have read Major Darwin’s able paper with much interest and
pleasure. I welcome it for two reasons: (1) On account of its intrinsic
value as a thoughtful and scientific contribution to the subject of
eugenics; (2) because it indicates, I think, that,the Eugenics Education Society is coming to recognise that the question of Birth Control
must be faced, and that it is desirable that the attitude of the Society
towards this movement be determined.

Whether we like it or not, birth control has come to stay and has
got to be reckoned with. It is widely practised amongst just those
classes which we are accustomed to regard as the most efficient. It
is calculated to have a great and far-reaching effect upon the future
oftherace. It is, therefore, a subject in which the Eugenics Education
Society should be profoundly interested. Certainly it cannot remain
indifferent .

We use the term birth control to connote volitional limitation
of the size of the family. Those who advocate birth control believe
that it is desirable and necessary in the interest, not only of the individual, but of the nation and the whole world to lessen the struggle for
existence and the evils which result from it. They further believe
that it is neither desirable or necessary, in order to effect this, to
mutilate married life by depriving it of the happiness and other
fundamental advantages which accrue from the physical union of
husband and wife, which after all is and always has been the great
distinguishing feature and privilege associated with marriage.

The eugenist has always stood for quality as opposed to quantity.
Yet he cannot be indifferent to the question of quantity, for quality
292 EUGENICS REVIEW.

and quantity are inversely correlated and to a large extent in antagonism, so that to obtain the one we usually have to sacrifice the other.
It is important, therefore, for the eugenist to decide whether and to
what extent mere quantity is desirable or undesirable. If it can be
shown that quantity is desirable the eugenist is at a discount, because
he is ‘‘out’’ for quality; but if the reverse can be shown, viz., that
mere quantity is undesirable, then the eugenist’s course is clear.

' The human race, like all other forms of life, tends to increase
faster than the means of subsistence, and although the potential
rate of increase may be slower than in the case of animals lower in the
scale of life, it is still very rapid when compared with the epochs of
history. In the earlier epochs, when the struggle for existence was
acute, the death rate was so high that it nearly equalled the birth
rate and increase of population was slow, but during the 18th century,
owing to industrial expansion and the fall in the death-rate due to a
higher standard of living, a much more rapid rate of increase set in,
with the result that the population of England and Wales, which was
nine millions at the beginning of that century, had increased to 32}
millions by the end of the century and to 86 millions by 1911; in
other words, it had quadrupled in 110 years. During the last quarter
of the century, as is well-known, the birth-rate fell greatly—very.
fortunately as some think—but the death-rate also continued to fall,
and population continued to increase.

The result was that during the first ten years of the present century,
1901—1£11, although the rate of increase was lower, the actual addition in numbers to the population was greater than in any previous
decade and the population of England and Wales increased by no less
than 3} millions. All through this period a totally unnecessary
outcry was being made in many quarters about depopulation and
‘trace suicide.’’ Yet a little calculation will show that if the same
rate of increase be maintained the population of this country by the
end of this century will be 115 millions, whilst by the end of next
century—a time which the great-grandchildren of some persons living
to-day may well live to see—the population will be 370 millions, or
something greater than the present population of India. No thinking
person can seriously believe that this country could maintain such a
population. For one thing, our coal supply would not hold out.
What would happen inevitably would be that long before we reached
that point, or anything near it, the standard of life would be so reduced, and the struggle for existence become so keen, that the deathrate would go up and the population would cease to increase so rapidly,
and eventually a balance would be struck, and it would remain stationary at just that point where a bare subsistence could be maintained.
In other words, we should be reduced to something like the condition
prevailing in certain parts of the East, e.g., China, with its ‘‘glorious’’
fertility! |

_ We would emphasise, then, that over-population is inevitable
sooner or later unless one of two things happen; either (1) reduction
of the birth-rate; or (2) increase in the death-rate. I would suggest
that man’s intelligence will surely show him—and there is evidence
that it is already doing so—that the wiser course is to reduce the
birth-rate.
BIRTH CONTROL: A DISCUSSION. 293

Turning now to Major Darwin’s paper, he points out that there
is good reason to fear that efficiency and infertility are becoming
correlated, and in so far as this comparative infertility is due to birth
control (and nearly all those who have studied the question belive
that this is the principal cause) we must pronounce birth control,
as at present practised, to be distinctly dysgenic in its operation.
For it is quite clear that the less efficient sections of the community
are multiplying faster than the more efficient.

At the same time, Major Darwin points out that by a strange
irony it is probable that the most dysgenic of all forms of birth control
is just that one which is recommended by the Churches, and which
is usually referred to as ‘‘moral] restraint.’’ The explanation is that
‘‘moral restraint’’ or ‘‘abstinence in marriage’’ will only be effective
with those individuals who are inherently endowed in a special degree
with that most desirable quality, self-control, whilst it will be ineffective in the case of those who are lacking in it.

The eugenist, therefore, cannot pin his faith to this method of
restricting fertility.

_ Major Darwin recognises that from the eugenic point of view
there are two possible alternatives: (1) to attempt to abolish birth
contro] by a campaign against it; or (2) to accept it and encourage its
further spread so as to reach the lowest and least efficient classes who
are at present least affected by it.

As regards (1), even supposing that any attempt of this kind
could be successful, which is most unlikely, Major Darwin points out
that probably its first effect would be dysgenic. Whilst by encouraging an increased birth-rate population would tend to increase still
faster, the struggle for existence would quickly become more acute,
poverty, famine, pestilence and war would result and a great increase
in the death-rate would be inevitable. Although, ultimately, after
many generations, the race might possibly be purified, the process
would be quite contrary to the rational aims of eugenists who wish
to substitute more human methods of selection for the cruel methods of
nature.

The other alternative (2) is to accept birth control and encourage
its spread downwards with a view to reducing the fertility of the less
efficient classes.

I wish to urge, with all the earnestness of which I am capable,
that this is the right course for the eugenist to take. The arguments in
its favour appear to me to be overwhelming.

1. I believe it to be practicable.

.2. It is a eontinuation and natural development of the present
movement; i.e., it is a going forward and not turning back; progress
instead of re-action.

8. It is merely teaching and encouraging the less efficient
classes to adopt the practice which the more efficient classes have
found by experience to be effective and satisfactory .

It is giving the less efficient classes something they want and
are asking for. Many of the letters written by poor. over-burdened
mothers of the poorer classes asking for information as to methods
of birth control are eloquent proof of this,
294 EUGENICS REVIEW.

In Section 5 of his paper, Major Darwin discussed the question
whether the practice of birth control to-day will tend to check the
practice in the future. He suggests that those who have an inherent
bias in favour of the practice will die out and be replaced by those
who are opposed to it.

I think, however, that he overlooks the fact that the being in
favour of or opposed to birth control is much more likely to result
from education, e.g., propaganda, than from any inborn, and
therefore heritable, quality. It is almost certain, that as population
gets ever larger and larger the need for restricted fertility will become
more and more manifest, so that those in favour of it will continue to
increase.

It remains to say a word about the ethical aspect of this question.
I am well aware that many worthy people believe that the practice
of birth control otherwise than by ‘‘moral restraint’’ is ethically
wrong. I wish to say emphatically that I am quite at one with them
as to the importance of the moral side of this question, but I firmly
believe that nearly all the so-called moral objections to what are
often referred to as ‘‘artificial’’ methods of birth control can be fairly
met. Some of them rest upon misapprehension; others clearly are
due to prejudice. The only one which it seems hopeless to discuss is
that which professes to appeal to Divine Authority by quoting isolated
texts in the Book of Genesis.

In conclusion I wish to submit that in the birth contro] movement, if wisely directed, and if properly used and not abused, we
have a most valuable eugenic instrument, probably the most valuable
at our disposal. It will indeed be a misfortune if eugenists fail to
recognise its value and remain content to allow the present unsatisfactory condition of things to remain, under which the more efficient
classes are quietly making use of it to their great individual advantage no doubt, but—so long as the less efficient neglect it—to the detriment (from the eugenic point of view) of the race.

The question has got past the experimental stage. Although
we have yet much to learn, no doubt, about birth control methods (and
serious scientific research is badly wanted) we know enough to justify
us In going forward.

The possibility of being able to contro] his fertility is one of the
most momentous discoveries made by human being.

The present widespread movement in favour of reducing the
burden of parenthood amongst the poor (the less efficient) and which
is coming to consist largely in giving doles, needs closely watching
by the eugenist. In so far as, by improving the environment of the
child, it improves the citizen of the next generation, well and good;
but in order to prevent its operating dysgenically, through encouraging the less efficient to multiply, it most certainly ought to be
accompanied by birth control propaganda. There should be no
practical difficulty about this. I believe that the great majority of
Health Visitors and Infant Welfare Workers sympathise deeply
with the poor and worn-out mother over-burdened by maternity.
They see how excessive fertility degrades maternity, neutralises
their efforts, and stultifies their work, and is bad for both mother and
BIRTH CONTROL: A DISCUSSION. 295

child. I believe that they would gladly co-operate as birth control
missionaries, once they have official sanction and the approval ‘of
public opinion. For this reason I welcome most heartily Major
Darwin’s outspoken utterance at the end of his paper in favour of his
Society adopting a definite Birth Control policy. I share Major
Darwin’s opinion that endowment of motherhood would probably
grow to be dysgenic in its operation.

Mr. Horre-JonEs, called upon to open the debate, said that he
had still an open mind as to whether birth control was morally right
or morally wrong. Much of the evidence was medical, and it was
difficult for an outsider either to get hold of it or to analyse it. It
was easy for experts to say that these questions were now past the
experimental stage, but there were experts on both sides. There
was contradictory evidence, and it was too much to ask the ordinary
man to throw in his lot at short notice with either side. He felt he
was on surer ground in referring to the policy of the Society. If
they were a scientific Society and nothing else, they should go ahead
oblivious of public opinion. The matter was not to be judged from
the point of view either of the Early Church orof Professor Huxley,
but as to whether it was going to fill the next generation with better
people or worse. They needed to influence public opinion on those
matters as to which they were agreed. By adopting the views of Dr.
Millard, the Society was in danger of alienating a large section of
public opinion. They had not yet made one man in twenty really
understand the Eugenic idea. By urging the practice of birth control,
or even by denouncing it. they would be alienating a large number of
people, and that would be aserious mistake from the point of view of
the Society. Ina matter like this he did not admit there was any real
distinction between ethics and politics. He would sum up his views
in the form of a motion which might or might not be put to the meeting.
His proposal was :—

‘*In view of the widely-spread belief that the Eugenics Education
Society is advocating artificial methods of birth-limitation, the
morality of which is questioned both inside and outside the Society,
it is felt that a short statement of its general policy on this question
is desirable.

1. Inno case does the Society urge upon any class or individual
the adoption of such methods. In no case does it favour interference between any individual and his or her medical adviser.

2. Members of the Society who consider these methods right,
or who consider them wrong, have as full liberty as any other persons
to spread their own views, but have no authority to quote the Society
as sanction for such views.

8. By advocating large families in general, and basing its
advocacy upon moral motives such as the ambition to become the
ancestor of a great race, and to deserve the gratitude of one’s children,
the Society strives to raise the birth-rate among those to whom these
motives can appeal: but in cases where the higher appeal fails to
overcome material motives for sterility, and selfishness 1s found to be
exterminating itself, it is opposed to the stimulation of the birth-rate
by threats, by bribery, or by denunciation,
296 EUGENICS REVIEW.

4. Eugenists are agreed that in some sections of the community
the birth-rate needs to be reduced, but have no intention of overtiding moral or religious considerations in their attempts to attain this
end. :

5. Eugenists, because they believe that man exists for some
greater end than self-seeking, and that in matters connected with
reproduction this fact requires especial emphasis, feel the need for
co-operation with all bodies, religious or otherwise, which stand for
the same fundamental belief.”’

_ Dr. B. Duntop said he approached the subject from the unanswerable Malthusian standpoint. The food supply of the world—
and of most countries, including Britain—was only increased at the
slow rate of one, or less, per cent a year, even before the war. Consequently, populations could only be increased slowly; in other
words, a low birth-rate was necessary in order to eliminate poverty.
A low birth-rate being thus necessary, the evgenic policy was to have
a very low birth-rate among the poor. The early Neo-Malthusians
urged that birth control information should be spread amongst the
poor. But this was hindered by the opposition of religionists and
socialists; consequently birth contro] had been a very dysgenic process. They did not disregard positive eugenics, for they held that a
very low birth-rate amongst the poor would enable the fitter classes
to contribute the larger proportion of children to the population.
Thus he did not agree with Major Darwin that birth control would
lead to the elimination of the fitter stocks. Practically everyone
would marry and have children when a low birth-rate had made it
economically possible. Again, the poor were generally most eager
to get birth contro! information; and if they were encouraged to adopt
it, he could imagine few not doing so in their own obvious interests.
Thus poverty would be eliminated and race improvement established
by the poor having one or two children, and the better off classes
two, three or four. Intemperance created a difficulty, but it was
fortunately much less amongst women; mereover, the birth control
methods employed by the woman were being increasingly regarded
as the best.

Dr. MarirE STOPES said that every child born sent. up the birthrate for one year, and sent it down for at least nineteen years if it lived.
As the population got larger and larger the birth-rate must steadily
run down. Dangerous phrases were loosely used by Councillor Clark
and all sorts of imbeciles who did not understand the meaning of vita]
statistics. She felt she had an earnest prophetic and God-given
mission, and she asked them to read the last two chapters of her new
bcok, ‘Radiant Motherhood.’’ It was written absolutely for the
n>xt ‘generation, and described the only way in which women could
bring forth the type of children of which they wanted the next géneration to be made up. Dr. Stopes went on to relate her efforts in regard
to challenging the reservation issued in connection with the report of
the second Birth-rate Commission of which she was a member, and
explained that whereas those who signed the reservation condemned
all scientific methods of control on ‘‘medical evidence,’’ none of the
signatories had been able to substantiate this and produce any medical]
facts from the evidence heard by the Commission.
BIRTH CONTROL: A DISCUSSION. -297

Mr. R. A. Fisuer said the subject was not new. Throughout
history there had been intentional limitation of offspring due to
ecomonic motives and sometimes advocated from patriotic reasons.
There had been infanticide and foeticide. Against these practices
an extraordinarily powerful moral opinion had grown up through
the centuries. In all civilizations the prevailing religion condemned
infanticide. The reason for the changed opinion was that those to
whom infanticide was repugnant, left children in greater numbers,
and those who murdered their infants disappeared from the face of the
earth. Among the Greeks and the early Norseman, infanticide was
practised without scruple. The Arabs, before the time of Mohammed,
practised female infanticide from a high conscientious and moral aim
as a duty towards their tribe. The early. preaching of Mohammed,
marked a revulsion due to instinct and conscience. Personally he could
not distinguish between instinct and conscience. He proceeded to
cite Greek and Roman writers to show the same change of feeling ‘in
regard to abortion. In the next century he thought there would be
similar revulsion against the employment of contraceptives. There
would be a gradual elimination of those types who from reasons,
however high-minded and conscientious, were willing to limit their
progeny.

Mrs. MARGARET SANGER, editor of the American ‘‘ Birth Control
Review,’’ met the objection that the poor would not adopt birth
control by giving an account of her recent investigations in Rotherhithe, where for some years, through the efforts of Miss Anna Martin,
poor women had been taught a method of birth control, with great
benefit to both mothers and children.

Dr. ALicE DryspALE Vickery related her experiences in the
matter of promoting birth control during the last forty years, She
was convinced that the disastrous and dysgenic condition of so large
a section of the population of to-day would have been avoided had the
relatively poor people of forty years ago been told in simple language
the theory of population, and the hygienic method of birth control.
No set of human beings had the right to deprive others of information
conducive to their well-being. Poor people, poor women especially,
had been deliberately deprived of the power of using their own judgment in regard to what was beneficial for themselves and their offspring. The result was the limitation of families amongst the wellto-do, side by side with the birth and survival of the unfit. The
agen-ies which produced dysgenic effects had increased and multiplied.
But the women of the poorer class were demanding to-day that information which had benefited the better classes. It was not natural that a
poor woman should desi e to bring into the world one child after another
without proper intervals of rest and recuperation. The nation needs
an A.1. population, it will attain that ideal when all women shall be
properly instructed in matters of sexual and social hygiene and the
regulation of conception, so that they may give the nation what it
needs ; and that is a population in which every child shall be well-born.

Dr. Kiviick MiLuarD, at the request of the Chairman, said a
few words in reply. -He welcomed the opportunity to exchange ideas
with those who differed from them. Their Society was certainly a
298 - EUGENICS REVIEW.

scientific Society formed to study what was beneficial for the future
of the race. If birth-control were equally exercised by all classes,
the results would no longer be dysgenic, and that was a strong argument for going forward. He was much interested in Mr. Fisher’s
historical references, but there was a great difference between infanticide or abortion, and the prevention of conception. To-day the
churches with few exceptions were in favour of prudence in the married
state. Their changed attitude from the old idea of ‘‘be fruitful and
multiply’? represented an enormous advance. The churches were
coming to recognise that it was not right that people should have
more children than they could properly bring up.

Mr. Hore-JoneEs said a few more words. He felt they should
hammer home the points on which they were agreed with a view to
convert public opinion. Such a course was morally and scientifically
right. To bring in side issues with the hope of influencing a mere
section of public opinion was morally and scientifically wrong.
