GENETIC PROBLEMS IN PSYCHIATRY

And their Solution by the Study of Twins
By AUBREY J. LEWIS, M.R.C.P.

ENETICS and psychiatry have this

in common, that they are old in so

far as speculations and empirical
practice go, but very young as sciences, and
still under suspicion by their elders of being
apt to romp and run wild on occasion. These
are clearly grounds for friendship between
them. But the respects in which they differ
are significant: genetics would be precise,
standing by ‘‘ actual measurement and the
Rule of Three ”’ ; in psychiatry, on the other
hand, the material of observation is fluid,
not clear cut, and measurement is seldom
attainable.

I propose to consider briefly the peculiar
difficulties which arise when these two are
mated, or perhaps, in franker expression of
my own attitude, I should say when genetics
becomes the handmaid of psychiatry. For it
is the problems of psychiatry with which I
am concerned, and they are for present purposes twofold—to determine what are the
individual mental disorders, and how these
are transmitted. For the latter end, genetic
study is indispensable ; for the former it is
of almost unexpected value.

It might be said that the psychiatrist
ought to know his own business well enough
by now to have found out what the mental
disorders are. ‘This is a matter presently
to be discussed, but I would say here that
geneticists and others often assume that the
diagnosis ‘ manic-depressive insanity,’ or
“dementia preecox,’ or ‘hysteria,’ or
* melancholia ’ is as definite and trustworthy
as one of ‘ diabetes mellitus’ or ‘ typhoid
fever.” It is not so. ‘These psychiatric
terms represent different sorts of diagnosis
and a considerable diversity of opinion as to
names and categories. In general medicine
diagnosis and the delimitation of diseases
depend on the recognition of more or less
characteristic structural changes, predomi
nant causal agents, or definite quantitative
or qualitative variation of function ; normal
function, which is usually average range of
function, and normal structure are known,
and deviations can be recognized for the
most part beyond dispute; causal agents
likewise are known and detectable. But in
psychiatry the range of the so-called normal
is uncertain; and sharp differences in kind
between the actual morbid phenomena are
often hard to establish ; whether a given feature is to be called a delusion, a hallucination or an obsession, may at times be a
matter of terminology, to be settled only by
some arbitrary standard or definition of
very limited validity. To the much greater
difficulties in the matter of actual diseasegroupings, syndromes, and symptom-complexes, I shall come in a moment.

Before starting any genetic studies, one
assumes that the general principles obtained
through the work of Mendel and later investigators dealing with physical structures
and functions, will be valid in the particular
field one is concerned with, that is, of mental ‘‘ structures,’’ or ‘‘ concepts,’’ and functions. One would need then first of all to
consider how far the inheritance of mental
characters has a somatic basis, such as may
be found or assumed in other subjects of
genetic study. But this is a problem which
in a sense may be said not to exist, for the
separation of ‘ mental’ from ‘ physical ’ is
generally repudiated in psychiatric epistemology, as is, for example, the false contrast between ‘ organic’ and ‘ functional ’
disorders. For the psychiatrist—or as he
may properly be called, the psychobiologist
—it is the whole man, the organism, integrated at a conscious level, that is the living
unit, reacting to situations, if you like, by
means of ‘ physical’ and ‘ mental’ functions which are ‘ abstractions in themselves

119
I2Z0

and in their components’ or morphological
representations; the heart and lungs being
no more actual entities permitting of independent consideration than the affects or the
memory.

In psychiatry, therefore, one is considering functions of the total person, which is
more than the sum of the functions of individual parts, detached or isolated for purposes of study. So when the inheritance of
mental disorder is spoken of, one is concerned primarily with the type or mode of
reaction of the whole organism, not with the
abstracted ‘ physical ’ or ‘ mental ’ changes.
As a matter of convenience and to establish
constant relationships, rather than by way
of looking into a crux, one makes the artificial distinction between physical and mental
and considers systems and _ functions
separately.

RELATION OF BRAIN AND MIND

What then are the physical correlates of
mental activity ?

The relation of the brain to mental dis- ~

orders was recognized by Galen; it was
made into a famous sentence by Griesinger :
‘“ Geisteskrankheiten sind Gehirnkrankheiten ’’; and it has been greatly furthered
by recent researches, as those of the Vogts,
von Economo, Elliot Smith, Monakow, and
many more. Less clear relations exist
between the working of the great systems,
the metabolism, the vegetative-endocrine
apparatus, and the mental state—the relations are much less precise and certain than
some loud talkers assert. But there is, it is
clear, a co-ordination of psychic part-functions with definite somatic—i.e. physical—
changes, although one can by no means
explain the former by the latter. The coordination speaks for the applicability to
psychic characters of genetic principles
ascertained by the investigation of physical
characters.

It might be supposed, then, that the best
plan would be to establish the regular relationships between somatic and psychic, and
thereafter to use the somatic features as the
more suitable material for genetic study,
since psychic characters are so difficult to

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

define, measure, or describe: slippery customers, in short. Gall’s Phrenology was
an essay in this direction ; the work of Lavater and Carus likewise ; Mott concluded that
a general abiotrophy, manifest in the
gonads and the brain, was the central feature in dementia precox; and in our own
times Kretschmer has given a fillip to all
such studies, through his well-known
attempts to find mathematical correlations
between psychic and somatic structure.
Against his conclusions and his methods
very weighty objections have been urged,
but even though his findings were just and
sound, they would tell us only in what
bodily types mental disorder of a given kind
may be expected, should mental disorder
occur in them at all: these bodily types are
found also widely spread in the average
population. It is fairly widely held that
temperament is dependent on the humours,
as Hippocrates supposed, and that the endocrine secretions, and even more the midbrain and the brain-stem, are the chief
material substrate for affective and conative
changes. But any close correlation has so
far proved impossible of demonstration, and
although the totality of the psycho-physical
constitution, integrated, with consciousness,
may be taken for granted, we do not know
enough of its working to use its exclusively
somatic manifestations as material for genetic studies.

So it becomes a question of examining the
‘psychic’ phenomena of ‘mental’ disorders. But the difficulties here, as we
have already partly seen, are of a kind
seldom met in somatic disorders.

TYPES OF MENTAL DISORDER

In the early years of this century the
great, one might say paramount, influence
of Kraepelin had resulted in a systematized descriptive psychiatry, in which
diseases — 1.e. nosological entities — were
separated off on grounds of etiology, course,
outcome, and occasionally also of structural
pathology. Nowadays it is very different.
Not only have the great groups, such as
Dementia Preecox and Manic-depressive
Insanity, altered their boundaries and inciGENETIC PROBLEMS IN

dentally their names, but their real existence as clinical entities is disputed. The
prevailing point of view has become biological, with a strong teleological bias.
Mental disorders are considered as types of
reaction, complexes of attempts at adaptation along special lines. Certain commonly
occurring types are grouped together in such
broad categories as ‘ schizophrenia,’ ‘ affective psychosis,’ and the like; but fluid
transitions to the normal and intermixtures
between the types comprehended in these
categories are the rule.

This conception of mental disorder has
pragmatic value, since it permits of more
adequate study of the individual illness, and
conclusions as to its outcome, than did the
earlier rigid system. But for genetic purposes it presents singular problems. There
is no common morphological basis or concomitant for these reaction-types; the chief
effective causes of them are in doubt: it is
:indeed a commonplace of psychopathology
‘that for almost any group of clinical fea‘tures, a number of indispensable preceding
thappenings or ‘ causes’ may be assumed.
‘No doubt this is true of general medicine
‘also: not all those exposed to tubercle
‘bacilli respond with tubercle formation in
their tissues, nor if it occurs do the formation and development of the tubercles go on
in the same way in different people. But in
| Most ‘mental’ disorders one has nothing
‘$0 constant as the tubercle bacillus to deter*mine the essence, and incidentally the
“limits, of the particular reaction : there is
No indispensable morbific agent, no main
i factor. Into the very pertinent disputes
‘about the disease-concept in general, and
‘especially in psychiatry, this is not the place
‘to enter. Briefly we may say that the refaction types are by no means unitary
diseases but are very useful provisional ficEtions, ‘as if’ constructions, with which
Fone must work.

4 en. far three difficulties have become appaprent : (1) there is no constant recognizable
‘3 ation between mental change and bodily
Estructure ; (2) there are no unitary diseases ;
and (3) there is not yet unanimity as to
ewhat shall be comprehended within the pro
 
   
  
 

 
   
   
 
   
  
 

PSYCHIATRY I2I

visional ‘ symptom-complexes ’ or ‘ types of
reaction.” Of what, then, is one to determine the inheritance? Some answer to this
problem is to be found in that method of
analyzing a mental disorder which seeks to
distinguish ‘ pathogenic’ from ‘ pathoplastic’ influences. The latter—i.e. pathoplastic—may be held accountable for all
sorts of individual variations from the
fundamental picture, variations which are
the product of special conditions of personality and environment. It is not to be supposed that a sharp distinction in this sense
is always possible, but the more thorough
one’s inquiry, the better does one succeed
in separating the superstructure from the
fundamental disorder, or, to vary the metaphor for the better, in stripping the skin
and other tissues from the skeleton. Very
often it is a matter of distinguishing
between the content of the psychosis and its
form. By this means a better conception has
been reached of what constitute the great
endogenous types of reaction, which chiefly
occupy the attention of the psychiatrist : the
problems of the exogenous types are of a
somewhat different order.

One will therefore first seek to determine
the inheritance of the fundamental disorder,
stripped of pathoplastic features; later one
will consider the personality, or, more
broadly, the inheritance of the ‘ normal ’
psychic characters—a very difficult task in
which studies have not so far been particu
larly happy.

THE STUDY OF TWINS

These are by no means all the problems,
nor is it my intention here to describe the
extraordinary successes that have been
obtained, in spite of the difficulties. I propose to go on to consider one limited branch
of genetic study in which I am particularly
interested. I mean the study of twins.

‘Twins who are the outcome of two fertilized ova are in their predispositions and
similarity to one another like ordinary
brothers and sisters, but when questions of
the development of some illness arise, they
are of value since they usually grow up in
I2Z2Z

much the same external conditions. Differences between them may therefore be
ascribed in the main to different inherited
tendencies. If uni-ovular twins, on the
other hand, are different, one accounts for it
by dissimilar environmental influences—that
is, if uni-ovular twins are really identical
in their inherited tendencies. As to this
there is dispute, but I think that one may
say that most of the evidence is in favour of
it. It is not to be supposed, of course, that
even if this be accepted, uni-ovular twins
will be the same at birth : intra-uterine influences have been operative, there is often
a sort of life and death struggle between
them, and at birth it is quite common for
the difference in weight and length between
uni-ovular twins to be greater than between
binovular ones. Such differences usually
disappear as the children grow, and in many
cases the twins become almost indistinguishable. But illnesses that affect one may not
affect the other; the colour of the hair may
change, according to exposure, etc.; the
shape of the skull may be altered in childhood by the adoption of a particular lie
when sleeping; and altogether the question
of whether a particular pair of twins is uniovular may be very difficult.

One must therefore consider what are the
criteria of uni-ovularity. For obstetricians
it is a simple matter : they usually say that
a single chorion means a single ovum. But
this is perhaps not universally true. And
even if it were, it could only rarely be applied
to the solution of the particular difficulty :
information about the chorion is not to be
got for the asking. And so the determination of the wuni-ovularity must rest on
physical likeness. Mere stmilarity of
appearance is deceptive; no single observation is decisive, and one has to take particular account of findings which have been
shown by statistical analysis to be trustworthy. Such a finding is likeness of finger
patterns ; but, as Dr. Stocks has pointed out
in his very valuable study of the problem,
‘in no branch of scientific investigation is
the circular method of reasoning so common.’’ However, for the most part one can
determine with a very high degree of prob
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ability whether a particular pair are, or are!
not, uni-ovular twins.

So one can say that twins are uni-ovular,
and if so, that they are alike in inherited
tendencies, though not necessarily in the
manifestations of these tendencies ; in other
words, the genotype is not by any means
the phenotype, and there may be considerable variation in the latter. Just as uniovular twins have been known in whom one
showed the inherited anomaly, hexadactylism, and the other did not, so in the case
of mental anomalies, even though predominantly inherited, differences may occur.
Indeed, it is one of the objects of twin
investigations to discover what is the range
of possible manifestations of an essentially
unitary disorder, though, of course, it is
hardly likely that the inherited influences
will be as predominant in determining the
form of these as in certain anomalies of the
nervous system, like the muscular dystrophies.

It is not to be supposed that the method
is new. I need hardly remind this audience
of Galton’s advocacy and use of it ; but most
of the literature until fairly recently was
anecdotal and misleading. A doctor saw
twins whose mental illnesses were very
alike, and he wrote to the medical journal
about it, but as often as not he gave no
evidence as to whether they were uni-ovular
or binovular : he said little or nothing about
the respects in which the illnesses differed,
and he never wrote to the medical journal
to report cases where twins did not behave
alike in the matter of mental disorder. So
one-sided a selection of material is obviously
not adequate.

In order to obtain unselected material,
there are two paths open—to go through a
given area, i.e. a given sample of population,
ascertaining all the psychopathic twins, as
well as all the healthy ones; or to go
through all the psychopathic people in certain mental hospitals or attending psychiatric out-patient departments, and to determine who among them are twins.

The former method is clearly impracticable when one considers that twins are fairly .

rare, and that mental disorder is no com~

: GENETIC PROBLEMS IN

 
    
   
 
   
 
  
   
   
   
 
   
 
   
   
 
  
   
 
   
   
 
  
  
   
 
  
   
 
   
  
  
   

mer among them than in the general
population. One would have to search
ough a very large area to get a sufficient
mumber of affected twins, and resources for
such a survey are not available.
: But the second method does not offer such
ereat difficulties, although unfortunately the
method of recording twin births in England
gs not such as to make reference to the birth
wegisters a simple and rapid method of detergnining, for a large group of people whose
ear and place of birth are known, which of
Shem are twins.

B. And then, having discovered the twins,
gne must use the whole armament of
Msychiatric investigation, a lengthy and
painstaking business.

pA series collected in the latter of the
fwo ways just mentioned is, it has been
pinted out, of representative value (1) in
Mspect of the frequency of twins among
Mose who manifest a particular character,
H in respect of the relative frequency of
Meovular and uni-ovular twins among those
Maring the character, and (3) finally, in
Bspect of the concordance or discordance of
Kirs with regard to the character in quesma. Of course, one has selected a group
« people for initial sample, in whom
ime of the possibilities of manifestabn of the particular inherited tendency
ay not be realized. If, for example, a
‘ Pe may appear either as epileptic
lacks or attacks of migraine, the genotype
lag the same, then those who show only
wraine will possibly be excluded. But
pee one partner at least will show the inited disorder in the usual clinical way,
® has no cases in which the twins are alike
tO their genotypical constitution, to use
Bh n’s term, though in neither of them has
§ character attained manifestation; nor
j one cases in which the manifestation is
Bssppressed, but has taken a form other
4 psychopathy calling for treatfnent.
sis a limitation one has always to bear
Prind in such series; a further disRantage is the small number of conMant twins one obtains in this way—lI
mn concordant as to the particular
Facter concerned.

PSYCHIATRY I23

There are other difficulties in the way
of twin research. The most important
psychoses have a prolonged and often
rather late danger period, so that by the
time one twin comes under notice, the
other may be dead; or alternatively, when
one twin is affected, the investigator
must wait years, sometimes, before the
illness of the other comes on. If one of the
twins is dead, one cannot be sure of the
uni-ovularity ; binovularity can be established with comparative ease. Further, the
later the incidence of the psychosis, the
greater the influence of the environment,
different elements in which may produce
different effects; one twin may have had a
blow on the head and may have borne several children, while the other is celibate and
has been exposed to lead poisoning at work.
Furthermore, in all one’s inquiries directed
to the members of the family who are not ill,
and especially the healthy twin, one must
count on even less trustworthy and more
partial replies than in the case of ordinary
somatic or psychic characters.

INVESTIGATION OF PERSONALITY

When one seeks to investigate personality, which must always be a very difficult
thing, the distortion of the data becomes
a serious obstacle. If both twins are ill,
the examination of the present state offers
fewer difficulties, but information as to the
twins’ earlier lives cannot easily be obtained
from their relatives in separate and unbiased
reports. ‘Then twins, especially uni-ovular
twins, are often almost inseparable; they
grow up together, they literally share each
others’ joys and sorrows; they live as
** We ” and not as two ‘‘ I’s’’; and when
they fall ill, they are apt to play a part in
the delusions and hallucinations of each
other. Finally, uni-ovular twins, who are
the most valuable material for research, are
on the whole few and far between: uniovular twins who have been reared apart
are extremely rare. - Their value needs no
emphasizing; the more different the environmental conditions from infancy upwards, the more satisfactorily will essential
similarity of any disease picture demon124

strate that it is an inherited, fated illness—
anankastic.

THE ‘FATED’ ILLNESS

I have used the word ‘“‘ fated.”” That
mental illness is ‘‘ fated ’’ or predestined
is a hard saying. But there seems to be a
good deal of loose thought about these matters and perhaps a certain confusion between
what people would like to be the case, and
what is. Psycho-analysts, whose influence
on general psychopathology should not be
underestimated, assign much greater importance to environmental influences, from
birth until about the fifth year of life, than
to inherited tendencies: and although this
attitude of theirs has been modified, their
scheme of therapy assumes that the repairing of post-natal detriment will be effective
in improving or curing mental disorder.
Likewise, much prophylaxis against the incidence of mental disorder in the individual
assumes that alteration of the conditions of
living will be efficacious in checking or
reducing the liability to such illness. In
so far as this is a hopeful attitude towards
a widespread blight, and has been fruitful
of much good, it has, of course, tremendous
advantages; but there is not yet incontestable evidence that the environmental factors
in mental illness are more potent than the
inherited factors ; it may be on the contrary,
as Lange and other psychiatrists maintain,
that the part played by ‘ mental ‘ experiences is of less significance than that of
experiences affecting the ‘ bodily ’ structure,
and that these latter, too, fall far short
of the great influence of inherited tendencies. On the possibilities of realization permitted by environmental factors to the
inherited tendencies towards mental disorder, twin studies should throw much
light. It remains to be seen whether, as
Lange declares, Galton’s views are corroborated :

‘‘ The steady and pitiless march of the
hidden weaknesses in our constitutions,
through iliness to death, is painfully revealed by these histories of twins. We
are too apt to look upon illness and death
as capricious events—whereas the fact of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW q

sal
the maladies of two twins being cond!
tinually alike shows that illness and death‘
are necessary incidents in a_ regular’
sequence of constitutional changes begin-ning at birth, and upon which external.
circumstances have, on the whole, very.
small effect.’’ ]

   
   
 
 
  
  

It is superfluous to say that this is a field
in which the psychiatrist with a knowledg@
of genetics is incomparably more fitted tof
work than the geneticist who has acquired
a partial familiarity with psychiatric terms}
Not that their collaboration is anything but}
desirable. But it is by no means to belittle
the geneticist to say that the problems are.
such as he could not cope with, unless he’
had also a thorough training in psychiatry.
Of course, so far as the inheritance of “‘ intelligence ’’ is concerned, one has measure-'
ments, however partial, permitting of fairly|
impersonal determination, but in the rest of
psychiatry pitfalls are everywhere. Into the
analysis of the material obtained I shall not.
now enter. I would mention, however, two
other aspects of twin-study.

The prophylaxis of mental disorder is
energetically urged, but our knowledge does
not yet permit us to recognize with cer
tainty those who, now apparently well, ar
in danger of falling ill or already in the pr
dromal stage. ‘This is as much as to sa
that we have no sure way of recognizin
the pre-psychotic signs or the latent morbi
disposition. Since, however, in uni-ovula
twins, with great similarity of psychosis,
the respective times of onset of the illness]
may be fairly wide apart, especially in
schizophrenia, one has particularly favour
able opportunities for observing the firs
signs and the development of the psychosi:
or ‘neurosis’ (to use a not uncommon, if'
undesirable, distinction). |

And then there is the study of personality,
as it is found in healthy people and in
those with minor deviations. How is per
sonality built up? What part do training
and the experiences of ordinary life play in
its development? It is almost essential t
determine these points by a study of twins
especially in regard to their daily activitie

 
   
 
   
   
   
  
   
 
GENETIC PROBLEMS IN PSYCHIATRY

at work and their sexual relations, if one is
to investigate similarly the so-called reactive
psychoses, as well as hysteria, obsessional
states, anxiety neurosis, and such widespread social misfortunes as compensationneurosis and pension-neurosis, and other
forms leading to chronic invalidism. Of
criminal twins and the inferences to be
drawn as to the influence of inherited characters, it is unnecessary to speak: most
readers will have seen Mrs. Haldane’s
translation of Professor Lange’s little book
Crime as Destiny.

A CURRENT INVESTIGATION

My own investigations are still in the
initial stage, and I do not mean to give any
account of what has been or may be concluded from these twin-studies. I have
spoken of the necessity for complete series
of cases, but I would not be understood to
minimize the value for some purposes of
carefully-studied single pairs of twins. I
shall be on the contrary very grateful for
any information about twins who show any
kind of mental abnormality, or about like
twins who have been separated from infancy.
The collecting of the material is one of the
main problems in this research, and I shall
be very glad of suggestions as to how I may
get in touch with suitable cases.

I have intended only to outline, in the
most general way, how the study of twins
can help to clear up the genetic problems of
psychiatry, and not only the genetic problems but others of definition, diagnosis, and
grouping. I would like to make it clear that

125

these are problems not necessarily calling
for an answer in the individual case:
psychiatry in practice has here and there
outstripped its theory, as it were; and our
answers to the particular questions:
‘What is the matter with this patient?
Will he get better? How long will he be
ill? How should he be treated ?’’ are much
more likely to be sound and justified by the
event than our replies if we were asked,
‘“What is the name of this man’s illness?
Is it a disease? How far is it the product of
inheritance? Will his children have similar
ulnesses ?”’

Though much has been learnt, it is still
true to say that one can give more help to
the anxious relative than to the anxious
eugenist. Preconceptions and impressions
have proved most fallacious : the simple vice
of crediting mass-statistics, with false belief
in the unitary psychosis; the folly of rash
and wholesale judgments about ‘ tainted
heredity,’ ‘bad family history,’ ‘ degeneration,’ and the like; the deceptive mixture
of entertainment with instruction in the
‘interesting case,’ the ‘remarkable instance ’—all these have been responsible for
undue pessimism in one direction, as well
as cloudy enthusiasm in another—both purblind. Painstaking and informed workers,
especially those in Germany (to whom I am
indebted), have done much of late years to
redeem psychiatry from this Egypt, but the
way is hard and the Promised Land is not
yet : I think, however, that the work I have
been discussing is peculiarly fitted to clear
away some of the hindrances.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 2.
