VIEWS OF FOUR BRITISH MEMBER-ORGANIZATIONS OF 1.U.F.O.
Pre-Marital Instruction in Rhythm
Method

1. Summary
HE REPRESENTATIVES of four of the
United Kingdom’s member-organizations
of the I.U.F.O. (three active and one
associate member), respectfully urge that the
I.U.F.O. should consider the propriety of
advocating the inclusion in programmes of

pre-marital instruction of guidance in the
rhythm (Knaus-Ogino) method.

2. Aims and structure of the I.U.F.O.

This memorandum is jointly submitted by the
representatives of the British Social Biology
Council, the National Marriage Guidance
Council, the Family Planning Association (full
members) and by the Eugenics Society (associate
member) of Great Britain.

The I.U.F.O. is an international organization
embracing the world, with the declared aim of
bringing together “‘regardless of race and creed”
all organizations which are working for the wellbeing of the family. Another aim is “gathering
and diffusing information” on important family
problems.

One of the Union’s four Commissions concerns
marriage guidance. Here there has naturally been
a policy of caution on controversial matters, but
it is established and recognized that all viewpoints are entitled to a respectful hearing, though
nothing may be represented as the view of the
Commission unless it is unanimous. We fully
appreciate the need for caution during the early
life of a complex international organization,
which could become paralysed by disruptive
strife. But we think that some issues of primary
importance for the family are, in varying degrees,
controversial. Now that the Union is ten years
old and that the leading representatives of its
member-countries know and respect each other,
we think that there are advantages in frank
discussion of controversial subjects, especially
when they are important ones and when the
prospects of agreement are reasonably good.

Through no wish of the I.U.F.O. it is not
representative. An official list, dated December
1957, shows that European countries (and also
peoples the colour of whose skin is white) are in
an enormous majority. The appended Table
shows that of the Union’s 187 member-organizations no less than 150 (over 80 per cent) are from
European countries, though Europe’s population
is but 15 per cent of the world’s total. Asia and
Africa, together containing some 63 per cent of
the world’s population, contribute but twelve
member-organizations, while India, Indonesia,
Japan, the U.S.S.R. and China (containing
between them about half of the population of
the world) are not represented at all. Of the
thirty-three represented countries, five only are
mainly non-Christian, namely, Irak, Israel, Pakistan, Thailand, and Egypt, which together
contribute six out of the 187 member-organizations.

We submit that if the Union is to pursue its
aims and extend its membership “regardless of
race and creed” it is important to show that
controversial issues can be openly discussed.
Otherwise non-European and non-Christian
countries may well fear that they will not be
given the same welcome as other countries.

3. Population pressure and family planning

It is a remarkable feature of the world’s post-war
history that, since 1945, official spokesmen of
many under-developed countries with rapidly
increasing populations have publicly declared,
in words never used before, that population
pressure depresses the standard of living, causing
poverty and misery from which women and
children mainly suffer. As a result efforts have
been made to improve agriculture, to promote
emigration, and to curb a fertility which is
deemed excessive. Without exception the advocates of these measures advance arguments
which should interest our Union, among them

186

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1958, 50, 3.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the need to prevent increasing resort to criminal
abortion. Quotations could be given from leading personalities in India, Egypt, Japan and
China (four countries together containing over a
thousand million people) all clearly showing that
they regard some form of family planning as
essential to the wellbeing of families in their
countries.

If we refrain from considering this standpoint,
the representatives of these populous countries
may feel that we are closing our eyes to what is
for them a basic need.

4. Means of family planning: the rhythm (KnausOgino) method

We well appreciate that irreconcilable differences
exist between ourselves and many (perhaps a
majority) of the Union’s member-organizations
on the use of appliance methods of birth control,
which Roman Catholics regard as unnatural or
artificial. We do not wish to make difficulties by
pressing these divergencies.

We note, however, that the rhythm (KnausOgino) method is held by Catholics to be a
natural (contrasted with an artificial) method of
regulating conceptions and it is to certain unrealized possibilities of this method that we wish
to call attention.

That his Holiness the Pope is aware of the evil
possibilities of population pressure was clearly
shown by his choice of words when, on September
8th, 1954, he addressed the delegates to the
World Population Conference then assembled
in Rome.

* The science of population is young,” the Pope
said, “‘but it is basic use it is immediately
concerned with human life and it can illuminate
certain of the gravest individual and social
problems. The Church is not unaware of these
problems; she is not indifferent to their agonising* aspects.”

The Pope went on to “‘urge Catholics to take an
active part in the research and the efforts which
are made in this domain. But we wish that they
do this with fidelity to Christian doctrine...”

Thus the Pope showed himself keenly aware
of the existence of a population problem and of
the need for research. That the rhythm method

* The Pope spoke in French. The word he used was
“‘angoissant’’.

186

would have high priority in a Catholic programme of research is suggested by the wellknown address which, three years before, the
Pope had delivered to the Italian Catholic Union
of Midwives.

In a discourse delivered on October 29th, 1951
at Castel Gandolfo, the Pope told the midwives
that, in appropriate cases, it was their duty to
give advice on the rhythm method, with the
theory and practice of which they should
acquaint themselves. He said:

“You are expected to be well-informed from the
medical point of view, of this well-known theory
and of the progress which can still be foreseen
in this matter; and moreover, your advice and
help are expected to be based not on simple
popular publications but on scientific facts and

the authoritative judgments of conscientious
specialists in medicine and biology.” t

Manuals and booklets in many languages have
been published on the rhythm method; but
relatively few controlled experiments have been
organized. The most comprehensive was that
promoted in India by the World Health Organization in the course of the years 1951-54. The
World Health Organization here acted in
response to a request from the Indian Ministry
of Health which favoured the rhythm method for
three reasons, one of which was that:

it appeared to be consonant with the Indian

traditions of self-control and, in particular, was
acceptable to Ghandian thought.

Two experiments were promoted. But grave
difficulties were encountered and the experiments
were rather suddenly terminated.

5. Possibilities of pre-marital
rhythm method

There were several causes of the failure of the
two Indian experiments. Cultural, climatic and
educational factors, in varying degrees local,
contributed. There is, however, one ubiquitous
source of difficulty met with in all such experiments, namely, that the rhythm method is found
difficult to adopt after marriage when sexual
habits and patterns incompatible with the method
have had time to become established.

instruction in

+ The Pope spoke in Italian. The above translation was
published by the Pontifical Court Club, a British Catholic
organization.
PRE-MARITAL INSTRUCTION IN RHYTHM METHOD

TABLE 1

MEMBERSHIP OF I1.U.F.0. BY COUNTRIES AND CONTINENTS. POPULATION OF CONTINENTS IN 1955
(IN MILLIONS: U.S.S.R. SEPARATELY SHOWN).

POPULATION* |
(millions) 1955

  
    
  
  
 
 
   
     
   
       
   
   
     
   
       
     

       

COUNTRY MEMBERSHIP OF I1.U.F.O.

     

        
   
   
  
   
    

  

Active Assoc. Govt. Total Numbers a

Germany 8 7 1
Austria 1 3 Belgium 6 13 2
Spain 2 1 1
Finland 1 2 France 12 21 2
U.K. 12 6 _
Greece .. i 1 Italy we 5 17 1

_ Lichtenstei - 1 - 1
Luxembourg 1 - 1 2
Malta... 2 - ~ 2
Monaco .. 1 - ~ 1
Netherlands 3 1 1 5
Portugal .. - 1 1 2
Sweden .. 1 - - 1
Switzerland 3 6 1 10

    
    
      

 

17 59 80 150
Argentine 2 3
Brazil . 1 4
Canada .. 1 1
Chile 1 1
U.S.A. 6 11
Peru .. 1 2
Uruguay .. 1 1

7 13 23

Trak - _ 1
Israel .. - 1 2
Pakistan .. - - 1
Philippines 1 - 1
Thailand - 1 1
1 2 6

1 1 4

- 1 1

1 ~ 1

2 3 1 6

2 - - 2

77 96 14

* Source of population figures: United Nations Demographic Yearbook 1956.

187
THE BUGENICS REVIEW

More favourable results than those commonly
recorded might ensue if the method were taught
to young people before marriage. They would
then embark on marriage knowing that they
must pattern their sexual lives in accordance
with the requirements of the method. The
requisite pattern calls for the observance of
regular periods of sexual abstinence within the
woman’s monthly cycle: the number of days
during which abstinence is required depends on
the regularity of the woman’s menstrual life.

Information on the rhythm method should,
we think, be incorporated in a programme of
pre-marital instruction. It is the experience of
marriage counselling agencies that prevention
(by appropriate guidance before marriage) is
better than cure (attempts to harmonize discords
which have developed after marriage); and many
of these agencies have become persuaded of the
value of pre-marital education.

We recognize that different countries have
different approaches to problems of sex and of
sexual education; and that there are people in
many Latin countries who oppose what they
regard as too free a ventilation of these topics.
Advocates of free public discussion are opposed
by advocates of public discretion; and the latter,
we know, hold that knowledge of these intimate
subjects should be communicated to young
people by their parents and not by school
teachers and marriage counsellors. But it is also
widely recognized that the parents are commonly
too ignorant or too shy to be successful educators
in this sphere; and that the information which
young people do not receive from their parents
they pick up in undesirable ways and distorted
forms.

To us, it seems that the information which his.
Holiness the Pope charges midwives to impart
to young married couples could be profitably
acquired from marriage counselling agencies
before marriage; and that in encouraging such
arrangements the Union would be fulfilling one
of its avowed objects of “‘gathering and diffusing
information on important family problems”’.

188

We ask ourselves if the Pope, who wishes to
encourage research, would not favour this
initiative.

6. Object of marriage not solely procreation

(This section is submitted by the National
Marriage Guidance Council).

It is not on grounds of expediency alone that
we recommend instruction (for those to whom
other methods are unacceptable) in how to
determine the safe period. Facts and figures are
not the only reason for full and frank discussion
of our proposals. We believe that sexual instincts have been given to men and women in
order that they might express through the body
the spiritual affection they have for one another.
Marriage is a lifelong partnership and love must
be continually expressed and renewed through
sexual intercourse if two different-minded people
are to live together without tension and disharmony and deceit. We expect single men and
women to exercise sexual restraint before marriage
but as our distinguished physician the late Lord
Dawson of Penn pointed out it is harmful and
wrong to ask two young people surrounded by
the intimacies of love not to be lovers. Marriage
is not only for the procreation of children, but in
order that a man and woman should express
their love, live happily together and build up a
secure and happy home for their children. We
therefore urge on moral and spiritual grounds,
and as a positive contribution to successful
marriage, that instruction should be given in this
method of spacing a family which is acceptable
to all branches of the Christian Church.

7. Request to the I.U.F.O.

We would therefore be happy if the Governing
Body (or other body with power to act) of the
Union would refer this proposal to its Marriage
Counselling Commission (or to any other appropriate Study Group or Committee) asking them
to give it consideration and to make whatever
recommendation they think suitable.
