C. P. BLACKER, M.A., M.D.

Dr. Yoshio Koya:
A Memorable Story’

WO SIMPLE BUT historical facts give
meaning to a collection of papers by
. Dr. Yoshio Koya.t The first is that, in
May 1948, there was enacted in Japan a Eugenics
Protection Law which widened the practice
of induced abortion. The second is that in the
following year (1949) a Population Problem
Council was set up in the Japanese cabinet
which recommended to the government that
all restrictions on family planning be removed.
But the recommendation was rejected and the
Population Problems Council, having failed in
its object, was dissolved in March 1950, less
than a year after its formation.

Thus was abortion encouraged and family
planning discouraged.

But it did not take long for the Japanese
authorities to recognize the mischief of this
policy. Eighteen months later (October 1951)
Japan’s Minister of Welfare announced a cabinet
decision that:

Abortion exerts undesirable effects on maternal
health. It is therefore necessary to disseminate
contraceptive information to decrease these undesirable
effects.

Nevertheless, the practice of abortion spread
in Japan and has done more than anything else
to accomplish what has been described as a
near-miracle—the halving of Japan’s birth rate
in thirteen years (from 34:3 in 1947 to 17-2
in 1960). From 1953 onwards, induced abortions
have exceeded a million.

Can contraception replace abortion as the

_ * An extract of this paper appears in the October
issue of Around the World News of Population and Birth
control.

+ Pioneering in Family Planning by Yoshio Koya M.D.
New York, 1963. Published with the assistance of the
Population Council Inc. Printed by Japan Medical
Publishers, Inc. Tokyo. Pp. vi + 173. Price not stated.

principal restraint on fertility? From the start,
nobody has believed more passionately than
Dr. Yoshio Koya that it can. But how to prove
that it can?

The fourteen papers included in this symposium give Dr. Koya’s answer. Two—the first
and the last—have not been published before.
The penultimate paper (entitled Problems in
procuring Contraceptive Materials in a rural
Area in Japan) is written by Dr. Minoru Muramatzu (1962). The remainder, ranging in date
from 1954 to 1962, are the work of Dr. Koya
and named colleagues.

The main theme throughout is expressed by
the book’s title—Pioneering in Family Planning.
The object is practical. It is “‘dictated by the
urgent demands of the time. More leisurely,
scholarly, and analytical work’’, says the author
on the last page, “‘remains to be done’.

If, as an article in an almost missionary faith,
you believe that contraception is better than
abortion, how do you set about proving that
the thing can be done? You devise social experiments in diverse contexts. You begin by designating a geographical area or an occupational
group. You make a census of the people in your
selected area or group, separating them by sex,
age, and marital status. You are primarily
interested in families wherein the wife is of
reproductive age. Your numbers are thus
whittled down. They are further whittled down
by the time you have excluded permanently
sterile women, widows, and wives permanently
separated from their husbands. Of your finally
reduced group you begin by making various
inquiries relating to abortions and their effects
on health, still-births, losses of children, earlier
practice of contraception (if any), and present
attitude to contraception. What proportion want

153

ER-D

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, Octoberj1963, 55,*3.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to know about, or more about, contraception?
These last are the subjects of your essential
experiment. You arrange for them to have
appropriate instruction, you supply their needs;
and you keep them under observation for the
period pre-determined in your original design.
You keep a yearly record of births (planned or
unplanned), of involuntary miscarriages and
still-births, of induced abortions, of contraceptive failures, or dis-use of contraceptive
methods (which may be for one of several
reasons), and finally of whether, at the end of the
period, contraception is still being regularly
practised. You finally compare the reproductive
experience of your group before your inquiry
was begun with its experiences during defined
phases of your experimental period. You can
state how many women have become users of
contraception, how much (if at all) their pregnancy rates have fallen, and how far (if at all)
they have resorted to abortion. But there are
various statistical snags which provide exercises
for academic demographers and “‘scholars’’.

Four such inquiries, concerned with different
groups of people over different time-periods are
reported in this collection. I will summarize
their main features and findings.

1. Three villages—a rice-cultivating village, a
farming village in mountains, and a fishing
village. The reactions of rural populations were
of special interest because of the circumstances
in which the recommendations of the abovementioned Population Problem Council were
rejected in 1950. Opposition came “not only
in the government but also by the Diet members
representing the rural parts of the country who
thought... that their constituents would not
welcome the idea of family planning”.

These three villages contained over 1,300
families of which 687 (53 per cent) included
wives “‘exposed to pregnancy’. Of these 687
families 62 per cent were using contraception
at the end of the experimental period (1949-57).
Abortions dropped by over 70 per cent—from
4-8 to 1:2 per thousand of population; and
birth rates were nearly halved—from 26-7 in
1950 to 13-6 in 1956. Satisfactory findings
indeed!

2. Coal-miners. In view of Japan’s rapid
industrialization a group of coal-miners working

154

a mine some 100 miles N.E. of Tokyo (Joban)
was selected. The period covered was the five
years April 1953—April 1958. By the last year,
590 families were included of which 314 (53 per
cent) were “‘exposed to pregnancy”. Of these 314
families, 266 (84 per cent) were using contraception. The birth rate fell from 36-9 to 9-3 per
thousand. ‘‘People”’, says Dr. Koya, “were
amazed at this decline; but the explanation is
simply that the mothers had borne more
children than they wanted.” Abortion rates (per
1,000 of population) were nearly halved from
16-2 (716 families in 1952-53) to 8-4 (590 families
in 1957-58). At the start “‘neither the Company
nor the workers were what might be called
co-operative”; but at the end “the Company
greeted our programme with eager co-operation,
especially in view of the obvious satisfaction of
the wives who were successfully practising birth
control’. Indeed, in 1956 the Company offered
to pay part of the costs; and in 1956 a prize was
awarded to it by the Ministry of Welfare. ““News
of these developments exerted much influence
upon many industries in Japan, and more
than eighty industrial enterprises have started
family-planning programmes.”

3. Families in receipt of public relief. As
candidates for instruction in birth control, this
group was about the least promising that could
be found. The families were living in one of
the poorest wards of Tokyo. The survey was
begun in 1953 and was continuing when Dr.
Koya, with six named co-workers, published his
joint report (March 1957). Results of the third
year’s work were then available. The survey
covered 1,789 families of which 418 were chosen
for the experiment. The average age of the wives
was 36:9 years. Of the 418 wives, 264 (63 per
cent) wanted to have guidance and were mostly
supplied with condoms and tablets. Abortions
(277 families) were halved from 45 (per 1,000
population) in 1952-53 to 22 in 1955-56; and
live births were reduced by three-quarters from
44 to 11. If this group in receipt of public relief
is in any way comparable with our social problem group, the results are truly remarkable. But
they are probably not comparable. Illness seems
to have been the main cause of their dependency.
“Of the 418 husbands under observation, only
157 can be regarded as healthy or normal. The
DR. YOSHIO KOYA: A MEMORABLE STORY

remaining 261, or 62 per cent, are either actually
suffering from disease or are unwell. Of the
diseases reported, the most important was
tuberculosis with an incidence of 40 per cent.”

The result surprised the investigators: ‘What
did astonish us was that our experiments with
relief recipients were as satisfactory as those with
married couples in the farming villages and the
coal-mining districts.” Dr. Koya adds: “These
people, we discovered, were less a gathering of
people of low quality than of unfortunate beings
who had either lost their property during the
war or their employment because of illness.”

4. Japanese National Railways. This inquiry
differs from the preceding three. It is on a much
larger scale, but was conducted less intensively.
Dr. Koya has been consultant in family planning
to the Japanese National Railways which are
served by some 450,000 employees belonging
to some 290,000 families. Dr. Koya contended
that family planning not only benefits these
half million employees and their wives but that
it is a highly remunerative proposition for the
railway company. The replacement of abortion
by contraception not only benefits individual
families; it benefits the industry’s economy.

Dr. Koya contributes two papers about the
Japanese National Railways. The first covers
some 4,300 families and seems to have been
mainly designed to show how family planning
could both reduce abortions and save money.
Instruction on family planning reduced abortions from 9-2 per cent (4,294 families) before
instruction to 5:6 per cent after; the same
instruction saved the railway company nearly
11 million yen. If it had been applied to all
240,000 families for whose members the railway
then provided employment, the programme
would have saved some 603 million yen.

The second paper describes a later survey
which, from the standpoint of Dr. Koya’s
objectives, is important. This because it constitutes a transitional enterprise between relatively
small and privately organized surveys of such
people as villagers, coal-miners and recipients
of relief, and a comprehensive national programme administered by government servants.
The family planning services of the Japanese
National Railways are systematically organized.
(if Dr. Koya, consultant to the National

Railways, was responsible for this organization,
all the more credit to him!) The railways themselves are administered by a Head Office in
Tokyo and by nine Regional Offices. Each of
these nine regional offices has a family planning
committee consisting of at least five persons.
The committee’s chairman (the idea may sound
peculiar to us) is the chief manager of the
railway’s regional office. Other members include
executives of “the Japanese National Railways
Labour Union” (there is apparently but one
such union. Lucky Japan!), members of “the
women’s society of the area’, an officially
placed gynaecologist and the head of the
regional office’s welfare section. These nine
regional family planning committees are concerned “not only with... numbers of pregnancies, still births, live births and abortions, but
also with the desired number of children and
intention to practice conception control”.

For collecting this information, the nine
committees use case-workers. These are specially
trained midwives, one being allotted to every 400
householders in the area. These case-workers are
paid 15,000 yen (about £15) monthly and their
travelling expenses are paid. Proceedings in an
area begin with an “inauguration ceremony”
which is “‘usually attended by the principal staff
members of the railway’s regional office and by
noted persons in the area. This produces the
desired effect of impressing upon the wives
of the railway employees the importance of the
programme.” Later the case-workers make doorto-door visits where they distribute contraceptive supplies in the form of condoms (eight a
month), diaphragms, jelly and foam tablets
(twelve a month). They also note on cards the
couple’s contraceptive experiences, past and
present, and particulars about abortion. It is
from the data thus collected that the following
figures emerge.

Not all the 290,000 families of railway
employees were first reported on. (It seems that,
in the two years intervening between the
publication of Dr. Koya’s first paper in 1960 on
possible economies and that of the later paper
(1962) now being considered, the number of

relevant families increased from 240,000 to

290,000). The elaborate regional arrangements
above described cannot fructify over-night. At

155
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the end of 1961, we are told, “we were giving
guidance in the manner described above to
some 80,000 households”. (These amount to
some 27 per cent of the total of 290,000.) From
these 80,000 households a selection was made.
“We selected those who had been receiving
guidance for three years and among whom the
wife was under 50 years of age.”’ There resulted a
sample of 9,282 households. This sample
(3:2 per cent of the total of 290,000 railway
families, and 11-6 per cent of the 80,000 families
who had received guidance by the end of 1961)
is substantial. The figure is much larger than
those involved in the earlier-mentioned surveys
of villages, coal-miners and recipients of relief.
Dr. Koya knows how to graduate the tasks he
sets for himself, his co-workers, and the employees of the company which he serves as
consultant. The figures which follow are based
upon the reports of the case-workers responsible
for guiding and following up these 9,282
families.

Seventy-five per cent were, at the end of the
first year, using the methods to which they had
been introduced, and the proportion of users
was highest (84 per cent) among women aged
35-39. These women, though capable of further
child-bearing, had mostly had as many children
as they wanted. Users of all ages compared
with non-users increased as follows during the
three years: after the first year, they formed
three-quarters of the total (75 per cent); after the
second year, they formed 79 per cent; and at the
end of the third year, 82 per cent.

Births in the total group of 9,282 (users and
non-users combined) diminished by a half over the
three years. The birth rate before the programme
began was 40-8 per thousand; after the first year,
it was 30-8; after the second, 23-0; and after the
third, 19-4.

Abortion rates seem to follow a different pattern from those of the three previously mentioned inquiries. The figure for the third year is
smaller than that for the year before the survey
began. But the difference is not sensational. It
is further noteworthy that the figures for the
first and second years are higher than the figure
for the year before guidance. The four abortion
figures are: 592 (year before guidance); 861
(first year); 725 (second year); and 553 (third

166

year). Why this rise in abortions during the
first and second years? The answer is now
becoming more widely recognized. It relates to
the immediate consequences of a vigorous
guidance programme. Two things happen. The
first is that women get it into their heads that
the number of their pregnancies is subject to
their own control and is not a matter of unalterable destiny; the second is that it takes time
to get accustomed to any technique of birth
control. Appliance methods make unfamiliar
demands. Certain steps have to be taken before
each act of coitus. Either the husband or the
wife may find difficulties or raise objections. But
these are commonly overcome as the new habits
are acquired. If, however, you become convinced that you can and should control your
pregnancies, you are more likely, if contraception fails, to turn to abortion than if you
believe that your pregnancies are controlled by
destiny. The more so as, in the area of your
home, abortions are much discussed and easily
obtainable. This situation is recognized by Dr.
Koya who notes that the abortion rate “may
increase at first in response to the family planning stimulus’. He further declares later on in
the article: “It has been our experience, in this
as in other studies, that the launching of a
planned childbirth programme often results
in an initial increase in abortion until people
acquire the necessary skill and experience for
successful contraceptive practice. Based on our
experience, induced abortion will decline markedly as the programme progresses.”

I now return to the point from which I began,
namely Dr. Koya’s crusade to substitute family
planning for abortion in Japan. The initial
challenge, to which these surveys are responses,
was the rejection in 1950 of the recommendations
of the Population Problem Council (later dissolved) that a family planning policy should
be adopted. The opposition largely came from
Diet members representing rural parts. But was
it true that the rural population “‘would not
welcome the idea of family planning’? Dr.
Koya’s first task was to demonstrate by his
survey of the three village populations that it
wasn’t true. Was it then true of the industrial
population? Again no, at least of very fertile
coal-miners. To clinch, as it were, the case
DR. YOSHIO KOYA: A MEMORABLE STORY

against the now diminishing cohort of objectors,
Dr. Koya demonstrated that it wasn’t even true
of recipients of public relief in a Tokyo slum.
But these were small surveys to which it might
possibly be objected that the selected samples
were not representative. Could the general
acceptability of contraception be demonstrated
on a large scale?

How far this last challenge was responsible
for Dr. Koya’s appointment as consultant in
family planning to the Japanese National
Railways we are not told in these papers. How
far was he responsible for the railway’s programme? It seems possible that the organization
of family planning services in nine regional
offices co-ordinated by the head office of National
Railways in Tokyo, the enlistment of a corps of
midwife case-workers (by then trained in
family planning), the devising of progressively
more ambitious surveys as the regional organizations improved, and lastly the demonstration
that, in addition to benefits in health, his programme yielded economic dividends—it is
possible that these measures originated in Dr.
Koya’s plan-rich brain.

The book contains chapters dealing with other
themes: the damage to health done by repeated
abortions; sterilization; the efficacy of foam tablets and the design of new tablets; the general

acceptability (perhaps surprising to some) of
the condom; Japan’s experience with the
rhythm method, including the problem of
seasonal amenorrhoea during the busy farming
season and during land development in remote
villages. This variety of themes suggests that,
with the hindsight of perhaps 1977 (by when
there will have elapsed a period equal to that
which has passed since Japan’s post-war
population problem was first recognized), the
“‘abortion years”’ may be seen as an episode of
the past, as an interim period—ugly but necessary—in a transition which no other country
could accomplish so quickly or by other means.

A word of appreciation of their far-sighted
initiative is due to the (American) Population
Council whose Research Associate, Mrs.
Dorothy Nortman, contributes a valuable introduction gratefully acknowledged by Dr. Koya.
The Council—Mr. John D. Rockefeller, Dr.
Dudley Kirk, Dr. Marshall C. Balfour are
specifically named—discerned the importance
for the world of what has been happening in
Japan, and they perceived the significance of
Dr. Koya’s role in the drama. It has been
through the Council’s praiseworthy initiative
that these papers have been collected and
published in a convenient and _ attractive
format.

 

‘157
