SOME ANTHROPOLOGICAL CHARACTERF =§=6ISTICS OF HYBRID POPULATIONS"

approaching the general problem of
2 crossing, it is important at the
poutset to make some distinctions between
anthropological and the genetical points
oy y as they are applied to studies of
ee beings. The anthropologist is prity concerned with what happens to large
aps 6 of people rather than to individuals.
Mregards the situation in its descriptive
s, and, to start with at least, he may
“no theories as to the mechanism of
fr heritance of physical characters. The
it tion of the geneticist is usually somewhat
ent. His chief interest being in the mode
Sndividual inheritance, the material he
seiders first will be composed of separate
Rily lines, so that the groups with which
are often small in comparison with
populations ” of the anthropologist.
Bu spite of the distinction just made begn the anthropological and the genetical
r roaches, it should be realized that they
0 some degree complementary, and that
Fis impossible to reconcile their findings,
f,must be due to erroneous deductions
a the material of one or the other. The
P ‘opologist has in mind the situation as it
ally exists, and his data are seldom of a
; i nature or such that the information he
a pres about them is relatively complete.
there has been extensive interbetween two populations repre
    
  
  
   
  
  
   
 
  
  
  
 
  
   
 
  
   
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
    
  

fv
-
ut
Ee“

1 e
Ea] ae
BY? —
x

Mahould be explained that ‘‘ hybrid ”’ is used here
f restricted zoological sense, viz. as relating to
peci ic rather than to interspecific crosses. The
ve ‘“‘ mixed,” though convenient, can be misz, since there is no acceptable definition of what
Ktutes a “‘ pure’ ’ human race. For the purposes
esent discussion, ‘‘ hybrid ’”’ will be taken to
$0 crosses between races comprised within
pat major divisions of mankind such as the
‘4 | ’ of Blumenbach and the main “ groups’
addon, Hooton and other anthropological

21

By J. C. TREVOR

(Leonard Darwin Research Fellow)

senting distinct human types, the conditions
under which it has taken place are always
very different from any ideally controlled
ones such as those arranged by the geneticist
in his experimental work on non-human
material. For example, the original numbers
of the racially distinct individuals that contributed to the ancestry of a particular hybrid
population may have been markedly dissimilar, and usually they are quite unknown.
It is only in exceptional cases that their
proportions can be safely inferred, as in that
of the Bounty mutineers and the Polynesian
women with whom they mated. In general,
all that can be stated with certainty about
a hybrid population is that it has been
derived from at least two racial stocks,
though their respective contributions to it
may be a matter of vague conjecture. At
any particular time, too, it may include
individuals representing almost every grade
of intermixture between the parental stocks,
and there are seldom reasons for supposing
that it has remained isolated without backcrossing to one or both of these or even being
affected by exposure to fresh infiltration.
Such hybrid communities are obviously very
involved in their biological constituents, but
they are the ones that do in fact occur, and
it is necessary to study them in order to
reach conclusions of practical value.

A great deal of confusion has been caused
by failure to appreciate the distinction between the group and the individual situations.
One of the main objects of the anthropologist is to trace the descent of human groups,
and the problem of miscegenation is of great
importance to him, as a knowledge of its
consequences must be obtained before he
can hope to reconstruct his racial genealogies. As a rule, most anthropologists have
taken more or less for granted certain
22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

generalizations bearing on the effects of race
crossing. To cite an instance, it is often supposed that when two populations have
crossed to form a third, the average values
of the physical characters of this last will be
intermediate in relation to those of its progenitors. The fact that in such a case the
anthropologist is thinking of an amalgamation of group characteristics is generally
overlooked and has given rise to much unprofitable discussion of ‘ blending inheritance.”’* Again, the opinion is frequently
held that the crossing of markedly distinct
racial stocks will result in a population that
displays a peculiarly large variability and
that the frequency distribution curves of its
metrical characters will in turn be of an
unusual kind, possessing more than a single
mode or peak.

Such questions are of prime anthropological importance, and it is strange that
no comprehensive examination of the most
suitable material for testing their validity,
namely that furnished by the intermixture
of groups representing widely different
human types, has yet been made. They
have, it is true, been considered empirically
in the case of particular studies of hybrid
communities, but with results which have
not always been in accord. Extreme types
can be chosen deliberately, because it seems
safe to infer that they will provide the best
evidence required to answer the general
problem. It is not suggested, of course, that
the nature of the mechanism of inheritance
will differ, though the types of genes may,
in crosses between European and Negro
groups, for example, from that which obtains
when European groups are crossed inter se.

Several hybrid communities have been
investigated anthropologically within the
past forty years, but the information presented by many of the observers is quite
inadequate for the demands of a modern
survey. In the present instance, it has been

* An adequate knowledge of the group characteristics
of hybrid populations may not throw any clear light
on the mode of individual inheritance, though the
position will be different in the case of the blood groups,
say, for which this is relatively simple, and in that of
metrical characters, which appear to be determined by
a number of genes.

possible to select nine studies—three of
crosses between Europeans and Negro and
related races, three of crosses between:
Europeans and American Indians and three:
of crosses between Europeans and other nonEuropean peoples—which afford a more or
less satisfactory basis for some preliminary
conclusions.

For the kind of treatment that is no
attempted, data relating not only to the
hybrid population but also to both parental
populations are required, and these data
consist of measurements of living subjects.
It must be acknowledged that, for practical
purposes, there are no measurements whatever available for the actual parental groups
from which the hybrids were derived. In
all such cases the process of intermixture
has been of varying duration and has taken
place within a period extending, as far as is
known, from the beginning of the sixteenth
until almost the end of the nineteenth
century.* Of the nine hybrid series con-.
sidered, the earliest to be examined was not}
measured until 1898. All the original
parents of either purely European or purely
non-European origin had probably died
before this date, and there are no anthro-.
pometric records for them. What can be
obtained, and what have actually been used,
are measurements of groups believed to be
descended from those populations which
actually contributed the parents. It is important to appreciate the point just made,
because analysis of the situation becomes
much more difficult if the parental populations were themselves changing phenotypically within the period mentioned. In
fact, so far as physical characters are concerned, there is no good evidence to show
whether they were changing or not, except
some relating to the past few decades, and
the best comparisons possible are obviously
far from ideal. There is a danger, for example,

* A striking exception is provided by Hawaii, where
primary miscegenation still occurs on a fairly wide
scale. A study of race crossing in the Hawaiian archi-;
pelago is now being undertaken by Dr. Harry L.;
Shapiro of the American Museum of Natural History,’
and the results of such a careful and unprejudiced
workers will doubtless clarify the problems arising in

this important area, for which the available material is
deplorably sparse.

   
    
  
 
   
   
 
CHARACTERISTICS OF HYBRID POPULATIONS 23

that the purely European or purely nonEuropean groups from which the hybrids
derive may not have been truly random
samples of the populations to which they
themselves belonged, and a great deal of
uncertainty must consequently arise regarding the material used in particular com
parisons.

Imperfections of the Evidence
«. The nine hybrid series to which reference
has been made will be described later in this
per, but certain of their features may be
‘eommented upon now. It is extremely probable that in the initial crosses most of the
fathers were Europeans and the mothers
-Europeans, but a small proportion of
pean women may have intermarried
re members of the hybrid population in
| generations. On the whole, it will be
‘onvenient to assume that the immediate
Bncestors of the first generation were
exclusively European males and _ nonBuropean females. It is unfortunate that
Bere are no data relating to the sort of
ist filial generation considered by geneticists
. the case of any of the series dealt with
fere, and it can only be supposed that each
if them has been made up of individuals
oh ose “‘ impure ”’ pedigrees are quite likely
® represent, contemporaneously, varying
Bades of intermixture. In general, there is
i information regarding the degree of genefegical heterogeneity shown by a particular
mies, but two instances exist in which either
Be conditions of the formation of the cross
re different from those of the rest or in
hich some details of the kind indicated are
wailable.
BAs has already been pointed out, the
ecendants of the Bounty mutineers are in
fair respects unique. It is known that
y are mainly derived from a few primary
Beses between Englishmen and Tahitian
| pmen Their pedigrees are thus approxiely ‘of the same length and each subject
ay be regarded as the product of equal
Rounts of European and non-European
Mestry, provided that such factors as
Mctive mating or differential dea‘h-rates
m be overlooked. By reason of their

   
 
    
 
 
  
  
   
  
   
   
 

geographical isolation, the inhabitants of
Pitcairn and Norfolk have formed practically
a closed community, and the prolonged inbreeding which has occurred on these two
islands takes on the aspect of an unpremeditated biological experiment. There is
little doubt that several back-crosses to the
parental populations are represented in the
eight other hybrid groups, none of which has
been isolated to the same extent as the
Pitcairn and Norfolk Islanders. Some investigation of pedigrees was undertaken in
five studies and attempts were made to
construct sub-series containing different proportions of intermixture between the
parental groups. Owing to the small size
of most of these sub-series, it is not profitable to consider them separately for the
purpose of analysis, except in a single case,
that of American Negroes of Mixed Blood.
All the remaining series, then, comprise
agglomerations of individuals with unequal
“impure ”’ pedigrees and possessing various
proportions of the two main ancestral stocks.

As far as can be ascertained, and with an
exception which will be mentioned later,
each hybrid population treated appears to
have been derived from purely European
sources, on one side, and a single non-European stock, on the other. In his extensive
work on the American Negro, Herskovits
(1930) has described a number of hybrid
series into the composition of which European, Negro and American Indian elements
have entered. These are not large, however,
and on this account and because an adequate
treatment of them would be an extremely
complicated undertaking, they have been
omitted from the present discussion.

While little difficulty exists in selecting the
hybrid series for consideration, the task of
obtaining samples which can fairly besupposed
to represent the parental groups is far from
easy. All that it seems possible to accomplish
in such a direction is to find modern series
which may be presumed suitable for the
purpose in view if the characters used are not
subject to secular change. As an illustration,
the type of the half-dozen Englishmen who
founded families on Pitcairn Island at the
close of the eighteenth century is, for eleven
24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the fourteen characters compared, taken
to be the same as that of a series of Oxfordshire villagers measured in 1922 and 1923.
In this case it is possible that the two groups
supposed to be equivalent constituted
samples, not absolutely random in nature, of
populations which were somewhat different
in type. The ten or twelve Tahitian women
with whom the Bounty mutineers contracted
unions are in turn represented by a series
drawn from the contemporary population of
the whole of the Society Islands. The best
comparisons which can be made under such
circumstances are evidently very imperfect.
In dealing with the other hybrid series, the
conditions are no better. The method employed has been to select samples which
appear to give more or less satisfactory
representations of the parental groups involved in the formation of the hybrid population and to make comparisons within these
triads. At first sight, it seemed quite probable that the material would be too defective
to yield suggestions of any value. Actually,
the conclusions arrived at are so consistent
that it can be concluded that its manifest defects are of less consequence than was feared.

Any adequate statistical characterization
of a population demands a sample of sufficient size to furnish reliable constants. It is
known from anthropological experience that
small samples, composed of fewer than thirty
individuals, normally provide either misleading or inconclusive results. There is also
some danger that small samples are less
likely to have been selected at random from
the assemblies they are supposed to characterize than large ones. Again, the numbers
of observations recorded for different characters in one sample are seldom constant. In
the hybrid series now considered, they range
from 880 to 23 in the case of adult males and
from 72 to 39 in that of adult females, the
majority for adults of both sexes being over
50. Most of these numbers are by no means
large for statistical purposes, but the series
are the longest available. The samples
chosen to represent the parental groups vary
in the numbers of observations for different
characters from 5,426 to 24 and from 1,549
to 25 in the case of males and females,

  
    
  
 
 
 
 
    
  
    
 
  
  
   
   
 
 
   
  
   
 
   
  
  

respectively. On the whole they are larger
than those for the mixed series. It is obviou
that the ideal statistical requirements are
satisfied very imperfectly by the data used.

Owing to the influence of the factor of
personal equation in metrical descriptions of
living subjects, it would have been a decided
advantage if each triad—the hybrid and the
two parental series—had been measured by
the same observer. This has been done in
only two studies. In three others the hybrid
and one parental series have been measure
either by a single observer or by a sm
group of observers working in conjunction,
and in the rest each one of the three associated series has been described by a different
observer. It is well known that comparisons
between measurements recorded by sever.
observers working independently will often
differ on the average to such an extent that
true racial distinctions are entirely obscured,
merely on account of the way in which the
measurements were taken. This is a regret-,
table state of affairs, but one which cannot
be avoided until anthropometric technique
become more rigorously standardized than
they are at present. It may be supposed
that exact comparisons can be made between:
data collected for various series by the same
observer or by a number of observers working together. In other cases the position is
different for different characters. There may
be little danger in comparing statures and
cephalic indices recorded by independent
observers, but nearly all the measurements
of the face and limbs are less reliable. So far
as the present material is concerned, an
attempt has been made to compare as man
characters as could be secured with any
reasonable expectation of accuracy, although
such a procedure involves retaining some
comparisons which are quite likely to be
fallacious owing to “errors’’ of measurement. As the general aim has been to restrict
the treatment to adult series, this has neces-'
sitated revision of some of the original
records in which several immature individuals
are included. As a rule, subjects under the
age of twenty have been rejected, though
their rxtention in some series cannot altogether be avoided.
CHARACTERISTICS OF HYBRID POPULATIONS 25

Material and Method of Analysis

_ The nine hybrid series concerned in this
paper may be briefly described as follows :

’ (1) Norfolk Islanders, 113 adult male and
female subjects, the descendants of six
amutineers of H.M.S. Bounty and from ten to
twelve Polynesian women from Tahiti and
‘possibly two of its neighbouring islands,
AMmeasured and described by Shapiro (1929).
They are compared with 153 male and female
Society Islanders, whose measurements were
‘faken by Handy and reduced by Shapiro,
and with 6,975 ‘“‘ English ” and 381 Oxford‘ghire villagers, whose measurements were
ares by Galton and by Buxton and Blackrespectively, and reduced by the
me The genealogical records of the Nork Islanders have been carefully kept since
#bout 1790, and any influx of fresh blood
fas invariably been noted.
(2) Half-Blood Sioux, 77 adult male subRécts, including some described as a quarter
pad others as three-quarters Indian, whose
: vasurements were taken by Boas and eight
mesistants and reduced by Sullivan (1920).
et heir European ancestry is said to be French,
otch, English and Irish. They are com" red with 540 full-blood Sioux, measured
y the sa same observers, and with 727 “‘ Old
pine ” Whites, measured and described
RS y Hrdlitka (1925). Herskovits (1930) has
~mvided several constants of variation for
he last series, and the writer a few others.
By: Hi3) Ojtbwa-Whites, 80 adult male subjects,
air pacipally from Minnesota, representing
fious degrees of intermixture between
women and French and Scotch
which has been “continuous and
in pe ative ’’ since 1660. They are described
W Jenks (1916) and have been compared
mh 24 full-blood Ojibwa (all that could be
Hained) and with 100 Minnesota French
= Ht 50 Minnesota Scotch, also measured by
The constants of variation of these four
r 2s have been computed by the writer.
* Yucatecans, 880 adult male subjects,
B product of intermixture between Spanish
pig ants into Mexico and Maya Indians
‘a period of some 350 years, measured
Edescribed by Williams (1931). They are

 
 
   
   
 
   
  
  
  
  
  
 
   
      
     
   
   
 
   
   
   
  

see n
Uwe

ae
eS
ie
.

compared with 77 presumably unmixed
Mayas, measured and described by Steggerda
(19320), and with 416 Andalusians measured
and described by Hulse (1933), for stature,
and 79 subjects from all parts of Spain, whose
measurements were taken by Barras and
reduced by Williams, for cephalic and facial
characters.

(5) Jamaican “ Browns,” 165 male and
female subjects of mixed White and Negro
ancestry from Jamaica, measured by Steggerda and described by Davenport and himself (1929). They are compared with one
series of 100 Whites of British and German
descent and with another of 105 full-blood
Negroes, also measured by Steggerda, both
coming from the island of Jamaica and its
dependencies. The Whites cannot be said to
represent ideal comparative material, and as
a large proportion of immature subjects is included in all three series, means based on their
absolute measurements would appear to be
unreliable. Consequently only indices, which
are less likely to be affected by possible
growth changes, have been used in the
present comparison. It is unfortunate that
the means and constants of variation provided by Davenport and Steggerda were
determined by very crude statistical methods
and that mistakes also occur in their computation.

(6) American Negroes of Mixed Blood, 254
adult male subjects of European and Negro
ancestry, principally from various parts of
the United States, measured and described
by Herskovits (1930). Genealogies were obtained from each subject, who was then classified with regard to the proportions of White
and Negro ancestry he possessed, three main
divisions being recognized: (i) more Negro
than White, (ii) approximately equal
amounts of Negro and White, and (iii) more
White than Negro. The number of individuals in each of these divisions makes
them, in general, adequate for separate
statistical treatment. They are compared
with an unmixed American Negro series of
109 individuals, also measured by Herskovits,
and with Hrdli¢ka’s “‘ Old Americans.”

(7) Boer-Hottentot Crosses (the so-called
“ Bastaards ’’ of Rehoboth), 74 adult male
26

subjects of six or seven generations of
mixed Boer and Hottentot descent from
South-West Africa, measured and described
by Fischer (1913). Fischer, like Herskovits,
divides his material into genealogical classes
representing different proportions of Boer
and Hottentot ancestry. None of these,
however, is really large enough for statistical
purposes, and the measurements have been
pooled to form a general Bastaard series,
which is compared with 74 Hottentots,
measured by Schultze Jena (1928), and, in
default of local Boers, with 70 Dutch, whose
forbears come from the northern provinces
of the Netherlands, measured and described
by Steggerda (1932a). The general Bastaard
constants of variation and those of the
Hottentots have been computed by the
writer.

(8) Kisar Mestizos, 132 adult male and
female subjects of mixed Dutch and Indonesian ancestry from Kisar, a small island
in the Sunda archipelago, some thirty-five
miles east of Timor. They were measured
and described by Rodenwaldt (1927), who
ascribes their origin to the seventeenth
century. The mestizos are divided by him
into genealogical classes, but these are too
small for satisfactory statistical analysis,
and the material has again to be treated as a
whole. For comparative purposes, 64 Kisar
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ese, also measured by Rodenwaldt, and
Steggerda’s Dutch are used.

(9) Anglo-Indians, ‘‘ new style,” 145 adult
male subjects of mixed European and Indian
ancestry from Calcutta, whose measurements were taken by Annandale, first reduced |
by Mahalanobis (1922-31) and later, with the
exclusion of some immature individuals, by,
the writer. There is almost a complete
absence of reliable information concerning
their origin and it has been found impossible
to select suitable material from Indian series
for a comparison of means, though in view
of their very complex racial antecedents
they can be retained for the study of
variability. |

In any investigation of race crossing it is
of interest to examine the physical relation
of hybrid populations to the parental stocks,
This has been attempted in the most direct
way possible, namely by selecting the means
of as many characters as are available for
both the hybrid sample and those representing the groups from which it is presumed to
have been derived, and comparing them pair
by pair in terms of the standard errors of
their differences. The method adopted is
illustrated in Table 1. Comparisons of the
kind indicated are admittedly very crude
and may be misleading. If for a particular:
character there is, in fact, no distinction

 

 
 
  

Character

Society (S)

Means and Standard Errors

 

   

Differences in Terms
of Standard Errors

 

Norfolk (N) | English (E) |S&N|N&ES&E

 

 

 

Head Length (L) 188-0 + °71/195°6 + °73/195°5 + ° 775| — | 7°7
Head Breadth (B) ... «un 159°6 + °54/155°5 + °54/151°4 4° 5°41] 5°3 | 10°6
Minimum Frontal Diameter (B’) 102°9 + °54/104°0 + °55|109°3 + ° — 6:6 | 8-1
Bizygomatic Breadth (J) ... 145°7 + °56|140°9 + °66/137°7 4° 5°5 | 3°7 | 10-2
Bigonial Breadth (W) 107°8 + *:66/107°6 + °58|/ 108-3 + - —_ — —_
Nasal Breadth (NB) 43°4 & °30) 37°6 + °35| 33°7 4° 12°6| 8-5 | 22°9
100 B/L 88-0 + +42) 79°5 + °36| 77°5 + *36/ 15°4 | 3°9 | 19°0
100 B’/B 64°6 + +33} 66-9 + -36/ 72°24 ° 4°7 | 10°3 | 15°3
100 J/B 91-4 + °29| 90°7 + -35| 90-74-35 — | — | — |
100 B’/J 70'7 + °36| 73°9 + *40| 79°64 - 5°9| 9°6| 15°7 |
100 W/J 74°90 + °45| 76°4 + °47| 78-9 + ° 3°7| 3°8) 7:6 |

 

  

 

i

|

TABLE 1.—Comparison of 3 mean cephalic and facial measurements of 85 Society Islanders, 64 Norfolk |
Islanders and 71 English. Any difference less than twice its standard error may be considered insignificant
and is omitted from the table. (Compiled from Shapiro, 1929, and Buxton, Trevor and Blackwood, 1938.)
CHARACTERISTICS OF HYBRID POPULATIONS 27

between the true means of the parental series,
then the question whether the mean of a
sample drawn from the first population is
ggeater or less than the mean of a sample
dstawn from the second population will be
determined merely by chance. In such a
ygase, the further question whether the mean

h.

gf the sample drawn from the hybrid popula‘tion falls between the two parental means

ill also be expected to be determined by
nance, and hence no significance can be
hed to the order in which the series are
ved by their several means. Where,

 
 
  
  
 

cu

 

  

 

however, the means of the parental series are
widely different, the position of the corresponding mean of the hybrid series in relation
to them is of real significance, and, as might
be expected on a polymeric hypothesis, its
value will tend to approach that of the
parental group which has made the greater
contribution to it. A rather striking example
of this is provided by the changes in position
of the mean value of the nasal breadth in
Herskovits’s male American Negroes, illustrated in Figure 1, where there is a progressive
decrease in the direction of the narrower

z 1.—Changes in the ¢ mean value of the nasal breadth with increasing amounts of European

 
  
  
 
 
  
 

try in three series of American Negroes of Mixed Blood. The vertical white line in the body of each
Mbution represents the position of the mean. The interpretation of the symbols in the extreme right
Min is as follows: N unmixed Negro, NNW more Negro ancestry than White, NW approximately

fgmounts of Negroand White ancestry, NWW more White ancestry than Negro, W “Old American’”’
The figures below a symbol denote the number of individuals in the series. The negative skewness
MNWW distribution is almost certainly due to the small size of the sample. (Compiled from HersMm 1930, and Hrdlitka, 1925.)
28

European nose with increasing amounts of
White ancestry.

The results obtained from a total of 102
comparisons of male and female series are
shown in Table 2, in which the position of
the mean of the hybrid sample is considered
with reference to the differences between the
presumed parental groups and its own
differences from them. It will be seen from
Table 2 that as the significant differences
between the mean values of the several series
in a triad become more numerous, the relative
frequency with which the hybrid means are
intermediate increases correspondingly, a
fact which would seem to validate a principle
of the classification of racial groups which
has generally been assumed in anthropological taxonomy.

Variability and Forms of Distributions

The problem of human variability has
recently attracted the attention of a number
of workers in both anthropology and genetics,
and it still bristles with difficulties. Since
the present discussion concerns populations
which have resulted from the crossing of
distinct racial stocks, it may be asked
whether they are more or less variable than
other populations not so formed, or comparison may be made between the observed
situation with regard to this matter and that
which would be expected in the light of
theoretical considerations. For the moment,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

only the first of these two methods of procedure, that is to say the description of a
situation which actually exists, will b
touched upon. It must be remembered tha
the topic is treated with reference to the
measurements of living people, characters
of a particular kind which are unlikely to
yield any results which might be susceptibl
of a simple interpretation even under th
most favourable conditions. Problems o
inheritance are involved, it is true, but speci
fically those of mass inheritance in the cas
of subjects whose origins are multifariou
and unknown, except within the wides
categories, and in the case of physi
features of an extraordinarily complex nature.
Most anthropological problems are of th
same kind.

The series described, though the best
available, are far from ideal when considered
as samples representative of a few of the
hybrid communities which now exist. In
this connexion it would be as well to recall
some remarks made a little earlier. It is im-|
portant to realize, in the first place, that the;
samples in question are assemblages of;
individuals representing all grades of intermixture between two or more parent
groups. Probably the only exception 1
furnished by the Norfolk Islanders, who ma
be supposed to be, roughly at least, the
descendants of a few members of two distinct)
racial stocks who intermarried in the first.

   
   
  
   
   
  
   
   
 

 

Class of Comparison

No significant differences between P and P’

Significant differences between P and P’, but none
between either P and H, P’ and H or both
(P and H) and (P’ and H)

All differences between P, P’ and H significant

All comparisons

H between H not between

P and P’ P and P’ Totals
6 or 30-0 per 14 Or 70°0O per 20
cent. cent.
34°5 or 76°7 10°5 OF 23°3 45
per cent. per cent.
36 or 97°3 per I or 2°7 per 37
cent. cent.
76°5 or 75°O per | 25°5 Or 25°0 per 102
cent. cent.

TABLE 2.—Comparison of the positions of g and ? means of anthropometric characters, betwee
hybrid (H) and the European (P) and non-European (P’) parental populations from which the hybridg

are supposed to have been derived.

In the few cases in which the means of H and P or H and PF’ are

identical for a particular character, -5 has been assigned to each of the second and third columns of th

table.
CHARACTERISTICS OF HYBRID: POPULATIONS 29

neration and subsequently inbred, so that
ich ‘individual to-day can, with reservations
hat have already been mentioned, claim to
pssess an equally divided racial heritage.
‘In these circumstances it would not be
urprising if different crossed populations
howed variabilities of different orders, so
hat generalizations regarding all of them
ould not -be of much value. As has already
ben stressed, in the majority of cases the
ormation regarding the parental groups
om which the hybrids have been derived is
adequate. There are almost no physical
cords relating to them directly, and for
sis reason it has been necessary to suppose
at data for series which are presumed
be their descendants can be used for
e comparative purpose in view. The
umption that the parental populations
hve not altered appreciably in type or
priability during the past three hundred
bars is not an unreasonable one, but slight
hanges of which no knowledge exists may
bvertheless have taken place.
‘Another source of uncertainty may be
more consequence. In making compariins of the mean values of measurements, it
is been assumed as a #7s aller that only one
uropean stock was concerned in the foration of the hybrid population, which is
rtainly no more than a first approximation
the truth. If, however, the same series
e used in several comparisons of variability
ere will be some danger of underestimating
e variabilities of the European groups
ich actually participated in the cross. It
quite impossible to assess the extent to

Order of Variability

} more variable than either P or P’

‘more variable than P but as variable as P’
less variable than P, but more variable than P
| less variable than either P or P’.

-_ which calculations are falsified on account

of this imperfection. A further difficulty is
introduced in cases in which the modern
hybrid population has been derived from
very small numbers of European men on the
one side and of non-European women on the
other (as in that of the Norfolk Islanders),
for these small groups may not have displayed the same order of variability as the
large populations to which they belonged.
Small samples are often peculiar and they
are not likely to represent random selections
from total assemblies. Finally, it must be
pointed out that the metrical data themselves involve certain defects. Different
numbers of characters are available for different comparisons of a hybrid with the two
corresponding parental series, and this must
not be forgotten when comparisons are made
between conclusions drawn from one such
triad with those drawn from another. Ina
few instances it is necessary to admit that
the same feature may have been measured
by two different observers in ways which are
sufficiently dissimilar to affect the comparisons of variabilities. It would be pleasant,
of course, to neglect any such imperfections

of the evidence when attempting to make

general deductions regarding the variability
of hybrid populations, but unfortunately
they are too obvious to be overlooked.

The method employed here in considering
the question of variability was devised by
Morant (1933). It takes into account the
ratios of the variances (c?’s) of a number of
characters and provides a conventional
estimate of the mean variability of one series

Hybrid Population

Jamaican ‘‘ Browns” ¢ and 9 (17), American

Negroes of Mixed Blood ¢ (12), AngloIndians ¢ (7).

Half-Blood Sioux ¢ (9).

Yucatecans ¢ (10), Mestizos of Kisar ¢ (4).

Norfolk Islanders g and @? (14), Bastaards of
Rehoboth ¢ (4). |

TABLE 3.—Comparison of 3 and 9 mean variances (g*’s) of anthropometric characters between hybrid

) and the Europ

potes the number of characters compared.

ean (P) and non-European (P’) parental populations from which the hybrids are
posed to have been derived. The figure in brackets after the n

ame of a series in the right-hand column
30

as compared with another. The results
obtained from the material that has been
used in the present paper are given in Table 4,
in connexion with which two points need
clarifying. Herskovits’s American Negroes of
Mixed Blood are his NNW, NW and NWW
series combined, and the standard deviations
(o’s) of the non-European series with which
the Anglo-Indians are compared were calculated by Mahalanobis (1927) from the
measurements of a number of North Indian
series included in Risley’s classical work
The Tribes and Castes of Bengal. The impossibility of selecting a single series which
might be supposed to represent the indigenous ancestors of the Anglo-Indians has
already been commented upon. A more
detailed analysis of the data shows convincingly that the variabilities of the hybrids
are of the same order as those of the populations from which they have presumably
descended. From this conclusion, which
certainly fails to coincide with the genetical
assumptions customarily made in considerations of race crossing, it is quite clear that
most hybrid populations do not tend to be
either appreciably more or appreciably less
variable than the majority of existing

‘unmixed ” populations.

The question of the unincreased variability
of hybrid populations has formed subject of
three important papers by Herskovits (1927),
Wagner (1932) and Muller (1936). Fischer
(1913), was inclined to attribute the low
variability of the Bastaards of Rehoboth
whom he studied to the unsuitability of the
measure of dispersion used, the standard
deviation, but Professor Muller, an eminent
geneticist, has pointed out that the term
“ variation ’”’ has hardly any exact scientific
meaning unless it is defined as the standard
deviation, the variance or the coefficient of
variation. Some ingenious Mendelian interpretations of unincreased hybrid variability
have been advanced by Muller himself, and
the one he favours may be quoted :

“* There are several circumstances which could

- give rise to a comparatively low variability on
the part of a population of mixed race, as compared with the original populations which went
to form the mixture, without the slightest

THE EUGENICS REVIEW - —

   
    
    
   
 
   
 
 
    
 

' violation of Mendelian or other accepted genet;

variability of the mixed race which was cause
by the segregation from one another of thoy
genes that had caused the two original races ty
differ. Thus the intraracial variability of th
new mixed race would be largely constituted o;
the inierracial differences, and the origina
intraracial differences would now be in par
suppressed in their expression.”’

It should be pointed out that for most of the
commonly used anthropometric character
interracial variability, ie. the variation
of the averages for different groups, is very
small compared with intraracial variability,
ie. the variation exhibited by individual
belonging to the same group, a fact which
Muller does not sufficiently stress.

The view that the distributions of metrical
characters in hybrid populations are often
bimodal or multimodal in form will be dis.
cussed very shortly. Most of the availabk
material is hardly adequate for testing this
supposition, but where normal curves have
been fitted to distributions of stature, head
length, head breadth, bizygomatic breadth,
cephalic index and nasal index for hybrid
series composed of 75 or more individuals,
none of the results suggests any appreciable
departure from normality, and the proba.
bilities of the true population distributions
being normal in these cases are all quite
high.* The question here, of course, is not
whether a particular sample gives a distribu.
tion which appears to be bimodal or not, but
whether any samples can be supposed t
indicate that the total assembly from whid
they were taken exhibits such a peculi
arity. The series examined do not indicat
that there is a clear departure from the usud
symmetrical form of distribution with asingl
peak in the case of any character and for any
population considered.

* The evidential basis of this and other statements it
the present discussion will appear in an extendd
monograph on race crossing-in course of preparatic
by the writer.
= reg,
.

Summary and Conclusions

' To summarize, the anthropologist, as such,
is not concerned specifically with the mechanof heredity but with certain of its results
gs they apply to groups of individuals. The
Dbservational data he has collected demonstrate in a conclusive fashion that some
simple relationships exist between the group
tharacteristics of hybrids and those of the
Stocks from which they have presumably
ppeer derived. The first of these is that the
grean values of quantitative characters are
Sntermediate in the hybrid population where
i) pe e is a clear distinction between the
erental groups, the second is that the
iabilities of the hybrid population do not,
a n the whole, tend to be peculiarly high or
. iarly low, and the third is that the
fistributions of qualitative characters in the
BY ybrid population are approximately normal
m form and, so far as can be judged by the
: ata at present available, apparently always
imodal.
fin spite of the imperfections of the eviance, these general conclusions may be
pnsidered as firmly established. They are of
ps h a nature that it would be possible to
i roncile them with any neo-Mendelian
gories concerned with the mechanism of
dividual inheritance. At the present time
er 2 is no adequate descriptive material
ilable which could be used to demonstrate
w the group situation is brought about by
ie 5 action of genetical laws. The anthroNogical data only enable one to observe an
@ result which might have been reached in
4 umber of different ways. An obvious
d exists for additional descriptive records
ting to hybrid populations which would
wct the linking up of anthropological and
fetical conclusions and also form a research
. of great theoretical and practical
prest.

   
   
   
 
  
  
    
   
   
  
   
 
  
   
   
  
  
   

CHARACTERISTICS OF HYBRID POPULATIONS 31

REFERENCES

Buxton, L. H. DuDLEy, TREvor, J. C., and
BLACKWOOD, BEATRICE, 1938, Measurements of
Oxfordshire Villagers, MS., Department of
Human Anatomy, University Museum, Oxford.
(Forthcoming.)

DAVENPORT, C. B., and STEGGERDA, MorRIs, 1929,
Race Crossing in Jamaica, Publ. Carneg. Instn.,
No. 395.

FISCHER, EUGEN, 1913, Die Rehobother Bastards
und das Bastardierungsproblem beim Menschen.

HERSKOVITS, MELVILLE J., 1927, Variability and
Racial Mixture, Amer. Nat., LXI.

» 1930, The Anthropometry of the American
Negro, Columbia Univ. Contr. Anthrop., XI.

HrpuiéKxa, ALES, 1925, The Old Americans.

HULSE, FREDERICK SEYMOUR, 1933, The Comparative Anthropometry of Cubans and Andalusians,
MS., Peabody Museum, Harvard University.

JENKS, ALBERT ERNEST, 1916, Indian-White
Amalgamation: An Anthropometric Study,
Univ. Minn. Stud. Soc. Sct., No. 6.

MAHALANOBIS, P. C., 1922-31, Anthropological
Observations on the Anglo-Indians of Calcutta :
Part I, Analysis of Male Stature, Part II,
Analysis of Anglo-Indian Head Length, Rec.
Indian Mus., XXIII.

, 1927, Analysis of Race Mixture in Bengal,
J. Asiat. Soc. Beng., XXIII.

Moran, G. M., 1935, An Attempt to Estimate the
Variabilities of Various Populations, Z. Rassenk.,
II.

MULLER, H. J., 1936, On the Variability of Mixed
Races, Amer. Nat., LXX.

RODENWALDT, ERNST, 1927, Die Mestizen auf
Kisar, 2 vols.

SCHULTZE JENA, LEONHARD, 1928, Zur Kenntnis
des Korpers der Hottentotten und Buschmanner,
Denkschr. Med.-Naturw. Ges. Jena, XVII.

SHAPIRO, Harry L., 1929, Descendants of the
Mutineers of the Bounty, Mem. Bishop Mus.,
XI.

STEGGERDA, Morris, 19324, Physical Measurements of Dutch Men and Women, Amer. J.
Phys. Anthrop., XVI.

, 19326, Anthropometry of Adult Maya
Indians : A Study of their Physical and Physiological Characteristics, Publ. Carneg. Insin., No.
434
SuLLivan, Louis R., 1920, Anthropometry of the
Siouan Tribes, Anthrop. Pap. Amer. Mus.,
XXITI.

WacGneER, K., 1932, The Variability of Hybrid
Populations, Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop., XVI.
WILLIAMS, GEORGE DEE, 1931, Maya-Spanish
Crosses in Yucatan, Pap. Peabody Mus., XIII

 

 

 

 

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXX, No. l.
