EUGENICS AND SOCIALISM
Their Common Ground and How it Should be Sought
By HERBERT BREWER

HE success of eugenics necessarily

depends upon the degree to which it

is able to influence, directly or
indirectly, the mass of the population.
Whatever may be one’s opinions as to the
validity of socialist ideas, it cannot be
disputed that in relation to the largest
section of the population they are always
powerful and often dominant. That the
wage earners, through trade unions and
co-operative societies as well as through
political organizations, are so largely under
socialist leadership, makes it important to
take into consideration the psychology of
the socialistically-minded in undertaking
the task of enlightening the public at large
upon matters of eugenics.

In some quarters, it is believed that the
socialist and the eugenist philosophy are
fundamentally opposed. If that view were
correct, the outlook for eugenics, in a world
where the drive of egalitarian democracy is
so potent a force, would not be promising.
The writer believes, on the contrary, that
the socialist and the eugenic outlook are
far from incompatible. It cannot be denied,
however, that in the main the socialist attitude to-day is negligent or mistrustful of
eugenics. Medical and other representatives of the socialist movement who have
denounced sterilization of the feeble-minded
as degrading, cruel, and subversive of working-class interests, probably speak for a
large number of followers.

There is reason for thinking that this
obtuseness to eugenic considerations on the
part of the political ‘left’ largely arises
from adventitious and avoidable causes.

It is natural that the social reformer, preoccupied with pressing environmental evils,
should tend to overlook the deeper seated
and more stubborn factors which lie in
humanity itself. But there appears no

19

essential reason why both aspects should
not ultimately be regarded and reconciled.
Stock raisers devote close attention to the
pedigree of their animals, while neglecting
no point connected with feeding, shelter,
and veterinary care. There is no a priori
reason why radical reform in raising the
standard of life of the masses should make
improvement in their hereditary quality
impossible. Indeed, to the extent that an
understanding of eugenic aims is advanced
by more education, leisure, and culture, a
higher general standard of living will
facilitate success. Moreover, the socialist
is bound to admit that the organized society
he proposes would require a higher level of
intellectual and moral capacity than does
the existing order. Measures tending to
raise the innate bases of such capacity must
therefore tend to improve the chances of a
socialist community working successfully.

LABOUR AND BIRTH CONTROL

The support that has been given by
socialists to birth control, though it has not
been prompted by definitely eugenic considerations, has been of considerable value
to eugenics. ‘The late Labour Minister of
Health took a bold and important step in
authorizing contraceptive advice for mothers
attending welfare clinics in cases where the
health of the mother would be endangered
by further pregnancy. Whatever be the
interpretation given to the qualification of
health reasons, it is probable that such
reasons will often coincide with eugenic
indications. In principle the change is
highly significant; for it involves the
admission by the State that conception can,
and sometimes ought, to be prevented.
When Labour is thus tending, unavowedly
but perceptibly, in a eugenic direction, the
time would seem opportune for cultivating
20

among its supporters a more conscious and
thoroughgoing support.

The Eugenics Society is rightly dissociated from political affiliations. I do
not suggest that it should seek them, nor
that it should not criticize a socialist government as freely as any other. What I do
suggest is that it should find more room in
its propaganda for arguments and appeals
calculated to carry conviction to people
influenced by socialist fallacies—or, if you
will, by socialist truths.

“The majority of Englishmen,’’ said
Eleanor Rathbone, ‘‘ whatever their class
and politics, have intensely conservative
minds, and are influenced greatly by tradition and the phrases in which tradition has
clothed itself. A proposal to which they
may take an unconquerable aversion if they
meet it clad in phrases which are repugnant
to an already established prejudice may be
received with acclamation if it can manage
to enlist in its service the particular set of
catchwords, which happen at the moment
to be in favour with the particular set of
individuals one is addressing.’’*

CLASS DIFFERENCES

It is not necessary to believe that
socialists are more under the sway of
catchwords than other people, to regard that
statement as possessing much relevance to
the present question. But there remain
some differences between socialist and
eugenist tendencies which cannot be
approximated by a mere exercise of tactful
phraseology.

An influential school of eugenic thought
takes the view that material success in the
existing economic system is significantly
identified with superior hereditary ability,
and holds that the eugenic problem may be
formulated as one of increasing the fertility
of the well-to-do, and of checking that of
the less prosperous classes. The means
proposed to this end involve preserving or
increasing the material advantages of the
well-to-do over the poorer classes, by a

* The Disinherited Family, p. 265.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

policy of taxation and social reform which
would slow down or reverse those legislative
tendencies which have been so distinctive a
feature of the past few generations. ‘Those
tendencies, which all parties have in
different measure advanced, the socialist
would carry much farther. The socialist
induction, drawn from another body of data,
would indeed have it that the present marked
inequalities of income are not only morally
unjustifiable, but are productive of economic
disorder and of the many-sided evils of
poverty.

I will not attempt to discuss whether the
formulation of the eugenic problem to
which I have referred is intrinsically sound.
It may be stated, however, that it has been
severely criticized by biologists of the
standing of Jennings, Haldane (J. B. S.),
and Hogben. Whatever its validity, it
would appear to be incompatible with
socialist methods and objectives. ‘That does
not dispose of the question of whether
socialism can march with eugenics. There
may be methods of approach other than
those to which the socialist takes objection.

If we suppose a classless society where
economic advantages are _ substantially
equalized, can we point to motives for
eugenic improvement which will still exist in
sufficient strength to serve as engines of
progress? If we can, then the disputable
eugenic proposals here in review need not
stand as insuperable obstacles to a modus
vivendt.

THE HUMANITARIAN ARGUMENT

In truth, eugenics can call upon motives
immensely more broad and deep than are
evoked by schemes which follow the contours of class egotisms. Rich or poor,
humble or exalted, whether under a
capitalist or a socialist order, one overwhelming reason applies universally in
favour of everyone being born with a good
hereditary endowment. This reason is that
without good heredity, a life worth living
for the individual is all but impossible.
Good health, constitutional soundness,
longevity, high vitality and intelligence—
these are goods which every rational being
EUGENICS AND SOCIALISM

ought to regard as paramount. ‘These
qualities should be praised as the most valuable ingredients of the good life, apart
altogether from the material gain they may
bring. Just as the most powerful reason for
being well born is that life may be worth
living, so the compelling consideration for
stopping the procreation of unfitness is that
being ill-born means to endure suffering and
degradation. Not economy, but humanity,
is the decisive reason why the multiplication
of the feeble-minded should be arrested.
‘The poor, no less than the rich, the socialist
no less than the conservative, has reason
for desiring that either they shall have
children well-born or else no children at all.

2I

To enlist a generous humanitarianism in
the service of eugenics is to make economic
sanctions largely irrelevant. A eugenic
policy conceived in such a spirit is best
calculated to smooth the formidable difficulties which stand in the way of persuading
hereditary unfitness to extinguish itself.
Disinterested humanity and pity are credentials, armed with which eugenics can
with confidence deliver its message to
individuals of every class and creed. When
it comes to do so, widely, persistently, and
devotedly, among those in whom it awakens
responsive convictions will surely be a great
number of those who call themselves
socialists.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 1.
