HENRY TWITCHIN

An Account of the Society’s Most Generous Benefactor

By MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN, D.Sc.

P to this spring, a generous mem
ber of our Society had been in the

habit of giving us £1,000 a year, a
fact not widely known because, respecting
his earnest desire that his name should not
be disclosed, as little as possible was said
about it. This reason for our silence, however, no longer exists; for our benefactor,
Mr. Henry Twitchin, died on March 19th
last, quite unexpectedly after an operation
for appendicitis. By his will the Society
becomes the residuary legatee of his estate,
thus probably more than trebling the income
to be received by us from this source. As he
is likely for long, or for ever, to head the list
of our benefactors, it is fitting that some account of the man himself should accompany
this expression of deep gratitude for what
he has done for eugenics.

Henry Twitchin was born on February
21st, 1867, at Shaw-cum-Donnington in
Berkshire, his father and grandfather having been farmers in good circumstances, the
latter indeed being described as ‘ gentleman’ in the death certificate. There was
in Berkshire a family of this name, which
traced back to the middle of the seventeenth
century, with arms on the tomb of one of
them; and with this family our Twitchins
were most probably connected, since the
name of Andrew occurs in both pedigrees of this uncommon surname. Henry
Twitchin’s mother’s name was Lovelock,
her father being a maltster, this being the
surname of yeoman families in Berkshire
back to Elizabethan times; and the same is
true of Northway, his paternal grandmother’s name. We may, in a future issue,
be able to give a pedigree of the Twitchin
family for those interested in such matters.
His immediate ancestry nearly all lived to
advanced old age, and for the most part left

QI

no recorded signs of ill health. It is true
that his father, another Henry, though living to the age of eighty-seven, retired from
work when comparatively young, and was
reported to have been always an invalid and
very irritable, though with dignified, aristocratic manners when in a good temper. He
was both a reader and an independent
thinker, holding views considered very advanced in his days. Our Henry Twitchin
also had an uncle who was deformed and not
at all a desirable character. His mother
was an amusing and courageous old lady of
strong character ; whilst his two sisters, who
completed the family, and of whom he was
very fond, both died young of consumption.
Our benefactor himself suffered constantly
from periods of depression, but must have
been physically very strong. He left no
near relatives. ‘These details are here given
with reference to his remarks, to be quoted
later on, with regard to his own hereditary
tendencies.

WEALTH FROM ANIMAL BREEDING

Henry Twitchin was educated at Newbury
Grammar School, and then at Downton
Agricultural College, where he did well,
winning several prizes. His training on the
land led him to think of emigrating, and the
fact that his father was strict and unsympathetic confirmed his determination to leave
England in spite of the opposition of all the
family. Who supplied the funds is unknown,. possibly a certain well-to-do relative
with no children; but certain it is that he
was able to sail for Western Australia before
he was twenty-two years of age and to start
sheep farming soon after his arrival. His
stocks suffered heavily in some of the
droughts; but, after visiting England to
raise further funds, he sunk a large number
92

of artesian wells on his property, which then
began to prosper greatly. When in 1924
he sold his estates of Towera and Lyndon,
comprising over a million acres of pastoral
leases, it was described as the biggest sale of
such property ever negotiated in Western
Australia. In fact, after thirty-four years
hard work he returned to England, having
made a considerable fortune, but with his
health seriously impaired.

In spite of his trying and constant occupations, Henry Twitchin evidently had time to
think, and did think deeply on many problems, though with little assistance of any
kind. Judging from certain notes found
amongst papers, philosophy and religion
occupied his thoughts a good deal at one
time; though, as we shall see, it was to
eugenics that his mind was most constantly
directed. But to show that he looked to
environment as well as to heredity it may
be mentioned that by his will the British and
the Western Australian societies for the prevention of cruelty to animals received legacies, whilst the following extract from these
early rough notes may also be quoted with
the same object. ‘‘ I am quite aware that a
vast proportion of human suffering is mainly
due to preventable causes and in too many
instances is perhaps a just penalty for their
own delinquencies ; but I have also seen in
my own family connection an amount of
suffering patiently endured, for which no
cause could be assigned and by those who to
our view were least deserving of it, that has
made a deep impression on me.’’ Amongst
these papers was found the telegram, which
he had kept for thirty-eight years, announcing the death of his sister; and we may
guess that it was her he had in his mind
when he wrote these words.

OUR USE OF THE MONEY

Turning to the advantages which will
accrue to the Society under the terms of Mr.
Twitchin’s will, some paragraphs of which
will be quoted later on, the Society is placed
under no “‘ legal obligations ”’ as to the way
in which his magnificent bequest is to be
spent. Nevertheless, I wish to take this

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

opportunity of appealing to our Councils in
the future, when deciding on the uses to
which this income shall be put, always at all
events to take into consideration—I say no
more than that—what were the wishes and
views of our great benefactor. ‘Though I
make this appeal, it is, I am sure, unnecessary, because all members of our Society are
sure always to regard the matter in this
light. What is desirable is to ascertain
what these wishes and views really were.

As to the general opinions held by Mr.
Twitchin in regard to eugenics, and his
reason for holding them, they may perhaps
best be gathered from the following extracts
from his private correspondence with me.
In reading them it must, however, be remembered that the earliest letters were
written from Towera, a remote pastoral
station in Western Australia, that none of
them were intended for publication, and
that if he had had the least idea that they
would ever appear in print, he would
probably have expressed himself more
guardedly. His first letter to me was dated
April 4, 1922, and deals largely with questions of business. The passages which concern us here run as follows:

HIS INTEREST IN EUGENICS

‘‘T first became interested in Eugenics
about 25 years ago, when the idea of
applying the principle we had for a long
time made use of in improving our farm
stock to the improvement of the human
family occurred to me just as originally
as it did to the Founder of our Society,
or the Greeks of old, and no doubt to many
others. This is not to be wondered at
when it is known that I am descended
from a long line of countrymen at home,
some of whom helped to make our domestic animals what they are to-day, that I
was live stock prizeman at the Downton
Farming School in 1888, and since then
have devoted my whole life to the breeding of live stock (over 40,000 last year),
in which as you know, under the best
practice, the principle of eugenics is the
controlling factor.
HENRY

‘* Although my occupation alone would
naturally have led me to this conclusion,
it was the fact that I was born of unsound
parents and inherited their weaknesses
and consequently have suffered thereby,
that first forced this question upon me.
Isolated as I was in what was then the
Back Country here, I had no opportunity
of discussing it with people who were
likely to know what had already been
done to make the idea of use to the world,
although it was certainly explained to one
or two of my more enlightened neighbours, and it was years afterwards that
I met with a reference in some paper
(The Times Weekly probably) to the
work of the late Henry [Francis] Galton,
and of the founding of the Eugenics
Education Society.

‘“* Applying the great principle, as I was
constantly doing in my work, it was
natural perhaps for me to see no diffculty in doing the same at once with men
and women. And IJ was then advocating
the immediate introduction of legislation
in all civilised countries prohibiting the
propagation of the unfit from any cause.
But after reading some of the publications
by the Society and other works on the
subject, I realized that the great majority
of the people were not ready for such a

revolutionary change, and that the best.

course to bring about the desired improvement was to do as the Society was
doing and educate, if possible, the masses
to see the inestimable advantage of
adopting the principle and gradually enforce control.

*‘ Believing in practice as well as in
principle, I never married, although better fitted to do so probably than fully
one-half of those who do—and being the
last of my family I have no relatives having any claim on my property I, in 1912,
made my Will—after providing for certain legacies—in favour of our Society,
for the carrying on of the propaganda
which I believe to be by far the most
urgent and important work possible in
human endeavour. .

TWITCHIN

93

HIS LEGITIMATE EXPECTATIONS

As it is of some importance to show in
what ways Mr. Twitchin was led to believe
that his bequest would be spent, it may be
as well here to quote part of my reply to
the above letter. It was dated June gth,
1922, and ran as follows:

‘* As to the methods of utilising any further funds coming under the influence or
control of our Society, that is a point on
which I could say a great deal, and is one
on which you will probably wish to hear
something. We now often miss an opportunity of getting a lecture delivered on
eugenics because we cannot afford to give
any remuneration to our lecturers. If we
could pay even a moderate fee, we should
soon get together a capable band of lecturers, and, being able to comply with any
demand, the work in this direction would
soon be largely increased. Our REVIEW,
as a method of propaganda, would be improved if we could afford to pay something
to our contributors. Research in certain
directions is at a standstill for want of
funds. I have in my mind especially certain half-finished work in connection with
the pedigrees of London pauper stock,
which would be valuable from a scientific
point of view, and most helpful to lecturers
to illustrate existing evils due to heredity.
Lastly, our staff is ill-paid and inadequate,
which makes all progress difficult. This is
perhaps sufficient to show how greatly the
whole position might be strengthened were
more funds available. ‘There is no institution throughout the world known to me
which is carrying on such an active eugenic
propaganda as we should desire to initiate
had we the means; and for any Society to
set a proper example in this respect might
produce beneficial results to posterity of incalculable magnitude.”’

It must be remembered that in 1922 we
were not receiving £1,000 a year as a gift
from Mr. Twitchin, as we did in many later
years.

A few more extracts from Mr. Twitchin’s
letters will now be given:
94

Perth, W. Australia, Nov. roth, 1923.—
“You gave me some account of your more
recent endeavours in the great cause, more
particularly in securing a share of the
Rockefeller bequest for the closer study of
heredity in England, which was an excellent
idea. But I suppose the money would have
to be devoted to the purpose specified and
might not be used for general propaganda.
I trust the special effort you were making
to increase the membership of the Society
was successful, as it is more important to
have many people interested in our teaching than to have the money of the few. .. .”’

The last sentence is interesting as coming from one who has bequeathed such a
large sum for the furtherance of eugenics.

The next quotation is dated April 30th,
1926, by which time he had come to live at
the Villa Eugéne at Nice. (He told me
laughingly that the name of his house,
though appropriate, was not given to it by
himself.)

‘The cinema and broadcasting seem to
me to be the best means of reaching the
largest number of people, though articles in
the popular press would be read by a good
many.”’

BIRTH CONTROL AND STERILIZATION

Villa Eugéne, Dec. 20th, 1926.—‘‘ Progress in practical eugenics measures is still
very slow, although it appears to be dawning on some public authorities that sterilization is the only means to help them out of
their financial difficulties in the case of the
feeble-minded. Perhaps after thinking
about it for another ten years it will be
adopted. ‘This is thoroughly British. Of
course, we cannot begin operating until the
spirit moves a sufficient majority to vote for
it. In the meantime, as the Government
will not do anything to establish public
clinics for teaching birth control methods,
there is nothing, as I understand the law,
to prevent private effort in this direction.

‘There seems little doubt that the
poor are quite ready to practise contraception if they are only taught how to do it;
although I fear that only the best of the
poor would trouble to learn. Those we

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

really want to stop breeding are too careless
and improvident. Some day perhaps they
will be sterilized without their consent.’’
Villa Eugéne, April roth, 1927.—‘' Referring to your long letter on the subject,
you quote Pearson as saying that ‘ the
effect of Birth Control up till now [the time
he wrote] has been simply disastrous.’
But at that time only the better classes
practised it, and withholding the knowledge
from the inferior classes will not stop the
practice in the higher. It would in fact
have a tendency to increase the latter, as
the support of the unemployed falls on them
and renders them less able to keep their
own families. I quite agree with the principles laid down in the Society’s outline of
a Eugenic Policy under Conception Control
[this has been somewhat modified since
these words were written]. Paragraph 3
covers the whole question as far as Britain
is concerned. The time has come when
owing to economic changes—loss of trade,
etc.—which are likely to be permanent, the
children of so many people cannot be raised
‘in accordance with a certain minimum
(decent) standard of civilization.” Perhaps
no one but those who have had the management of large stock farms fully realize the
practical side of this question. We know
the utter madness of going on breeding up
when the Ranch is fully stocked and there
is no, or insufficient, outlet for the surplus.
If it is to do any good we must
banish sentiment and act drastically. We
must not consider the rights of individuals
over-much—a lunatic in my opinion has no
rights—when the vital interests of the State
are at stake.’’

EUGENICS AND ‘STOCKYARD METHODS’

Chambord, France, Aug. 26th, 1927.—
‘“T should not if I were you condemn
‘ stockyard methods,’ so called, so severely.
What are they but the practice of the very
essence of eugenic principles—the prevention of the breeding of the unfit and making
it possible for only the best types to do so.
It may be good policy for the present not
to go too far, but if eugenic teaching is ever
to do any practical good for the human
HENRY ‘TWITCHIN

family, stronger measures will have to be
taken than any so far advocated.”’

Villa Eugéne, Oct. 30th, 1928.—‘‘ I
have read your new book [What is
Eugenics? | and agree with most of the arguments in it, but still think that in combating a great social evil we should not be
over scrupulous as to the means by which
we hope to bring about an improvement,
and that as birth control in some form is
the only practicable way to this end, it
should be enforced by the authority of the
nation regardless of the likes and dislikes
of those who haven’t the intelligence to
know what is good for them or the contrary.
Pro bono is still supposed to be a principle
of democracies. Your smaller book is undoubtedly more suitable for the great
majority of readers than the larger one and

. I should be glad to subscribe for say
1,000 copies to be sent to distributing
centres in large towns, if you approve the
proposal,”’

It gives me great pleasure to think that
this plan was carried out, the copies being
sent at his suggestion to public and other
libraries at home and in the Dominions. Of
course he may have been mistaken as to the
value of that book; but we cannot be mistaken in believing that his object was to
place a book capable of being widely understood where it would be widely accessible.

Villa Eugéne, June 18th, 1929.—‘‘ The
other book you sent me, Posterity, is I
think a most useful contribution to the subject, very clearly and concisely stated and
going a little further than you do in suggesting immediate remedies. The
late Health Minister could only propose
keeping mental deficients (300,000) in
colonies and after some training letting
them out under supervision as though they
could then be prevented from propagating.
Could anything be more childish? .
Progress is slow, but the only way is to keep
pegging away like a patient fisherman hoping for a bite sooner or later. I think we
must look for the greatest developments in
the newer countries like America, where
deep-rooted prejudice is not so strong as it
is In our country; and yet it is here that

95

eugenic reform is most needed to get rid of
the great burden of the unemployed.”’
Geneva, July 21st, 1929.—‘‘I certainly
agree with you that our Society should
advocate all measures likely to improve the
race rather than concentrate on one only.”’

TWENTY YEARS OF THOUGHT

Passing on to consider what were Mr.
Twitchin’s more definitely expressed
wishes, several wills were made by him in
which his intentions of benefiting eugenics
were expressed, the first one being signed in
1912. At about that same time he wrote a
letter, from which the following extracts are
taken, to be held for safe keeping with that
will by the Public Trustee :

‘* Lest it should be considered that in be
queathing the whole of the residue of my
estate, as I have done, for the purposes of
furthering the knowledge and, I trust, in
time securing the adoption of the principles
of eugenics both in England and throughout the world, I have acted hastily.
I am desirous of mentioning by letter to you
that I have for nearly 20 years past
taken the keenest interest in all aspects of
eugenics and have read and thought much
upon the subject and, in the result, I am
thoroughly convinced that to the extent the
knowledge of the science is brought home
to the people and its principles acted on and
enforced, enormous beneficial results must
inevitably follow, and it is to aid and assist
in this that I very thankfully devote the
bulk of my property.’’

When all the available evidence has been
considered, it will be agreed, I believe, that
the word ‘‘ furthering,’’ which occurs at the
beginning of this last extract, is used in
much the same sense as the phrase about
bringing ‘‘ home to the people,’ which is
used lateron. In fact I submit that it was
the wish for a wide dissemination of already
accepted eugenic truths which mainly
actuated the writer of this letter.

In this will of 1912, and also in one of
1919, both of which were cancelled, Mr.
Twitchin gave power to the Public Trustee
as sole executor to pass on any part of the
residuary estate to the Eugenics Education
96

Society or to any society having the same
or similar objects [the italics are mine]
or, if the Society was not carrying on its
work efficiently, to form a trust the income
from which should at all times ‘‘ be employed in the furtherance of the knowledge
and principles of the science of eugenics.”’
Whatever may have been the exact meaning intended to be attached to these last
quoted words, they are not repeated in the
will of 1926, in which the Eugenics Education Society was made residuary legatee in
an unqualified manner. In 1922 a codicil
was signed making the President of our
Society a co-executor with the Public Trustee, who was at the same time authorized to
discuss the terms of the will with myself.
In the will of 1926 I was personally appointed, together with Sir Ernest Allen, to
be co-executors with the Public Trustee, the
President of the Society to act in my place
if I failed. Finally, Mr. Twitchin signed
a codicil on the day of his death which added
his French estate to the property passing
to our Society. Thus we see in these 18
years, from 1912 to 1930, signs of a steady
increase both in his wish that his property
should be used in “‘ furthering the objects
of the Society ’’’ and in his trust in our
efficiency. The production of such an effect
on the mind of an impartial and intensely
interested observer cannot, to say the least,
be made the foundation for an argument in
favour of any drastic change in our policy
or in our objects.

PRACTICE OUR MAIN OBJECT

But what are our objects? Or rather,
what had Mr. Twitchin been induced to believe them to be? In our Memorandum of
Association they are set forth in the most
authoritative manner under a number of
headings, most of them dealing only with
the business aspects of our proceedings.
The first four of these headings, which alone
concern us here, runs as follows:

“(1) The promotion of the science of
eugenics; this science including the study
of the laws of human life in so far as they
concern human heredity and the conservation, evolution, and progress of the human

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

race.’”? ‘These words were doubtless put in
to permit any research being undertaken in
connection with any eugenic question. But
they cannot be quoted as giving any indication of Mr. Twitchin’s views or wishes;
for they were written after he signed his
last will, and I have no reason to suppose
that he ever saw them.

In the Memorandum then follow three
other headings, which are both in substance
and in words nearly identical with the statement of our objects which has appeared almost unchanged in every issue of our
REVIEW since its publication began. It
was from that source that Mr. Twitchin
most probably obtained his first information
about us, and it is to these words in our
REVIEW that we ought to look if we wish to
know what our benefactor had been led to
regard as being our objects. They run as
follows :—‘‘ (1) Persistently to set forth the
National importance of eugenics in order to
modify public opinion and create a sense of
responsibility in respect of bringing all
matters pertaining to parenthood under the
dominion of eugenic ideals. (2) To spread
a knowledge of the laws of heredity so far
as they are surely known and so far as that
knowledge may effect the improvement of
the race. (3) To further eugenic teaching
at home, in the schools, and elsewhere.’’

We can here find no foundation for a belief that research was held by us to be one
of our objects. Knowledge in so far as
surely known is alluded to, but no mention
is made of any increase in our knowledge.
If we undertake research, which we are certainly at liberty to do, we must do so under
the powers given us by our Memorandum
of Association, which Mr. Twitchin probably never saw.

The words in the REVIEW concerning “ all
matters pertaining to parenthood ”’ certainly
indicate that we are very practical in many
of our aims. ‘That this is so is confirmed
by the statement concerning the furtherance of teaching ‘‘ at home, in the schools,
and elsewhere.’?’ Home comes first, and
does not this give the idea that our first
object is to spread eugenic thought broadcast and as widely as possible? Schools
HENRY

come next and universities are not mentioned. May not Mr. Twitchin have been
led to suppose that we regarded universities as centres from which eugenic light
would automatically flow in all directions
and not as dark places needing illumination
by independent societies? ‘T’o encourage the
production, publication, and distribution of
literature suitable both for schools and for
the spread of eugenic thought in homes certainly comes within the declared scope of
our work.

OUR LEGAL FREEDOM

The following are the operative words of
Mr. Twitchin’s will of 1926 as far as it
affects the “ Eugenics Education Society ”’ :
“It is my desire that the aforesaid bequest
should constitute a permanent fund and
that the income derived therefrom should
alone be used for furthering the objects of
the Society, including the support of
branches of the Society, but I expressly
direct that such desire shall not impose a
legal obligation on the Society or prevent
the expenditure of capital if such expenditure is deemed expedient at any time.’’ Our
Society cannot now change its objects as set
forth in the Memorandum of Association,
whilst when these words were written they
could be altered by a two-thirds majority at
any annual or special meeting of the Society.
Hence I submit that the words of the will
may be fairly interpreted as expressing a

TWITCHIN

97

hope, but not a command, that we shall as
a general rule not part with the control over
the income arising from this bequest, and
that we shall expend it in what were then
declared to be the objects of the Society.

What Mr. Twitchin evidently desired
was that the income derived from the money
which he had won by many years of hard
work in a trying climate should be used for
the promotion of effective measures of eugenic reform. He knew that our knowledge of
the laws of heredity had been sufficient to
enable us to maintain and improve the
qualities of our cattle; and this led him to
feel sure that it was also sufficient to justify
practical steps being taken in order to improve the inborn qualities of our nation.
The main difficulty which he foresaw was
the persuasion of the public of the immense
advantages thus to be obtained ; and he held
that, to overcome popular prejudices, a persistent propaganda should be maintained by
persons who had given the subject adequate
attention. ‘The choice between many legitimate ways of spending our newly-acquired
income will always be open to our Council;
for Mr. Twitchin showed his confidence in
our judgment by not tying our hands at all
tightly. This trust in us, however, merely
strengthens the obligation of honour to follow the path indicated by him so long as we
agree that it leads to the end he had in view,
namely the advancement of mankind in the
future.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 2.
