THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

THE WORK OF TORNIER AS AFFORDING A POSSIBLE EXPLANATION OF
THE CAUSES OF MUTATIONS. |

By Proressor E. W. MacBripe, F.R.S.

In a previous communication to the Society I gave an outline
of recent discoveries which tended to show that the effects of habits
acquired during the lifetime of the individual were transmitted to
posterity. Since that time more and more evidence pointing in the
same direction has come in, and finally the recent experiments of
Pavlov may be regarded as decisive on the question. The inheritance of environmental effect is therefore a vera causa, and has
probably been the chief, if not the only cause, of the evolution of the
plant and animal kingdoms, but it is certainly not the only cause of
variation. The conspicuous deviations from the normal, known as
sports or monstrosities, which appear suddenly, which are inherited
strongly, and which ‘* mendelize ’’ when crossed with the type, still
demand an explanation of the cause of their occurrence. It is on
characters such as these that the breeder seizes when he wishes to
produce a new strain ; and it is the offspring of similar ‘‘ sports ”’
in the human race that fill the slums of our great cities.

To say that these sports owe their origin to ‘“‘mutations’’ in
the chromosome-complex of the type is merely playing with the question ; it is, in the words of Darwin, to substitute a form of words for
an explanation. Granted that if the hereditary potentiality of a
stock is changed, the nuclei of the germ cells. have undergone a
change ; to assert this is merely to push the difficulty one step further
back. What has changed the nuclei? Till we can answer that
question all talk of an explanation of mutations is futile.

For a considerable time we were without any information as to
the circumstances under which mutations made their appearance.
All we knew was that domestic breeds of animals and cultivated
varieties of plants which, presumably, had originated from their
wild congeners by variations which had occurred spontaneously,
‘© mendelized ’? when crossed with the wild type. Then De Vries in
his great work on mutations in the evening primrose (Oenothera
lamarckiana) brought forward evidence which he thought proved
this plant was undergoing “ a fit of mutation,’? during which it was
continually producing new species which appeared suddenly complete
in all their characters like Minerva from the head of Jove. De
Vries carried on the culture of Oenothera in his gardens at Amsterdam for about 10 years, and in every generation some of the
supposed ‘‘ new species ’? appeared in varying numbers, usually
546 EUGENICS REVIEW.

about one in a thousand, occasionally as numerous as three per cent.
All De Vries plants were derived from about nine specimens of
young plants which he found growing -wild in a potato field at
Hilversum, a village in Holland. The new “species”? were in many
cases fertile when selfed with their own pollen and came true from
seed. | :

The great objections to De Vries’ theory are first that he was
unable to find any other plant in a similar “ fit of mutation,’’ and
secondly that Oenothera lamarckiana seems not to be a pure species
at all, but a garden hybrid of unknown ancestry. The genus
Oenothera is native to North America, but Oenothera lamarckiana is
unknown there. The only critical attempt to repeat De Vries’s experiments with an undoubtedly wild American species of Oenothera
has given entirely negative results. No new ‘“‘species’? made their
appearance in the cultures. It appears probable, therefore, that
many of the ‘‘mutants’? of Oenothera may be nothing more than
Mendelian segregates of the qualities of the two original parents.
Others, such as Oenothera gigas, which is characterised by
‘* tetraploidy ’’ or the doubling of the numbers of the chromosomes
are not so easily explicable, but the fact that similar aberrations
turn up in cultures of other hybrids, would lead us to believe that
they also may be due to the disturbance caused by hybridism. It is
asserted that parallel mutations to those found in Oenothera
lamarckiana have been found in the open in connection with smallflowered wild species of Oenothera which are self-pollinating. But
the origin of these supposed mutants is totally unknown, and he
would indeed be a rash man who asserted that flowers which are
normally self-fertilizing are not occasionally crossed with foreign
pollen. |

But there can be no doubt that in the cultures of the bananafly Drosophila melanogaster which have been made by Morgan and
his pupils in New York, new mutations have occurred which cannot
be explained by hybridism. For though other allied species of
Drosophila are known, these, when crossed with D. melanogaster
rarely yield hybrids, and when they do these are barren. The mutations are however both fertile when crossed with their like and with
the type.

When however we examine in detail the “‘sports’? which have
turned up in Morgan’s cultures we are struck by their peculiar
character. Nearly all of them are recessive when crossed with the
original wild stock. Now the recessive quality is explained by
Bateson and Punnett as being due to the absence or loss of something which is present in the type. Consequently these ‘‘sports”’
represent a weakening or crippling of the type, and indeed this is
obvious without any consideration of their mendelian qualities at
all. Most of them are characterised by failure of pigmentation leading to pale body colour and various grades of pale eyes culminating
in white eyes, or by imperfect development of the wings culminating
in the representation of these organs by shrivelled vestiges. A very
few “‘sports’? were dominant when crossed with the type, and so one
naturally turns with hope to examine them. To one’s surprise they
THE WORK OF TORNIER. . 547

turn out to be even more pathological than the recessive mutants,
so pathological indeed that it is impossible to produce a pure culture
of them. When crossed with their like they are sterile. It appears,
therefore, that the difference between dominant and recessive, so far
as these sports are concerned, may require a somewhat different
explanation from that put forward by Bateson and Punnet. The
‘* sport ’’ in both cases seems to owe its origin to some pathological
or degenerative process ; when this process is not severe the germcell of the defective strain when united with the germ-cell of the
type gives rise to offspring in which the pathological] process is not
manifest ; but when the process is intense, then its results can be seen
even when it enters into the constitution of the child from only one
side of the house.

Now, as I have pointed out before, the natural races of animals
do not differ from one another by characters comparable to those
separating the sports, but by greater or less degrces of functional
‘adaptation. It is true that there are differences in pigmentation and
in the development of the limbs, but these are correlated with differences in habits and are regulated in relation to the environment.

Now amongst animals celebrated as having produced numerous
sports which breed true and which mendelize when crossed with each
other is the gold-fish Carassius auratus. The wild type is gray in
colour and is in fact a very ordinary fish belonging to the Carp
family. Like other carps it is of medium length and fair depth, provided with well developed dorsal and anal fins, and the pelvic fins
are situated a short distance behind pectoral fins, that is in the
primitive abdominal position. It is a native of the rivers of Eastern
Asia, and all our domesticated ‘fancy’? breeds have come from China
and Japan. But a most interesting account of the Japanese varieties
has been given by Dr. Matsubara,* Director of the Imperial Fisheries
Institute in Tokyo. According to him all the varieties cultivated
in Japan came originally from China. Only four of these have been
known in the country for a long time and these we may briefly
describe as they give a good idea of the abberations in structure
which these breeds exhibit. They are as follows :-—

(1). The Wakin. This is really very like the ordinary goldfish
sold by dealers ; it is altogether normal in shape and development
except that sometimes the lower lobe of the tail is split into two
parallel lobes. The colour when young is gray, but as the fish grows
the colour changes from gray through steel blue to vermilion variegated with white.

(2). The Ryukin. (Called by Americans the Veilfish). . This
is a fish with a short and rounded body and swollen protuberant
abdomen. The caudal fin is enormously developed, being as long as
the body, and when at rest it hangs down like a feather. The other
fins are strongly but not abnormally developed.

(3). The Ranchu. This is a fish with a short and round body
and an abnormally shortened snout and head. There is no dorsal fin

* ** Goldfish and Their Culture in Japan.”? Bull Bur. Fisheries. Vol. 28,
1908, Pt. I, page 383. ‘
548 EUGENICS REVIEW.

and the caudai fin is short, and the animal finds great difficulty in
swimming. As the fish grows the head becomes covered with great
bulbous protuberances of skin. The upper lobe of the tail fin is
divided into two parallel lobes.

(4). The Oranda Shishigashira. This is a fish which resembles
the Ranchu in having the bulbous outgrowths of skin on the head,
although these are not developed to the same extent as in the
Ranchu ; but the caudal fin is completely double and it is very long,
and there is a well developed dorsal fin. This variety is stated to
have been produced by crossing the Ryukin (No. 2) with the Ranchu
(No. 8) in 1840.

Two further varieties were introduced from China about 1895.
Both are characterised by having protruding eyes ; these are :—

(5). The Demekin. This is a fish fairly normal in aspect with
an enlarged and completely double caudal fin. The colour is dark
spotted with red. The eyes protrude like hemispheres.

(6). The Deme Ranchu. This is a fish generally resembling the
Demekin, but with a shorter body and the dorsal fin is absent. The
eyes protrude like tubes (telescopic eyes) and are turned upwards
through an angle of 90°.

Matsubara mentions several other varieties which have been
produced in recent years by crossing some of the types just mentioned, but he has no doubt whatever that all the original races
of goldfish found in Japan have been introduced from China.

When we turn however to China in order to investigate the
fancy breeds of goldfish, we find that the culture of goldfish goes
back for hundreds of years. Milewski* has given a _ short account
of what is known on the subject. So far as can be gathered from
tradition the goldfish was ‘‘discovered’’ about the year 1200. By
this discovery is obviously meant the first appearance of the reddishgold colour of the cultivated variety. This attracted the attention
of fanciers, it became popular, and this popularity led to increased
attempts to cultivate the fish. In the course of this culture the other
mutants appeared and were isolated and cultivated.

Now the methods of culture at present in use in China seem
hardly to have changed since remote antiquity. The breeders keep
the fish in earthenware pots arranged by hundreds on shelves in
wretched dark ill-ventilated huts. Under these circumstances many
fish sicken and die, but amongst those that survive, extraordinary
mutants make their appearance, are selected and preserved for sale.
The deposition of spawn also takes place in these receptacles, and in
them the young fish grow to maturity, although in the summer they
are transferred to overcrowded small dirty tanks out of doors.

In Japan much more hygienic conditions prevail. The fish are
reared for the most part in open tanks in parks, in private gardens,
and in temple enclosures. Nevertheless many of these tanks are to

* Milewski. Uber Tornier’s experimentelle Untersuchungen iiber das Entstehen
pathologischer Verbildungen bei Tieren Sowie Weiteres tiber experimentelles
Erzielen von monstrésen Goldfischarten Arch. Ent. Mech. Vol. 44, 1918.
THE WORK OF TORNIER. 549

be found in small, ill-lighted backyards, completely surrounded by
tall buildings.

There is no evidence that intelligent selection was practised by
the Chinese breeders, or by the older Japanese fanciers, for there was
no trace of purity of breed in the cultures. The extreme types were
found swimming mingled with a host of forms of all grades intermediary between them and much more normal types.

In view of these facts it occurred to Gustav Tornier that there
must be some general underlying cause for the production of these
abnormalities. It seemed to him futile to attribute each one to the
separate appearance by chance of a ‘“* factor.’ He was thus led to
formulate what Milewski calls an ‘‘ epoch-making theory,”’ to the
confirmation of which Milewski has himself largely contributed. Like
the Mendelian theory itself the Tornierian hypothesis did not at
first attract the notice to which it was entitled. This was due to two
causes—first because the theory conflicts with all preconceived ideas
as to the origin of mutations, and secondly because Tornier has
published his results for the most part in journals* which
have not a sufficiently wide circulation to reach zoologists in general.
Tornier’s theory is as follows :—Every embryo is endowed at the
beginning of its existence with a certain quantity of protoplasmic
energy. This energy manifests itself in two ways: (1) by the early
beginning and vigorous character of the moveinents of the embryo ;
(2) by the ability of the embryo to resist the tendency of all its
tissues, especially those of a less active growth, to absorb an excess
of water—in a word to regulate the intake of water. In practically
all eggs the portion of less active growth is that in which the yolk
globules are stored, and hence Tornier speaks rather too loosely of
an absorption of water by “‘the yolk’? and its consequent swelling.
The swelling is not confined to yolk-containing cells, nor strictly
speaking is it the yolk itself which swells, since this consists chiefly of
globules of a lecithin-like substance insoluble in water. The very
same swelling takes place in mammalian embryos in which there is
no yolk. Davenport and Parker showed long ago that a large part
of the increase in bulk which embryos undergo during the earlier
period of their development is due to the imbibition of water.

Now according to Tornier, when an embryo is exposed in the
earliest period of existence to scarcity of oxygen, the protoplasm becomes weakened and is not able to prevent the overswelling of the
less active portions of the body by water. This abnormal swelling—
since the embryo is confined within a relatively inextensible mem
 

* Tornier

(1) Vorlaiifiges itiber das Enstehen der Goldfischrassen sitz. ber. der
Gesellschaft der naturforschenden Freunde zu Berlin, 1907.

(2) Uber experimentelles Hervorrufen und  Naturentstehen von
mopsképfigen Cyclopen und anderer vorgeburtlichen Kopfverbildungen
ber Wirbelthieren. Ibid.

(3) Vorlaiifiges iiber experimentelle erzielten Hautalbinismus ber Axolotl
larven. Ibid.

(4) Uber die Art wie aiissere Einfliisse den Aufbau des Tieres abéndern
Verh. dentschen zool. Gesellschaft. Year 21, 1911.
550 EUGENICS REVIEW.

brane—leads to pressure on the actively growing parts which impedes
their growth, distorts their shape, and in extreme cases, prevents
their growth altogether. If we examine in detail its effects in goldfish embryos we find that all the natural cavities of the body, such as.
the buccal cavity, the gill cavity (beneath the operculum), and the
body cavity become enlarged beyond their natural sizes, whilst strong
pressure is exerted by the swollen yolk-sac against the growing embryo in an antero-posterior direction, so as to impede the natural
tendency of the embryo to grow in length.

As a consequence the whole vertebral column, which is naturally
slightly convex upwards, becomes shortened, straightened and eventually bent inwards and downwards. The skull is likewise compressed and the characteristic short round head is produced. In some
cases when the body framework is thus irrevocably fixed, the skin of
the head retains its original power of growth, and thus the peculiar
bulbous folds on the face of the Ranchu are produced. In other cases
the push of the yolk acts on the upper part of the skull alone, leaving
the lower jaw long, and thus a bulldog face is produced.

In extreme cases—the eyeball—which is a cavity filled with loose
connective tissue, becomes swollen. This happens indirectly through
the swelling and enlargement of the buccal cavity, which tends to
squeeze the growing eye out of the ring of bones forming the orbit.
Thus released from the natural pressures restricting its growth, the
eyeball absorbs water and swells so as to form the tube-like telescopic
eyes of the ‘‘Deme-ranchu,”’ the growing lens is pressed on and
reduced to minute dimensions. ,

The fins also are affected indirectly. They are fundamentally
skin outgrowths and if the area of skin from which they take their
origin is put on the stretch by the swelling of the body, then they
can grow to enormous dimensions, as in the Ryukin, or its ally the
Comet fish. If on the other hand the skin area from which they arise
is compressed then their growth is impeded and may be altogether
hindered. Thus when the anal region of the embryo becomes swollen
it presses on the skin from which the anal fin grows, and may entirely prevent the appearance of an anal fin. The anal fin and the
lower lobe of the tail fin both arise from paired rudiments belonging
to the right and left sides of the body respectively. The swollen yolk
often intrudes between these rudiments and separates them ; as
result both fins can be doubled.

As a result of the sluggishness of the weakened embryo it is unable to carry out its normal movements within the egg-membrane.
These movements have, in normal circumstances, the effect of stretching the egg membrane and so making more room for the embryo.
When they are not carried out the membrane presses too tightly on
the embryo and bends the developing fins, converting them into the
so-called ‘‘ veil-fins.”’

Finally, the colour of the embryo is also produced by the
** protoplasmic-weakness.’? Whenever the yolky part of the embryo
becomes swollen some of the yolk coagulates, and cannot be used by
the growing tissues. This portion is got rid of principally through the
anus. As a result, in later stages of growth the proper supply of
THE WORK OF TORNIER. 551

nourishment to the tissues is deficient. According to Tornier, pigment
is a reserve stuff, and this is drawn on to supply the needs of the
growing cells. Tornier’s view is justified by the most recent physiological research, for vertebrate pigment is a melanin which is an oxidation product of tyrosin, itself a product of tryptic digestion. If these
reserves are totally used up a white or albino fish results ; intermediate grades of depletion give reds and yellows.

But these abnormalities are inherited. The ‘fancy fish’ have been
exported to America and Europe and bred there. According to
Tornier what is inherited is not a ‘‘gene’’ or ‘‘factor’’ for enormous
fins, telescopic eyes, folds of skin on the face or doubled tail fin, etc.,
but the greater or less degrees of plasma-weakness, and the special
localization of this weakness in different regions of the embryo.
The sports are not pathological because one organ is unduly developed
and so the normal play between the various organs of the body
interfered with. They are primarily pathological because of their
weakened constitutions, and the abnormal structures which they
exhibit are the results of the working of these constitutions.

But although the plasma weakness can be handed on to the offspring, if these offspring are removed to healthier surroundings their
is a tendency to recover from the weakness. This is noticeable in the
large tendency to “‘reversion”’ on the part of the offspring so that
only a minority come true to type and the ‘“‘pure-race’’ has to be
established by rigid selection. This is in accordance with the experience of all breeders. |

Now the complete proof of Tornier’s hypothesis would have been
given if he had taken the eggs of normal goldfish and by subjecting
them to adverse influences had caused them to produce abnormalities
like the ‘‘ sports,’? and then rearing the abnormal fish to maturity
had proved that placed under normal circumstances they gave rise
to fry, some of which exhibited the same abnormalities as their
parents. This proof has not been given, for the reason which renders
all such experiments so difficult of execution, viz., the enormous
length of time required. To rear a goldfish from the egg to maturity
requires from 4—5 years! Nevertheless a good dea! of indirect evidence has been adduced. ‘Tornier experimented with the eggs of
that large newt, the Axolotl (Siredon pisciformis), which in this
country under normal circumstances passes all! its life in water. He subjected these eggs to darkness which prevented the plants in the water
from producing oxygen, and placed them for 48 hours in 5 to 10%
solution of sugar, which acted as an absorbent of any oxygen present
in solution. As a result he obtained embryos which exhibited all the
phenomena of ‘‘plasma-weakness.’’ The axis of the embryos in question has been shortened and in some cases bent inwards in a concave
curve, the head in consequence bent upwards, and the mouth cavity
and gill slits enlarged. When the embryos hatched they gave rise to
larvae with enormously swollen abdomens very like those of the
‘‘Ranchu.’? When these abnormal specimens were dissected it was
seen that the abdomen was swollen with water and that the liver had
consequently been impeded in its ‘growth, and was not a fourth of the
size of the normal liver.
552 EUGENICS REVIEW.

By applying his methods to the tadpoles of frogs and toads he
was able to get further results. In these cases he used 25% solution
of sugar for a shorter time. The yolk plug which normally fills the
blastopore became enormously enlarged and prevented or greatly
impeded the growth of the tail.

But the most interesting experiments of Tornier* were those
dealing with the reduction of pigment. The experiments had as their
subjects the larve of the Axolotl and the tadpoles of the European
toad Pelobates. The normal colour of the tadpoles of this
latter animal is dark grey. If they are fed exclusively
on algae they live till the yolky matter is used up; then
they cease to grow and eventually die. If, however, to this diet is
added a little fish meal (piscidin) then they continue to grow and
eventually metamorphose. An exclusive diet of fish meal causes
them to grow vigorously and to metamorphose into vigorous young
toads ; the tadpoles, however, are so deeply pigmented as to be almost
black, and the toads to which they give rise are also dark. A certain
minimum of the meal is necessary for progressive growth and metamorphosis ; by providing only this albino tadpoles are produced which
metamorphose into exceedingly pale toads. By giving intermediate
quantities lemon-yellow tadpoles can be produced, which give rise to
correspondingly coloured toads. But albino tadpoles can also be
obtained by stabbing the egg in an early period of development so
.as to cause it to lose a considerable quantity of yolk ; thus confirming
exactly Tornier’s view as to how the gold red colour of the goldfish
is brought about. It may be remarked that goldfish fry start their
existence with the ancestral coat of gray which they only lose as they
grow bigger.

Milewski, to whom we owe the first clear and comprehensive
account of Tornier’s work, experimented with the eggs of goldfish
themselves. He chose a pair of ‘‘ Veil fish ’? (Ryukin), in which,
however, the distinctive qualities of the “‘fancy’’? were poorly represented. Thus the tail fin was single, not double, the dorsal fin was
not particularly high, and the drooping ‘‘veil’’ of the tail was hardly
developed at all. He placed this pair of fish in an accumulator jar
with lots of waterweed and left it for a week in a dark spot. The
female laid her eggs. Under these circumstances the waterweed
absorbed oxygen and gave off CO2, and the water was saturated
with the latter gas. In spite of these conditions all the embryos
hatched. They were now transferred to the light, and oxygen gas
was allowed to bubble through the water. As a result, instead of
as was usually to be expected from such poor parents, only a very
few of the offspring showing “‘high”’ characters in-dorsal and tail fins,

80% developed into typical veil-fish, with high dorsal fins, long
double anal fins, and long flowing tail fins, and 10% were typical
“‘Comets”? with long flowing undivided tail fins. As the female
normally becomes ripe again in a few weeks’ time, a second experi
 

* (1) Vorlaiifiges iiber Experimentell erzieltes Hautalbinismus ber Avxolotl
larven sitzber. Ges. naturforschender Freunde zu Berlin, 1907.
(2) Nachweis iiber das Enstehen von Albinismus Melanismus und NEHER
ber Fréschen Zool. Anzeiger Vol. 32, 1908.
THE WORK OF TORNIER. 558

ment was tried under the same conditions and gave a like result.

Another experiment was tried with a different pair of veil-fish.
The male parent was a ‘‘poor’’ one, from the point of view of the
fancy, with the fins comparatively low ; in the female the fins were
comparatively high, and in addition she was devoid of scales. The
fish were allowed to lay their eggs under normal conditions ; the
result was 90% of ‘‘poor’’ offspring and 10% of high qualities. Half
were scaled and half were scale-less. These scale-less ones were nearly
all ‘‘poor’’ in respect of fins. Thus they inherited one quality from
the mother and the other from the father.

A short time afterwards this same pair were allowed to spawn
in water with a largecontent of COe2 , and in darkness. The result
was that 80% of the brood had “‘high’’ fins, and all those that were
scale-less showed in addition bands of alternate colours in the skin,
*‘tiger-colouring,”’ a quality much prized by dealers. The remaining
20% of the brood were an irregular mixture of ‘‘poor’’ types. The
*‘poor’’ types developed fairly rapidly ; the ‘“‘high’’ types on the contrary, with extreme slowness. A few of them survived two years,
and these began to show traces of telescopic eyes. No trace of either
telescopic eyes or tiger colouring was to be found in either parent. If
in the language of ‘‘genetics’’ we attribute the appearance of high
fins to a gene, then we must admit that the distribution of this gene
amongst the offspring can be altered from 10% to 90%. by altering
the conditions under which the young develop ! 1

Hirsch* examined the eyes, brain and spinal cord of the various
*‘sports’’ of goldfish and found that in these sports the right and left
halves of portions of the brain which normally fused remained separate, and those that normally were paired were widely separated from
one. another. The ventricles of the brain were enormously enlarged,
as was the cavity of the spinal cord. In all respects Tornier’s anticipations were fulfilled.

Tornier goes on to generalize from his results. Thus he does not
hesitate to attribute the shortened faces and reduced jaws of many
of our domestic animals to the dark, ill-ventilated stalls in which
they conceive and bring forth. This is especially true of pigs. In
the mammalian eggs there is no yolk, but at a very early period of
development they grow into thin-walled, hollow vesicles. On the
surface of these vesicles the embryo is differentiated and the head of
the embryo is pushed downwards into a fold in the wall of the vesicle. Under these circumstances it is easy to see that strong pressure
may be exerted on the growing head with disastrous results. Sir
Robert Jones, our leading orthopaedist, is inclined to attribute many
human deformities to too great intra-uterine pressure.

It seems to us that Tornier’s work is capable of a much wider
application than even he undertakes. Since almost all the mendelizing mutations—whether in plants or animals—which have been
studied, are of a degenerative nature, may not they all be symptoms
of greater or less degrees of the ‘‘ plasma-weakness ’’ which he was
the first to characterise? That ‘* mutations ’’ must have causes even

* Hirsch Uber das Gehirn Riickenmark und Augen der Varietaten des Goldfisches. Archiv fur Entwicklungsmechanik. Vol. 35. 1918.
554 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Morgan admits, and he concedes further that these causes must be
sought in the environment, ‘‘ since there is nowhere else to look for
them.”’? That the effects of evil environment on the growing embryo
can be handed on to posterity has been proved again and again, one
of the latest proofs having been given by Kosminsky, who, by exposing butterfly pupz to cold, produced aberrations in the wings of the
imago which were inherited.

The cumulative evidence of Tornier’s and Milewski? s work seems
t> us overwhelming. The principal objection that would naturally
occur to a critic is the comparatively unstable character and high
percentage of reversions exhibited by the aberrant breeds of goldfish.
We have been taught to believe that in the case of other animals and
of plants the ‘‘ mutants,’’ once they appear, are remarkably stable in
their heredity. But as reversion is for Tornier recovery, more or less
complete, from ‘* plasma weakness,”’ even if it were true that
‘* mutants ”’ of other species were more stable than those of the goldfish, this would only mean that in those species recovery was a slower
and more difficult affair. Nevertheless, such recovery or reversion has
been detected in some cases, though it is naturally not called by that
name. Morgan has described ‘‘ mutation backwards ”’ in some of his
cultures, and Allen and Sexton discovered in the brood-pouch of a
recessive albino-eyed Gammarus (fresh-water shrimp), which had been
paired with its like, two embryos, one with white eyes like the mother,
and one with normally pigmented eyes, like the wild type. Further,
in rearing the mutants, which is often a difficult business, every
endeavour is made to keep the conditions constant; in other words, to
repeat the environment which presumably caused the mutation in the
first instance. If one considers the conditions in a farmyard, compared with those under which the wild Gallus bankiva lives, and still
more if one thinks of the surroundings of closed glass tube and rotten
banana in which Morgan raised his cultures, it is not difficult to guess
the origin of mutations.

We may devote a few words to plants, though naturally it is
impossible to be as precise in our definition of causes in the case of
plants as in the case of animals.

The life of plants is much slower in its metabolism and reactions
than that of animals, and it is consequently much more difficult to
analyse. Yet when we consider the fact that when gardeners wish to
produce varieties from a wild plant they introduce it into rich cultivated ground and that they do not expect any results for ten years,
plasma-weakness as the cause of variations is strongly suggested.
During the ten years the gardeners say the plant ‘* sulks,’’ an expression which we may perhaps interpret as the slow weakening of the
plasma owing to the suffocating influences of the manure. Further,
it is notorious that plant mutants will only develop their characteristic
features in special soils. It is for this reason that Biffen’s brilliant
results on wheat are limited in their application by local conditions.
Reversion in the form of the appearance of ‘‘rogues’’ is a common
feature in garden plants.

The interest in all studies of heredity to the Eugenics Education
Society is, of course, their applicability to human conditions.
THE WORK OF TORNIER. 55

Tornier’s work suggests strongly that bad conditions during the period
of conception and the early phases of development may be the
original cause of the degenerative mutants in man, including under
that head not only mental defect, but hemophilia, night-blindness,
colour-blindness, &c. But the important fact is that, however caused,
the plasma-weakness is handed on to posterity. It is the object of
negative eugenics to prevent these plasma-weak stocks from adding
their quota to the race, by discouraging their reproduction. In the
future we may hope that eugenics, in conjunction with medical
research, may perhaps detect and isolate the specific causes of plasmaweakness, and thus diminish, if not entirely prevent, the appearance
of plasma-weakness in the race.

Tornier’s work has further a great interest for the student of
evolution. That ‘‘ mendelizing mutations ’’ had nothing to do with
evolution, and have not formed the raw material on which natural
selection has acted, is a conclusion to which those best qualified to
judge of the evolutionary history of animals—palzontologists,
embryologists and systematists—had independently arrived. Tornier’s.
work shows us why this must be so. If all these mutants owe their
peculiarities to their weakened constitutions, it is vain for Morgan to
suppose that a mutation might arrive which would be chosen by
‘* natural selection.’? Not one of them would have a dog’s chance in
open competition with the type. That evolution has been brought
about by the inheritance of habits, and of the structures resulting
from them, is the view to which the best students of life, past and
present, have been coming nearer : they have hesitated to enunciate it.
clearly, on account of the dogmatic assertion of Weismannian and
Mendelian ‘‘geneticists’? that the inheritance of acquired characters is
impossible. But irrefragable proof to the contrary has now been
obtained, so that we may now freely avail ourselves of what even
Weismann admitted to be the “ easiest’? method of explaining
evolution.

If, however, we do this, we can then analyse heredity into two
factors which show a striking analogy to the two elements which Dr.
Spearman has detected in mental activity. According to him, there
is on the one hand the intensity of general mental energy which determines the level of the intelligence, and on the other the special
abilities, musical, mathematical, &c., which vary from individual to
individual. So in inheritance we have the intensity of developmental
energy, defects in which give rise to ‘‘ mutations,’’ and we have the
inheritance of specific habits which, using the word in a broad sense,
may be defined as memory. It is this factor which has produced.

evolution.
E. W. MacBripe.
