FAMILY ALLOWANCES AND EUGENICS*
By FRANCOIS LAFITTE

Past Attitude of Eugenists

T is well to begin a discussion of the
| even aspects of family allowances by

briefly recalling what has been the
attitude of eugenists to family allowances in
the past. In the years following 1918, J. M.
Keynes was preaching a then popular doctrine—that over-population was a major
cause of the last war. A glance at the files of
the EUGENICS REVIEW shows that eugenists
too shared this fear, and were especially
worried by the excessive fertility of the
poorest social classes compared with that
of the middle and upper classes. Typical
was Professor Carr-Saunders’s review of
Eleanor Rathbone’s Disinherited Famuly :

“Miss Rathbone makes out a very
strong case in reply to the objection most
often raised, namely, that any form of
Family Endowment will encourage an
increase of populidion among the less
desirable classes. We are in complete
agreement. It will, on the contrary,
probably tend to lower the birth-rate
-among those who now have the largest
families, because it is the raising of the
standard of living and of the dignity and
status of the mother, which more than
anything else helps to stem the devastating
torrent of children.”

Typical, too, at the same time, was Professor R. A. Fisher’s advocacy of family
endowment as a method of raising the birthrate of that portion of the population “ in
which the Eugenics Society has always been
especially interested, that portion which is
popularly called the upper and middle
classes.”’

In 1926 the Eugenics Society adopted an
Outline of Practical Eugenics Policy, a statement advocating “a scientifically designed
system of family allowances ”’ as the “ most

* The substance of a paper read before the Eugenics
Society on September 24th, 1941.

potent means” of altering the differential
birth-rate in favour of the better-off classes.
The statement added: ‘‘ The Society is
strongly opposed to redistribution by means
of taxation, or to the allowances being made
a charge on the State, and favours the
establishment of equalization pools among
the employing bodies of the salaried professions and skilled occupations.’’ This was
followed in 1927 by Parliamentary lobbying
for higher income-tax children’s rebates, and
for exemption from taxation of maternity
and education expenses. From 1928 to 1932
I have been unable to find any reference to
family allowances in the columns of the
EvucENiIcs Review. Interest in the subject
was apparently on the decline among
eugenists.

The new knowledge of population trends
which came in the 1930’s set eugenists
thinking of family allowances again—from
a new angle. The Aims and Objects of the
Society, adopted in 1934, reaffirmed the
principles of the Soctety’s statement of
1926 on family allowances. In the following
year the Soczety set up a Committee on
Positive Eugenics, out of which grew the
Population Investigation Committee, which,
with David Glass as research secretary,
has done such fine work in promoting the
study of population trends and of foreign
birth-rate policies. Out of this work in
turn grew the Soctety’s collaboration with
PEP in forming the Population Policies
Committee, whose task, interrupted by war,
was to work out a population policy for this
country. Family allowances have been a
major topic of study for both of these research bodies.

The Eugenics Soctety has thus sought to
alter birth-date differentials as between
social and occupational groups in favour of
the wealthier groups. At first it stressed
mainly reduction of the fertility of the “ less
desirable classes .. . who now have the

67
68 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

largest families’’; more recently it has
stressed the need to raise fertility among
the “salaried professions and skilled occupations.”” In both cases it has tended to
believe (or hope) that family allowances
would be the “most potent means” of
achieving the desired object. Two big
questions are here involved : (1) what social
groups, if any, should be encouraged to
have more children ? (2) If we can identify
such social groups of desirable parents, can
family allowances assist them to more
prolific parenthood ?

Intelligence Classes are not Social Classes

The real problem, of course, is how to
raise the fertility of desirable parents, whatever social class they may be in. Let us take
the level of mental ability as a criterion of
the desirable parent—it is the criterion most
favoured by eugenists. Is there in fact a
high correlation between social status and
intelligence ? Are the above-average in intelligence below average in fertility ? The
evidence in the whole of this field is largely
fragmentary, often contradictory. Most of
the research until quite recently has been
done by isolated individuals on very small,
often unrepresentative, groups of schoolchildren. The intelligence tests used have
frequently been subjects of controversy ;
the measurements of social status are commonly unsatisfactory ; even the statistical
methods employed have often been challenged. It is only in recent years that a few
fairly large-scale surveys, employing adequate statistical techniques, have been
conducted. Outstanding instances are the
surveys of Fraser Roberts (3,300 schoolchildren in Bath), Moshinsky and Gray
(nearly 10,000 London school-children), and
the Scottish intelligence survey of an entire
age-group of children (not analyzed by family
size or social status).

Three factors are involved: the child’s
Intelligence Quotient, the number of its
brothers and sisters, and the social status of
its parents. It is no good generalizing from
a correlation between any two of these
factors if we ignore the third. Thus a nega
tive correlation has been shown to exist
between a child’s I.Q. and the size of its
sibship. Early American work gives values
of about —o-30 (cf. Chapman and Wiggins,
1925; Terman, 1925; Willoughby, 1928).
More recently Thurstone and Jenkins (1931)
found a correlation of only —o-19. British
work gives quite low values: Pearson and
Moul (1925): no correlation between intelligence and family size among East
London Jewish children* ; Sutherland and
Thomson (1926): about —o-20; Shepherd
Dawson (1932) : between —o-10 and —0-20;
Fraser Roberts (1938-39): up to —0-23
(only o-12 in his largest group, senior
elementary children). Must we simply conclude that larger families tend to produce
less intelligent children to the extent indicated by these correlation coefficients ?
We cannot, because we have ignored the
third factor—social status. Since both 1.Q.
and family size may vary with social status,
our correlations must be standardized for
social status before we can draw any conclusions. Wherever this is done, the value
of the I.Q.-sibship correlation is reduced.
Thus Chapman and Wiggins give —o-33 for
the intelligence-fertility correlation; but
this is reduced to —o0-27 if social class is
held fixed. Sutherland (1929) studied 3,100
children of one social grade alone—Yorkshire
miners—and found a fertility-intelligence
correlation of only —o-13. Sutherland and
Thomson and Fraser Roberts admit that
lower values result from standardizing for
social status, but give no figures.

Moshinsky’s (1939) findings are of great
interest. In all groups selected for brightness
(e.g., scholarship holders), children from
small families preponderated. Fraser Roberts
also found that the fertility of parents of
gifted children was low, whether they were
well off or poor.t But among groups not

* Pearson and Moul suggested that this was because
most of their children came from Russian and Polish
immigrant families whose fertility was still largely
unrestricted.

¢ This finding may be partly due to the fact that a
considerable proportion of working-class children who
win free places never enter secondary schools, because
their parents prefer them to go to work. This would
tend to favour bright children from the smaller families.
FAMILY ALLOWANCES AND EUGENICS 69

selected for intelligence, Moshinsky found
no intelligence-fertility correlation except
among junior elementary school-children,
for whom the correlation was —o-°23. A
split-up of this group according to parents’
occupations showed that family size and
intelligence were not correlated among the
majority, but only among children of
clerical and commercial employees (—0-24),
and of skilled wage earners (—0-27).

There would thus appear to be a slight,
but unmistakable tendency for the aboveaverage in intelligence to be below the
average in fertility, but it is not at all clear
that this tendency is present in all social or
occupational groups. If we examine similarly the relation between I.Q. and sociooccupational status, there is no doubt that
the hierarchy of mean I.Q. values tends to
correspond to the hierarchy of social and
occupational groups. Average intelligence
tends to rise with social status, but again
the correlation coefficients are low. The
majority of studies give values up to +0-25.
Intelligence differences between families in
the same social class are far more important
than differences in the average intelligence of
different social classes. Since our chances of
predicting a child’s I.Q. from its parents’
social status are still at most something like
nine to one against, we have to accept the
conclusion of Evelyn Lawrence’s careful
study (1931) : |

“It becomes clear that for any definite
plans for social reform based upon the
differential inheritance of intelligence,
social class is not a satisfactory grouping.
Either some basis of classification resulting
in more homogeneous and more widely
differentiated groups needs to be found, or
we must realize that the only safe unit by
which to assess intelligence is the individual, or at most the family.”

Thus, if the qualities measured by intelligence tests are the criteria of desirable
parents, there are practically no social
groups which we can single out as desirable
(or undesirable) parents. The desirable and
undesirable are to be found in all classes,
and, although there certainly is a tendency

for the stratification of average intelligence
to approximate towards the stratification of
classes, there is no real sense in which we
are justified in speaking of the “less desirable classes.’” There may be a few exceptions, among professional groups selected for
their intelligence, where there might be
grounds for special measures to encourage
parenthood. Thus teachers’ children come
very near the top of the average intelligence
scale, while teachers are one of the least fertile
groups in the community. But eugenists
cannot adopt as their general strategy an
attempt to raise fertility in all the higher
social groups as the best method of increasing
the number of able children in the community. Moshinsky and Gray (1938) show
that among London children the proportion
of children with I.Q.’s of 130 or more is
higher among professional workers than
among clerical and commercial workers, and
higher among them than among skilled
manual workers. But to increase the number
of able children by 5 per cent would involve
doubling the birth-rate among professional
workers (who contribute only 5 per cent of
the total number of able children) ; whereas
it would only involve raising the fertility
of black-coated workers by one-third, or of
skilled workers by one-sixth (because they
contribute 31 per cent of all able children).
They further find that while all upper-class
children, intelligent or not, receive postprimary education, only 30 per cent of able
children of skilled workers, only 20 per cent
of able children of unskilled manual workers
ever get beyond elementary school. The
greater part of the superior ability of workingclass children is simply wasted. It is still far
more important to be born to parents well
provided with money than to parents well
endowed with intelligence.

Raising Fertility a General Problem

It is, therefore, fruitless for eugenists to
hunt for social or occupational groups whose
parenthood should be encouraged. Our
broad strategy must be, by general measures,
to encourage healthy parenthood in all
classes, and, by specific measures, to hunt
70 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

out individuals who are undesirable as
parents. This latter task is essentially a
matter of personal case-work, which can
only be done effectively when (a) the necessary case-working agencies have been created,
(0) social workers and doctors generally are
thoroughly trained in problems of human
heredity, and (c) far more is known about
human genetics than at present. Unfortunately we are as yet nowhere near fulfilment of these conditions—research into
human genetics in particular is a neglected
subject in this country.

Is a system of family allowances one of the
measures we should advocate to encourage
healthy parenthood in all classes? In so
far as family allowances would tend to reduce economic inequalities and to increase
equality of opportunity for children—to
introduce a more equal social environment—
eugenists should welcome them. For greater
equality of opportunity would enlarge our
eugenic knowledge, by making it easier to
determine which differences between children are mainly attributable to nature, and
which mainly to nurture. But I am not
convinced that any conceivable system of
family allowances can, by itself, go very far
towards equalizing economic opportunities,
not even if it were combined with decent
minimum wages, as advocated by Seebohm
Rowntree.

Nor do I believe that any family allowance
system can by itself do much to alter the
basic trend of human fertility. Within the
framework of our present economic system
and class structure family allowances are
bound to be at best a palliative social service, at worst petty bribes to parenthood.
Family allowances by themselves cannot
remove the basic social frustrations which
inhibit parenthood—the aspirations of the
mass of people for a fuller, freer life, the force
of ‘‘ social capillarity ”’ in a politically democratic but economically oligarchic, competitive society, the feelings of insecurity engendered by man-made—but apparently
uncontrollable—‘‘ economic blizzards,’ and
total warfare. These frustrations are rooted
in the ownership, inheritance, or control of
property. Family allowances will not alter

the fact that 6 per cent of the population
own 80 per cent of the nation’s capital.

H. G. Wells, one of the first Englishmen
to ponder on the significance of the falling
birth-rate, wrote in 1906 of

“the enhanced sense of the child in
middle-class life. . . . There has come an

intensified respect for children, an im
mense increase in the trouble, attention

and expenditure devoted to them—and a

very natural and human accompaniment in

the huge fall in the middle-class birth-rate.

It is felt that to bear and rear children 4s

the most noble and splendid and respons
ible thing in life, and an increasing number
of people modestly evade it. People see
more clearly the social service of parent
age, and are more inclined to demand a

recognition from the State for this service.”’

He added that .

“the internal structure of the middleclass family is altering fundamentally
with the general growth of intelligence,
with the higher education of women, with
the comings and goings for this purpose
and that, the bicycles and games, the enlarged social appetites and opportunites of
a new time.”

What was then true of the middle classes
is to-day becoming true of the intelligent in
all classes. ‘‘ Social appetites and opportunities ’’ have been immeasurably enlarged
since Victorian times, but their fulfilment
and enjoyment are to be achieved only by
abstaining from parenthood. Our civilization
has, in fact, given us a promise, but no fulfilment. It has promised us a brave new world
of security, a decent standard of living,
reasonable leisure, a general raising of the
cultural attainments of the mass of people.
Most people to-day believe these things to
be within our reach. But instead we are presented with “poverty in the midst of
plenty,’’ unemployment at times of up to a
third of our material and human resources,
mass under-consumption coupled with mass
destruction of basic necessities, social insecurity which breeds excessive thrift and
fosters gambling on football pools or stock
markets, leisure exploited by commercialized
FAMILY ALLOWANCES AND EUGENICS 71

forms of passive amusement, and total warfare, of which the fears and frustrations of
bewildered peoples were an essential precondition. All the “ good things of life ’’ have
been commercialized, have become alternatives to parenthood. Parenthood is now
merely one among many desirable ways of
spending money.

In our civilization prestige goes primarily
with the ownership of property and conspicuous spending—preferably without conspicuous working to justify it. As long as
this is so, it will determine the moral tone of
our whole society, and men will strive for
ownership. Social promotion depends on
striving, in competition with others and often
to others’ detriment, for a higher income or
greater possessions. Social security, too,
depends on climbing the income and property ladder. At whatever rung one starts,
the concentration of wealth—mainly by
inheritance—into a few hands so handicaps
the mass of people, that it is a ladder best
climbed by those unencumbered with too
many children. These basic frustrations to
parenthood will have to be removed by
providing a fuller, more equal life for all,
by democratizing our economic life. We
shall have to strive for a social order in which
social promotion depends on ability and
social prestige attaches to social service. A
higher income would certainly be the reward
of conspicuous social achievement, but of
nothing else. It must be a society in which
one can be poor and yet secure—in which
failure to distinguish oneself does not mean
exclusion from an adequate minimum of the
material and spiritual goods of life. I do not
believe that we shall achieve a lasting rise
in the birth-rate without some such social
reconstruction—and that is a matter of
economic planning and of maintaining full
employment in peace as in war. Family
endowment is neither an alternative to, nor
the main method of achieving, social reconstruction—but it is indispensable for the
completion of such changes.

Possibilities of Family Endowment

I regard family allowances in cash as one
species of the genus Family Endowment.

Family endowment means the direct allocation to children of part of the nation’s
resources—it means that the community,
through the State, shares with parents the
costs of child-rearing. The greater part of
the cost might be met from social resources
instead of out of the individual’s wages. It
might also mean that many things which
to-day are financial alternatives to parenthood should be withdrawn from commercial
enterprise and provided communally—
especially in the field of cultural and leisure
pursuits. There are many other species of
family endowment which are quite as important as cash allowances for children. The
exact scope for cash allowances can only be
decided by regarding them as one of a series
of measures included in one programme for
the promotion of healthy parenthood by
family endowment. Such a programme would
include : (1) Measures to reduce the drudgery
imposed on women by housework and
maternity, so that women can take part
more equally in the work, public and social
life of the community. Family endowment
in this field is mainly a matter of new social
services, especially (a) an adequate housing
plan for the whole community (including
rent rebates) to minimize housework, with
possibly free laundry, window-cleaning and
other services, and (0) nursery schools or
day nurseries for all children, holidays for
parents away from their children, etc.

(2) Genuine equality of opportunity in
education. This almost certainly involves
free education for all and adequate maintenance allowances for higher education and
vocational training of exceptional children.

(3) Free, equal and adequate medical
services for all. This is even more important
than free and equal education, and is again
largely a matter of services. The entire
population needs not only adequate antisickness services. Special services, covering
every aspect of family life from marriage
guidance and contraception to pregnancy
diagnosis and freer abortion, are necessary
to “rationalize ’’ married life on the lines
proposed in Sweden.

(4) Many other cheap or free services are
conceivable. Children might eat free at
72 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

school, travel free up to school-leaving age,
have free weekly visits to cinemas, theatres,
concerts, or swimming baths.

All this does not exclude direct allowances
to parents. But even here I believe that the
value of cash allowances has been exaggerated. In some respects individual freedom
of choice is vital, but with regard to a great
range of commodities the complete freedom
of choice afforded by money allowances is
not necessary. Why not give each child a
pint of milk daily, half a pound of butter or
half a dozen oranges or eggs weekly, rather
than pay parents money which they may
spend on such foodstuffs? There is great
scope for children’s allowances in the form
of free distribution of basic necessities.
““ Earmarked money,’ based on the existing
children’s ration coupons, would have to
be used. Parents would receive in respect of
each child coupons earmarked for specific
commodities (or groups of commodities).
These could be exchanged, without money
payment, for definite quantities of milk,
butter, eggs, oranges, cod-liver oil or other
necessary foodstuffs. Coupons exchangeable
for certain amounts of clothing or footwear
for children might also be issued. Such a
system would facilitate economic planning,
would ensure a definite flow of basic necessities to those who need them, irrespective of
retail price levels, and would secure to
parents many of the benefits of bulk-buying.
In war-time, when scarce supplies have to
be shared out fairly, I believe such a system
is essential if the purpose of coupon-rationing is not to be thwarted by the rationing of
the poor (who include a large proportion of
families with children) by rising prices. In

peace-time, as a measure to ensure that children enjoy an adequate minimum of the essentials of healthy growth, children’s allowances
in kind are preferable to allowances in cash.
There might still be some scope for cash
allowances, but we might find, as they found
in Russia, that they are mainly of value for
the exceptionally large family. In Russia
cash allowances begin with the seventh
child ; in Britain they might begin with the
fourth. But we must decide on the scope of
family endowment by free services or by
allowances in kind before we can determine
the scope or type of cash-allowance scheme
we wish to introduce.

References
Chapman and Wiggins: Pedagogical Seminary
and Journal of Genetic Psychology (1925), 32, 414.
Dawson, Shepherd: British Journal of Psychology (1932), 23, 1.
Lawrence, Evelyn M.: British Journal of Psychology Monograph Supplement (1931), 16.
Moshinsky, Pearl: Sociological Review, April 1939.
Moshinsky, Pearl, and Gray, J. L.: in Polttcal
Arithmetic (1938).
Pearson and Moul: Amnals of Eugenics, 1925, 1.
Roberts, J. A. Fraser: Eugenics Review, January

J. A. Fraser, Norman, R. M., and
Griffiths, Ruth: Annals of Eugenics, January
1938, 3, 2.

Sutherland, H. E. G.: Journal of Educational
Psychology (1929), 20.

Sutherland, H. E. G., and Thomson, G. N.:
British Journal of Psychology, October 1926, 17, 2.

Terman, L. M., et al.: Genetic Studies of Genius
(1925), 1.

Thurstone, L. L., and Jenkins, R. L.: Order of
Birth, Parent-Age and Intelligence (1931).

Wells, H. G.: Socialism and the Family (1906).

Willoughby, R. R.: American Journal of
Psychology (1928), 40. .

Willoughby, R. R.: Proceedings of the National
Academy of Science (1928), 14.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXII, No. 3.
