P. E. VERNON

M.A., Ph.D., D.Sc., Professor of Educational Psychology, Institute of Education,
University of London

Race and Intelligence

gence has for long been a controversial

one, probably because of its serious
social and political implications. If it were
proved, for example, that Negroes were poorer
in innate ability than whites, there might be
some justification for the latter regarding the
former as relatively unfit for self-government,
or for educational or vocational advance. This
belief is indeed widely held, particularly in parts of
Africa and of the United States. But it is contested by the majority of social anthropologists
and psychologists on the ground that the observed intellectual inferiority of Negroes (and
of other more primitive peoples such as Australian
aborigines) may be largely due to their lack
of educational opportunity and their socioeconomic repression.

What then are the facts? There has been a
tremendous amount of investigation, especially
of Negroes in the United States; a recent book
by A. M. Shuey surveys 170 studies in this
area alone. For present purposes it will be
sufficient to accept such broad distinctions as
the Caucasian (European and North American
white), the Negro and the Australasian without
going into the tricky problem of just what
constitutes a “‘race’’.

As early as 1918 group intelligence tests—
the Army Alpha (verbal) or Army Beta (pictorial)—were applied to nearly two million
American recruits, who were classified by
country of origin or descent. White recruits
who were immigrants or descendants from
most northern and western European countries
all obtained similar average scores; those from
southern and eastern countries were mostly
somewhat lower, and Negroes were lower still,

Te TOPIC OF racial differences in intelli
* This article appeared in The New Scientist on January
22nd, 1959, and is here reprinted by kind permission of
the Editor and of Professor Vernon.

99

their average corresponding to an intelligence
quotient (I Q) of not much above 80: the average
IQ for European and North American whites
is defined as 100.

However, critics soon pointed out, first that
the men tested were not necessarily representative samples of their countries. The western
Europeans were more likely to be of early
pioneering stock, whereas those from, say,
the Balkans were poorer peasant immigrants.
Secondly it was obvious that the obtained
hierarchy of national intelligences corresponded
closely with the degree of economic advancement and educational development. Many
social scientists therefore jumped to the
conclusion that the Army tests merely measured
educational differences, and that the results
could be attributed wholly to the effects of
environment and upbringing. Actually, of course,
they did not prove this explanation; it would
be quite plausible to maintain that the higherscoring national or racial groups, because of
their higher intelligence, had achieved greater
economic advance and better education.

Even more striking, though, than the group
differences, were the individual differences
within groups. In other words there was tremendous overlapping; at least 10 per cent of
Negroes scored higher than the average white,
and 10 per cent of whites lower than the average
Negro. Later studies have confirmed this and
have indeed revealed occasional Negroes ranging
all the way up to IQ 180 and over, and whites
down to 20 and below, though the proportions
of such high and low scorers respectively are
very small. Moreover there were, and are,
marked differences in different parts of the
country, Negroes in the northern states (largely
urban) averaging some 10 points higher IQ
than those in the south (largely rural). Indeed
the average for northern Negro recruits was

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1959, 51, 2
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

actually superior to that of whites in some of
the southern states.

This of course raised the question of whether
northern Negroes improved because their
economic circumstances and education were
more nearly similar to those of whites, or
whether the brighter stocks were more apt
to migrate from the south. O. Klineberg’s
famous investigation in New York City (1935)
and Lee’s similar research in Philadelphia (1951)
indicated indeed that the longer the period of
residence in a northern city, the higher the
IQ. But in fact such increases amounted only
to about 6 IQ points in all, and the highest
level reached—I Q 874 in New York—was still
well below the white average of 100. Moreover,
despite Klineberg’s evidence to the contrary,
later workers have discovered a distinct trend
towards selective migration. Probably about
half the north-south difference can be attributed to this.

Testing in other parts of the world has
been on a much smaller scale. But mention
should at least be made of S. D. Porteus’s
investigations with his test of tracing the most
direct path through a maze—the maze is drawn
in the form of a plan, rather like a children’s
puzzle. Here is a type of intelligence test having
no apparent educational bias. Porteus has used
it in many African communities, in Australia
and Hawaii, and found marked variations, the
average score for non-whites being considerably
lower than that for whites. However, his groups
were small, as the test must be given individually,
and therefore doubtfully representative; and
the differences are puzzling to anthropologists,
since some of the most primitive peoples did
better than others relatively culturally advanced.

Apparently, however, the lowest scoring
groups were those which had had least access
to any kind of educational facility. It may
be, too, that Australian aborigines did somewhat
better than expected because of the resemblance
of the task to tracking with which their culture
is familiar. Thus here also the results are complicated by possible environmental effects,
and similar objections can be raised against
other researches using all kinds of test materials.

Most psychologists would nowadays agree
that no tests are, or can be, “culturally neutral”’.

100

Scores on tests involving verbal reasoning are
naturally somewhat dependent on education.
When tests based on pictures or practical
tasks (performance tests) are used, differences
between national or racial groups are often
diminished, though they do not by any means
disappear. But surely it is obvious that the British
or American white child gets far more experience
with pictures, blocks and puzzles similar to
such tests than does the southern-state Negro
or the Australian aboriginal child. For example,
it has been noted that some African peoples
cannot readily recognize drawings of familiar
objects or animals on paper, though they carve
just the same shapes on ivory or leather.

But over and above these handicaps, psychologists realize that test performance depends
considerably on motivation or attitude. The
white middle-class child is brought up to answer
questions or carry out tasks quickly, by individual effort. The Negro or more primitive
child approaches such a test situation in quite
a different frame of mind and does not see the
point of it; his culture may, for instance, stress
group consultation rather than individual competition. Important differences of this kind
have been brought out by Davis’s and Havighurst’s sociological studies of child-rearing
practices in America, and by Biesheuvel’s
observations of Africans in the Union.

We are forced to conclude, then, that the
question of genuine racial differences in intelligence cannot be answered. For whether we
use formal tests, or whether we observe the
cultural achievements of different groups, the
results are always going to depend as much on
the whole upbringing and environment as on
innate potentialities. One might indeed go
further and say that the whole controversy
rests on a confusion of terms. The layman
insists on using the word intelligence in two
radically different senses. On the one hand
he thinks of it as “native wit”—the capacity
of the brain to build up intellectual abilities,
which is ultimately determined by the genes.
On the other hand he describes people as
intelligent when in daily life, at school or in
employment, they can comprehend, reason,
learn and judge effectively. And such abilities,
we now realize, although they are based fundaRACE AND INTELLIGENCE

mentally on innate brain potentiality, only develop in so far as they are stimulated by upbringing, and they develop very differently
with different kinds and amounts of stimulus.
Our tests measure intelligence in the second
sense quite successfully, and indeed do a useful
job in revealing differences in those intellectual
capacities which are valued by white middleclass culture. But we are not entitled to infer from
them to differences in genetically-determined
potentiality, when conditions of upbringing
have been very diverse.

At the same time, the pendulum may well
have swung too far towards environmentalistic
explanations. The existence.of genetic differences has not been disproved, even if it has not
been securely proved. But many American
researches have endeavoured more or less
successfully to compare whites and Negroes

of similar education and similar socio-economic
status; yet IQ differences still persist. It is
noteworthy too that these differences are smallest
with younger, pre-school children, and tend to
become more marked when older children and
young adults are tested in powers of abstract
reasoning. Thus it is a plausible hypothesis
that they may be somewhat lacking in the genes
that underly these intellectual functions.

Yet even if we regard this hypothesis as
reasonable, we should not forget the very great
degree of overlapping. It may be that relatively
few Negroes or members of other more primitive
societies are capable of the highest intellectual
development even in favourable environments,
but some are. And there is certainly no justification for assuming that any one race should
be wholly differentiated from any other on the
ground of a universal inferiority.

 

POPULATION STUDIES

A Journal of Demography
Edited by D. V. GLASS and E. GREBENIK

Vol XII No. 3.

W. F. WERTHEIM
NorMA MCARTHUR
Davip GOLDBERG

Ceci, Gorpon, A. R.
EMERSON and D. S.
PUGH |

N. H. CARRIER and
A. M. FAaRRAG

Book Reviews.

developed Countries.

CONTENTS

Sociological Aspects of Inter-Island Migration in Indonesia.

Fijians and Indians in Fiji.

The Fertility of Two-Generation Urbanites.

The Age Distribution of an Industrial Group (Scottish Railwaymen).

March 1959

The Reduction of Errors in Census Populations for Statistically Under
Subscription price per volume of 3 parts 42s. net, post free
(or American currency $6.75).
Single parts £1 each plus postage (American $3.25, post free).

Published by the PopULATION INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE, at the LONDON SCHOOL OF
ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE, 15 HOUGHTON STREET, LONDON, W.C.2.

 

IOI
