G. C. L. BERTRAM
M.A., Ph.D.

The Making and the Taking of Life’

Introduction

HIS TALK MIGHT perhaps have been

entitled Lords of Creation, but in fact I

have called it The Making and the Taking
of Life, which means the human biological
problems of our day. I can assure you that I will
not pour upon you an excess of figures. What I
propose is to start with certain considerations
concerning the making of life in bulk—reproduction and blind multiplication—wisely and often
now called the population explosion: and then
proceed to the stage so far reached in the making
of life by deliberation—that is to say when the
production of children becomes the planned and
deliberate action of free and responsible individuals. Then I propose to consider briefly
certain qualitative aspects of the situation,
before going on to some ethical considerations.
These will be as introduction to a variety of
topics regarding the taking of life—at all stages—
but not including warfare and capital punishment. Finally I will try to conclude with a brief
integration which will firmly stress the need for
freedom and individual liberty, and the inevitable growth of responsibility which springs from
increasing knowledge. I must add that I speak as
a zoologist and not as a medical man.

Making in Bulk

In a sense we can define life—or an aspect of
life—as the process in which and by which
assemblages of organic molecules separate
themselves from, and perpetuate themselves in,
an alien and chemically more simple environment. Speaking loosely, we can say that the
resultant organisms are highly successful in this
process, and their multiplication in space and
time is continuous, except in so far as it is
checked by particular limiting factors. In our
own human case the increase of knowledge

* The substance of a lecture: Oxford Humanist Group,
March Sth, 1963.

allows us progressively to remove earlier limiting
factors which more primitively have held human
populations in check. The growth of agriculture,
the domestication and improvement of plants
and animals, the increase of law and order and
removal of petty strife, the improvements in
sanitation and water supplies, the growth of
long distance transport (both across the oceans
and by rail), the understanding and then the
control of epidemic diseases, and more recently
the advancement of medicine at a more personal
level—all these represent the pushing back of
factors previously instrumental in limiting
human populations and checking their increase.
And very fortunate we are, for personal elimination by strife, starvation or disease is undeniably uncomfortable—and to be avoided both
for ourselves and for others.

The net result, the population explosion, is of
course well known to many educated people
to-day. Known it may be but resultant sensible
joint reactions and planning remains astoundingly inadequate. So it is that world population
at about 200 million at the time of Christ grew
gradually to near 450 million in 1600—to 2,000
million when I was an undergraduate only thirty
years ago. Since then—in what seem to be a very
few short years—it has leapt to 3,000 million
and is increasing so as to double again by the end
of the century: and so to continue to double at
progressively shorter intervals—if we remain
successful in holding back those limiting factors
which are so uncomfortable. This rate of multiplication, its real meaning and its dangers, are
very hard to drive home—though I hope not
to an audience such as this. Here are three ways
of regarding what is happening. The 50 million
dead of two world wars are replaced in less than
400 days. The City of Oxford is added daily to
the world. Of all the individuals who have ever
lived on earth 3 to 4 per cent are alive at this
moment.

159

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1963, 55, 3.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Yet, let us recognize, this fantastic rate of
population increase has been neither planned
nor desired by anybody. Most of it is a mere byproduct of beneficence. We have striven to
check petty strife, to improve transport, water
supplies and medical care because of our, and
our recent forebears’, joint personal kindliness
and feeling for the well-being of ourselves, and
of other individuals scattered throughout the
world. We have neither planned nor desired
great population increases on the world scale,
nor the national scale. They have happened,
fundamentally because of kindness and compassion, the effort of the many and the initiative
and expertise of the few.

To take a simple and compact example,
that of British Guiana—where I was this time
last year. It is typical of those places where
malaria has been banished with the sudden
coming of D.D.T. at the end of the last war.
Malaria was eliminated through the biological

skill and initiative virtually of one man; infantile .

mortality plunged. And now B.G. at 3-4 per
cent per annum has almost the highest rate of
population increase in the world—doubling in
under twenty years. Let me stress—this is a byproduct of beneficence. And the advantages of
great population increase are few and the disadvantages very many. I wrote recently:

There simply are vo real and admirable advantages
in any greater further increase in world population.
It cannot sensibly be argued that numbers must
mount in order that the mass market may increase
for particular material objects. The increase of a
mass market is not a true measure of advance.
Likewise, reproduction so as to build bigger
armies, whether of infantry or technicians, is not
admirable advantage.

Not only are there no discernible and admirable
advantages in further population increases, but
the disadvantages are so real and many, quite
apart from poverty and wundernourishment.
What is the correlation between mounting
numbers and national pugnacity? It is surely all
too often positive. Was not World War II initiated
in the name of Lebensraum? We hear now, too,
of stress syndromes which are known to afflict
our fellow mammals under conditions of high
population-density and resultant struggle. And
urban man himself most certainly is not immune:
neurotic symptoms multiply,

*““What are people for?’ in The Humanist Frame
edited by Sir Julian Huxley. 1961. Pp. 377-8.

160

The despoliation of the natural environment,
the extinction of other species of strange and
beautiful animals and plants, the fouling of rivers,
the oiling of birds and beaches, urban sprawl and
traffic chaos, these are all direct consequences of
excessive increase in numbers. Space itself already
becomes a rare commodity as the conurbations
grow, and cities become places of frustration
rather than of culture. Even worse, for the full
development of important aspects of theindividual,
is the progressive difficulty of finding solitude.
Likewise, as local numbers mount, so too diminishes the feeling of personal “relatedness” with
the majority of those one sees.

The population explosion jeopardizes whatever
worth, development and evolution—whatever
happiness, opportunity and enlargement of personality—we may cherish for our children and
future generations.*

Indeed the making of people—the making of
human life—progressively is recognized to be
excessive and to be imposing the most severe
strains. The pushing back of “natural’’ limits to
population growth is highly desirable because
these factors of limitation are uncomfortable.
For a while we can repel them, and then again
we seem to be up against new limits—at present
food shortages primarily—though people can
go on breeding in a surprising manner even when
fundamentally undernourished or underfed.

Great efforts are made to meet food shortages.
There is a most fortunate and widespread,
though historically very recent, interest in the
well-being of others. OXFAM typifies this kindly
feeling for the needs of those at a distance—
though, with some other organizations, sometimes one feels that the heart drives rather than
the head. I do not want here to go into the problems of potentialities versus actualities in these
matters of food production world wide. What
matters is the relative rates at which populations
and supplies increase. So far despite all efforts
they run neck and neck, and supplies are certainly not gaining significantly. Yet the analogy
of a race is thoroughly bad, for the one thing
clear about a race is that it has an end. In matters
of population and food there is only perpetuity
or disaster.

To deal with the major world problem we
must of course both increase food supplies and
reduce multiplication. Yet so far the World
Health Organization has been impeded by the
Roman Catholics in all activity which would
THE MAKING AND THE TAKING OF LIFE

help to provide even advice on restraint through
contraceptive practice—that more comfortable
substitute for the distressing ‘‘natural’’ modes of
population limitation.

Perhaps we may gain perspective by pondering
the query ““What are people for?” and then we
may see even more clearly the dangers of excess.
Even if ““What are people for?’’ is too difficult
a question to answer we can at least probably
agree some of the area for which it is worth
striving, and then review the staggering population increases in relation to that goal.

To clear the argument, it is perhaps easy
first to agree what are not among human
objectives. We do not believe that the aim is the
co-existence of the maximum of living human
flesh. The present total is about 120 million tons.

Obviously we do not believe that humanity’s
proper destiny is the breeding of cannon-fodder
(or nuclear ninepins); nor the production of a
multitude who will have to live in squalor and
hunger; nor the production of an enlarged
environment for human parasites; nor is our
human objective the production of the largest
possible market for the manufacturers of material
objects.

No. Our jointly agreeable objectives are in the
realms of the “good life’, the fulfilment of
individuals, the achievements of societies and
cultures, and the perfection of humanity in terms
of biological evolution. There may, indeed, be a
large measure of agreement if we attempt to
define the objectives in human life in some such
terms as these: that every individual shall be born
a loved and wanted child, in an environment
which will, in liberty, allow the full development
of all the attributes with which he is endowed,
physical, mental and spiritual. We desire, at the
same time, a continuation of human evolution,
both genetic and psychosocial, such that gradually
may be produced a population in which the many
shall possess a stature (or quality) which is rare
indeed to-day.*

And now we must turn from the making of
people in bulk—the by-product of beneficence—
and consider the much more rational making of
people by deliberation.

Making by Deliberation

These are the years of evolution from the old
blind reproduction, something haphazard, to
the responsible use of personal freedom. In
the western world, at any rate the British,

* Ibid. Pp. 373-4.

Scandinavian and North American world,
advance is fortunately fast. Already in the United
Kingdom it is estimated that probably 70 per
cent of all children are wanted children deliberately conceived. But so far deliberate reproduction, family planning with the aid of contraceptive practices of one kind or another, only
extends to a maximum of perhaps 10 per
cent of world population. There is no time here
to trace the growth of what is known in this
country as the family planning movement.
After earlier pioneers and experimenters, it is
well to remember that it is still less than fifty
years since the American Margaret Sanger—who
is still happily alive—was imprisoned in New
York for helping poor mothers not to be burdened with still more unwanted children; and
Marie Stopes in this country was embroiled in
the most bitter controversy and struggle.
Suffice it must to say that the family planning
movement grew upon the view that women
should—since they bear the heavier burden in
reproduction—that women should be responsible for and be able to plan reproduction in
freedom—-so that children should first be wanted
and then deliberately conceived—thus turning
blindness into deliberation, and reproduction
into the responsible decisions of free individuals.

Kind and Quality of Making
This is of importance whether the making of
life is in bulk or by deliberation, because all
people are not the same—by inheritance they
differ much from one another both in obvious
ways and in finer points—though of course they
share the great mass of their genes in common
so as all to be classified as human. All men have
—or should have—equality of opportunity, of
freedom, dignity and respect—but demonstrably
they do differ anatomically, intellectually, and
so on as between individuals, and as between
groups and within groups. There should always
be equality of opportunity but it is foolish to
fancy that all have the same capacity to make use
of opportunity—for example, in higher education.

In these matters, no suggestion is being made
of superiority or inferiority, no judgements are

_ being made, but simply a statement of differ
ences. Superiority and inferiority are meaningless unless a proper reference is defined. Many

161k
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

qualities are by no means evenly spread through
all “‘races’”. To take an extreme and absurd
but true example—size and basket ball—the
small and elegant people of Siam will always be
“inferior” to the Americans—whose average
Olympic team height was 6 ft. 10 in. It is also
true that if you like to use musical aptitude as a
criterion of superiority then you will probably
be happier in Central Europe rather than in
East Anglia. It is also true that people who have
any particular quality in high degree are more
likely on average, to have comparable children
than those who possess that quality in lesser
degree. These are matters of probability, betting
if you like—and inherited variations are evident
throughout all plants and animals. Yet, in so
far as people are different in some of their
inherited attributes, differences in actual fertility
may come to be of great importance—differences
between great groups or “races”, or within
limited populations which may call themselves
nations. This was in the minds of those who
marvelled, or were dismayed, by the so-called
“spawning of the English” a century ago; or
have been alarmed at the ‘Yellow Peril” ; or have
been saddened by the, probably temporary,
adverse differentials which appear within a
population during the period of first spread of
contraceptive practices.

What I am driving at is the importance of
differential fertilities, whether simply occurring
while the making of life remains a blind bulk
activity, or contrived or stimulated when the
making of life has at last become a matter of
personal responsibility in freedom.

What this amounts to at the present stage is
that, with the passage of time, differential
fertilities change the human complexion of the
world, or of parts of the world. This of course
is true of other species too. If the Chinese, as
they do, now breed faster than the British, then
in years to come the proportion of world
population which is Chinese may be relatively
greater than now and the proportion which is
British will be relatively less. Some will feel the
prospect admirable, and others will think it sad.
Likewise take Fiji: there the immigrant people
of peninsular Indian origin now breed a good
deal faster than the indigenous Polynesians—
so that the whole complexion of the population

162

changes. The local political implications are
great. Canada, with its somewhat separate
French community, feels a comparable problem.
Again, in British Guiana (though to simplify a
little) those of peninsular Indian origin, who
are mainly rural and of one political party, now
multiply faster than those of African origin who
are mainly urban and of the rival party. The
balance tilts and, if the voting age is reduced to
eighteen, the tilt to the former party will be
faster still.

There is no time now to extend this line of
thought, but it is of great importance, and must
be recognized, both on the large scale and on the
small—both between nations and within nations.

Differential fertilities are always to be expected
and therefore change is inevitable.

Now that the making of life, in our present
sense, becomes progressively more deliberate,
the realities of differentials in actual fertility
will likewise progressively become more prominent. Whether in fact there emerges a will to do
so, certainly the opportunity arises to steer—
or to refrain from steering and take the consequences. If a vigorous and highly patriotic
and uninhibited people were deliberately to
arrange—for example by differential taxation
and public pressure—not only to limit the total
of their breeding—and that they must do—but to
build differentials between their people of most
and of least ability and vigour, some astonishing
results might appear in two or three generations.
This might well happen.

The essential core of this argument is that not
only is there responsibility for how many we
make, but for what we make as well.

Ethical Considerations

While human multiplication remained the
chief objective, even duty, of life in a harsh
environment, ethical considerations could remain relatively dormant. There may be some
wonder, in the mind of the observer looking
back, at the lack of clash between the contemporaneous earlier admonitions to “reproduce
and fill the earth” and to “holy chastity”. Yet
always new knowledge brings new responsibilities and new ethical problems, whether in the
realms—say—of nuclear physics or of reproduction. In these days when reproduction
THE MAKING AND THE TAKING OF LIFE

becomes deliberate, new ethical problems inevitably proliferate. Not only Hamlet’s “to be or
not to be’, but now “‘to create more life or to
refrain”.

Now here is a matter which I will not embark
upon in detail, only. mention as one more piece
to be fitted into the puzzle whose completion may
provide mature perspective. Ponder the modern
techniques which allow, for example, artificial
insemination, and recognize the new ethical
problems and worlds of responsibility induced
by the new possibilities of creation. There could
be the deliberate making of human lives of a
kind previously impossible—for reasons of both
space and time. But modern transport, plus
novel techniques for the long-term storage of
human semen, soon makes possible the strangest
of genetic mixtures. Ethical considerations
quite inevitably—and entirely properly—impinge
most powerfully upon the thoughts of the edu
_cated. I draw attention to new realms but do not
propose to go further here. The existence, of new
ethical problems and responsibilities as an
inevitable accompaniment of new knowledge,
is what I wish to stress.

The Taking of Life

I have already said that I do not here propose
to discuss either warfare or capital punishment.
Nor will I embark upon road accidents, murder
and things of that kind.

Ethical problems concerning the taking of
life may spring into prominence by mistake or
because, for example, deliberate contraceptive
intent has failed; or for reasons of defect; or
for reasons which are personal in some other
way. Here are some examples of the problems of
“taking”, starting with a laboratory technique
and mounting up to euthanasia.

Reductio ad absurdum—no one presumably
condemns the throwing away of unwanted
tissue cultures of human cells, which might have
been nurtured carefully for years—yet assuredly
those cells possessed “‘life’—and human life
at that.

The surgeon may, for therapeutic reasons and
with valid consent, cut away living tissues—
even cut away reproductive organs, so taking
away “‘life’’ both actual and potential.

To go further—consider the tiny human
embryo which grows into a foetus and later into

a child. Any tampering here raises emotional,
legal and theological issues which vary much in
time and geographically. Yet abortion is a worldwide practice, permitted in some countries,
condemned in others. The Japanese, using it as
their traditional method of limitation, cut their
excessive birth rate from thirty-four to seventeen
per thousand in five years around 1950. Hospitalization was good and 14 million abortions
a year was acceptable, and only seemingly
clumsy to those with knowledge of more convenient methods of contraception.

In this country thirty years ago Mr. Justice
McCardy said in open court that he could not
conceive it ever to be right that a woman should
be forced to bear a child against her will. He was
roundly condemned for his kindliness. Our
local emotional, legal and theological tangle
continues to this day—so does the multiplicity
of illegal abortions. We have a vigorous Abortion Law Reform Association which puts forward Private Members Bills in Parliament to
cover stated categories of cases. This aspect of
the problem of taking life is a very live issue—
more especially, recently, when linked with
probable defect or drug-induced monstrosity.

Proceed to a slightly later stage. At a particular
instant the foetus becomes a separate airbreathing entity—a baby. The taking of the life
of a baby is infanticide—in the past a widespread
practice for a variety of reasons. As a fact, in
countries which call themselves civilized, infanticide is now regarded as inappropriate, unethical,
illegal, damnable or call it what you will. But
here comes a difficulty—vividly in the minds of
many from the recent thalidomide controversy.
It is only at birth that gross defect or monstrosity
becomes conveniently—or horribly—visible.
And it may take a vast number of different
forms of varying degrees of severity. Suitable
action is a matter of intense heart searching.
Emotions are very powerful—and not all in one
direction. The Liége trial demonstrated a clash
of opinion most vividly. The thalidomide affair
has alerted people’s consciences and stimulated
thought on a most difficult topic in a way that
the far more numerous non-thalidomide monstrous or defective infants have never done.
In the Liége community the evolution of public
opinion seemed to have forged ahead of the law.

163
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Roughly, about 500 thalidomide-damaged
babies were born in this country and about half
of them survived. The actual figures do not
matter—within a few hundreds—for the total
is small in proportion to the gross total of about
15,000 badly defective babies born annually in
the U.K.—for combined reasons of faulty
heredity and uterine environment. The thalidomide affair will have done good if it has brought
more fully to public consciousness the problem
of this “normal” crop of gross defect.

The problem of the severely deformed infant,
whether mentally or physically deficient, has
facets which are emotional and ethical, rational
and traditional, of the head and of the heart.
The suffering of a child with gross physical
deformity, even after surgery or partial alleviation with gadgets, can be immense. Additionally,
there is the mental suffering of the parents, and
often of the siblings too, if the mother tries to
compensate for the disability by so much devotion that they obtain insufficient love and care.
Dogmatic, but varied, assertions based on clear
consciences have been many, but few seem to
have recognized, at least in letters to the Press,
two fundamentals. The one is that this problem
has both physical and temporal degrees, and the
other is that there is an evolution of conscience
among even the most devout of individuals and
the most dogmatic of groups, with the passage
of time, and from one generation to another.
The history of the introduction of anaesthetics
provides an admirable example.

In June 1960* the Bishop of Exeter preached
in Torquay to the 128th Annual Meeting of
the British Medical Association. He took as his
text the couplet

Thou shalt not kill; but needst not strive

Officiously to keep alive.

The unfortunates whom he had in mind on
that occasion were the elderly, desperately and
chronically sick—whose mortal misery could
be extended a little further by modern technology.
He did not include—as perhaps he might have
done—the infants born grossly defective—infants
who, under “natural” or more primitive conditions, would indubitably die at once or very
soon—while now, with technical aids, they may
linger longer or even survive for years.

* See THE EUGENICS REVIEW. 1960. 52, 134.
164

The ethical problems here presented are most
distressing. At present the appropriate treatment
of deformed infants is a matter for the consciences of individuals. It is difficult to see how
the problem of the deformed infant—including
mental and physical deformation—can be dealt
with except by special legislation, since “‘sound”’
and fashionable medical practice will never be
able (except in the case of the occasional perceptive midwife or obstetrician) to deal with it
without legislation. A doctor cannot yet openly
help without committing an offence.

Is it rational—is it evil—is it ethical—having
created an infant burdened with gross defect, in
compassion to end the life that has scarce
begun ?—to end the one in the expectation that
a better may be deliberately created? That
happened surreptitiously at Liége and was
condoned. Will the evolution of conscience,
law, or social acceptability, come to allow such
termination of defect to be regular practice under
suitable professional safeguards? I ask the questions. Consciences and opinions are greatly
divided. There are noble, educated and wise
people holding totally opposite views on all
these questions. The head and the heart, propriety and expediency, struggle together in
seeking solutions. The answers, and the practices approved, will doubtless continue to vary
from land to land—for example, infanticide in
one will be called infantile euthanasia in another.

In the House of Lords in 1936 Lord Dawson
of Penn, that great physician, said “This is a
courageous age, but it has a different sense of
values from the ages which have gone before.
It looks upon life more from the point of view
of quality than of quantity.”’ That was in fact
said in a discussion on euthanasia.

So continuing our survey of the making and
the taking of life, we come to suicide—a matter
of personal decision with grave social overtones.
Again the problem is one of extreme difficulty
and often of extreme sadness. Recently, in this
country, the slow evolution of the law has
allowed suicide to be no longer a criminal act.
The failed suicides—and they may possibly be as
ten to one in comparison with those successful—
are no longer to be punished for their attempted
crimes, but treated with a curative kindness
which may assuage their despair. But to help a
THE MAKING AND THE TAKING OF LIFE

suicide to commit his now non-criminal act
does itself remain criminal, and vigorously
punishable. The argument is understandable.

Yet, take the matter further, to the realms of
euthanasia—that is to say the deliberate desire
to take one’s own life—an exercise of personal
freewill—to take one’s own life in the event,
usually, of lingering sickness and great pain in
old age. If done alone, now no crime has been
committed. But in the circumstances where
the personal need is likely to be greatest, the
capacity and facilities for lone action are often
minimal. The Euthanasia Society promotes
legislation to ease this difficulty—so far without
success. That Society is another body of kindly
individuals, convinced of the need to increase
personal freedom—the freedom to have medical
aid to remove one’s life when, in one’s personal
judgment in old age and sickness, it has grown
miserable to excess. The need for legal safeguards is obvious to all: but the opportunity
for euthanasia seems a proper freedom to many,
and to others a damnable tampering with God’s
will. In that regard one may add in parenthesis,
again, that anaesthetics only a hundred or so
years ago were equally condemned by some;
and pneumonia used often to be called the
poor man’s friend.

Conclusion

Thus I have tried to spread before you a whole
area of importance within which new knowledge
brings new responsibilities. And new responsibilities are already there, whether or no many
people have yet appreciated the inevitable
consequences of the new knowledge. Within this
area of biological concern for our own species
we are, on every side, beset with emotions and
inhibitions, to speak not at all of ignorance,
prejudice and dogma. All these delay the
appreciation of what is rational, and impede
whatever actions may be sensible.

Blind and dangerously excessive multiplication must, world-wide, be replaced by moderate
and deliberate reproduction by thoughtful
individuals acting in freedom. There must be
appreciation of the astonishing genetic diversity
of men and women, and there must be conscious
appreciation, too, of the kind of goal for which
we strive for all people. And that goal must
include appreciation of the worth of all individuals—however varied—and their equality
of right to opportunity and freedom. The most
dangerous feature of all, as I see it in the present
picture, is that excessive multiplication is itself
the foremost adversary of personal freedom in
almost every way.

165
