REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

Wallas, GranaM. The Great Society—A Psychological Analysis. London. Macmillan and Co.; 1914; pp. 406.

No apology is needed for reconsidering Mr. Wallas’s treatise on the psychological basis of society on its modern scale, for one may turn and turn
again through its fascinating pages and find new threads of analysis and
synthesis on subject after subject. Among the more interesting lines of
thought is that relating to the sufficiency of the natural equipment of
man for his present environment. “Our fathers . . . . could trust that
_ adaptation when once it had been achieved by habit would be
handed on to succeeding generations by biological inheritance. The
biologists of our time have forced us to realise that such ‘ acquired characteristics’ are not inherited. Each generation, except in so far as we
create by selective environment a somewhat better, or, by the sterility of
the finer individuals a somewhat worse, human type, will start, we are
told, in essentials, not where their fathers left off, but where their fathers
began” (pp. 8-9). “ We cannot see or hear or remember much more than
was required by our earliest human ancestors, or endure much more
exertion than was necessary for them in gathering food” (p. 30). Starting from this basis Mr. Wallas shows the essential difficulties of organisation when most of what must be organised is beyond our sense impressions, and discusses the machinery of artificial memory and the organisation of thought, of will for carrying out desires, and of happiness. His
purpose is not, however, physiological, but “this book . .. . is written
with the practical purpose of bringing the knowledge which has been
accumulated by psychologists into touch with the actual problems of
present civilised life,” and so he considers man’s natural dispositions, one
by one, and discusses how far they can be influenced so as to make for
cohesion and efficiency in society.

Even if we grant Mr, Wallas’s rather dogmatic account of the teaching of “the biologists of our time,” we may still hold that the natural
equipment of an infant in a modern civilised nation is very different from
that of our earliest ancestors, since there has been a continual fusion of
races, and selection generation after generation of those races and those
stocks which can survive in ever increasing complexity of conditions, so
that to a great extent the modern child is born modern, and is disposed
to be alert in the presence of machinery rather than of wild beasts, and to
use the extended vocabulary and the printed records which extend the
powers of communication and the store of knowledge. It is also easy to
exaggerate the effect of the modern artificiality of environment on undeveloped races. The negroid conductor of an American train, the
workers in and about the Transvaal mines, the eastern visitors to London,
seem to have no difficulty in understanding complex mechanical processes
or in preserving themselves in the hustle of the streets.

“ Social psychology can never lead men to wise practical conclusions
unless it keeps in view its relation to that science of human breeding
which Sir Francis Galton named eugenics” (p. 59). This sentence
reversed to read that “ Eugenics can never lead to wise conclusions unless
it keeps in view the science which Mr. Graham Wallas names social
psychology,” contains exactly the truth which concerns readers of this
journal. Suppose that we had the power of selection and that we had
the knowledge of inheritance of psychological dispositions, whom should
we choose to be parents of the members and administrators of the great
society? Everyone who studies this book will find that he has advanced
some way towards a tentative answer to this question.

A. L. BOWLEy.
