REVIEWS OF BOOKS

second, the estimates made by Rickman, Farr,
Brownlee and Griffiths for the eighteenth and
early nineteenth centuries. Griffiths’s hypotheses
of the decline in mortality in the eighteenth
century and the possible causes of such a decline
are then examined critically in three papers by
Marshall Habakkuk, and McKeown and
Brown. The last of these is particularly stimulating. The authors’ main theme is the examination
of the possible influence of medical science on
mortality in the eighteenth century, and they
reach the challenging conclusion that an extension of medical services at that time would have
been more likely to produce a rise than a fall in
mortality. In the section of their paper in which
they discuss the possible influence of the birth
rate, however, McKeown and Brown are on

rather weaker ground. Statements such as

““Coitus interruptus . .. to be effective requires
more self-control than is usually credited to the
majority of people” are open to dispute; so are
their conclusions on the potential effect of
changes in age at marriage. Detailed studies of
particular areas are provided in the papers by
Eversley on an area in Worcestershire and by
Chambers on Nottingham and the Vale of
Trent; and in an essay on “The Changing
Adequacy of English Registration, 1690-1837”,
Professor Krause of Rutgers University puts
forward the view that the general quality of the
parish registers deteriorated during the eighteenth
century.

Part III is concerned with Europe and the
United States, and comprises eleven contributions: four are devoted to France, and the others
to Ireland, Scandinavia, Finland, Italy, Barmen
(a small town in western Germany), Flanders
and the United States. The French studies
include a paper of outstanding interest and value
by M. Louis Henry, wherein he summarizes the
principal features of the recent analyses of parish
registers in France. We are also given an English
translation of the paper by M. Jean BourgeoisPichat on the evolution of the population of
France since the eighteenth century, which was
first published in Population in 1951. His
reconstructions of the patterns of fertility,
mortality and age-sex distributions in the
nineteenth century are of great value; but his
extrapolations into the eighteenth century are

based on rather shaky assumptions. His conclusion that the long-term decline in French
fertility began somewhere about the year 1770
has not been fully corroborated by the studies
of parish registers described by M. Henry,
although the practice of birth control was
undoubtedly spreading among certain sections
of the population, principally the nobility,
during the eighteenth century. The other chapters
devoted to France consist of a study of the data
available for the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries by Professor Goubert and a discussion
by M. Meuvret of the relationships between on
the one hand the famines and epidemics of the
Ancien Régime and on the other the fluctuations
in fertility and mortality.

Professor Glass and Dr. Eversley are to be
congratulated in bringing together in one volume
such a large range of valuable studies. It should
prove indispensable to all students both of
demography and of economic history. Not only
does it bring out the salient points of recent
research, but it also indicates the lines along
which future investigation should be directed,
and it should thus provide effective stimulus to
such research.

J. G. C. BLACKER

United Nations General Principles for National
Programmes of Population Projections as Aids to
Development Planning. New York, 1965. Pp.
vi+60. Price 75 cents (HMSO, 5s. 6d.).

THIS MANUAL, WHICH should perhaps be
regarded as a short introductory textbook for
the developing countries, was planned at the
1961 session of the UN Population Commission.
In 1963 and 1964 it was sent in draft to various
agencies, institutions and individual experts and
subsequently it was revised, in the light of their
observations, before publication.

About one-half of the text consists of a very
useful and thorough bibliography, classified
according to the different aspects of the subject.
The remainder of the book describes the various
types of projections, and the general considerations underlying their preparation and use.
Technique is not dealt with, and there are no
examples; thus the exposition cannot in any
sense be regarded as complete, but at least the

101
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

stage is properly set for a rational approach to
the understanding and interpretation of projections. For example, the single page devoted to
the choice of a time-span explains how for some
purposes it is advantageous to look far ahead
while for others only the next few years need be
contemplated. Similarly the value of a set of
alternative projections and the best concepts for
a range of such a set are expounded succinctly
and clearly. P. R. C.

SOCIOLOGY

Hobhouse, L. T. Sociology and Philosophy: A
Centenary Collection of Essays and Articles.
Preface by Sydney Caine. Introduced by Morris
Ginsberg. London, 1966. G. Bell for the London
School of Economics. Pp. xxvii+340. Price 45s.

THIS VOLUME CONTAINS twelve essays and
articles reprinted from various sources and an
interesting introduction by Professor Ginsberg.
This reprinting is very welcome; all the papers in
the volume are written with the clarity and
vigour so characteristic of Hobhouse and can be
read with profit to-day. It is a great service to
have rescued these writings from the semioblivion of encyclopaedias and learned journals
and to have made them easily accessible to a wide
public. Hobhouse, who died in 1928, was the
most outstanding English sociologist during the
first quarter of the present century. His work
covered a very wide range; he was a scholar in
more than one field and he also made notable
contributions to the discussion of the social and
political problems of his day.

The topic which inspired his main work was
that of social development, a topic which, as
Professor Ginsberg says, is again attracting
attention after having been out of favour for a
time. Hobhouse was careful not to equate social
development with progress; for him social
development was a process of mental learning
through experience the course of which had to be
traced by establishing the facts while judgement
of facts had to be kept distinct from judgement
of values. When expounding his view of social
development, which can hardly be contested,
Hobhouse was concerned in some of his writings
(though in none which are included in this

102

volume) to confute the somewhat crude attempts

to interpret social development as having a basis

in biological evolution, which were current at the
beginning of this century. In this he was fully

justified, but from some of his work he gives the

impression that he underrated the importance of
the genetic endowment of individuals; in any

case he did not concern himself with those

problems which are of special interest to students

of eugenics.

Of the essays in this volume, that on sociology
is the one which will probably be of greatest
interest to readers of THE EUGENICS REVIEW.
This essay, which originally appeared in the
Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics in 1920,
sets out the task of sociology as Hobhouse saw
it, and can be read with profit by those who work
in any of the special social sciences, demography,
for instance. His view is summed up in a
quotation which Professor Ginsberg extracts
from another article, not reprinted here, which
appeared in 1908: “General Sociology’, he
wrote, “is neither a separate science complete in
itself before specialism begins, nor is it a mere
synthesis of the social sciences consisting in a
mechanical juxtaposition of their results. It is
rather a vitalizing principle that runs through all
social investigations nourishing and nourished
by it in turn, stimulating inquiry, correlating
results, exhibiting the life of the whole in the
parts and returning from the study of the parts
to a fuller comprehension of the whole’.

A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS

ECONOMICS

Meade, J. E. The Stationary Economy. London,
1965. Allen and Unwin. Pp. 238. Price 35s.

ALMOST EXACTLY THIRTY years ago Mr. (as
he then was) James Meade published his
successful textbook An Introduction to Economic
Analysis and Policy in which he expounded, at an
introductory level, the then new ideas about
employment and income, and about imperfect
competition. He was concerned to stress especially their implications for policy problems,
and he actually used some of the new technical
concepts in advocating particular economic
policies. This latest volume from Professor
