NATURAL INFERTILITY

Factors Influencing the Results of Contraceptive Methods
By CECIL I. B. VOGE, B.sc.. PhD., F.RS.E.

(From the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine)

URING the course of an investiga
tion into the chemistry of contra
ception I have been impressed with
the number of ‘ natural agencies’ which
may be responsible for the successes
claimed for various methods of birth control; and the recent paper by WagnerManslau’ reinforces my opinion that genetic
factors may play a part in the production of
certain sterilities. These would be all the
more in evidence amongst certain population
groups where, owing to sociological conditions, inter-marrying within a group is
encouraged—with the consequence that a
fixation of characters will ultimately take
place. This would result in a differential
birth rate, a factor which opens up the
question as to whether contraceptive results,
obtained from one social group, can necessarily be applied to another.

Thus I might suggest that a part,
at least, of the low birth rate is due not to
contraceptives but to the natural sterility
of those who use them. Many factors are
naturally at work, for if the users already
possess a low fecundity, chemical contraceptives of a certain class may act in a spermicidal manner, or it is possible (and evidence
will later be brought forward in the elaboration of this point) that others may actually
increase the chance of pregnancy.

If this problem is worthy of elucidation,
then I would ask that scientific methods
should be brought to bear upon it, and at
the very commencement of this communication it will be as well to state that I do not
wish to introduce any further uncertainty
into a subject which has already had more
than its share of difficulties. I do desire,
however, that clinical work now being
carried out should be undertaken with as
complete a knowledge as possible of the

many factors which may influence the
results. For example, contraceptive
failures may be recorded which are due
more to an upsetting of the biochemistry
and bacteriology of the vagina, than to an
actual failure of the method (although,
naturally, this latter is indirectly to blame),
and in this connection it is incumbent upon
us to have accurate knowledge of the
chemical constitution and reactions of the
products which are employed. On the
other hand, successes are found which are
in reality due to the sterility, natural or
acquired, of one of the marriage partners.

Many of these factors will not be of great
actual importance nor intrinsically affect
the value of the clinical results obtained
with methods which possess a high degree
of reliability. Those which will be
influenced are those which are at variance
with the theoretical knowledge which we
have obtained (discussed in The Chemistry
and Physics of Contraceptives'). At the
present time, if roo couples use a contraceptive method for a period and five
pregnancies are found, we record a 95 per
cent. success. Now if it can be shown that
within this same group there is a 25 per
cent. sterility, it will be evident that these
25 cases would not have become pregnant
even if no contraceptive had been employed.
Hence an assessment of the value of the
method can only be based upon 75 cases—
giving a 93°4 per cent. success.

What are the factors which are likely to
affect the results? Natural and acquired
sterility of either the male or the female
will act in this manner; and it must be
borne in mind that the fact that the woman
has already had one or even more children
does not signify that her reproductive
period, or that of the husband, will con
85
86

tinue. There are always the questions of
one-child sterility; of age, not only by
itself, but with reference to the date of the
first pregnancy; of the time interval between pregnancies; and finally of gonorrhea. ‘The last in itself is a large and
difficult problem; and it must be realized
that a woman may have become pregnant at
the same time as she became infected, and
that this infection gave rise to the subsequent sterility.

TWO GROUPS OF PATIENTS

Patients can be divided into groups. In
the first are those that might be described
as the hyper-fertile type, although nulliparae are more and more coming for advice
to a doctor or to a clinic, and will in all
probability be fitted, or be advised to use
one of the methods which offers a considerable chance of success. The second group,
I consider, presents the real problem. These
employ contraceptive methods without any
guidance. ‘They use a method because it
is advertised, or circularized, or (and this
may be a slightly more rational argument)
because a friend has used it—notwithstanding that they would not, and in many cases
could not, wear his eyeglasses! Condoms
and chemical methods are mostly the
methods which will be found in this second
group; but if the basic principles could
only be inculcated, there is no reason why
a certain degree of success should not be
attained even with purely chemical methods
when used alone.

Sterility can be divided into several
types. In functional sterility the patients
would, in all probability, have become
pregnant if circumstances were different.
In this group we find impotence of the
husband and abstinence. The latter may
be due to various causes, such as vaginismus, dyspareunia.

In the next we have primary sterility,
which includes certain conditions that
either prevent or allow intercourse to take
place, but are definitely associated with
permanent sterility. In this group we have
such conditions as under-development or

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

malformation of the various reproductive
organs.

Acquired sterility should also be placed
under this heading. Here we find hormonic
conditions, inflammation, displacements,
and various tumours.

Lastly there is secondary sterility, due
to the effects of labour and similar causes.

Figures relating to the incidence of
sterility are obtainable from two main
sources. Those which emanate from
gynecologists are, in all probability, apt to
be weighted, since the fact that they have

sought a consultation postulates some
degree of dysfunction. On the other hand,
figures obtained from the Registrar
General are naturally free from this taint
and will provide a much closer approximation to the real state of affairs.

Giles? has collected together figures
which are representative, since they do not
necessarily refer to pathological states.

TABLE I

Frank and Burdach 2 per cent. (a)
Ansell... see .. 8 » (d)
Oehren ... as .- 84 ,, (d)
Simpson (Town A) - 99 ,, (c)

» (4, B)  .«. 13:0 ,, (a)

»  (Aristocracy) ... 16-3. ,, (e)
Duncan ... _ .. 15/0. ,, (f)
Stark... _ . 190 ,, (g)
Graham ... a «5 20'0 __,, (h)
Marton ... eee ... 20°0_,, (2)
Chevin ... wee -. 20°0.,, (7)
Rochard ... wee a0 OOO iy (7)
Goehlert ... mr we 20°5 gy (k)
Giles wae a6 wee 22°2,, (2)

(a) These figures would appear to be based upon vague
and unsubstantial statements.

(6) Quotation from Kisch.

(c) The town of Bathgate, Scotland; 455 marriages,
of which 410 were productive.

(2) The town of Grangemouth, Scotland;
marriages, of which 182 were productive.

(e) These figures are based upon Sharpe’s work on the
British Peerage, 1833. They refer to 495 marriages,
of which 81 were sterile.

(f) The registers of Edinburgh and Glasgow for 1855.
These showed 4,372 marriages, of which 3,710 were
productive, but miscarriages and still-births were
omitted.

(g) Census of Scotland for 1861.

(z) Census of England for 1851

(t) Based on the population of Massachusetts.

(7) Based on the population of France.

(zk) Based on the Dynasty of the Capets ; 451 marriages;
19°7 per cent. sterile.

Based on the Dynasty of Wittelsbach; 177 marriages ; 23.7 per cent. sterile.

210
NATURAL INFERTILITY

Based on both figures; 628 marriages; 20.5 per

cent: sterile.

(1) 4,500 cases; 3,367 married ; 1,133 spinsters; 239
cases where there is no record as to children hence ;
3,128 marriages; 2,435 productive. The original
should be consulted for further details,

Giles,’ criticizing his figures, points out
that although the chance of pregnancy may
fall according to such factors as the age of
the woman and the time which has elapsed
since her last pregnancy, a woman cannot
be considered sterile until she has reached
the age of forty; also, many of his patients
have definitely come for advice relating to
sterility, and he consequently considers
that in a normal population 15 per cent.
would be a more correct figure.

Dickinson and Beam’® in their series give
a figure of 35 per cent. for 965 cases, but
again their series is weighted by the inclusion of cases which come to consult upon
their sterility.

From our point of view it does not
matter which of the partners is responsible
for the sterility, but in passing we may
note that these latter authors® give a figure
of 44 per cent. for the female and 43 per
cent. for the male in the series which they
present. Other workers give figures varying from 10 to go per cent, but evidently
in such there are many fallacies.

THE SEXUAL OUTLOOK

Under this heading we have two factors
which will affect the chance of pregnancy
occurring. ‘The first is frigidity, and the
second coitus of more than normal frequency, Dickinson and Beam* and Davies‘
give the following figures :

TABLE II

Frequency Dickinson and Davies
Beam (526 cases) (971 cases)
A. Daily or oftener 82 cases 16% gocases 9:2%

B. One to three
times a month
Once in two to
six months ...
Seldom or infrequently
Less than once
a year ... 58cases 11:0%

The whole question is a very difficult one

but, in general, it would appear as if the
normal incidence of coitus was about three

RO
125 cases 12°8%

-§9
14 cases 2:°6%

38 cases 3:9%

87

times a week. Davies shows that 71 per
cent. of her cases fall into this category,
upon either side of which are the two
extremes given above. At one end of the
scale (B) the frequency of coitus appears
to border upon abstention; and we must
realize that there is then a considerable
chance that coitus may take place during
one of the relatively infertile periods which
exist during each month. At the other (A),
where sexual intercourse takes place daily
or oftener, it would seem possible that the
spermatoxins might be formed. The work
on this subject is as yet by no means really
clear, although from a paper by Freeman
and Dreisbach® (as yet unpublished, submitted to me by the Committee on Maternal
Health) it certainly would appear that spermatoxins can be and are successfully produced. Davies has correlated the number of
pregnancies occurring with the frequency of
intercourse, and has shown that while in
the entire group 16°3 per cent. were never
pregnant, amongst the 90 who had ihtercourse daily or more frequently only 8-8
per cent. fell into this category. This
appears to be an entire contradiction of the
hypothesis that spermatoxins are formed,
and tends to support the belief that the
greater the frequency of sexual intercourse
the greater the chance of pregnancy.
Davies* re-analyzes her figures so as to
show how, in this same group, the use of
contraceptives affects the percentage of
pregnancies. The figure is higher among
those who have used contraceptives than in
the group which has not. A knowledge of
proprietary chemical contraceptives enables
one to visualize many conditions which
might be produced within the vagina, and
which are entirely capable of altering the
biochemical and bacteriological reactions of
that organ. In this manner spermatozoa
which would normally die might survive,

. thus greatly increasing the chance of a

pregnancy. This is discussed later.

We must also realize that many matters
appertaining to the social state of the
patient are of great importance, since, as
we all know, there are differences in the
number of children (per hundred married
88

couples) in the various social classes. To
take the 1911 figures, teachers, ministers,
physicians, and authors give an average of
99°8 children ; policemen and postmen 156;
carmen, dock labourers, barmen, and
miners 230, while general labourers beget
438 children.

Now many different reasons are assigned
in explanation of these figures, but the
factors which seem most cogent are recreation and bedroom accommodation, since
both of them will have repercussions, not
only on the frequency of coitus, but also
on the chance of a contraceptive, if it is
used, being employed in the manner
directed. The latter is not so cogent when
a method such as the rubber pessary is
used, since that is inserted and removed at
leisure under conditions free from the
disturbing influences of coitus, but it
becomes very urgent where chemical
methods are employed.

CONTRACEPTIVE METHODS

Now it will be evident that, as far as the
clinics go, the women who come to them
have all been fertile and, in most cases, still
are. In general, therefore, successes from
this source may, with certain reservations,
be accepted as being due to the contraceptive method employed, generally the
**Dutch Cap.’’ On the other hand, we find
that a great number of other methods are
manufactured and sold by chemist shops
or through other channels. ‘There are suppositories, jellies, foam tablets, and condoms ; and with the exception of the figures
given by Charles,’ referring to condoms
and suppositories (no make stated), and by
Stone® with reference to jellies, we have no
knowledge as to the success or otherwise of
these.

Before passing on to a discussion of the
chemical methods, there is one interesting
point in connection with the success
reported by the condom. Charles gives
82+3°4 per cent. for the success of the
condom, and when it is reinforced by a
chemical method the percentage of success
rises to Ioo (quinine) and to a figure of 92+
7°8 when syringing was also employed. Thus

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the use of the condom plus another method
gave 98+2°2 per cent. Now it would seem
that this difference between the percentage of
success attained with the condom alone and
that with another method can only be attributed to a flaw in the condom—since, after
all, the use of another method does not
necessarily increase vaginal lubrication
which might possibly prevent condoms
from bursting. If a large number of condoms are examined at a wholesaler’s, it
will be found that about 20 per cent. contain flaws. A stock such as this is often
sold to retailers as ‘‘ untested,’’ but these
latter merely roll the condoms up, place
them in envelopes and sell them. In this
manner a 20 per cent, possibility of failure
becomes evident. If condoms which have
been tested and have not aged are used,
there is much evidence to show that the
percentage of success should be much higher
than the value given by Charles.

Scarcely any information is forthcoming
concerning purely chemical methods,
Charles only giving one series where
quinine soluble suppositories have shown
a 54+5.9 success. Very many products
of this nature are to be found varying in
size, in the quality of the cocoa butter, and
in the concentration of spermicide; and
more reliable information is therefore necessary before we can criticize this series.
Stone has examined the clinical results
obtainable with five jellies possessing different formule, and it is interesting to note
that the expectation of success as evolved
upon this basis, runs parallel to that
actually attained.

It has been stressed* that two problems
exist in chemical contraception. Firstly,
we have that associated with the erection of
a chemical barrier in such a manner that
the spermatozoa cannot gain entry into the
cervical canal; and secondly, we have the
one dealing with the choice of spermicides.
The latter is important, as was shown ¥
Stone’s series ; but it is pre-eminently necessary that the barrier should be satisfactorily
formed and should remain in position until
all the spermatozoa are dead. I have already
pointed out that chemical methods are depenNATURAL INFERTILITY

dent upon certain variables for their success.
Foam tablets are dependent for their success
upon :

(a) Their insertion into the vagina a

sufficient time before the commencement of coitus.

(b) The presence of moisture.

(c) The absence of pressure.

Suppositories are dependent for their success upon :

(a) The time factor (as above).
(b) The temperature factor. ‘This is of
special importance where low| grade products are considered.
(c) The volume of the vagina.

Jellies are independent of most of these
- factors, but the volume of the vagina and
the viscosity of the jelly must be considered.

Foam Jellies are mostly independent of the
above factors. On account of their
method of action they can exert their full
effect regardless of time, temperature,
and moisture.

It will be evident that from the above an
expectation of success can be evolved; and
an elaboration of the original argument,
correlated with clinical success and failure,
would appear to justify the claim that these
views are in keeping with actual fact.

It is upon methods which possess a low
eficiency and which are dependent upon
several of the above factors that we must
focus our attention; for the successful
results which are often claimed for them
would seem to be attributable to the previously discussed sterilities. ‘These claims
are entirely comparable to those that are put
forward by some who state that they ‘‘ have
used coitus interruptus for ten years and
have never become pregnant.”’

Yes! but are the users fertile?

TYE BIOCHEMISTRY AND BACTERIOLOGY
OF THE VAGINA

The bacteriology of the vagina is a subject which has been much neglected as far
as contraceptive research is concerned ; and
yet it, together with the various biochemical

B

89

changes which also take place, must play a
most important part in the problem of contraception. These questions will naturally
arise in the discussion of certain forms of
sterility ; but to a great extent they become,
I venture to suggest, more urgent where
some of the chemical methods which are
employed are considered.

Doderlein’ in 1892 investigated the
vaginal secretion of pregnant women with
special reference to puerperal fever, and his
work was later corroborated by others.
Their observations led them to believe that
secretions of the vagina possessed a bactericidal power associated with pronounced
acidity ; this was due to lactic acid which
normally was present in a concentration of
o*4 per cent., but which rose during pregnancy too’g per cent. The presence of an acid
in such concentrations would naturally be an
important factor in inhibiting organisms
which were incapable of survival at such a
pH, and in favouring others.

Later work showed that the presence of
lactic acid was due to the fermentable carbohydrate, glycogen. There would, however,
appear to be considerable difference in the
deposition of this substance in different
species, or in the same species, according
to the efficiency of ovarian function. As
regards the former point, glycogen, which
is the source of lactic acid in the human and
the higher apes, is produced at the rate of
12°17 mgm in 24 hours, the pH being proportional to the lactic acid produced; while
in rats, cats, rabbits, and guinea-pigs
glycogen is absent and the secretions are
alkaline. Space.does not permit a fuller
discussion of this matter, and further information should be sought from A System
of Bacteriology in Relation to Medicine
(published by the Medical Research Council).* But the above will serve to indicate
that some of the experimentation which has
been carried out upon the lower animals is
not capable of application in its entirety to
the human female; and it would appear that
much further work in this direction is
necessary.

In Table III the influence of pH upon the
life and vitality of spermatozoa and certain
go

forms of bacteria is shown. It must be
remembered that the conditions within the
vagina may change three times:

(a) The normal pH of the vagina.
(b) The pH after the insertion of a
chemical contraceptive.
(c) The pH after ejaculation has taken
place.
may naturally be omitted in
appropriate circumstances.)

(“ b 3

The seminal fluid is usually distinctly
alkaline, a condition which will not only
neutralize the normal vaginal acidity, but
will also ensure that the spermatozoa will
definitely survive a sufficient length of time
to gain the shelter of the cervical canal. If
the vagina has an abnormally high pH at
the commencement, the chance of survival
is increased ; and if a chemical contraceptive
which possesses a pH of about 6 or 7 is
used, it will be evident that the reaction of
the vagina will not return to normal for a
very considerable time. Thus the chance that
a pregnancy will follow becomes greater.
Upon these lines one might suggest that there
would be a correlation between fecundity
and a heavy abnormal bacterial infection of

 

 

TABLE II
Spermatozoa| Spermatozoa become qui- | Spermatowill die and | escent if subjected to these |zoa become
revitalization} conditions for a long | progressis impossible | enough period ; if only for | ively more
a short time, they can be active
revitalized
|
Normal :
flora cocci | otteptococci
| | r tr ty oT
3°0 §=3°5 | 470 | 45 50] 5°5 6:0
3°86 4°45 5°34 6°4

THE EUGENICS REVIEW,

the vagina; while a similar state might
easily be produced by the use of chemical
contraceptives which allow such a condition
to arise.

It has also been shown that the reactions
of the vagina change during the menstrual
cycle—which may explain the observations
of some workers, who suggest that certain
preparations may be more efficacious at one
period of the cycle than at another, and also
that some are apt to give rise to irritation where normally no discomfort is
experienced.

Many aspects of the problem have been
discussed in this communication, and I
greatly hope that a frank discussion and
exchange of views will result therefrom, to
the end that we may strive to obtain
accurate information and focus our attention upon such methods as are likely to be
harmless to the user and successful in use.

REFERENCES
1 Voge, The Chemistry and Physics of Con
traceptives. Jonathan Cape. London, 1933.
Pp. 288.

2 Giles, Sterility in Women. Oxford University Press. 1919. Pp. 227.

Thousand MarBaltimore, 1931.

3 Dickinson and Beam, A
riages. Williams and Wilkins.
Pp. 482.

4 Davies, Factors in the Sex Life of TwentyTwo Hundred American Women. Harper. New
York, 1929. Pp. 430.

5 Charles, The Practice of Birth Control.
Williams and Norgate. London, 1932. Pp. 190.
6 Stone, Therapeutic Contraception. Medical

Journal and Record.
1928,

7 Déderlein, Das Scheidensekret und seine
Bedeutung fiir das Puerperal-fieber. Durr,
Leipzig, 1892. (Cited by: See reference 8.)

a A System of Bacteriology in Relation
to Medicine. Medical Research Council, Vol.
VIII, page 363 et seq.

® Wagner-Manslau, Human Fertility, EUGENICS
REVIEW, 1932, Vol. XXIV, No. 3.

New York, March arst,

 

ee

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 2.
