THE ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION

AND

PEP

By RICHARD RUMBOLD

ning) has recently issued a valuable

paper (Population and the Press:
Ihe Royal Commission Reports)* setting out
its views on the Report of the Royal
Commission on Population published in June,
1949. The pamphlet, as is to be expected,
consists mainly of a comparison between the
Royal Commission’s report and PE P’s
own report on the same subject which was
published in 1948 under the title of Population Policy in Great Britain.t ‘‘ The two
reports,’ says PE P, “have very much in
common. They discuss the same things, in
much the same way, and by and large come
to the same conclusions.’’ But (it adds)
for that very reason the Royal Commission’s
report is rather disappointing, since a body
with such resources might have been expected to achieve more than P E P with its
far more limited resources although the
formidable battery of statistics accumulated by the Royal Commission will prove
invaluable in any further discussions of
population questions; and it is very reassuring that, despite the highly controversial nature of the subject, these two very
different bodies, working independently,
have seen the essentials of the problem in
very much the same light.

Eugenists, however, will note with disappointment that the Royal Commission,
although implicitly aware of the qualitative
aspects of population problems, is much
more cautious than PEP in making any
positive recommendations in this matter.
P E P wants a Family Welfare Service linked
to the National Health Service within which
would be a group of para-medical services.
This Welfare Service would be at the disposal of couples contemplating marriage,

Pp E P (Political and Economic Plan
* Planning. No. 301.
{ EuGENIcs REVIEW, July, 1948, 40, 2, pp. 55-60.

giving them advice on minor sexual problems, advice which should include an eugenic
assessment of the parties; abortion would
be legalized on certain eugenic grounds ;
and voluntary sterilization would be permissible for people suffering from hereditary
disease. But support for these admirable
proposals is lamentably absent from the
Royal Commission’s report. ‘“‘We have
received evidence (it states) of a small but
growing demand for advice on suitability
from an eugenic point of view for parenthood. The evidence does not justify us in
recommending any comprehensive provision
at this stage, but we should like to see
experiments made where circumstances are
suitable. A clinic which embraced facilities
for advice on infecundity and on birth
control could develop naturally as the needs
emerged to include pre-marital examinations
and other services of direct relevance to
family welfare.’ This all eugenists will
rightly regard as “fiddling while Rome
burns”; and in addition no proposals are
made in regard to sterilization.

Let us turn now to the wider issues of
population policy. Both reports are in
agreement (though they reach it by different
considerations) as to what the goal should
be : a falling population, they declare, would
have considerable disadvantages, but, on
the other hand, there are no valid reasons
to justify substantial increases, and the goal
of policy should be, therefore, to increase the
birth rate to the point at which the present
population replaces itself. PEP believes
that with good planning a rising standard
of life can be secured for a stationary population, and the Royal Commission states that
“the uncertainty of the future regarding
world supplies of food and the opportunities
of British export trades gives us good reason
to be thankful that no further large increases
in our population are probable.”

127
128

The methods of securing the desired increase in the birth-rate should be primarily
by creating a society sufficiently attractive
for people to want to bring children into it.
There must be no attempt to coerce women
into childbearing by lowering their status,
depriving them of careers or by restricting
the use of contraceptives. No one could
quarrel with this humane thesis, but it may
be questioned whether PEP is justified
in contending that ‘individuals may be
morally certain that children are a blessing
and that anyone who thinks otherwise has
a false and distorted sense of values.”’
Parenthood, surely, is a vocation, calling for
qualities of high selflessness and devotion,
and not everybody is inclined or fitted to
accept its trials and responsibilities ; and
nothing can quicker lead to disaster than
to badger people into bringing children into
the world against their will by telling them
that their reluctance to become parents
spells a distorted sense of values.

Both reports recommend an increase in
family allowances and an increase in the
present insurance maternity grant for the
first baby; and PEP recommends lowinterest marriage loans. But both declare
that the major obstacle to parenthood and
family life is shortage of houses. The need
to build houses more quickly is imperative,
and the Royal Commission asks for more
variety in size of houses to enable families
to move as they expand and then contract
with the years; and both agree on the
importance of giving large families the
financial means to pay the rents of the large
dwellings that are available. PEP, however, puts forward a positive proposal to
extend rent assistance to all families, whoever are their landlords. After definition of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a standard of accommodation appropriate
to a family, the family would receive a grant
representing the difference between the rent
which it could afford and the reasonable rent
of this appropriate accommodation. The
Royal Commission also accepts the need for
some such scheme, but recommends that an
expert committee should be appointed to
examine the possibility of a general scheme
of rent subsidies or rent rebates related to
the size of the family.

Another question over which the two
bodies are in substantial agreement is emigration. Both recognize the disadvantages
of large-scale emigration from this country,
particularly, of course, of young able-bodied
workers, which is bound to exaggerate the
present bad age-distribution. On the other
hand, emigration to Commonwealth countries, particularly if it included a share of
dependants, has obvious strategic advantages in lowering the density of population ;
and both reports believe that the matter
should be discussed farther on the highest
level between the Governments concerned.
Regarding immigration, however, there is
considerable difference of view. PEP is
inclined to welcome selective European
immigration to compensate for deficiencies
in fertility, shortages of certain types of manpower and losses due to emigration. But the
Royal Commission is pessimistic about the
“ capacity of a fully established society like
ours to absorb immigrants of alien race and
religion.”’

These, however, are relatively minor differences, and the wide measure of agreement
reached by the two bodies should greatly
increase the value and importance of each
other’s work.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLI, No. 3
