CAUSES OF RACIAL DECAY

DISTRIBUTION OF NATURAL CAPACITY

The Need for a National Stocktaking
THE GALTON LECTURE, 1928

By C. J. BOND, CMG, FER.CS.

the distribution of Natural Capacity*

in the population, a few words on the
causes of the decay of earlier civilizations
from the biological point of view may not be
out of place.

Periodicity—the cyclical process of ascent
and descent, of integration and disintegration, of birth and death—seems to be inherent in the universal scheme of things.
Civilizations and nations, like individuals,
are born; they pass through successive
stages of growth, maturity, and decline, and
they eventually die or pass away. We are,
however, so familiar with death in the individual, that we regard it as natural and
inevitable. The life of a nation or race,
on the other hand, extends over a period not
included within individual experience.
Hence decay is here less familiar, and is
regarded in a somewhat different light. We
recall Herbert Spencer’s’ well-known comparison between the life of the individual
and the social organism, and more recently
Spengler’s? description of human societies
and cultures as necessarily passing through
successive stages of childhood, youth, manhood, and old age.

In associating periodicity with the life history of races I merely wish to imply that
civilizations and races have, as a matter of
historical fact, passed through these successive stages. The periodicity in their case,
however, must not be regarded as identical
with the same cyclical process as seen in the
life of the individual organism. It is also
necessary, as MaclIver3 says, to draw a distinction between culture and civilization.
just as we distinguish between life and
organization. It is the life of a people

Rie commencing our study of

* By Natural Capacity is meant the ability to respond effectively to, or to become adapted mentally
and physically to, a changing or widening environment in space and time.

which decays, and which is, or which may
be renewed by the infusion of more vigorous
racial characters. The decline of the
civilization or the culture follows later.

It is also important, when discussing the
fall of earlier civilizations, that we should
bear in mind the fact, pointed out by Major
Darwin‘ and others, that the causes in each
case have been not one but many. Further,
as Perry’ points out, a culture may perish
while the population which produced it may
persist at a lower level of existence.

Flinders Petrie® in his book on ‘‘ Revolutions in Civilizations’? gives a chart on page
80 which shows in graphic form the rising
and falling waves in the eight stages of
early Egyptian civilization. He concludes
that in each phase there has been a stage of
advance through strife and effort to a period
of maximum wealth production. This coincides with the crest of the wave, and is followed by a period of decline, and this again
(after an interval) by another rise. The
stage of ascent is characterized by autocratic,
the summit of the wave by oligarchic, and
the falling phase by democratic rule. Petrie
also states, and this is important from our
present standpoint, that ‘‘ in every case the
rise which followed the fall was preceded by
the incursion of a new race.’’ Our knowledge, however, of the racial qualities of
these invading peoples is very scanty. He
also goes on to say that the complete mixing
of the population, through the fusion of the
new with the old race, occupied some seven
hundred or eight hundred years—that is,
until the period of maximum ability has
been reached.

When we speak of a stage in any culture
when ‘‘ Wealth accumulates and men decay,’’
we must remember that some accumulation
of wealth is a necessary accompaniment of
every civilization. As Keith’ truly remarks,
** Without capital (i.e., biological capital)
6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

we can neither preserve nor absorb knowledge.’’? In the same way, forms of Government—autocratic, oligarchic, democratic,
and plutocratic rule—are, like wealth accumulation, accompaniments rather than
causal factors. They interact with human
activities in various fields, and promote or
hinder progress. The real factors which
determine the rise and fall of nations and
civilizations are the racial qualities and the
innate capacities of the citizens themselves,
and the way in which these capacities are
exercised.

But what is the significance of the fact
that the period of maximum wealth production has, in so many cases, coincided with
the crest of the civilization wave, and has
accompanied the beginning of the fall?
Surely this: that it is not the accumulation
of wealth but the lack of capacity to use
wealth to right ends—that is, to ends which
promote racial welfare—which is responsible
for the decay. It is the inability to resist
the enervating effects of luxury, the ceasing
to put forth effort. It is the loss of these
essential qualities, rather than forms of
government or accumulation of material
wealth, which have initiated and promoted
decline. Thus we are brought back to biological factors as the chief source of the
decline of past civilizations and of earlier
races.

The demands of a growing and complex
civilization increase out of proportion to the
growth of the innate mental and moral qualities of the people. Social outruns biological
growth. Meanwhile, as Fisher says®, ‘‘ The
fate of a civilization may be sealed by so
small a thing as the economic advantage of
the less fertile stocks’’ ;in other words, by a
differential birth-rate exercising a dysgenic
effect on the population.

INDIVIDUAL AND RACE

Provided we strictly observe the limitations as to periodicity we may gain some
light on the problem of racial decline from a
study of the life history of the individual
organism. We know from the work of
Hughlings Jackson and other eminent neurologists, among whom I may mention
my friends the late Sir Frederick Mott

and Sir Victor Horsley, that advancing age, disease, and other injurious
influences exercise their earliest and chief
effect on the more highly organized and the
more recently evolved centres in the brain.
We also know that the fully grown functionally active nerve cell does not give rise to
new nerve cells. So, too, with the epithelial
skin cells : the older cells die and are thrown
off and their place is taken by younger, less
specialized cells which grow up from
below.*

The life of a nation in the same way is
normally renewed from below by individuals
and families of less social achievement perhaps, but of greater racial potentiality. It
is true that the lowest social groups are today (in this country) contributing far too
large a share to the population. But this
is abnormal, both biologically and sociologically. These lowest groups contain a
large proportion of bodily and mentally defective individuals. They are like the parasitic cancer cells in the individual organism
in which specialization and functional
capacity have given place to excessive cell
multiplication.

Thus while decline arising in the more
specialized units is a common feature of both
individual and social life, decay arising in
the less specialized units is abnormal and
more serious. It is a sign of disease and
degeneration in both the individual and the
nation, and indicates the commencement of
racial decline. |

Again, we speak of a ‘‘ natural span of
life,’? which varies in length in animals of
different species and in different human
families. Galton’s own family descent on
his mother’s side provides a striking example. In the human individual longevity
depends mainly on hereditary qualities, on a
capacity to resist disease and the wear and
tear of life. The same is probably true of
different human races.

But while this capacity for continued life

¢

* It is true that when grown in pure culture, under
suitable conditions outside the body, highly
specialized cells, perhaps even nerve cells, do show
some capacity for reproduction. But the fact remains
that when growing in the body under normal conditions reproductive activity is in inverse proportion
to specialization.
CAUSES OF RACIAL DECAY 7

is not renewed in the individual, a people
or a race can be rejuvenated by an infusion
of new qualities from a more vigorous race.*
- Carr-Saunders? suggests that just as domestication increases the fecundity of wild
animals so civilization (a form of domestication) may have increased the fecundity of
the human species. In regard to this point,
however, we must remember that selective
breeding for productivity has played a considerable part in the domestication of
animals. Further, although moderately
civilized peoples do have, no doubt, large
and growing populations, a highly elaborate
civilization like our own brings about unhealthy modes of living and artificial conditions of life which resemble the effects of
captivity rather than domestication in the
_case of wild animals, and thus tends to reduce
rather than to increase fecundity, both in
animals and in the human species. It may
‘be that under the influence of natural or
artificial selection, a type or types of the
human race will arise which can become
highly civilized without losing fecundity.
‘Such would be a very valuable quality from
the survival point of view, and might prove
to be the deciding factor in race survival in
. the future.
- However this may be, there can be no
: doubt as to the increasing value of ‘‘capacity
‘for citizenship ’’ in our modern civilization.
.By “capacity for citizenship ’’ is meant
power to contribute by productive labour or
‘by some other form of useful service to
rnational welfare. This constitutes civic
rworth. But there is another kind of worth
fof equal importance—viz., racial value,
rwhich represents the capacity to hand on
Ethese good qualities through offspring to
Bsucceeding generations.

Civic worth and racial value are not
Palways found in accurate association in the
Rsame individual or in the same family. It
ms true that, speaking generally, and when
Mlealing with large numbers, they are assoFeiated ; but our trouble begins when we try
to apportion civic worth and racial worth to

 
   
     
   
   
      
  

E *I am not now considering the possibility of the
occurrence of rejuvenation in the individual as the
fesult of organ-grafting or of organotherapathy.

particular groups of the population at different social levels.

Now, this inverse relationship between
specialization and reproductive capacity
is a fundamental phenomenon running
throughout life. It has its parallel in the
experience of the stock breeder. It also
probably plays an important part in
the well-known sterility of inter-special
hybrids. In the mule, for instance, blending of parental characters occurs in the F.1
generation, in which also, though the hybrids may possess normal or even increased
vigour, they are sterile inter se. It may also
be concerned in the phenomena of dominance, recessivity, and segregation in Mendelian inheritance.

But in addition to its general genetic
interest, this antithesis between specialization and reproduction has considerable importance for us in the study of eugenic
problems. For instance, in tracing the
transmission of a particular talent in families of the same ancestral stock, it is frequently found that the special gift is handed
on by members who have not themselves
achieved distinction, rather than by the
geniuses themselves. The same thing holds
good in the case of mental abnormalities and
defects. A particular defect may be handed
on by ‘“‘ carriers ’’ who do not themselves
show any abnormality.

‘There is also the exceptional case of men
and women of genius, of creative power, reformers and pioneers in the realms of
thought and conduct. In many cases such
individuals have been ignored by Society,
or they have been outcasts or persecuted.
While their contribution to the social heritage of mankind has been very great, their
racial legacy, in the shape of offspring
gifted like themselves, has frequently been
small or even absent. ‘They resemble the
highly organized and specialized brain cells
which govern and control the individual
organism, but leave no descendants.

Thus it comes about that economic status,
wage-earning capacity, and position in the
social scale, though on the average useful,
are not wholly reliable criteria of racial
worth. This difficulty, however, is less
when we come to deal with the groups at the
8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

bottom of the social scale. These lowest
level groups—the mentally defective, the
habitual criminal, the inebriate, and the
hereditary pauper classes—possess no Civic
worth. They contribute nothing to national
welfare ;they also possess no racial value, but
are at the same time highly fertile. Though,
as Carr-Saunders” has shown in the case of
the mentally defectives, and Goring in that
of the criminal classes, their contribution to
the next generation according to their numbers (absolute fertility) is less than that of
the rest of the population.

If then, as in a general way and when dealing with large numbers the evidence compels us to do, we assume a high degree of
correlation between civic achievement or
social status and racial worth, and if we use
wage-earning capacity or social status as
tests of social worth, we become liable, except in a general way, to certain errors
against which we must be on our guard.

We do not attach enough importance to
those upward and downward currents which
are constantly spreading through Society
and which disturb the normal association
between civic and racial worth. An effective social ladder is no doubt (as McDougall"?
says) an important agency in the advance
of a civilization. It tends to collect good
mental qualities in the upper social strata.
But it also leaves the lower strata depleted.
Then, if these good qualities (owing to reduced fertility above) are not perpetuated,
the ultimate effect of such a social ladder
may be to hasten the time when the reservoir of good qualities, from which the life
of a nation is renewed, becomes empty. In
this way social growth outruns innate
capacity, and the ladder becomes or may
become a factor in decline.

We see the same thing in the life history
of certain families. A family rises in the
economic and social scale. It contributes
to national welfare. It possesses, in fact,
civic worth, and it also shows (or until the
introduction of the practice of conception
control, did show) normal fertility. Then
after a period of economic and_ social
stability of varying length, a period of decline sets in, probably from inter-breeding

with less gifted families, with accompanying
loss of civic status and racial worth.
In the lowest level groups, on the other

, hand, civic and racial value are both lack
ing, while fertility alone remains. It is true
that in these groups (as Lidbetter’ has
shown) mating of like with like occurs, and
this tends to bring about some degree of
isolation, whereas in the group immediately
above this lowest section—the group which
includes the lower grades of unskilled
labour, the habitually poor, and the slum
dweller—the danger of the dissemination of
inferior qualities is greater. "The members
of this group mingle freely with and intermarry with members of the groups above.
Hence a constant deterioration goes on in
the population which, if continued long
enough and on a sufficiently large scale,
must lead to racial decay.

This is the direct biological effect of such
inter-breeding. But there is also an indirect sociological effect of much importance.
The support of this economically incapable
group is largely borne by the more capable
citizens above. Their ability to rear their
own families is thereby reduced. If, in addition to bearing this burden, their ability to
bear it is also diminished, a double injury
is inflicted on the nation.

Thus we must regard the great middle
section of the population as the main reservoir from which the life of the nation is
renewed ; and as long as the ‘‘ heart of a
nation ’’ remains sound incipient decline
may be arrested. Our aim must be therefore to increase the relative fertility rate in
this large and important group of average
citizens, and in those above the average.
We may, I think, leave the topmost social
group, the so-called ‘‘ cream of Society,’’
outside our immediate consideration. ‘The
present low fertility rate in this small section
is not the direct result of poverty, and if, on
the other hand, it be due to loss of natural
fertility, or to a desire to escape the duties
and responsibilities of parenthood, then the
race will not suffer if these characters are not
perpetuated.

But if our British race is to maintain its
proud position at the head of the nations,
CAUSES OF RACIAL DECAY 9

we must see to it that we do not, among
other good qualities, lose our capacity for
citizenship.

Now, capacity for citizenship in this administrative and higher sense is of comparatively recent growth in the history of
human development, and like all the more
recently acquired faculties, it is one of the
first to be lost when a nation or a race begins
to decline. Under the conditions now prevailing in the modern world the danger of
pu losing this essential quality lies in

reeding from inferior, anti-social stocks in
our own population rather than from wholejsale admixture with an alien race. ‘This
capacity for leadership, this organizing
ability, is one of the most valuable of all
racial qualities, especially in an Imperial
people like our own.

It would not, I think, be safe to conclude
that because there is less crime of certain
kinds nowadays that no deterioration is
going on in the mental qualities, or in the
capacity for citizenship, of our population.
‘The mental make-up which led some citizens to violent, adventurous conduct regarded as anti-social and criminal when
practised in the old country no doubt helped
the Botany Bay transportees and the
settlers of a hundred years ago to make
good, and to contribute to the making of a
new nation in the freer atmosphere of the
new Australian continent. The question is
whether the particular kind of criminal conduct which is associated with mental defect
shows a similar decline.

No doubt more might be done to develop
the exercise of this capacity for citizen‘ship by instruction in our schools in
the duties, responsibilities and privileges
of citizenship. For it is by education
“that a racial conscience must be awak-ened and a sense of responsibility to
-future generations cultivated ; for, as Have“Jock Ellis’3 has said, it is we who ‘“‘ generate
‘the race and we alone can regenerate it,’’
“that is, in so far as biological factors are
“concerned,

‘NEED FOR AN ENQUIRY

- We have now considered some of the
“causes which have led to the decline of

civilizations in the past. We have also compared the life history of the social and the
individual organism. ‘The time has come to
ask the question whether all is well with our
own British race, or whether, in view of the
disquieting statements in certain official reports, a fuller inquiry on a national scale, a
national stocktaking, a census of the quality
as well as the quantity of the population, is
not urgently called for.

I am indebted to Sir Arthur Keith for
valuable information concerning previous
inquiries, in which he and our President
took an active part. In recent years notice
was first drawn to this subject of physical
deterioration immediately after the Boer
War, by the late General Sir F. Maurice.™
In the following year the Army recruiting
statistics’ showed that 4o per cent. of the
men offering themselves for military service
during the previous ten years had been rejected owing to physical defects. Then
came the Report of the Scottish Royal Commission,’© and a little later, in 1904, the Report of the Inter-Departmental Committee
on Physical Deterioration.?7 This committee, influenced by the absence of all data
of comparable value, recommended that a
census of the people should be taken in
order to reveal physical defects if present ;
and they also outlined a scheme.

Nothing, however, was done, and the late
Lord Londonderry, replying on behalf of the
Government in the debate in the House of
Lords, said that one difficulty was a possible
objection on the part of parents to any
measurement of their children. Later
efforts by the anthropological section of the
British Association and the Royal Anthropological Institute failed to bring about any
advance.

In 1908 the Act was passed authorizing
the compulsory medical examination of
school children. This medical examination
of (at that time) some two million children
of school-age, ‘‘ entrants ’’’ and “ leavers,’’
formed the first step towards an anthropological survey. ‘The very important facts
thus revealed concerning the incidence of
physical defects in the schoolchildren of the
country have been forcibly brought to the
Io THE EUGENICS REVIEW

notice of the Government and the public in
the valuable annual reports of the Chief
Medical Officer of the Board of Education,
Sir George Newman.”

It is encouraging to find that the latest
report, that for 1926, shows a definite improvement. The Report states (page 12)
that the English child is growing in stature
and in weight. ‘This is good hearing so
far as the prevention and cure of disease,
better nutrition and better environmental
conditions are concerned, and although
mental health and vigour would, if tested,
no doubt also show a corresponding improvement, this does not necessarily mean
that any forward step has been secured in
the elimination of innate physical and mental defects. The fact that the condition of
the children of pre-school age does not show
a like improvement is important from this
point of view.%8

Two lines of action seem to be open to us
in dealing with our child population. We
may—indeed we must—promote physiological living, and provide food, fresh air,
sunlight, exercise, and sleep, in order to
build up a healthy adult population.” If
we concentrate, as we are inclined to do,
on the children with hereditary mental and
bodily defects, we may no doubt save individual lives that would otherwise have
perished, but, unless we take at the same
time, effective steps to prevent the perpetuation of these defects we shall be promoting
racial deterioration and we shall inflict an
injury and not a benefit on the nation.

While fully recognizing the great work
done by the medical inspection of school
children, one may perhaps be permitted to
question the accuracy of the inference in the
opening paragraph of Circular 576 issued by
the Board of Education in November, 1907,
‘‘ That the mental and moral improvement
of coming generations will be a natural corrollary of the physical improvement in the
school children which it is the aim of the
Board to bring about ”’; that is, unless we
cease breeding from the less vigorous and
lower grade stocks which our well intentioned efforts have kept alive, and have enabled to reach the reproductive age. It is,
however, encouraging to read (page 13 of

the Report) that ‘‘ It is anticipated that the
Report of the Anthropometric Committee on
Physical Measurements will be available in
a few months.”’ It is also to be hoped that
this will be followed by a survey of the
native intelligence of the children.

In 1916 the Royal Society called a conference of the scientific societies of the
country, with Major Darwin as Chairman,
to which the Board of Education, the Local
Government Board, the Ministry of National
Service and the Registrar-General sent representatives. This conference again urged
the importance of such a national survey,
but it recommended that each Government
department should carry on its own inquiry.
It also became evident that any scheme to be
complete must include the whole or, at any
rate, samples of the womanhood of the
country. In 1918 came the report of Sir
James Galloway’s Commission,” appointed
by the Ministry of National Service. This
examination in 1917-18 of two and a half
millions (the exact figures were 2,425,184)
men of military age, revealed a very unsatisfactory condition as regards the physical state, vigour, and health of this section
of the population. In short, it showed that,
on the average, of every nine men of military
age in Great Britain in 1917-18 only three
were perfectly fit and healthy ; two were on
a definitely lower plane of health and
vigour ; three were incapable of undergoing
more than a moderate degree of physical
effort, while one was a confirmed invalid.

In assessing, however, the value of these
results, we must remember that in a certain
proportion of cases these defects, if not inborn, would disappear, and in fact did disappear under the influence of an open-air
life, regular exercise, and military training.
On the other hand, we cannot ignore the
fact that the standard for peace should be at
least equal to the standard for war, the ideal
in both cases being a sound mind in a sound
body.

In addition to official and semi-official reports dealing with physical defects we
have some evidence in regard to the equally
important problem of the mental qualities
of the population. Reports”™ issued by the
Board of Control showed that in January,
CAUSES OF RACIAL DECAY II

1925, the number of notified insane persons
under control in England and Wales was
131,551, while the mental defectives under
care numbered 19,376, although these
figures do not represent the total numbers in
the population. Dr. Tredgold,” in an important address to the Royal Sanitary Institute Congress in July, 1926, pointed out that
there were 50,000 mentally defective children of school-age, excluding imbeciles and
idiots. He estimates that in June, 1926,
the insane and mentally deficient persons
composed one per cent. of the population,
and, of great importance from our present
point of view, he states that in his opinion
four-fifths of all cases of mental deficiency
are due to inborn causes. Carr-Saunders”
estimates the number of mental defectives as
between 350,000 and 380,000, or IO per
thousand of the population.

The Reports of H.M. Inspectors of
Constabulary for 1924 show that out
of 100 men who applied for admission
to the Police Force in ten years only
five were admitted as physically and mentally fit to undertake the responsible and
onerous duties of a police constable. I
should also like to draw attention to the
valuable inquiries conducted by Mr. Lidbetter and other observers into the life histories of a number of families of the pauper
and habitual criminal class.

In addition to these reports and inquiries
some evidence of a more general character
is available. Thus, Sir A. Keith, dealing
with physical defects, finds from a comparative examination of the skeletons and skulls,
especially the jaw bones and teeth, of early
and modern inhabitants of these islands,
that very important physical changes have
taken place and that some of these changes
are degenerative and detrimental in character. Medical men, too, practising in large
cities, with an experience extending over
more than one generation of urban
dwellers, have from time to time expressed
the opinion that degeneration among city
dwellers is going on.

To sum up, we must conclude that there
are real grounds for thinking that the physical and mental condition of a considerable
section of our population is not satisfac
tory and that some deterioration is going on;
secondly, that in view of the urgent need
for accurate data and the great assistance
such information would give in revealing
directions in which steps might be taken to
arrest decline, a survey of the physical and
mental condition of the population, or of
representative samples of it, should be
undertaken without delay.

IMPORTANCE OF MENTAL QUALITIES

So far we have been mainly considering
physical characters. But if, as we believe,
the civilization of the future will develop
on psychical lines, then intellectual and
moral qualities, personality, character, and
capacity for citizenship will assume a growing importance in the social environment
of the future. Hence we must endeavour
to ascertain the extent to which these essential mental qualities are present to-day in
different social groups in the population, in
order that accurate comparisons may be
made between present and future records.
It is only in this way that we can find out
whether mental improvement or deterioration 1s going on.

No doubt there are difficulties. It may,
for instance, be said that it is only possible
to judge of mental qualities by observing the
behaviour of the individual, man or animal,
as the case may be; and inasmuch as behaviour depends on experience and training,
as well as on innate mental capacities, uncertainty is thereby introduced which may
vitiate the results of the inquiry. It is
certainly difficult in some cases accurately
to assess the relative value of acquirements
made and capacity to acquire. But the disentanglement of these two factors is being
carried out with increasing success as experience widens. Apart, however, from the
difficulty in estimating instructive and temperamental tendencies, another difficulty of
a somewhat different kind might also be
supposed to minimize the value of any
inquiry into mental characters.

We are ignorant, so it is said, of the real
nature of mental operations—i.e., of the
working of the mind—and cannot therefore
form any accurate conception of mental
manifestations. But without entering on
12 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the insoluble problem of the relation between
the body and the mind, we may, as Mott has
said, ‘‘ regard the brain as a transformer
of cosmic into neural energy.’’*4

Light waves and sound waves and other
external impressions are transformed into
waves of neural energy as they enter the
recipient sense organs and pass through the
conducting channels in the brain. In the
cerebral cortex, the seat of psychical manifestation, these are again re-unified with
previously received, memorized impressions
into one neuro-psychical whole—one personality. Thus consciousness appears coincidently with this transforming and reunifying process.

Although we know little of its real nature,
we can measure the rate of spread of a neural wave as it passes along a nerve,
and we can estimate the retardation which
ensues when such a neural wave travels from
lower to higher brain centres by a circuitous
instead of a direct route. We also know that
these differences in speed, according to route
traversed, are associated with corresponding
differences in the psychical manifestations
which accompany them.

The evidence suggests that neural, like
electrical energy, consists of energy of only
one kind which varies in volume, in intensity, and in rate and distribution of flow,
according to the molecular structure, insulation and complexity of the nerve channels
and the synaptic areas through which
the wave passes. If this be so, then
the corresponding variations in mental
capacity which distinguish genius from
moderate intelligence will also depend on
quantitative changes in energy of one and
the same kind, and not on qualitative
changes or in energy of different kinds.
High intelligence would be associated not
necessarily with a heavier or a larger brain,
but with a brain which contains a larger
number of cortical cells and a more complex
system of associated nerve centres and
nerve paths.?5

This conception is in harmony with the
teaching of the comparative anatomy and
physiology of the nervous system in animals
and man, which tells us that psychical evolution proceeds pari passu with the evolu
tion of a nervous system of more elaborate
structure and of finer texture. Such a view
is also in harmony with the recorded subjective impressions of men and women of
genius concerning the mode of working
of their own minds. It is, at any rate, a
suggestive fact that these psychical manifestations, which represent the highest form
of energy known to man, should be associated with molecular activity in the most
highly organized form of matter (whatever
may be the ultimate nature of matter), of
which we have any experience or knowledge, namely the human brain.*®

This suggestion, that differences in intellectual capacity are essentially quantitative, although more suited perhaps to a
philosophical or metaphysical discussion, is
nevertheless a subject which bears on our
present inquiry. The more complete and
adequate our conception of the nature of
neuro-psychical energy and its mode of
action, the more accurate will be our knowledge of the working of the human mind,
and the more reliable our estimate of the
relative influence of nature and nurture in
the formation of character and conduct in
our fellow citizens.

BIRTH-RATE AND BIRTH-CONTROL

I must now add a few words concerning
the birth-rate in different sections of the
population. Our immediate object is to
form some reliable estimate of the contribution made by different social groups, not
only to the numbers but also to the quality
of the population. The first is a comparatively easy, the second a more difficult, task.

The Registrar-General’s statistics?” show
that, speaking generally, the birth-rate is
now lowest in the upper social strata and
in the professional and salaried groups,
in the big middle section of society,
and that it rises as we reach the ranks of
unskilled labour. There are two important
facts about this movement. Firstly, it has
grown and is still growing in a remarkable
manner in recent years, and secondly, in its
operating on a very large scale. If it continues at its present rate it must have a
very marked effect on the population as a
whole.
CAUSES OF RACIAL DECAY 13

The modern practice of conception control on the other hand is more prevalent
among the educated and upper and
middle classes, and diminishes as we
reach the unskilled labour ranks, while
it is practically absent in the lowest
degenerate sections of Society. This
means that, as at present practised in this
and other countries, the so-called birth-control movement is exercising a dysgenic
eflect on the population, by reducing the
effective fertility of the more worthy and fit
groups, in relation to the less desirable sections from the racial point of view.

The remedy, however, is not, in my
opinion, to be sought in any attempt to curtail?® the spread of knowledge, but in a wider
diffusion of such knowledge, in so far as it
is sound, to all classes of the population,
poor as well as rich. In this world-wide
experiment, so potent for harm and good,
we must, as Major Darwin has said,’ carry
ona dual campaign. We must, by awakening the eugenic ideal, and by the ‘‘ arousal
of a racial conscience,’’ bring home to the
minds and consciences of our citizens the
double duty—on the one hand, the responsibility which rests on all married citizens of
healthy parentage and sound stock to beget
and rear under the best possible conditions
an adequate number of healthy and vigorous
‘offspring, and, on the other hand, the equal
responsibility and duty of avoiding parentage in the case of all who are the subjects
of hereditary disease, and those who have
sprung from unsound or defective stocks.

There will still remain, however, the
lowest groups: those which include degenerate, defective, and irresponsible persons, non-responsive to all educational and
moral appeals, those on whom, like Cali‘ban in The Tempest, ‘‘nurture will not
stick,’ those without capacity for citizenship and possessing no racial conscience.
With such groups other measures must be
employed, such as compulsory segregation
during the reproductive period of life, while
under certain conditions and in some cases
sterilization may be desirable.

I believe that adequate knowledge of the
factors which affect fecundity and of the
means of controlling conception are neces
sary steps in the evolutionary process whereby man will be enabled to exercise a growing influence over human destiny, and by
which also the possibility of increasing the
racial stock of innate capacity will be
brought within human control. If this be
true, then we must not condemn the practice
of contraception, provided it has no injurious effect on individual or racial health,
and provided that its potency for harm when
used improperly or for unworthy ends is
fully recognized. However this may be,
the other alternative—uncontrolled increase
and population pressure—must become a
serious menace, not only to the peace of the
world, but to the standard of life in civilized
countries, and to the future of our civilization.

KIND OF ENQUIRY NEEDED

We must now consider shortly the form
that any inquiry into the distribution of
natural capacity in the population must take.

The idea of a national stocktaking seems
to have originated in a correspondence between Sir Francis Galton and Florence
Nightingale.” In 1924 Major Darwin formed
a small committee to advance this project,
and communications have taken place between the Eugenics Society, the Medical Research Council, the officers of the British
Medical Association, and the Ministry of
Health.

I do not propose to enter into details, and
will only indicate the main principles on
which in my judgment it should be framed.

Since our object is to ascertain the physical and mental qualities of the citizens,
especially in the large middle section which
includes the average citizen and forms the
bulk of the population, the inquiry must be
so formulated as to reveal the incidence of
civic worth in association with racial value
in the population, particularly in this
middle group. The suggestions are:

(1) The inclusion in the census schedules
of 1931 of the questions of racial importance
(as to size of family, etc.) which were
included in the census of I91I but were
omitted from that of 1921. ‘This suggestion
has already received the support of the
Council of the Eugenics Society.
14 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(2) A review of our present system of
birth certification and registration, with a
view to the inclusion of the ages of parents,
and of other data of genetic importance.

(3) In addition to the fuller information
which could be obtained from a census of the
whole nation, much might be learned from
an intensive study of a selected sample
or samples of the population. The
questions should be so standardized and
arranged as to make the answers strictly
comparable with the results of future inquiries. Such a sample might (as Fisher
and Carr-Saunders suggest) be taken from
among the school children of a certain age.

The inquiry should include : (a) Anthropometrical measurements, (b) medical data,
and (c) psychological records and scholastic
tests.

The anthropometric data would include
stature and weight, eye and hair colour, and
other important bodily characters. The
medical examination would have reference to
development and general health, condition
of eyes, teeth, etc., and absence of disease.
The mental state would be examined under
two headings: (a) Psychological, concerned
with native intelligence, and (b) scholastic,
dealing with verbal and linguistic attainments.

This is, of course, merely an outline.
The details would require careful preparation. Any suggestion whereby the examination could be so improved as to distinguish
more accurately between capacity to make
acquirements, and acquirements made,
should receive careful consideration.

If, in addition to this intensive study of a
sample (or samples) of children of school
age, records could also be obtained from the
whole or from a portion of the industrial
population, additional valuable material
would be secured.

On June 28th, 1927, a deputation, organized by Miss Olga Nethersole and the
People’s League of Health, and introduced
by Lord Burnham, waited on the Minister
of Health to urge that all entrants into
industrial life, under the National Health
Insurance Act, should undergo a medical
examination on entry and periodically at
subsequent intervals.3° Such an examina
tion, if strictly standardized, would give
valuable information as to the condition of
the working class section of the population
of both sexes.

(4) At the present time a very large number of records are being collected by various
societies and government and municipal de.
partments in various sections of the population. If these inquiries, which in the aggre.
gate affect large numbers, could be standardized and made comparable among themselves and with future records, much valuable knowledge as to the physical condition,
of the population would thereby become
available.

The results from these four lines of in-;
quiry would probably supply the greater}
portion of the information needed and would:
be practicable from an administrative point:
of view. In other directions the intensive
study of smaller groups, so successfully em-;
ployed by Mr. Lidbetter in the case of cer-!
tain habitual pauper and criminal families,
might be continued. This was the method!
employed by Galton in his famous inquiry:
into natural inheritance and _ hereditary:
genius. 3

Such inquiries, however, are concerned:
with extreme groups. It is equally or even
more important that data should be obtained
in regard to the distribution of mental and
bodily characters in that larger section
of the nation which includes the average
citizen and forms the bulk of the population.
For it is not so much from the extreme types
—the men and women of genius on the one
hand, or the degenerate groups on the other
—but from the average level of innate
capacity of intellect and character in the
population as a whole that any true estimat
can be formed as to the occurrence of im
provement or deterioration.

What is wanted is a census which wil
reveal quality as well as numbers, one whic
will show in what sections of the populatioxz
civic 1s associated with racial worth.

HEREDITARY FACTOR IN DISEASE

There is still another aspect of the su
ject to which I wish to draw attention. I
a discussion on the biological foundations o
sociology twenty-two years ago I spoke o

 
  
 
 
    
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
    
 
   
  
  
  
   
CAUSES OF RACIAL DECAY 15

the pressing need for the teaching of the
science of heredity as a part of the medical
curriculum.3* This has not yet materialized.
We still await the great impetus which
would be given to eugenic progress by enlisting the interest and active co-operation
of the medical profession in heredity problems. Moreover, the advantage would be a
mutual one. On the eugenic side, because
medical men engaged in general practice
possess unrivalled opportunities for collecting family records of mental and bodily
characters hereditarily transmitted through
several generations. On the medical side
the gain would be equally great, for increasing medical knowledge continually emphasizes the great importance of the hereditary
factor in disease.

Excluding accidental injury, the main
cause of death in the large majority of the
population arises from the action of some
poison, either elaborated within the body,
or more frequently introduced from without.
Now, it is largely the hereditary factor
which decides whether any individual man
or woman will succumb to auto-intoxication
or to some microbic poison introduced from
outside. The same factor also helps to
decide the actual organ or tissues which will
be primarily affected, and even the particular portion of (for instance) the nervous system, which will bear the brunt of the attack.

Such, then, is the all-important part played
by capacity of resistance in combating
disease. Medicine and the medical profession would greatly gain by a more intimate
knowledge of this biological factor, this
capacity of resistance against disease.

It is not, however, only or even chiefly in
bodily ailments that genetic factors play a
decisive part. The study of mental abnormalities and mental defects would be similarly advanced by a closer analysis of hereditary influences—and as we have already
seen, mental qualities will be the deciding
factor in the future of our race.

A working alliance with medicine would
also be helpful in another direction. The
problem of the rise and fall of nations and
races is partly a psychological one. In such
a study the hereditary transmission of both
normal and abnormal mental qualities is a

factor of great importance, and one in which
medical men, trained in physiology, psychology and genetics, could render most valuable service.

But before we can hope to secure the
interest and the active co-operation of the
medical profession in eugenic problems,
certain preliminary steps will be necessary :
(x) A favourable mental attitude to genetics
must be obtained in the General Medical
Council, in the medical faculties in our
universities and medical schools, in the
Ministry of Health, and in the public medical services—in fact, in all bodies concerned
in medical education. (2) Medical students
must be taught the principles which underlie and the methods employed in, the study
of genetics in animals and in man. In
short, the study of genetics and of eugenics
must form an integral part in the theory
and practice of preventive medicine.

In thus drawing attention to natural resistance and immunity against disease as a
striking example of that natural capacity
which we have been discussing, I am reminded of the words of Aristotle, written
more than two thousand years ago: ‘* Men
are called healthy in virtue of the inborn
capacity of easy resistance to those injurious influences which may ordinarily arise ;
and unhealthy in virtue of a lack of that
capacity.’’3?

FUTURE CIVILIZATION

Since we know so little about the lines
along which human evolution is developing,
or of the nature of the civilization which will
form the environment of the future, we cannot, so it may be objected, form any true
conception of the mental and bodily qualities
which the citizens of the future must possess
if they are to live in successful adaptation
to such a greatly altered mode of life. Thus
any artificial attempt to produce such unknown qualities must fail.

It is no doubt true that we do not know
in detail what human life will be like even
one hundred years hence. But we may be
sure of this, that the evolution of the human
race will proceed along psychical lines, and
that the environment of the future will be
mental rather than physical, social rather
16 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

than individual, and a world in which brains
will count-for more than muscle. There
will be no room for mental deficiency.

In such a world and in such surroundings
it is also certain that not only intellectual
power, but moral qualities, character and
personality, capacity to lead successfully the
social rather than the individual life—in
short, capacity for citizenship and adaptability to an ever-widening environment in
space and time—will count for much. One
of the main characteristics of the citizens of
the dominant race of the future will be
ability to assess in moral and spiritual
values, and to apply to worthy ends, that
growth in material prosperity which a constantly increasing power of control over
natural forces ever brings in its train. We
have already seen that failure to accomplish
this has been one of the main factors in
bringing about the fall of ancient civilizations and earlier races.

‘* There are only two ways of righting disharmony in every department of life. Either
the environment must be widened to allow of
the exercise of the larger faculties, or the
capacities must be reduced to the level of
the narrower environment.’’33

Surely the former is the better way.

CONCLUSIONS

We must now sum up the main conclusions at which we have arrived.

In order to deal successfully with any
disease the first essential is to know its
cause. ‘There can, therefore, be no doubt
that a national survey of the population, a
census of quality as well as quantity, is
urgently needed before any reliable comparisons can be made between the physical
and mental qualities of our citizens to-day
and the same qualities some years hence.
If, as is very probable, such a survey should
reveal presumptive evidence of deterioration,
especially in the field of native intelligence,
then we shall at least know how we stand
and what steps to take in order to arrest the
decline. Among the many remedial measures which have been, or which might be
suggested, the first place must be given to
education.

Eugenic ideals must be established and a

racial conscience awakened in the mind of
every citizen capable of responding to such
appeals, especially in the adolescent section
of the population. This will be difficult and
will take time, for the ‘‘ national conscience ’’ is a very heavy sleeper. But even
so, the degenerate groups, the irresponsive
residuum at the bottom of the social scale
will still remain untouched. Segregation
during the reproductive period of life must
be the main remedy for this group, supplemented where necessary and in suitable
cases, after judicial inquiry and expert
advice, by sterilization. ,

In regard to the large middle section,
which includes the average citizen and forms
the bulk of the population, an attempt must
be made to increase the relative fertility
in this group by well considered economic
measures such as family endowments, relief
in income-tax according to number of children, and in other ways designed to relieve
the present heavy burden of parenthood.
Such relief, either by family endowment or
reduction in income-tax, must be discriminative, and should, in my opinion, be limited
to the first four or possibly five children in
the family. It would thus tend to reduce
the number of children in the too large
families in the lower groups, and to increase
the number in the, at present, too small
families in the middle section of Society.

In thus advocating the employment of
economic measures as a means of promoting
fertility in the worthier social groups, I am
aware of the objections which have been
raised by Drysdale and others. If, however, we really believe that the future of
mankind partly depends on a wise exercise
of human .control, then surely it is necessary that such control should be exercised
not only in the social and biological but also
in the economic sphere of life.

In this middle section also education on
eugenic lines must be relied upon and will
be especially useful. All such eugenic instruction, based on sound biological principles, must form an integral part of education and training for life as a whole. Nay,
it must (as Galton urged) receive religious
sanction and possess the driving power of a
religious belief. Indeed, if it were not for
CAUSES OF RACIAL DECAY 17

the wiser attitude taken up by a few leaders
in Church and State in regard to this question of biological teaching in our schools,
one would be alarmed by the general
indifference manifested to this vital problem.

I look to the spread of a knowledge of
heredity to bring about a great change in
our mental attitude one to another. I believe such knowledge will lead to a far better
understanding of the nature of individual
responsibility, and to a truer conception of
the principles which underlie good and bad
conduct. It will also, surely, help us to
realize in what way we can best help our
neighbour, and will tend to promote a more
reasonable and a less barbarous mental attitude to crime and criminals.

As has been truly said, ‘‘ Biology is the
science of life’? (that is, of individual,
national, and racial life), ‘‘and the science of
life must be pondered (and taught) continuously and reverently if the art of living
is ever to be developed.’’34

The second suggestion is this. We must
try to bring about some degree of segregation along social, economic, and biological
lines between the fit and the unfit sections
of the population. Sound and healthy families of good stock must not inter-marry with
the hereditarily diseased and the genetically
defective. For the latter will never voluntarily sever their connection with the
former. ‘This does not mean that the strong
and healthy are no longer to help, or to take
any interest in the weak and the disabled.
This would be to cease to exercise those inestimable qualities of sympathy and kindness which form the basis of true citizenship, and mean so much for the future of
mankind. But these virtues must be exercised wisely and with due regard to racial
welfare. Mere benevolence is not enough.
It must be a benevolence which seeks to prevent as well as to relieve suffering. Nature,
as we know, is careless of the individual.
Her concern is with the species and the race.
Man in his desire to help the individual is
apt to overlook the race.

The great problem of the future will be
how best to harmonize individual with racial
interests.

Many of our present difficulties arise from

this mingling and inter-marrying of the fit
with the less fit. A stricter demarkation
along lines of civic and racial worth would
not only help to form a sounder public
opinion on eugenic questions, it would also
facilitate the eventual elimination of the
unfit from our population.

Moreover, it is very important that we
should look at this problem of racial deterioration from a wide standpoint. It may be
that, as by the elimination of the unfit individual the welfare of the community is
secured, so by the removal of the decadent
race the evolution of mankind is promoted.
If this be so we ought to welcome the extinction of the degenerate race—that is, if it be
incapable of regeneration and _ re-birth.
There is also this consolation. If, as we
believe, the older and cruder method of
natural selection is being gradually superseded by the less wasteful and more humane
method of artificial selection under human
control, then we may reasonably hope that a
kinder and a better way of eliminating both
decadent races and degenerate stocks will
be found, and that that way will be by nonperpetuation rather than by extinction by
war, famine, and disease.

We have already seen that it is impracticable and useless at present to endeavour
to produce genius by breeding with that end
directly in view. The mountain peaks of
genius which arose in Greece in the time of
Pericles soared from the tableland of a high
level of intelligence, among the Athenian
citizens prior to the Classic Age. If we of
the British race firmly resolved to make a
wise use of our newly acquired power of
human control, we might, even in the course
of a few generations, so raise the average
level of intelligence in our own population
as to render possible an outcrop of men and
women of genius like those of the Elizabethan and Victorian Ages.

But this will need a better way of living,
and a new attitude to life. It is no doubt
true that man has grown but little in mental
stature during historic times. But the
signs are encouraging : the dawn of a new
era is approaching. The power acquired by
civilized man to control, to-day, perhaps,
only the quantity, but to-morrow the
18 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

quality of human life, will also enable man
to change human nature and to raise mental
and moral capacity to a higher level. But
we are building not for the present but for
the future, and we must exercise patience.
We must think in generations rather than
in years.

Finally, whatever may be the future of
our British race, we are entitled to regard
the future of mankind with confidence and
hope. Progress, both biological and social,
has occurred in the past, and it would be unreasonable to imagine that now, when man
is beginning to exercise control, all evolutionary progress will cease.

But this artificial selection under human
control must be of the right kind and it must
be used in the right way. Atthe present time
it is not being so used. Education on eugenic
lines will help to bring about a wiser mental
attitude to both social and racial problems
and to the way in which they react on each
other. Of this, at any rate, we may be
sure, that the dominant race of the future
will be that race which succeeds in eliminating the unfit and the degenerate from its
ranks.

Thus we arrive at our final conclusion :
The future of a race depends on the possession of civic, in close association with racial
worth ; that is, on the possession of qualities of mind and body which will enable a
people to respond to the good and to resist
the bad influences in the environment, together with the capacity to hand on these
good qualities to offspring adequate in numbers to perpetuate the race effectively.

At present our only or main test of racial
worth (in the human species) is the existence
of civic achievement in the individual, the
family, or the stock, and this, as we have
already seen, although statistically useful,
is not an entirely reliable criterion.

I will conclude my address with a final
reference to the life work of Francis Galton.
We eugenists shall do well to copy his judicial and scientific attitude of mind and his
deep appreciation of the complexity of the
problem before us. Ours is a great mission,
and our aim the promotion of human progress along biological lines. It will need all
our courage, patience, and tact.

Our immediate object must be to bring
home to the minds of statesmen, government
departments, local authorities, and the public, the fact that our present sociological
methods are not based on sound biological
principles. All such methods for improving the conditions of life must not only rest
on a sound biological foundation, they must
also deal with human beings having some
capacity of response, if they are to be successful in promoting progress, not only in

individual and national, but also in racial
life.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Herbert Spencer : Social Statics and Principles
of Sociology, Chap. xii.

2. Spengler: Untergang, des Abendland des, Voll.

3. Maclver: The Modern State, Oxford Univ.
Press, 1926.

4. Darwin, L.: The Need for Eugenic Reform,
Murray, 1926.

5. Perry, W. L.: The Disappearance of Culture,
‘‘ Eugenics Review,” July, 1924.

6. Petrie, Flinders: The Revolutions of Civiliza
tion.
7. Keith, Sir Arthur: Concerning Man’s Origin,

1927.

8. Fisher, R.A.: The Problem of the Decay of a
Civilization, ‘‘ Eugenics Review,’’ 1926.

g. Carr-Saunders : Population, 1925.

1o. Carr-Saunders and Caradog Jones: Social
Structure of England and Wales, Oxford Univ.
Press, 1927.

tr. McDougall :
Decay.

12. Lidbetter : Report of the World Population Conference, Arnold, 1928.

13. Ellis, Havelock :
Regeneration, 1911.

14. Maurice, General Sir F.:
Review, January, 1902.

15. Army Recruiting Statistics Return, 1903.

16. Report of the Scottish Royal Commission, 1903.

17. Report of the Inter-Departmental Committee on
Physical Deterioration, 1904.

18. Newman, Sir G. : Report to the Board of Education, 1926,

19. Wheatley, Dr. J. : Public Health, Nov., 1925.

20. Report of the Ministry of National Service, 1919.

21. Report of the Board of Control, 1925.

22. Tredgold : Address to the Royal Sanitary Institute Congress, 1926.

23. Report of H.M. Inspectors of Constabulary,
1924.

24. Mott, Sir F. W. : Nature and Nurture in Mental
Development, 1914.

25. Berry, R. J.: The Study of Mental Abnormality,
‘‘ British Medical Journal,’ January 14th, 1928.

26. Myers, C. S.: Proceedings of the Royal Society
of Medicine, 1925.

27. Stevenson, Dr. T. H. C.: Fertility of Various
Social Classes in England and Wales, Journ. Royal
Statistical Society, April, 1920.

National Welfare and National

The Problem of Race

Contemporary
CAUSES OF RACIAL DECAY 19

28. Report of the Special Committee on the Ethics
of Birth Control and Medical Aspects of Contraception, National Council of Public Morals.

29. Life of Florence Nightingale, Appendix,
abridged ed.

30. Report of the People’s League of Health, 1927.
31. Bond, C. J.: Discussion on the Biological
Foundations of Sociology, ‘‘ Sociological Papers,’’
3. ‘Aristotle, Categorie, Chap. viii, 9, a, 21. Oxford
Trans.

33. Bond, C. J.: Health and Healing in the Great
State (Chap. v), 1912.

34. East, KE. M.: Heredity and Human Affairs,
Scribner, 1927.

35. Goring, C.: The English Convict, 1919.

Plato: The Republic.

Freeman, Austin: Social Decay and Regeneration,
1921.

Rentoul, R. R.: Race Culture or Race Suicide.

Parsons, Professor F. G. : The Englishman of the

Future. {B. A. Leeds, 1927.)
Fisher, R. A.: The Actuarial Treatment of Birth
Records, EUGENICS REVIEW, 1927.

Pearson, Karl: The Chances of Death. London,

1897.
Bell, A. G.: The Duration of Life and the Conditions associated with Longevity. Washington, 1918.

Barnes, D.D., Bishop of Birmingham. Galton
Lecture, 1926.
Still, Dr.: 1 nfluence of Place in Family. (Lancet,

October 15th, 22nd., 1927).

Pearson, Karl: National Life from the Standpoint
of Science, 1901.

Schuster, Edgar. Eugenics.

Galton, Sir Francis: Restriction in Marriage;
Studies in National Eugenics, Sociological Papers,
1905; Hereditary Genius; Studies in Natural Inheritance.

Morgan, T. H.: The Physical Basis of Heredity.

McDougal, William : Social Psychology; The
Group Mind.

Blacker, C. P.: Birth Control and the State.

Jennings, H. S.: Public Health Progress and
Racial Progress. Are they Incompatible? Baltimore.

Myers, Professor J. L.: The Causes of Rise and
Fall in the Population of the Ancient World.
(EuGENIcS RkEvisew, April, 1915).

Ward, L. F.: Applied Sociology. Boston, 1906.

Kelly, T. L. : The Influence of Nurture on Native
Differences. N. York, 1926.

Laughlin, H. H. : Eugenics in America, (EUGENICS
REVIEW, April, 19 25).

Schiller, F. C. 3." The Ruin of Rome. (EUGENICS
REVIEW, 1925;),

Whetham, W . C. D. and C. D.: An Introduction
to Eugenics. 1912.

Bond, C. J.: Our Critic Criticised. (EuGENICS

REVIEW, January, 1914.)
Fremantle, Lt.-Col.: The Health of the Nation.
1927.
*Gorr-Saunders : A Criticism
(EucENIcs RkEviEw, October, 1915.)
Moore, Eldon : The Spectator, January 14th, 21st,
28th, February 4th, 1928.
Rathbone, E. F.: Family Endowment. (EUGENICS
REVIEW, January, 1925.)
Darwin, L.: Letter to The Times, January 17th,
1928.

of Eugenics.

 

CRIME & HEREDITY

MR. JUSTICE ROCHE

(Chairman)

DR. NORWOOD EAST,

Professor

VAN LOON.

Discussion Meeting at 8 p.m., May 9th

ROOMS OF THE LINNAEAN SOCIETY, BURLINGTON HOUSE

Eugenics Society Announcement
