EUGENICS AND EDUCATION

The Practices of Ancient, Primitive, and Medizeval Societies

By Professor R. RUGGLES GATES, LL.D., F.R.S.

Address to Section L of the Centenary Meeting (1931) of the British Association.

REEK methods of education are

often cited as an ideal, but eugenics

is usually regarded as a very modern
development. Yet various practices of the
Greeks were clearly eugenic in their effects.
The age of Pericles, with its supreme developments in philosophy, science and art,
could only have been realized after several
centuries of essentially eugenic selection.
During this period, natural selection must
have coincided with selection of the best
mental and physical elements of the Greek
race, for there has been no such concentration of genius at any other period in human
history. When these selective processes,
which are so difficult to control, took another
turn, the decay and downfall of the race was
as rapid as had been its rise.

Among primitive peoples, seriously defective children quite generally have their
existence terminated. The narrow margin
of safety of the tribe will not permit of the
racial handicap which would result from the
additional burden of unproductive mouths to
feed. And who can say that they are not
in their way wiser than we, who go to the
other extreme and in the name of humanitarianism not only use all the resources of
science to keep alive those whose whole
existence can only be a misery, but even
create conditions in which many of the
mentally or physically unfit can marry and
perpetuate their kind at the public expense.
It is undeniable that former ages were in
some respects more eugenic than ours. For
even with their high birth and death rates
they unconsciously created conditions in
which the more vigorous and hardy tended
to survive and multiply, while the weaklings and defectives were generally elimi
nated before they had an opportunity to
perpetuate their kind.

MEDIAVAL APPRENTICESHIP

The institution of apprenticeships and
guilds, which grew up in the Middle Ages,
was clearly eugenic in some of its effects.
The relationship of master and apprentice
existed not only in the trades, but also in
the professions, such as law and medicine,
and university scholars were apprentices in
the same sense. The apprentice system
gave the guilds considerable powers of contro], not only as regards economic status,
but also in relation to marriage and reproduction. Apprentices could only marry
when they had reached a certain status and
efficiency ; the less efficient never had the
opportunity of handing on their inefficiency
to later generations. A law enacted in 1562
made a seven years’ apprenticeship for any
‘“trade or mystery ’’ compulsory, and it
was not until 1814 that all restrictions were
removed, allowing anyone to take up any
trade without previous training. In modern
times all the essentials of apprenticeship are
continued as regards the professions, and
notwithstanding the difficulties created by
trade unions, some trade apprenticeships
continue, though usually for a shorter term
of years. Extension of the principle of
apprenticeships would undoubtedly be an
advantage, both from the educational and
the eugenic point of view.

But in modern society such checks to
reproduction are removed, and the most
thriftless and improvident can marry and
produce children which they are unable to
support. At the same time as these checks
to reproduction were removed from the less

395
306

endowed members of society, economic competition and the necessity to pay for the increasing provision for the support of the
incapable and their offspring have progressively increased the economic pressure
on the better endowed, who are thus forced
to delay marriage and limit their offspring.
In this way both economically and mentally the country is being led towards bankruptcy.

The studies of Mr. E. J. Lidbetter* on
pauperism in a slum area of Kast London,
begun in 1910, have thrown much light
upon the nature of city pauperism in
general. He finds that the pauper community is composed of two closely-related
and intermarrying elements: (1) those
showing original defect and transmitting it,
(2) self-perpetuating low-grade stocks composed of the mildly incompetent, the
spiritless and dull. One hundred pedigrees,
many of them going back five or six generations, and many statistics of the whole
available population in this area have been
collected. Here we have a race of pauper
stocks, breeding together, not marrying to
any extent with the normal population, and
not diminished by modern improvements in
conditions or in education. The insane, the
tuberculous, and the feeble-minded each
tend to marry their own kind within the
group, which as a whole remains essentially
the same from generation to generation.
Lacking in parental responsibility, they
have a much higher fertility rate than
the rest of the community. There is no
evidence that they are recruited to any
considerable extent from the normal population, nor that they send any recruits to
the normal population. The pauper community is thus a distinct element in the
population, largely derived from the mentally deficient and the mildly incompetent,
closely related, and remaining relatively
stationary for at least a century while the
rest of the population has responded to
gradually improved conditions.

example, ‘‘ Heredity, disease and

* See, for
World Population Conference,

pauperism,’’ Proc.
1927, Pp. 326-337.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

INDIAN AND ESKIMO CUSTOMS

That primitive tribes have some regulations or taboos which are clearly eugenic
in their effects, may be shown by one or
two examples. The ‘‘ white Indians ”’ of
Panama are albinos who have occurred in
some numbers among the natives for several
centuries. Owing to lack of pigmentation
in skin and eyes they are at a disadvantage
in the strong sunlight of their native, land.
The condition is a simple Mendelian recessive to normal skin and eye colour, so that
two white Indians will have only white
children. But tribal law forbids that such
matings shall take place. Our civilization
has at present no effective means by which
marriages even much more serious in their
consequences can be prevented.

An instance of a different kind may be
taken from the Eskimos. They believe that
an evil spirit keeps watch to see that men
commit no breach of the innumerable taboos. +
It is strictly forbidden to sleep out on
the edge of the ice when seal hunting. ‘This
is a very desirable regulation for the safety
of the tribe, but the reason given by the
Eskimo is that the Sea Spirit does not like
her creatures to smell human beings when
they are not actually hunting. The taboo
is reinforced by a circumstantial myth, in
which a certain spirit stole away the entrails
of two men who slept one night on the iceedge. Thus it would appear that a prohibition which is beneficial to the race is irrationalized by attributing its origin to the
whim of a spirit, and is enforced by
constructing a myth setting forth the
imaginary but serious consequences of disobedience.

We may therefore conclude that what we
now call eugenic measures and educational
methods began equally early in the history
of mankind. Racial advance can only take
place when conditions resulting in eugenic
selection are accompanied by adequate
educational facilities for those who are best
able to profit by them.

culture of the
1930.

Intellectual

Rasmussen, K.,
Copenhagen.

tT
Hudson Bay Eskimos.
EUGENICS AND EDUCATION

FUNCTION—AND COST—OF EDUCATION

While eugenists and educationists should
thus co-operate, there is traditionally a
fundamental difference between eugenics
and education, since eugenists are concerned
mainly with the inborn qualities, the hereditary potentialities of succeeding generations, while educationists, as such, are engaged in bringing out and developing to the
full those inherited qualities. It is these
potentialities with which we are all concerned. But the eugenist is better able
than many educationists to appreciate the
fact that the potentialities of youth are not
so unbounded as some would optimistically
suppose, but that they are necessarily
limited and determined by the organic inheritance each has received from his
parents.

Individuals, even in the same family, are
born with large inherited differences in
ability and in aptitude for particular kinds
of mental or physical activity. It is well
known, and has been shown by psychological tests of pupils, that education increases rather than diminishes these
differences in aptitude. We all improve
more rapidly by practice in doing the thing
we like best than in learning to do that in
which we are less interested or efficient.

Universal education can never bring all
men to the same level. On the contrary,
it serves, as many educationists already
recognize, to emphasize still further the
mental differences which already exist.
The ideal of a well-directed educational
system should therefore be to give every
individual the opportunity of developing to
the maximum by his own efforts, with aid
according to his grade of ability, the aptitudes which will enable him to make the
maximum contribution to the life of the
community.

Believers as we all are in education, it
is necessary for us to take a wider view of
the racial effects of education than has
hitherto been taken by our legislators or by
many of our educationists. The view that
populations exist as blind mouths to be fed
by education regardless of their racial

397

worth is all too prevalent and will lead us
along the road to racial decay. In this
country the cost of the education of defective
children ranges from £25 to £88 per head,
depending on the nature of the defect and
the conditions of education, as against £12
per head on normal children in the elementary schools.* But educational tendencies in modern societies have still more
serious effects. Anyone who discusses the
subject, especially with the teachers in our
primary and elementary schools, soon
realizes the appalling frequency of lowgrade intelligence bordering on  feeblemindedness in many of our schools. Sir
George Newman states that in the elementary schools of England and Wales
there are half a million dull and_ backward children, and another half-million so
defective mentally or physically as to be
unable without medical treatment to derive
reasonable benefit from school education.
The continually increasing School and
State Medical Service is to some extent
dysgenic in its indirect effects, and the
medical profession as a whole is only beginning to realize that the racial effects of its
activities may be even more important than
the direct results in prolonging and improving the life of the individual. While
the teaching of school hygiene will have
some ameliorative effect, yet something
much more fundamental is required, to
replace unsound constitutions by children
who are racially vigorous and show relative
freedom from physical and mental defect.

AN AMERICAN PARALLEL

Dr. W. M. English, President of the
American Psychiatric Association, has
recently quoted statistics which show that
in the United States there are 1,800,000
persons with the mentality of children
below nine years of age. Of these, 600,000
are below the mental age of seven and
should have constant supervision throughout their lives. The great majority of these
cases he believes are the result of heredity,

 

* Report of Chief Medical Officer of Board of
Education for 1928, p. 105.
308

and he finds that feeblemindedness is
increasing alarmingly in all civilized
countries.

As Karl Pearson has said, ‘‘ No degenerate and feeble stock will ever be converted
into sound stock by the accumulated effects
of good laws, education, and _ sanitary
measures, though such means may render
the individual members of the family passable, if not strong members of society.”’

Dr. Willoughby, in his recent inaugural
address as President of the British Medical
Association, stated that half the insured
population in Britain came under treatment
in an average year. ‘The claims for sickness and disablement benefit increased continuously and had virtually doubled in
recent years. Even in Germany, whence
we borrowed the scheme of National Insurance, its dysgenic effects on the people are
already being recognized.

All students of the subject recognize
that selection of racial stocks is the chief
means by which racial improvement or degeneration can take place, but in the postWar period we have laid ever increasing
burdens upon the naturally endowed members in all strains of society in order that,
in effect, the least endowed might be aided
to multiply at their expense. It is diffcult to conceive anything more dysgenic and
disastrous in its effects on the race.

Clearly then, there are trends in modern
civilization which are leading towards downfall such as overtook all the civilizations
which have preceded ours. Modern legislation is oblivious of these racial problems,
or of the racial effects of the laws passed
by modern legislatures.

BETTER—NOT MORE—EDUCATION

Having thus exposed a few of the subversive tendencies of post-War legislation,
we may well ask what can yet be done to
alter these dysgenic currents and arrest the
racial decay before it is too late. Can we,
by taking thought, stem this tide and introduce eugenical conceptions into educational
and other legislation ?

Our need is for better (not more) education. Ignorance of the biological effects of

‘THE EUGENICS REVIEW

legislation and of the urgency of the racial
problems involved is not confined to parliamentarians, but is general throughout our
population. Enlightenment on these subjects can only come through a form of
education which will give the younger generation some sort of biological outlook. Man
is an organism and will fail in his destiny,
as he has failed many times before, if he
refuses to recognize the applications of biological law to his own species.

Those who wish to neutralize eugenic
action usually begin by minimizing the importance of heredity. But the advances of
genetics in relation to mankind in recent
years* have made the evidence overwhelming that the inheritance of all sorts of
differences, great and small, normal and
abnormal, is as intense in man as in other
organisms and follows in general the same
laws, which geneticists and cytologists have
formulated during the last thirty years.
That this applies equally to the inheritance
of mental differences, no one who has
examined the genetic evidence can doubt.

INHERITANCE OF AMENTIA—

This is not the place to discuss that evidence, but I will cite one or two instances
which indicate in the clearest way that
mental defect is largely perpetuated by
inheritance, even although there is much
to learn regarding the limitations and interrelationships of the various types of mental
defect from an inheritance point of view.
Tredgold} states that of 124 of his patients
with neuropathic heredity, it was found to
be present in the direct ancestral line of 98
cases (or 80 per cent.) and in collateral lines
of 26 more. Similarly, Dr. E. Sayer? found
that in the families of roo mentally
defective children there was a family history
of insanity in 31, of epilepsy in 11, while
one parent was mentally defective in 34,
making a total of 76 per cent. On the contrary, of roo normal children, 7 showed a

* See, e.g., Gates, R. R., Heredity in Man. Constable. 1929.

+ Tredgold, A. F., Mental Deficiency (amentia).
Fifth Edition. Bailliére, Tindall & Cox. 1929.

t Eucenics REVIEW, 1913.
EUGENICS AND EDUCATION

family history of insanity, 6 of epilepsy,
and 2 had one parent who was mentally
defective, a total of 15 per cent. Dr. Tredgold rightly concludes that ‘‘ the extent of
neuropathic inheritance is quite insignificant in the mentally normal as compared
with the defective population.”’

Among school children in this country of
ages 7-14, Dr. E. O. Lewis* finds 40
mentally defective per I,ooo in certain rural
districts and 21 per 1,000 in urban areas.
Sir George Newman, Chief Medical Officer
of the Board of Education, in considering
this Report,f concludes that perhaps ro per
cent. of school children are dull and backward, and 1-2 per cent. more are mentally
defective. Yet we are asked to contemplate
this state of affairs with equanimity, recognizing our duty to care for these defectives
throughout their lives, but without making
any serious attempt to reduce their numbers
by removing the cause.

AND THE SOCIAL PROBLEM GROUP

Dr. Lewis, in his investigations, found
that whereas idiocy and imbecility appear
to be equally distributed in all social strata,
yet feeble-mindedness (which constitutes 75
per cent. of mental defect) shows great
differences in incidence in different schools
and villages and in different parts of the
same town. He concludes that the majority
of feeble-minded come from a relatively
small social group numbering some Io per
cent. of the population, who are themselves
subnormal, constituting the retarded or
‘social problem group.’ This gives a clear
basis for the hope that in future the carriers
or transmitters of feeble-mindedness may
be recognizable by suitable mental tests. It
is also very strikingly in harmony with the

* Report of the Mental Deficiency Committee,

1929.
"4 Report of Chief Medical Officer of Board of

Education for 1928.

309°

results of Lidbetter, already quoted, regarding pauperism. In both cases it is found
that the bulk of the defect arises from a
stratum only a little higher, which is itself
subnormal.}

Some acquaintance with such questions
can be gained through the study of elementary biology, which forms the necessary
background to them all. A serious defect
of the present English school system is the
lack of sufficient biological teaching. Every
schoolboy and girl should, as an essential
part of their education, receive some instruction regarding the nature, structure,
and action of plant and animal organisms,
as well as their relationships and reactions
upon each other. They should know something of heredity, and realize that every
organism inherits and transmits its genetic
peculiarities, down to the finest details of
difference.

Man’s increasing knowledge has created
conditions in which the need for biological
fitness can be disregarded for a time; but
sooner or later the day of reckoning comes,
and the race which has been breeding too
largely from its worst stocks finds itself
supplanted by more vigorous and efficient
strains. This may happen slowly and
almost imperceptibly or it may happen
with disconcerting speed. It has happened
many times in the history of mankind.
Races have developed their culture, lost
their stamina through reversed selection,
differential birth rate, crossing with lower
races, or through other causes; and then,
perhaps centuries after the social damage
has been done, their decadent descendants
have been finally swept away by a more
virile but less evolved people, and the cycle
of development has begun over again.

tIt by no means follows that the bulk of the
working classes are unsound or defective in their
inherited capacities, although some opponents of
eugenics attempt to suggest that such a conclusion
would follow.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 4.
