THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

HE Annual General Meeting was held
at 69 Eccleston Square, S.W.1, on

| Tuesday, May 28th, 1940, at 5 p.m.,

with the President, Lord Horder, in the Chair.

MINUTES. The minutes of the Annual
General Meeting held on Tuesday, May
16th, 1939, which were contained in the
Annual Report, included in the April issue
of the EUGENICS REVIEW, and had therefore
been circulated to all Fellows and Members
of the Society, were taken as read and signed
as correct.

ANNUAL Report. The Chairman presented the Annual Report, the adoption of
which was proposed by Mr. Bramwell,
seconded by Mr. Binney and carried unanimously.

STATEMENT OF ACCOUNTS AND BALANCE
SHEET. The Honorary Treasurer presented
the Statement of Accounts and Balance
Sheet for the year ended December 3ist,
-1939. These were unanimously adopted.

APPOINTMENT OF HONORARY OFFICERS
AND COUNCIL FOR THE YEAR 1940-1. The
following Resolution, passed by the members of the Emergency Committee at their
meeting held on April 2nd, 1940, was read
by the President :

‘“‘ Since it appears to this meeting that
it is undesirable in present circumstances
to have elections of members of Council,
it is hereby resolved that the procedure

be modified during the current year by the
suspension of the annual election of members of Council and that those members of
Council who have consented shall remain
in office without further election for that
period with the powers vested in them.”

It was therefore agreed that the Honorary
Officers and Council should remain as
appointed at the Annual General Meeting
held on May 16th, 1939, with two exceptions: 1. Owing to the resignation of
Professor Ryle there would be now only
five Vice-Presidents instead of the usual six.
2. The resignation of Sir Mark Grant
Sturgis from the Council; this was received
and accepted last September, to take effect
in May.

The Emergency Committee for the ensuing
year will consist of the following, with power
to co-opt: The Lord Horder, Sir Charles
Arden-Close, Mr. Binney, Mr. Bramwell,
Mr. Chance, The Hon. Mrs. Grant Duff,
Mr. Gun, Mrs. Hubback, Dr. Lewis, Mr.
Martin, Mr. Titmuss.

ELECTION OF AUDITORS FOR THE YEAR
1940-1. It was proposed by Mr. Binney,
seconded by Mr. Gun, and carried unanimously, that the auditors of the Society,
Messrs. West & Drake, be re-elected.

A hearty vote of thanks, proposed by Mr.
Binney, to Lord Horder for his work on
behalf of the Society for the past year was
carried unanimously.

ANNUAL REPORT 1940-41

In this Report, the accounts relate to the
period December 31st, 1939, to December
31st, 1940. The rest of the Report covers
the period from March 31st, 1940, to March
31st, 1941. |

The war and the continued absence on
active service of Dr. Blacker have made the
work of the Socrety difficult during the past

27

year, but in spite of adverse conditions the
Emergency Committee Meetings were regular and well attended. At the October Meeting, however, it was agreed that, in view of
the situation arising out of the war, the work
of the Soctety should be placed on a care and
maintenance basis, and with great regret it
was decided to dispense with the services of
