66 EUGENICS REVIEW.

antagonism. But it is, to say the least, a moot point whether social
progress, as distinguished from national or racial integrity, cannot be
secured in a practically stationary—though not declining (!)—population.
The problem of Malthusianism from this point of view is certainly worth
discussing. S. HERBERT.

Kelynack, T. N., M.D. Auman Derelicts: A Collection of MedicoSociological Studies. London. C. H. Kelly; 1914; price 5s. net. ;

PP. 337EXPERIENCE has taught us to regard the editorship of Dr. Kelynack as a
sufficient guarantee of excellence. By the value of its subject-matter, as
also by the method and the manner in which this is presented, Human
Derelicts fully justifies our expectations. “ This book,” writes Dr. Kelynack in his preface, “ aims at providing all workers engaged in enterprises
striving for human betterment with a concise and reliable presentation, in
non-technical language, of such essential facts, guiding principles, and
effective practices as are likely to be of assistance in the study and
solution of those social problems which are directly related to the chief
sections of morbid mankind. It is hoped that the book will find favour
with those for whom it has been specially written, ministers of religion,
parents, teachers, leaders of organisations dealing with adolescents, as
well as social and religious workers.” We would also commend the book
to the attention of those societies and circles which exist for the discussion
of social proolems. Each of the seventeen articles composing the book
is the work of an expert of high standing, whose guidance may safely be
trusted. The titles of some of its chapters are an indication of the scope
of the volume. These include “ Mental Derelicts,” “ The Epileptic,” “ The
Inebriate Derelict,” “The Criminal Derelict,” “The Vagrant,” “ The
Prostitute,” “The Human Derelict : Pre-Natal Influences,” and “ Eugenics
and the Human Derelict.” And since it is a lack of knowledge rather
than a lack of will which hinders our progress in cleansing human society
and in beautifying human life, we could wish nothing better than a wide
circulation for Human Derelicts, for it is full of vitally important knowledge, set forth with an admirable simplicity.
R. DIXON KINGHAM.

Mereier, C. A., M.D. A Text-Book of Insanity and other Mental
Diseases. London. George Allen and Unwin, Ltd.; price 7s. 6d.
nett; crown 8vo.; pp. 368.
AN authoritative text-book upon mental diseases is worthy of notice, for
it needs to be written by a medical man of large and long experience with
the insane, and who himself should be a physiologist, a pathologist, and
a psychologist of repute and standing. Too rarely is such a combination
of qualifications found, but it is not too much to say that the author of
this manual fulfils all these requirements, being, in addition, a recognised
master of metaphysical subtleties. The text-book under review is lucid,
original and informing, but it is also lacking in some essentials, and to
these deficiencies we shall refer later.
The first edition, brought out a dozen years ago, was designed fo
the student, but, as the present preface suggests, this new edition is intended also for the instructed, and we recognise this must be so, for the
author is frequently tempted to reflect upon the ignorance of the alienist
and the uselessness of the psychologist, and he proceeds to repair these
imperfections in a dogmatic, cynical, albeit original fashion. “A knowledge of text-book psychology is of no more value to the student of
insanity than a knowledge of cuneiform inscriptions. ... The nature and
varieties of attention, the association of ideas, imagination, and the relation of thought to language are no concern of the alienist, the analysis of
sensation or the nature of apperception are useless acquisitions, and the
sooner he forgets them the better will he understand the disorders of mind
from which the patient suffers... . To understand the disorders of mind it
