THE PROBLEMS OF QUANTITY AND
QUALITY IN THE BRITISH POPULATION’

By R. C. K. ENSOR

addressing, on this subject, a body, so

many of whose members have far more
special knowledge than I, the answer is, I
suppose, that I speak as a member of the
Royal Commission which reported a year ago.
During the five years of the Commission’s
life I was one of only two members who never
missed a meeting ; and (which I suspect may
have been equally rare) 1 never shirked
reading any document which came officially
before us. So I may claim perhaps to have
been a diligent member.

The Royal Commission worked hard, but
in two respects it was unlucky. Appointed in
war-time it was not far in its second year when
the war ended. There followed the great
post-war spate of births, which marked the
years 1946-7-8, and gave many of the publica
totally false impression that the population
problem was solving itself. Following this we
reported in 1949, and within a very short
while of our doing so occurred our second misfortune, the national financial crisis, which
involved the devaluation of the pound. I say
nothing about that crisis or its handling,
excepting this—that it obviously entailed on
the Government and its departments a policy
of immediate economy, and that when that
happens the omens are not good for any
proposals involving new expenditure. The
Royal Commission had not been extravagant
in that way ; it always kept the Treasury well
before its eyes ; but without some amount of
expenditure little can be done. So, in fact,
nothing has been done ; and there is a real
danger that the entire labour of the Commission may for an indefinite time be thrown
away. Something in such cases depends on
personality ; and if our present Chancellor of
the Exchequer, a man with many brilliant in
| F I ask what justification there is for my

* A paper read before the Eugenics Soctety on May
23rd, 1950.

tellectual facets, happened to include among
them an interest in population, doubtless
some money might be found for that subject
even now. But it looks, I fear, as though he
does not.

Now that is a misfortune not only for the
Commission but for the nation. There is no
field in which we can less afford to. neglect
the factor of time, or in which the unretrieved more quickly becomes the irretrievable. Let me give you by way of an opening
example the following illustration of what
I mean.

If you compare the British population for
the decade 1871-81 with that for the decade
1931-41 (that is, sixty years later) you will
find that the population at this later date was
60 per cent more than at the earlier. Sixty
per cent over sixty years ; a crude average
growth of I per cent per year; nothing to
grumble about, you may say. No, but look
a little deeper. The number of births in the
earlier decade actually exceeded by roughly
3 million the number of births sixty years
later. See what that means. The children
born 1931-41 will be the men and women
aged 20-30 in the decade immediately before
us, the fifties of this century. On them we
shall have to depend for our main fighting
man-power if war breaks out ; on them, too,
we must depend for the physically strongest
and mentally most adaptable elements in
the occupations of peace. And we shall
actually have 3 million less of them than
Victorian Britain had in the last decade of
the nineteenth century.

What I want you to appreciate is the certainty and unalterability of facts like those.
The account is closed; this deficiency of
young adults, which confronts us, is inevitable. It results from something that happened years ago—something that Westminster and Whitehall scarcely noticed. The
only thing that theoretically could repair it

128
PROBLEMS OF QUANTITY AND QUALITY IN BRITISH POPULATION 129

now would be an immigration of 3 million
young foreign adults ; which is not a practical possibility.

If you ask how, in spite of it, there was
that 60 per cent increase in the total population, an important part of the answer is that
in 1947 the people over 65 were four times
as numerous asin 1871. Now I should be loth
to suggest (being one of them myself) that
people over 65 have no uses. But for the
mainstay purposes of the nation, whether
production in peace-time or defence in wartime, [ am afraid that nearly all of them must
be rated as passengers, not crew. Therefore
their enormous increase between the two
periods, so far from mitigating the loss of
those 3 million young adults, actually makes
it worse, since there is a much larger burden
for the fewer shoulders to carry

Well, take all that as a digression. It is
one, but I have thrown it thus forward
‘deliberately. I want no one in this room to
suppose me talking at random if I say that
any major statesman who acquiesces without
protest in the shelving of these problems will
commit a major wrong against the nation.
Before the Royal Commission reported,
statesmen had the excuse of ignorance ; now
they have not.

Let us come back to the Royal Commission. It had at least one feature that no
Royal Commission has ever had before.
Besides its main membership it had attached
to it three advisory committees—statistical,
biological and medical, and economic. Only
the chairmen of these committees were
members of the Commission. This arrangement was perhaps inevitable. A Royal Commissioner is somewhat like a juryman ; till
the verdict is given he is more or less constrained to silence. But to go to an eminent
biological or statistical authority—a man
who very likely is a university teacher of his
subject—and to ask him to serve you on
terms of keeping his mouth shut for five years
would plainly not be practical. At the same
time we wanted from some of those people
more than a mere giving of evidence, and
the committee system seemed a way of
getting it. Incidentally, members of this
Society were well represented, its president

being chairman of the statistical committee
and its secretary a prominent member of the
biological and medical.

But although this system may have been,
as I have said, inevitable, and although the
members of our three main committees were
in each case extremely eminent, the working
of the system as a whole was not, I think,
unreservedly a success. There was, you see,
no contact between us (the Commissioners)
and the committees, except through their
chairmen. We did not hold joint meetings,
and if we had they would have been too big
to be useful. In some cases we knew that a
committee’s membership were far from
unanimous, but their chairmen were normally and naturally reluctant to lay bare to us
the sources and the extent of their differences.
In one case a committee, reporting on a
subject upon which some of the Commissioners were certainly entitled to opinions of
their own, made or seemed to make the claim
that, since they (the committee) were the
experts in their sphere, we (the Commission)
must accept without question whatever they
chose to say about it. Here, something likea
head-on clash was only averted by the tact
of the chairman. Another weakness was that
whereas the Commission, being the only body
concerned with all sides of the subject, might
frequently, perhaps, have suggested a profitable line for exploration by one of the committees, it had no means of informally discussing it with that committee in the first
place. Consequently suggestions from the
Commission to the committees tended to be
rare and of small importance.

I mention these difficulties of the Commission, because you must appreciate that in
spite of some strokes of signal good fortune
(and, in particular, the services of an admirable staff) we did not work under ideal conditions. And we always knew that public and
Parliamentary opinion was none too friendly
towards us. True, the only big request that
we made to the Government of the day was
granted. That was our request to be allowed
to take a sample family census. It was an
absolutely necessary census; our inquiry
would have been a very poor affair without
it; but it did cost a good deal of public
130

money, and I should like here to pay an
emphatic tribute to the intelligence of the
Treasury officials and the courage of the then
Chancellor of the Exchequer which in wartime enabled us to get it. Even so it was
hampered by a most serious limit—the filling
up of the census papers had to be voluntary.
This was necessary to get the project past the
House of Commons. In the alternative there
was only too much reason to fear that the
back-bench ignoramuses of that body would
have come into action against us with such
claptrap about “ snooping ” and “ prying,”
as had already prevented the fertility census
of 1911 from being later repeated ; and in
the commotion we should have lost our census
altogether. Nevertheless this voluntary
limitation added very considerably to the
difficulty of drawing deductions from the
results attained—how considerably even our
statisticians only fully found out when they
got down to analysing the figures.

Our terms of reference empowered us to
study “the present population trends ”’ in
Great Britain, their causes and their probable
consequences, and to make recommendations
as to how its future trend might be influenced
in the national interest. These terms were
wide, and had the great merit of pre-judging
very little. Under them we had broadly two
problems to examine—quantity and quality.
Neither was pre-judged. In regard to
quantity members of the Royal Commission
were at first very much at variance. Several
were inclined to say offhand that our island
was full enough already ; some even toyed
with the William Morris idea of a Britain
much less populous and more idyllic than at
present. Others, including myself, took quite
a different view. But eventually we reached
a kind of loose concordat on the footing that
we should not aim lower than to stabilize our
existing population. How then was stability
to be ascertained? The answer, as the
Commission came to see it, is set out in Mr.
W. A. B. Hopkin’s memorandum on “ The
measurement of Reproductivity,” printed as
an appendix to the report. The conception
known as the net reproduction rate, as
developed by the late Dr. R. R. Kuczynski,
and generally relied on before the war, is

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

there discarded, for reasons shown; and
reliance is placed instead on a different concept—average family size. Important data
for measuring family size in this country had
already been supplied by the special fertility
census of 1911 ; but the omission to repeat
this census since had left them, so to say,
hanging in the air. Hence the urgent need
for the family census which the Commission
eventually took ; which made it possible to
calculate average family size down to the
date of its taking. This “sample census of
families,’ based on a Io per cent sample of all
the women in the population of Great Britain,
was taken in January and February 1946.
As has been said, it was on a voluntary basis,
and though most of the women who were
asked to fill in papers did so, a certain proportion did not. Now if these abstainers
had been a random sample of the whole their
abstention would have made no difference,
but late in the day, unfortunately, it became
certain that they were not. Elaborate and
difficult inquiries and calculations had therefore to be made to reduce as far as possible
the margin of error. Some margin must even
so remain, and to that extent the sample
census suffers ; but nevertheless its showings
have a very high value.

The superior convenience of the average
size of family. concept can be illustrated in
connection with the spate of births during
the years 1946-7-8. Here the net reproduction rate could merely record the situation,
say for each of the ten years from 1938
onwards, and give you some measure of the
fluctuation between the different years.
Average size of family, on the other hand,
helps you to judge whether a spate of births
means that parents are actually having more
children than they otherwise would have had,
or whether it is merely a case where by a
combination of postponements and anticipations a number of births which would anyhow have taken place have been crowded
into particular years, while the ultimate
average size of families will not be increased.
We cannot for some years, of course, give a
final answer to this, because most of the
1946-7-8 parents could still have more children if they liked. But we know that the
PROBLEMS OF QUANTITY AND QUALITY IN BRITISH POPULATION 131

war did not directly and at the time increase
average size of family ; what it did was to
lower considerably the average age at which
people married ; and although that reduction
in age at marriage may eventually have
some influence in increasing average family
size, it isnot likely to be large if the married
couples in question retain the same general
attitude towards parenthood as their predecessors.

What then has the attitude of their predecessors been ? The answer is that average
family size, which in the mid-Victorian
period was about 5-5, began falling from 1877
onwards, was a little below 3:5 in the first
decade of this century, and fell to 2-2 for
the couples married in the half-decade 1925-9.
At this last level it has since been stationary,
and the evidence points to its still being so.
And how far does this figure 2-2 go towards
replacement ? The answer will be affected
by two other factors—the future marriagerate and future death-rate. The marriagerate cannot rise much because it is so
high already. The death-rate, on the other
hand, after falling rapidly since 1900, seems
likely not merely to retain its low level but
to go on falling at the same rate for another
thirty years. If it does, the figure 2-2 represents 94 per cent of replacement, while if
it only remains where it is the figure 2-2
will represent only go per cent of replacement. Striking a mean, we may say that
replacement would be achieved if the present
average family size, 2-2, were raised to 2-4.
That is, if on the average every ten married
couples had twenty-four children instead of,
as at present, twenty-two, the quantitative
problem of replacement would be solved.

Stating the matter thus it may seem so
short a step to replacement that we really
need do little, if anything, about it. But it
is not so short as it looks. The fall of the
figure down to 2:2 has undoubtedly been due
to the spread of deliberate family limitation.
This spread has not been complete and,
humanly speaking, will go further. There are
still considerable probabilities of further
shrinkage, for even to-day fourth and later
children still constitute about one-fifth of all
the births. Again it must be remembered

that 2-4 is an average for all families, including those where for physical reasons the
marriage is sterile, or where through marrying
late or an unfortunate first confinement the
parents cannot have their full quota of
children. If an average of 2-4 is to be maintained the parents who are fully able to
must have not 2-4 children but more like
4. That figure has some other recommendations, since it is the lowest within which it is
possible for each boy to have a brother and
each girl a sister. But it is a long way from
the one-child and two-child families which
prevailed during the inter-war period in
virtually all classes.

May I make one further comment about
targets. Surely the important thing is not
that the population as a whole should replace
itself but that the population of efficient age
should do so—say those from Ig to 65. Is it
not a little ludicrous that we should think to
improve our figures by the expected fall in
the death-rate, when we know that the bulk
of the fall affects the aged ? In many ways
it may be most desirable that people who
would formerly have died at 70 should live
to be 80, and those who would have died at
75 live to be 85. But, as I have already said,
such people, however much they may be
cherished, are in most cases no addition to
the nation’s strength but a tax on it. And
the tax is going to be a heavy one. In 1948
the cost to the Exchequer of retirement
pensions was {238 million. But for 1978,
even if (which is most unlikely) there is no
further fall in the death-rate and no further
rise in the scale of pensions, the estimated
cost on the same basis is £501 million ; that
is an increase of much more than double over
thirty years. Do not forget that the figure
for 1948 is itself a high one. I told you
earlier that in the previous year the number
of people over 65 was four times what it
had been in 1871, though the population as
a whole was less than double.

There is another point which makes it
impossible, I think, to justify a tepid attitude
towards the problem of quantity. The
replacement calculation based on an average
family size of 2-4 assumes that there will be
no net emigration. Yet not only has there
132

already been much emigration since the war
but it is most desirable that it should continue. During the past three centuries it has
been the sustained volume of emigration
from this country which has procured for the
English language, the British faith in representative government, the British cult of
liberty and the rule of law, the great place
which they have to-day in the world. People
often talk of the invisible ties which, despite
our differences, connect us with the United
States, and those which have enabled the
inhabitants of Canada, Australia and New
Zealand to build up new and distinct nations
without ceasing to regard this island as ina
sense their Mother Country. Well, the
greatest of those invisible ties, perhaps, has
been continuing immigration. It is because
in any given decade down to 1930 so many
British families have had sons or daughters
settled in those overseas countries, with personal postal intercourse flowing regularly
between there and here, that the Commonwealth could become a reality, and also that
we have been able to avoid for 136 years any
clash with ever-growing America.

I said “down to 1930,” because in the
’thirties, as a result of the world economic
crisis of 1929-33, the current was temporarily
reversed ; and whereas in the sixty years
before I93I our emigrants exceeded our
immigrants by an average of 56,000 a year,
in the nine years 1931-9 our immigrants
exceeded our emigrants by an average of
60,000 a year. This was due to the specially
heavy incidence of the world economic crisis
upon primary producers; which caused
many who had gone overseas in the ’twenties
to come back again in the ’thirties. There is
no such backwash now. The war has led all
parties in the Dominions, except the
Afrikaners, to desirea greatly enlarged annual
intake of settlers; and the end of the war
found an exceptional number of British
anxious to settle there. But unless our
average family size rises very appreciably the
process can hardly continue. Meanwhile it
has been recognized by all recent British
Governments that whereas the Commonwealth as a whole needs population it is
preferable that we should send British settlers

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to the Dominions and ourselves receive
foreign settlers here, rather than that too
many foreigners should go direct to the
Dominions, whose smaller populations will
be less able to absorb and assimilate them
than ours would be. Serious obstacles, however, have been put in the way of settling
foreigners here since the war, notably by
certain trade unions.

If then we agree that this country’s figure
for average family size needs raising, how can
we hope to raise it? The Commission
rejected any idea of doing so by restricting
the spread of contraceptive knowledge. It
wanted people, if they have more children,
to have them voluntarily. Why then do they
not ? Why did 81 per cent of the couples
married in 1925 have no more than three
children and 42 per cent no more than
one?

If you start asking people that question
about themselves they will commonly give
you any of a dozen reasons, more or less
fanciful—often any rather than the right one.
But there can be little doubt that the main
motive is economic. And it is very important
to understand how it operates. It operates
within classes rather than between them, and
is perhaps more felt within the better-off
classes than within the worse-off. People are
deterred from parentage not because all
parents are poorer than all non-parents—for
obviously they are not—but because all
parents are poorer than all non-parents 7m the
same class. At all income levels (except
possibly the millionaires at one end and what
used to be called the paupers at the other)
parentage is an economic and social handicap, steeply increasing with every additional
child.

How far can the handicap be measured ?
That was the subject of a most interesting
study made for the Royal Commission by its
brilliant research assistant, Mr. J. Hajnal,
and Professor A. M. Henderson, which was
published only recently in volume V of the
papers of the Royal Commission. The raw
material was provided by (1) a large number
of working-class budgets, (2) 1,360 middleclass budgets—both collected just before the
war, and therefore wrong for to-day as
PROBLEMS OF QUANTITY AND QUALITY IN BRITISH POPULATION 133

regards absolute figures, but not in the main,
it may be presumed, as regards relations
between figures. I shall not attempt here to
pilot you through it ; but there are two tables,
XII and XIII, to which I would refer you,
as illustrating what I said just now. These
are tables dealing with clothing. At each of
the income levels recorded the showing is
the same; the amount spent per head on
clothes falls with each additional child.
Particularly noticeable is the drop in the
expenditure on adult clothing, i.e. in what
the parents can afford to spend on themselves. In the middle-class range parents of
two children spend on their own clothes only
two-thirds what is spent by childless couples ;
in the working-class ranges the proportion is
much the same. But clothing is only one
example among many. Parents do not only
go shabby because they are parents, they are
forced into deprivations all round. Just
before the war the social surveys carried out
at York, Bristol and Birmingham showed
that the incidence of the poverty line
depended mainly on size of family ; workingclass families with more than a certain number of dependent children fell almost automatically below it. In the other classes
parentage means being deprived of things
which the other members of the class take for
granted—all the normal luxuries and many
of the normal conveniences which those
others enjoy. To have children, but above all
to have more than two children, places the
parent in a position of devastating economic
and social inferiority as against people who
in respect of upbringing, outlook and gross
income are his or her natural equals. In the
most literal sense it is ‘‘ imprudent ” to be
a parent ; and the result is that at almost all
social levels the prudent persons tend to have
the smallest families. If, as we have just
seen, the national interest requires that
average family size should be raised, how can
we expect to raise it, unless we do something
to lessen the handicap against parentage ?
Well, what can we do? A little reflection
will show that since the handicap operates
not between classes but within them, and
within all of them, flat-rate reliefs, like the
present family allowances, can produce no

effect except at or near the bottom of the
income scale. To say that is not to deny
them value but to define that value, which
lies in their rescuing low-income families
from being forced by parentage below the
poverty line. But it seems improbable that
they will influence the artisan birth-rate and
certain that they cannot affect the professional one—even if the Treasury had not
clinched the matter by its delightful policy
of charging income tax upon them. It ts at
this point that the quality aspect of population comes in. If quantity were all that we
had to think about, we might solve our
problem by merely bribing those lowest in
the income scale to have large families. But
if there is also a real problem of quality we
cannot find our solution on those lines.

Let me first state the quality problem as
experience seems to suggest it. Few people
who consider the subject without bias will
doubt, I think, the broad fact that human
stocks vary very widely in respect of their
heritages of natural ability. Can we doubt
also that with the increased opening of
opportunity to talent the members of the
abler stocks are more and more finding their
way upwards into the higher strata of
society ? The process began not later than
the Renaissance ; it went further in the
seventeenth century ; it was greatly stimulated from 1750 onwards by the industrial
revolution, and in the nineteenth century
also by the immense widening of the educational field. To-day the nation’s egalitarian
policies do not merely provide “ ladders ”’ of
opportunity, but we toothcomb the whole
school population in our endeavour to find
able children to climb them. That in itself is
just, right, and, so to say, inevitable ; but
to what can it lead if not to the ever-increasing segregation of inherited ability towards
the top in the higher-income levels? And
what then, if the people at those levels continue to show the lowest average size of
family, a size far and away too low for
replacement ? Must it not mean that the
nation’s abler stocks will come to an end,
and it will have only the less able ones left
to draw upon? And if you consider how
much the greatness and prosperity of Great

Cc
134

Britain has been due to her exceptional fertility in great men, ought not this danger of
her able stocks being sterilized to be taken
most seriously by statesmen ?

Observe, I am merely stating a case, not
proving it. It cannot all be “ proved”
to-day in the strict sense. Nevertheless the
presuppositions on which it rests are each so
strong that no one who cares for the future
of the country can ignore it. After all,
practical men, whether in business or politics, have constantly to act on assumptions ;
and you will not often find a stronger set of
assumptions than those to which I have just
directed your attention. The Royal Commission recognized this ; it laid down, therefore, that any policy for increasing the
population should aim to increase it not at
one level only but at all; and, as a corollary,
in addition to the flat-rate allowances to help
parents in the lowest income groups, it
proposed to help parents in the higher ones
by remissions of income tax proportionate to
their incomes. These remissions could in
themselves, apart from their population
aspect, be justified as equitable on the
ground of taxable capacity.

It cannot as yet be proved that the continual progress of ability towards the top of
society, combined since 1877 with its increasing sterility when it gets there, has resulted in
any lowering of the nation’s ability. One
part of the case, the withering away at the
top, is probably familiar to you all, but I will
give you an illustration from my own
experience. In 1890 I had the luck to be one
of twelve boys elected scholars at Winchester. One of them, for reasons that I will
not go into, vanished early from my ken ; so
leave him out and leave me out and concentrate your attention on the remaining
ten. They represented a high average of
ability, the Winchester scholarship being
then, as it is now, about the hardest to
obtain. They all came of age in either 1900
or 1901, and none of them died young. Six
of the ten, including one of European
reputation, died without having any children
at all; and the other four produced ten
children. The bare replacement figure for
the ten men is, of course, twenty. I believe,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

though I have not exact figures, that both
the roll of scholars elected the year before
me and that elected the year after me would
show even worse results.

The difficulty is on the other side of the
case—to show whether, as a result of what
happens at the top, the reservoir of able
stock in the nation is being seriously or
measurably depleted. On the Royal Commission we received a good deal of evidence
about this, and in particular a set of memoranda, which you will find in that volume V
of the Commission’s Papers, to which I
referred just now. The set starts with a
memorandum by Sir Godfrey Thomson,
whom most of us honour greatly for his work
in this field ; then there is a comment by
Professor R. A. Fisher, then two comments
by Professor J. B. S. Haldane, then one by
Dr. J. A. Fraser Roberts ; then a memorandum by Dr. E. O. Lewis, and a long one by Sir
Cyril Burt ; and lastly, a further memorandum
by Sir Godfrey Thomson, dealing with the
results of the Scottish intelligence survey
made in 1947, a full account of which,
entitled The Trend of Scottish Intelligence,
was published by the Scottish Council for
Research in Education last year.

Now I have read these men’s names to
you because I think you will recognize that
they are those of scientists eminent in this
sphere—men, too, with very different views
on many things ; and I for one was struck by
the remarkable degree of agreement between
them—only broken by Professor Haldane,
and by him only in the second of his two
comments, written some years after the first.
What does seem to be otherwise generally
accepted is that there is a negative correlation—which Sir Godfrey Thomson estimated
at — 0-25—between degree of intelligence and
size of family. Put in non-mathematical
terms that means that the abler children
come from the smaller families ; not invariably but to an extent which can be measured
and which is far too high to be explained by
chance. A negative correlation of 0:25
would mean that about 60 per cent of the
families are in agreement with the tendency,
while 40 per cent are not.

In Scotland in 1932 an intelligence test
PROBLEMS OF QUANTITY AND QUALITY IN BRITISH POPULATION 135

was taken of all the eleven-year-olds in the
schools, and the negative correlation between
intelligence and size of family was shown by
it. Fifteen years later, in 1947, a similar
testing was carried out, and the same negative correlation was shown by it. Only,
whereas such a persistent association of
intelligence with small families might have
been reflected after fifteen years in a lower
average of intelligence all round, in point of
fact the average in 1947 was higher. How
do we account for that? Possibly, I think, by
changes of environment. The Scottish children of 1947 were taller, heavier and healthier
than in 1932, besides being more accustomed
to do intelligence tests. Up to a point these
factors might very well offset and disguise a
fall in inherited intelligence without ultimately counteracting it.

The Royal Commission—rightly, I think—
did not attempt to adjudicate these issues.
But it drew emphatic attention to their
importance and strongly recommended that
further research into them should be “ generously ” and “actively ’’ encouraged by the
Government. I venture to throw up this
recommendation of the Commission as by
no means its least important one.

What were our other recommendations ?
They fall broadly under three heads: (1)
Monetary help to parents—increased (and
untaxed) children’s allowances for the lowerincome levels, together with a sliding scale
of tax relief at the higher ones ; (2) A long
list of social welfare aids to parentage,
ranging from painless confinements and
longer nursing to priorities for housing,
rebates for rents, nurseries, home helps and
many other things ; (3) A provision for better
and more continuous Governmental study of
population questions.

Of the first I will merely say that our
financial demands were deliberately kept low.
French experience suggests that more, perhaps much more, may eventually be needed
to bring about any sufficient increases in
family size. But, even apart from the present
financial stringency, there is much to be said
for beginning modestly. Our figures may be
taken: generally as minima. Of the second I
would say, that while everything there
recommended may be justified in itself, I am
less confident about its producing much effect
on family size. In Sweden, where the problem
has been tackled on those lines, the result
seems to be an improved welfare State, but
not, as yet, an improved family size.

And, lastly, there is the third heading—
provision for better Governmental study of
population problems. Here we put forward a
carefully considered plan. We recommended
that a particular Minister, the Lord President
of the Council, should be given a special
responsibility for population. But we did
not suggest setting up a new department.
We recommended instead using that useful,
though perhaps little-known body, the
Inter-Departmental Committee on Social
and Economic Research, which should be
given the necessary power and finance, and
be required to appoint a subcommittee to
carry out the actual work.

A year has passed and none of that has
been done. But as regards the all-important
third part I gather that behind the scenes
discussion has been active. Indeed, if
rumour speaks true, the proposed alternative
to our scheme is not to do nothing but to do
a good deal more. If so, more power to the
discussion. Only I never forgot the ancient
Greek proverb, that the best is sometimes the
enemy of the good.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLII, No. 3
