COMMENTS AND CRITICISMS.

Marriage and War.—The more or less sacramental ideas
about marriage of the early pre-Christian nations seem to have
been most highly developed among those who had won their
land by the sword and had constantly to defend it. In such
circumstances two things must have been obvious; firstly, the
necessity of keeping up the national fighting strength; and
secondly, the need of some protection for the numerous widows
and orphans left by the ever-recurring wars. The first object
was achieved by making the leaving of sons a religious duty
incumbent on every man; the second by making the nurture of
orphaned children the duty of the father’s male relatives. To
achieve the latter aim it was necessary to guard against doubts
as to the paternity of the children; so fidelity to the marriage
vow was made incumbent on women. It was not exacted from
the men so long as they avoided corrupting their neighbours’
wives. No other view could well have arisen in polygamous
communities; and polygamy was useful as helping to keep up
the national fighting strength.

Two remarkable examples of this stand out in ancient
history, namely, the Jews and the early Aryan settlers in India.
Both of these are specially interesting, because, with this effort
to keep up their numerical strength by sanctifying marriage and
encouraging large families, they combined an effort, which was
really eugenic, to keep the race pure. Both races rightly
believed themselves to be superior to their neighbours. The
Jews had made the great advance of identifying God with
righteousness, while their neighbours had no such idea. The
worship of the Shining Gods, as it has come down to us in the
Vedic hymns, points to religious ideas on the part of the early
Aryan settlers which must have been far above those of the nonAryan races then in India. Certainly the Aryans proved their
superiority by the dominant position they eventually gained.
Both Jews and Aryans had to fight for centuries to retain their
ground; and both had hard work to prevent their race from
54 EUGENICS REVIEW.

being swamped by intermarriage with their neighbours. Every
reader of the Old Testament knows how strongly the Jews
objected to such marriages. In India caste was the measure
adopted to prevent them, and the result is that considerable
sections of the population, the Brahmans and Rajputs especially, are to this day clearly of Aryan descent. The Jews: have
also kept their race fairly pure, in spite of their dispersion
throughout the world. Both races have also increased. in
numbers. | |

In contrast with what has been done by these two national
religions, combining some worldly wisdom with more distinctly
spiritual aims, we may look for a moment at what has occurred
under Buddhism. The teaching of Gautama caused a great
spiritual uplifting in the India of his day, and has left its
impress on Indian thought. But in time the creed was practically driven out of India, probably because its teaching in
regard to caste cut at the root of Brahman ascendancy. Though
driven out of India, it took firm hold in the countries beyond
India. In China and Japan its teaching is venerated along with
that of the indigenous creeds, but it was in the countries lying
between India and China that it was received unreservedly and
enthusiastically by all the leading races, and has become
supreme. The Burmese, for instance, have been devoted
Buddhists for centuries and are so still. This religion, however,
is so entirely spiritual that it does not concern itself at all with
such things as marriage or keeping up the nation’s fighting
strength. Under it marriage is merely a civil contract. The
man who wishes to marry can do so without blame, but he stands
on a lower spiritual level than the monk. With marriage on
this basis it is scarcely wonderful that the population has never
increased to anything like that which so fertile a country could
easily support. Very much the same holds good in Siam and
the other purely Buddhist countries. In India, on the other
hand, the population has always tended to be excessive. Noone
can fail to admire the lofty moral and spiritual teaching of
Buddhism, but it is better for any people when their Church
gives some attention also to the practical needs of ordinary life.

| | JouHN Stuart.
COMMENTS AND CRITICISMS. 55

Disabled Soldiers and Marriage.— We have referred in a
previous number to the question of the marriage of soldiers and
sailors disabled in the war; and, believing as we do that mutilations have absolutely no inherited effect, and that the soldiers
and sailors, as a picked body, are on the average superior to the
general body of the population, we have ventured to advocate
such marriages as an important means of racial repair. We are
glad, therefore, to inform our readers of the record in this matter
of the Blinded Soldiers’ and Sailors’ Hostel at St. Dunstan’s,
Regent’s Park. Sir Arthur Pearson has kindly placed statistics
at our disposal, which, in addition, serve to throw some light
upon the magnitude of the whole problem. Of 440 blinded
soldiers entering St. Dunstan’s, 144 were previously married,
and 296, or rather more than two-thirds, were single. Of these
single men 55, or 18 per cent., have married since their disablement. It is noted that the wives are to be considered in every
case as extremely suitable, and almost without exception as
unusually good looking. The Directors of St. Dunstan’s are to
be congratulated upon this desirable policy, and it is to be hoped
that the State may be induced to take account of eugenic considerations, and to make allowance in the disablement pensions
for children born subsequently to disablement. R. A. F.

Children and the Land.—Sir Rider Haggard, in his
speech on Empire Land Settlement, when touching on the
fundamental problem of population, said: ‘‘It is only on
the land, speaking generally and with exceptions, that
large families are reared to-day. Don’t run away with
the idea that this is because I think there is any particular virtue attaching to the land, or that there children
arise spontaneously. The explanation is that land-dwelling
parents, especially if they are owners or have some permanent
interest in their farms, have a very real, if unexpressed, desire
for cheap labour. I have noticed again and again that in the
nests of small holdings are found the children, but go where
these are not, and you find but few children. That is one of
the great reasons why a country should make every sacrifice
and do everything it possibly can to encourage settlement on
56 EUGENICS REVIEW.

the land, because children in adequate numbers are necessary
to the welfare and safety of all nations.’’

Eugenics and Morals.—It is noted in the reports on child
welfare and maternity schemes that ‘‘in practice, the mothers
who have been fed are the wives of men who have long illnesses or who are of the wastrel class, and seldom earn sufficient
to support their wives and families.’’ Morally, it is clearly
our duty to support and encourage all such schemes, but,
eugenically, it is clearly our duty to see that this survival of the
unfit is, to some extent at least, counterbalanced by the birth of
the fit. N. A.

The Fertility of the Unfit—Dr. McMurchy, who has
recently published a Report on the Feeble-minded in Ontario,
is evidently an ardent reformer, and to strengthen her case in
Ontario has ranged the world in search of facts concerning the
feeble-minded, so that her report is rather more a general than
a local one. An investigation in one of the counties of Pennsylvania resulted in the unearthing of another Jukes pedigree, 508
defectives being traced back to two family groups. In this
community too the fertility of the fit averaged three in a family,
of the unfit, seven. N. A.

National Baby Week—July tst-7th, 1917.—It has been
decided to hold a National Baby Week from July 1st-7th. Lord
Rhondda is Chairman of the Council, and all the National
Children’s Societies are co-operating in the movement. The
Eugenics Education Society is also represented on the Committee. Information with regard to it can be obtained from
The Secretary, ‘‘ National Baby Week,’’ Kingsway House,
Kingsway, London, W.C.

 
