SINANTHROPUS AND OTHER FOSSIL MEN

Their Relations to Each Other and to Modern Types

By S. ZUCKERMAN,

HE recent discovery of fossil man in

China, and the still more recent finds

of his remains in fava, have combined to raise, ina light not readily apparent
before these discoveries, the trying issue of
the correct classification of the zoological
family to which modern man belongs. The
evidence is critically reviewed in this paper,
and the conclusion is drawn that the existing classification is irrational. One of its
more serious drawbacks is that it prevents
a convincing evolutionary interpretation of
the remains of fossil man already available
for study. The tentative suggestion is made
that archaic types and modern men fall into
two readily definable groups, the sub-family
Paleanthropide comprising such forms as
Peking and Neanderthal man, and the subfamily Neanthropidze consisting of types
like modern man and men of the Upper
Palg@olithic.

INTRODUCTION

Although the study of Fossil Man is an
organized and accepted branch of anthropology, and in spite of the fact that it has
been this for over half a century, there are
still writers who deny both its intrinsic
scientific interest and its relevance to wider
questions of human biology. For example,
at the last meeting of the British Association (1932), a well-known speaker affirmed
that Fossil Man was of no account in discussions of man’s zoological position.
Again, in a recently published criticism of
evolutionary doctrine, a section is devoted
to what are derogatively styled ‘‘ supposed
links between man and other animals.’’?
Reactionary views of this kind may conceivably act as a deterrent to those more
extreme writers on evolution who very

1 Douglas Dewar: Difficulties of the Evolution
Theory. Arnold. London. 1931.

M.A., D.Se., M.R.C.S.

plainly over-emphasize the significance of
what human fossils we have, and whose
enthusiasm, stimulated by an overwhelming
popular interest, tends to distort the proper
position of these studies in the wider body
of our knowledge. An over-enthusiasm for
human paleontology, however, is usually
far less biased than is the kind of opposition, both lay and scientific, which this field
of study usually receives.

Of the many criticisms it has to withstand, two are perhaps worthy of notice:
the one, that the subject has no practical
significance, and that its pursuit, by attracting money, deleteriously influences the
progress of studies of more immediate
social importance: the other, that the
general principles upon which it proceeds
are unscientific and not in accordance with
those principles which operate in comparable biological fields.

There is no good answer to the first argument. Palzontology is an essential part of
geology, which, as is generally recognized,
is of great economic importance ; but fossils
regarded purely as zoological specimens
obviously have little practical value, and
this is particularly true of the few human
ones so far discovered. On the other hand,
the intensive study of these human bones
is a branch of anthropology, and it is permissible to argue that such study provides
a solid basis for investigations of racial
heredity—even though it could not be said
that the knowledge so provided forms an
essential foundation for these investigations. In being almost devoid of more than
cultural significance, the study of human
fossils does not, however, stand alone in
scientific inquiry. It is not yet demanded
of all scientific investigation that it necessarily possess some recognizable practical
value, either immediate or remote.

273
274

Far less deserving of adverse criticism
are the biological principles on which the
study of human fossils proceeds. Physical
anthropology has been somewhat adversely
described as pursuing its course ‘‘ with a
serenity unimpaired by the results of
experimental investigation,’’ the reason for
this being, so we are told, that geneticists
have not indicated the ‘‘ devastating consequences ’’ of their discoveries.” But even
if it be assumed that geneticists have not
done this, and that systematic biologists
and physical anthropologists are altogether
in ignorance of the implications of the conclusions of genetics,* it would in any case
be impossible in the circumstances of
present biological knowledge to conceive
of a kind of systematic treatment of fossil
skulls different from that which they at
present receive.

“Theoretically, human paleontology proceeds on the same principles as do other
palzontological studies, all of which may
be regarded as branches of systematic
biology. ‘These principles are the best that
all biology, including such experimental
studies as genetics, can at present offer.
Nevertheless, to-day there are few students
who would claim that the tracing of phylogenetic relationships through any group of
animals, existing or fossil, is in large part
more than _ speculation. Experimental
science may have helped in the realization
of this fact, but it has altogether failed to
provide new methods in place of those
which have always been employed in
systematics. The almost automatic comparison of every new object of interest that
is discovered with already familiar things
is responsible, as far as fossils are concerned, for their systematic classification.
When the fossils are man-like in character
this automatic treatment is strengthened
by an inescapable anthropocentric interest,
and quite as inevitably the classification
leads to phylogenetic inferences. Students

2, Hogben: Genetic Principles in Medicine and
Social Science. Williams & Norgate. London. 1931.
3 An assumption not generally borne out in the
literature either of systematic zoology or of anthro
pology.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

will, of course, argue on these matters, and
they will make mistakes; but though both
the classification and the phylogenetic
inferences of systematic biology may be
arbitrary processes unsustained by any
firm logic, classification is nevertheless
both essential and valid on its own level,
while phylogenetic inference is inevitable,
and up to a point of value too. The fact
that the stamp of scientific certainty cannot
embellish the conclusions of these studies
is no reason why they should be discontinued. The same criteria of exactitude
are unfortunately missing in the conclusions of many other fields of biology, which
nevertheless merit exploration simply on
account of their intrinsic interest.

THE INEVITABLE CONTROVERSIES

Cut off though it may be from immediate
practical ends and from the main body of
biological inquiry, the study of man’s
phylogeny pursues its course with anything but serenity. Its roots are deeply
embedded in the conflict which raged in the
nineteenth century between established
religious ideas and the scientific view of our
kinship with the animal world. To-day
the conflict has mostly subsided, but even
now fossil human remains do not allow
themselves to be treated in the detached
way the paleontologist regards the bones of
a Triassic reptile.

Argument begins with every report of
their discovery and continues endlessly.
The bony fragments may not be found close
together, and it will have to be decided
whether or not they are parts of the same
individual, sometimes even if they are parts
of the same kind of individual. The
deposit from which they are recovered may
not be well defined geologically, and their
correct horizon will be matter for argument. ‘This will not be all, for authorities
are unlikely to agree about the way the
fragments should be reconstructed and how
they should be described, and all these
trying issues will only be preliminary ‘to
the more important one of proper interpretation, which demands meticulous comparison of the new find with previously
SINANTHROPUS AND

described human fossils, with existing
human beings, and with the great apes.
Finally, stock will have to be taken of
current views on human phylogeny in the
light of the newly gained knowledge. If
one is to take Sir Arthur Keith seriously
when he expresses* the doubt ‘‘ if the belief
of modern anthropologists in Evolution is
more than skin deep,’’ perhaps even more
fundamental issues may be raised.

SINANTHROPUS PEKINENSIS

These questions have recently been given
prominence by. the discovery of the Peking
human fossils. The facts of this discovery
are perhaps too well known to merit more
than brief description here.*

China had long been considered a possible home of primitive man. Thirty years

ago, Professor Schlosser, of Munich,
described a tooth that a certain Dr. Haberer
had found included in a collection of

‘““ dragon bones,’’ bought in Peking.*® It
was a left upper third molar, completely
fossilized, which showed on its surface a
reddish clay that suggested it had been
unearthed either from some tertiary or
from some very early pleistocene deposit.
Unable to reach a definite decision, Professor Schlosser suggested that it might be
the tooth of a manlike ape or an apelike
man. However vague this diagnosis was,
it clearly pointed to China as a field in
which to search for fossil man, and excavations at Chou Kou Tien nineteen years later
(financed partly by the late Ivar Kreuger,
the Swedish ‘‘ Match King’’), led to the
finding in an early pleistocene deposit of
two more human teeth, an immature left
lower pre-molar and a somewhat worn adult
right upper molar.

The latter discovery, more than Dr.
Haberer’s, marks the rebirth of ‘‘ Peking

 

“New Discoveries Relating to the Antiquity of
Man. Williams & Norgate. London. 1931.

5 See Davidson Black: Palgontologica Sinica.
Series D, Vol. VII, Fasc. I, 1927, and Ibid., Fasc.
2, 1930. The latter monograph provides a full
bibliography relating to the discovery. Also
G. Elliot Smith: The Search for Man’s Ancestors.
Watts. London, 1931.

6 Abh, d. kén. Bayer-Akad, Wiss. Math. Phys.
Kl., Bd. XXII, 1903.

OTHER FOSSIL MEN 275
Man.’ ‘The teeth were described by Dr.
Zdansky,’ a Swedish paleontologist, who
was disinclined to regard them as a basis
for far-reaching conclusions about human
origins—a conservative point of view which
well merits commendation in spite of its
strange sequel.

Professor Davidson Black, the Professor
of Anatomy at the Union Medical College
in Peking, took a different view of the find,
and was instrumental in interesting the
Rockefeller Foundation in the matter. This
institution immediately undertook to subsidize further excavation at Chou Kou Tien,
and late in 1927 another human molar tooth
was found, this time by Dr. Bohlin. To
give recognition to the peculiarities of this
tooth, Dr. Davidson Black courageously
created a new genus and species of man,
Sinanthropus pekinensis. His enthusiasm
was well justified, for a year later fragments of two jaws and two brain-cases were
found in the same early pleistocene deposit,
and in 1929 Mr. W. C. Pei found, again in
the same deposit, an almost complete braincase. In 1930 still anothér brain-case was
unearthed. In addition to these remains
many teeth have been recovered, and to-day
several complete sets, both milk and
permanent, are available for study. The
excavations have also shown that the site
at Chou Kou Tien was the home of the
Sinanthropus people for an extremely long
period, and that they knew the use of fire
and made implements.’

Enough remains have been found to
allow of exact description of the type of
skull possessed by these extinct early
pleistocene people. Both of the complete
crania are in length and breadth well within
the range of modern European skulls, but
they are very low, so much so that the
cranial capacity of the specimens found was
little more than about 950 cubic centimetres
(the average modern European skull has a
capacity in the region of 1,400 cubic centimetres). The eyes are surmounted by
strong eyebrow ridges, immediately behind

 

7 Bull. Geol. Soc. China, Vol. V, 1927.
8 Davidson Black: Bull. Geol. Soc. China, Vol.
XI, 1931. C. Pei, Ibid.
276

which the skull is very constricted. The
frontal slope is not steep, and the wide
lower occipital part of the skull (the maximum width of which is situated low down,
just above the ears, as in adult large apes)
is bent at an angle to the rest, and shelves
sharply into the neck. The mastoid processes, though massive, do not markedly
project. The base of the skull is preserved
in only one of the specimens, and it shows
certain peculiarities in the region of the ear.
The lower jaw, too, shows several strange
characters. For example, there is little, if
any, chin, and although the teeth are big,
the canines are not overdeveloped.

VARIATION IN THE REMAINS

The two brain-cases differ slightly from
each other in many ways—e.g. in dimensions; in the thickness of the bones, a
feature in which there is great variation,
especially when the fragments found in
1928 are remembered ; in the inclination of
the frontal slope ; and in the development of
the frontal bosses. Such differences are
only to be expected, and they may be
related to a variety of factors. Thus they
may be accounted for on the scores of sex,
age, or of individual variation irrespective
of sex and age. Actually, Professor Black,
who is responsible for the official account of
the skulls, regards the differences as being
solely due to differences of sex and age.
This is a debatable point, and it is
doubtful if any opinion on the matter could
be regarded as conclusive. The skulls are
without doubt of different age, the one
apparently being that of an individual who
died between puberty and maturity, the
other that of a young adult.

It is obviously impossible, however, to
tell whether the younger skull would have
grown, had its owner lived to become a
young adult, to reach or exceed the dimensions of the older skull. It is equally
impossible to be certain of the sexual difference. Before the second skull was found,
the first was thought to be that of a female.
When the second was found and compared
with the first, the diagnosis was changed,
the second being regarded as a female, and

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the first as a male. This in itself shows
the difficulty of forming a positive opinion
on the matter, and the doubt it suggests is
very much strengthened by the fact that
sex identifications of many types of skull
(for example Australian, Tasmanian and
South African) on the basis of anatomical
characters, are regarded as being valueless
on account of their uncertainty.’ In view
of the extent of variation unrelated to either
sex or age that exists, not only in modern
human but in the Mousterian human
remains and also in existing ape skulls, it
would be extremely unlikely that Sinanthropus would fail to show similar variation. Because of this probability it is
perhaps hazardous either to  underemphasize the phenomenon of individual
variation when explaining the differences
which exist between the two specimens
already found, or to imply that these
differences are of no particular account
since they might be ascribed to sex and age.

VTHE SYSTEMATIC POSITION OF PEKING MAN

As was stated above, the remains found
at Chou Kou Tien have been ascribed to
a new genus of the Family Hominide, the
other accredited genera of the Family being
Pithecanthropus (the Ape-Man of Java),
Eoanthropus (Piltdown Man) and Homo, to
the last of which belong such widely
different types as modern man, Neanderthal or Mousterian man, and Rhodesian
man. Professor Black, while he states that
the Sinanthropus skulls show certain
resemblances to Neanderthal skulls, nevertheless regards the two types as profoundly different, and although he also
admits that the Chinese brain-cases show
closer resemblances to the Pithecanthropus
skull-cap, he still feels ‘‘ that they differ
from one another in points of size, proportions and detail to a degree amply sufficient
to proclaim their generic distinction.’
From the point of view of systematics, it is
worth while examining this conclusion more
closely, since the differences, especially

® On this question see Wood Jones, Journ. Anat.,
Vol. LXITI, 1929, and Hrdlitka, Proc. United States
Nat, Mus., Vol. LXXI, 1928.
SINANTHROPUS AND OTHER FOSSIL MEN

those between the younger Sinanthropus
and the Pithecanthropus specimens are, as
Black’s data show (1930; table, p. 92), not
very great. One has to guard against overemphasizing their significance, particularly
when the variation in the different Sinanthropus remains themselves is remembered.

The relegation of the Chinese remains to
a new genus rather than to one of the three
previously known, is largely dependent on
the definition of the term genus, a definition which for practical purposes is unfortunately vague. The question of the
systematic differentiation of genera and
species is discussed more fully below. For
present purposes the following points may
be noted here:

If the creation of the new genus is fully
justified, and if the accepted classification
of the other members of the family is indisputable, it should follow that the differences
which separate Sinanthropus from its
fellow genera are greater than those which
separate the various species of the single
genus Homo—sapiens, neanderthalensis,
rhodesiensis, and  heidelbergensis — from
one another.’® ‘This will not be the case if
equal value has not been given throughout
the classification of the Hominide to

10 From the evolutionary point of view it might
be argued that stronger emphasis could be laid in
classification on differences which exist in an earlier
stage of the differentiation of a group of related
organisms than on equivalent or even greater differences which may be found at a later stage, e.g. the
differences between Sinanthropus and Pithecanthropus (both of which are usually referred to the
beginning of the Pleistocene) should be given
greater weight than those between H. sapiens and
other relatively recent forms of Homo which do not
fall into the species sapiens. Thus it might be said
that small differences in an early geological horizon demonstrate the divergence of a group into
several separate lines of descent, within each of
which occurs still greater differentiation (as indicated by the range of both later fossil and existing
forms). Theoretically this may be true, but in practice it is extremely hard to give recognition to the
point in classification. The phylogeny of systematic
zoology is a series of secondary abstractions from a
primary series constituted by correct classification.
Such classification must take cognizance of every
member of the group being classified, and of the
sum of all their resemblances and differences. Unless
on the strength of an a priori belief special weight
were attached to the characters of fossil forms, specific differences could not possibly be greater than
generic ones.

277

characters which serve to differentiate
certain types from others. ‘Thus a difference which in one case served as part of the
basis for generic differentiation, should
have been given equal consideration in
another. Moreover, any common physical
characters which bind the species of Homo
into a single genus should not occur in any
other genus of Hominide; also any character or characters on which the validity of
the other genera depend should be peculiar
to these genera. These theoretical criteria
of differentiation should be satisfied unless
the generic term Sinanthropus is to be
accepted as one of convenience designed to
define an outstanding palzontological find.
In coining the term, however, this was not
what Professor Black wished, a point he
clearly indicates by devoting a considerable
part of his 1930 monograph to an exposition of the differences which separate the
skull of Sinanthropus from those of other
fossil men.**

A classification could not, however, be
thoroughly tested in the light of these
criteria of differentiation unless data were
available giving the full range of variation
of the forms being classified. Since there
are only few data relating to the variability
of Sinanthropus, and none at all in the case
of such archaic members of the Hominide
as Pithecanthropus and Eoanthropus, the
satisfaction of these criteria cannot be
insisted upon too heavily in testing the
generic status of any one of these types,
while the extent to which variation in these
forms is denied or admitted becomes largely
a matter of opinion rather than one of scientific analysis. There are certain facts, however, given in Black’s 1930 monograph,
which do bear on the general question of
the generic and specific differences of fossil
men. Thus a table is provided (p. 74) showing the values of certain measurements in
the two Sinanthropus skull-caps and in

 

11 As was noted above, the genus Sinanthropus
was created to give recognition to certain peculiar
characters of the tooth found in 1927. As yet no
study has been published to show how far this tooth
is typical of the scores of others since found in the
same site, and how far the characters of all these
teeth overlap with those of other anthropoid teeth.
278

twelve other fossil human skulls, of which
ten, in accepted classification, are referred
to the species H. neanderthalensis. ‘These
ten skulls were  biometrically
by Morant’” who writes of them that ‘“‘ the
type was remarkably homogeneous.”’ Disregarding the juvenile La Quina specimen
of Neanderthal man, it is clear (see Table
on opposite page) that in all but two of
Black’s thirteen selected dimensions, about
which it is possible to make a statement, a
smaller gap separates the Sinanthropus
skull-caps and those Neanderthal specimens which in these dimensions approximate to them most closely, than that which
separates these Neanderthal skulls from
other skulls classified in their own species.
The two exceptional measurements are the
height of the skull above the ear holes and
the measurement of the least frontal
breadth.

In all but five of the thirteen measurements the Sinanthropus remains are consistently smaller than the Neanderthal. In
three of these five dimensions both Sinanthropus skulls are bigger than, or as big
as, the smallest Neanderthal skull. Excluding these three measurements, ten of
the thirteen comparative dimensions are
left, and in five of these the Gibraltar, in
four the adult La Quina, and in one the
Krapina, approximate most closely to
Sinanthropus. ‘The La Chapelle specimen
is the skull furthest removed from the
Peking brain-case in almost all these ten
dimensions.’® When superimposed contours
are examined (Black provides several such
figures) it again becomes plain that one
Neanderthal contour may differ from another of the same kind as much as the contours of Sinanthropus differ from them all.
Yet, as Morant has shown, the Neanderthal
specimens, although widely separated from
one another in space and time, form a group
‘not more variable than a sample drawn

12G, M. Morant: Annals of Eugenics, Voi. II,
Parts 3 and 4, 1927.

18 Since the Mousterian type is a homogeneous
one, it is possible to imagine that one of its representatives (still to be found) will approximate ‘in all
Black’s selected dimensions as closely to the Peking
skulls as La Chapelle is removed from them all.

studied ~

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

from a single homogeneous and contemporaneous population might well be.’’? Thus
arises the anomalous fact that intra-specific
differences of linear dimensions of the skull
are often greater than generic ones in the
Family Hominid@, as at present classified.

Not only is this so, but the facts also fail
to fit the other criterion of classification
mentioned above—namely that equal value
be given in classification to characters which
serve to differentiate certain types from
others. Thus a main distinguishing feature
of Neanderthal skulls is shown by Morant
to be their peculiarly small and flattened
sagittal arcs,** the flattening and abbreviation being demonstrated not only by the
entire arc, but also by its constituent segments. ‘This phenomenon to some extent
indicates an unexpanded vault, and it is
therefore not surprising to find that in
respect of the measurements defining the
flattening, the Sinanthropus brain-cases
correspond, not only to Neanderthal skulls,
but also to the Rhodesian type*’ as well as
to Pithecanthropus. In this there again
occurs an anomaly in the classification of
the Family Hominide. ‘The flattening of.
the sagittal arc is sufficiently pronounced
not only to bring these archaic skulls
together, but also to differentiate them both
from skulls of the upper Palzolithic’* and
from those of recent people. As a taxonomic
character, however, it cuts across accepted
classification, since the Neanderthal and
Rhodesian types are regarded only as
separate species of the genus Homo (other
species of which do not exhibit the character), whereas in Sinanthropus it is made
part of the complex of features determining
generic status.

Peculiarities of the zoological classification of man do not cease here. As one of
the few significant differences between
Sinanthropus and Pithecanthropus, on
which he argues their generic distinction,
Black points to the fact that the vertical

14 The sagittal arc of a brain-case is the contour
of its median longitudinal section.

15 See Morant : Annals of Eugenics, Vol. III, Parts
3 and 4, 1928.

16 See Morant: Annals of Eugenics, Vol. IV,
Parts 1 and 2, 1930.
279

SINANTHROPUS AND OTHER FOSSIL MEN

ee

t Ads

cé

apedeq) eT

 

 

iI Ads

ce

cé

aedeyy ey

SNGOMYJUDULS
WO1I} peaowlel
FSOqHIe} [INAS
Teq}epute Nn

‘S][NAS [CEYPIIPUCON 94} JO UOTPELIeA Jo OBueI OY} UIYIIM SI UOIsSUOWIP sndosyzuvuts oy} eq} A[duit UUIN[OS SIq} UI Sayseg »
‘S[[NYS 9Y} JO ssousjo[duooul 9y} Jo osnedeq oiqeurezqoun

Ajyensn ore orga sanyea oni} oq} jo ,, suoyewrxoidde o[qeuoseal ,, yuosoider YIeu uoyYsenb e Aq pomoTfo} soins1gq ‘o€61 ‘Hoel uospraeq wo e}zeq
*SISUIIDY4IPUDIU “FIT PUe SndosyjUDULS UI SUOISUSTIC] [IUCID UlezIOD JO sonfeA oY} BUIATs sIqe]

[eyuepueon pue euing ey]

eulng eT

‘

reqfesqyty)

euIng) eT]

soTlTex) pue euide1yy
eulng) eT]

«¢

c¢

reqerqix)

sngosyjUvuts 0} }SeSO]o

TINS Teyopueen

ZI

 

1-61

| | PA | ee | SS | ST TTT |

9-1

AS | EE | GREECE | er | AS | ITS OPPOSE

Cz

Iv

S| SS ff | ene sueneDatmmnemcnmates | SDK a

ZI
6-6

z-Cr

“tau

SOLIOS

[eq}IopueoNn

JO UOTZELIEA
jo osuey

6-9

ene Ra | coreaeneace ee | cam re RS | AS | A

6-2

ee SS | cr | RA ASS | As | |

or 4

€.'r

rere | cere] FE fA ES | A RTP

6.Gz1-4€-go1

8°9

9:91

€-S

or

ee eet

€.L

sweeten ucieine | exeemgagecmren ane | eater ER ETE | A TOTES | Se

6-7

 

“Uru
#SOLIOS
[eqyopuesaNn
pue
SNGOAYJUDULS
199M30q
des ysayyewus

¢6-hr1-—46-zor
gzI-—26-9o1

év-ZII-{Q-ZOL

é€€1-— 4011
€9gS— gzzS
éS11— ¢Zor

éz-I€I-{F-zZ11

z-601- 96
z-QSI-¢£-Qer

¢z6I—- 40gI

STINAS
Teyylopuean
oun

évor 140)
éOII 66
601 zOl
OzI €1I
ézoS

46 ‘eo| 2-26
ozI ‘eo| II
gor ‘ed| G-IOI
bg ‘e0| -1g
ver eo} €€1
éLL4i o£1
gL1
g-Zg1

‘a a

uur
qd sno0'T
srInyg sndosynuvtas

pioy) epquiey-eurseig
IY epquie]-eulseig
ploy) eulsaig-uolseN
IY eULssIG-UOISeN
QOUdIIFUINIAT) [}UOZLIOF]
WSIEeH Ie~ouny

Ypeaig oworayseIg

Y}peoig [e}Uo1y 4S9}eaI4)

YIpeaig [e}UOLy 3seI]

wpearg [eyeg UNWIXe]}]

 

y}8uaT epquiey-uoisen,

 

waSueT] peyd1009-uo0ssydQ

 

yysueT eqidis9Q-eT]2qeTD

 

SUOISUOTIC,
280

planes in which certain breadth measurements of the brain-cases fall, are different
in the two types. Quite as important a
difference in one of these breadth measurements differentiates all Neanderthal skulls
from modern types. In their case, however,
it is not regarded as indicating more than
specific differentiation.

DISCREPANCIES IN THE ACCEPTED
CLASSIFICATION OF THE HOMINID

From what has been said above, it is
fairly plain that discrepancies, or apparent
discrepancies, exist in the commonly
accepted classification of the Hominide,
for on the basis of single cranial dimensions
there can be little doubt that Neanderthal
man is differentiated from modern man quite
as definitely as Sinanthropus is from Pithecanthropus. While the two Eastern forms,
however, are regarded as being generically
distinct from each other, modern man and
Mousterian man are placed in the same
genus—-apparently an almost wholly arbitrary measure.

The species, Homo neanderthalensis was
created by King,’’ who disagreed with
T. H. Huxley’s opinion*®® that the Neanderthal skull was simply an extreme variant
of the modern skull. King himself seems to
have believed that the characters of the
Neanderthal brain-cases were so peculiar
that they almost justified generic recognition, but in view of the strong bias against
admitting human evolution that existed in
the period when he wrote (1864), it is not
surprising that he chose to regard the Neanderthal remains as those of a new species of
Homo rather than as those of an altogether
new kind of man. Even this moderate view
was strongly opposed, and until quite
recently writers on the subject have had to
defend Neanderthal man’s specific status
rather than push the separation still
further. The few who, like Sergi, the
Italian anthropologist, were inclined to
emphasize the generic distinction of the
type, have had their views pushed aside,

17 Quart. Journ. Sci., Vol. I, 1864.
18 Man’s Place in Nature, 1863. Everyman Edn.,
Dent. London. 1ga2r. .

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

simply as a matter of opinion, by students
better versed in controversial discussion.
This treatment of Neanderthal ‘man does
not lead one to expect a logical explanation
for the fact that the differences between this
type and modern man have received smaller
recognition than the differences between
Pithecanthropus and Sinanthropus. Since,
however, it may conceivably be incorrect in
the systematic classification of skulls to lay,
on a priori grounds, equal emphasis on all
measurable cranial characters,’® it might
be argued that it is wrong to state that the
morphological gap in cranial form between
modern man and Mousterian man is no less
than that between the two fossil men of the
East. It may be that those characters in
which modern man and Neanderthal man
differ are less significant than those which
separate the two Eastern types. Actually,
there is little strength in such an argument,
and it is very difficult to point to any
measurable criteria which justifiably could
be considered to merit greater value than
others for purposes of the classification of
the four types under consideration. The
most likely one would perhaps be the height
of the skull, which is an important measure
of cranial expansion. Thus a few pages
back, when considering the table of comparative measurements provided by Black,
it was pointed out that the measurement of
the height of the brain-box above the ear
holes was one of the two dimensions in which
the extent of the gap between Sinanthropus
and Neanderthal man was greater than the
range of the distribution of this dimension
in fossils of the latter type. In all other
dimensions except that of least frontal
diameter, the variation within the species
H, neanderthalensis exceeded the gap

19 As a general rule, of course, more attention is
paid in the classification of the Hominide to characters which most clearly distinguish the modern type
of human skull from all non-human varieties. On
an a priori basis, however, the many characters
which come under this heading (e.g. chin, median
axis of the foramen magnum, prognathism, etc.)
cannot be differentiated amongst themselves as
being more or less valuable as characters of classification. They could be, only when the ratios of
their inter-and intra-racial variabilities have been
found and graded for a much larger series of types
than have as yet been studied.
SINANTHROPUS AND

which separated the Peking skulls from the
Mousterian. The height of the skull may
therefore be a more signficant criterion of
differentiation than are other cranial measurements.

Although both of the two chief height
dimensions of the brain-case (basi-bregmatic and auricular) of Neanderthal skulls
are, relatively to their cranial lengths, less
than in modern types, they both in absolute
measure fall within the range of variation
of these dimensions in the skulls of existing
men? Here, it is then possible to argue, is a
reason why this archaic type should be
regarded not as a different genus, but as a
separate species of Homo. Sinanthropus is
different. Its skull-cap is remarkably low,
although not so low as that of Pithecanthropus. With the naked eye it can be seen
that its frontal and parietal regions are more
expanded than in the Javanese Ape-Man.
In this, as Professor Elliot Smith has
pointed out,”? Sinanthropus shows certain
similarities to Piltdown man, Eoanthropus
dawsont. As a basis for generic distinction, however, this difference between
Sinanthropus and Pithecanthropus should
not be too heavily stressed, since almost as
great a difference both in size and form (a
difference which cannot with any certainty
be ascribed to sex and age) separates the
two Sinanthropus specimens. Moreover, if
the height of the brain-case were to be made
a special criterion of classification, it would
be necessary arbitrarily to divide the dimension into classes. Even if this were done,
the results would not be in accordance with
accepted classification, since variation in
cranial height in the Neanderthal species,
so far as is possible to judge, is greater than
the difference in this dimension between
Sinanthropus and Pithecanthropus (heights
being judged from the n-y plane).”* On the
basis of this criterion, therefore, and assuming the judgment of Morant and others
regarding the homogeneity of the Neanderthal race to be correct, Sinanthropus does
not merit generic distinction from Pithecanthropus.

20 Nature, May 30th, 1931.
31 See Biometrika, Vol. XVI, pp. 73-101, 1924.

B

OTHER FOSSIL MEN 281
If special linear dimensions fail to provide
an explanation for the accepted classification
of Mousterian man, Sinanthropus and
Pithecanthropus, it is still possible that
its justification could be found in the
existence, in each of these archaic types,
of peculiar morphological characters meriting differential treatment. Special emphasis, for example, could be laid, as has been
done by many writers, on the peculiar
features of the temporal bone of Sinanthropus, particularly of its tympanic element,
in support of its generic distinction.
Unfortunately, the corresponding part of
the skull is not known in Pithecanthropus,
and so it is impossible to argue that these
two types are distinguished from each
other in this character. Moreover, equally
striking anatomical’ peculiarities can be
found not only in the corresponding region,
but also in other parts of the skull of
Mousterian man (H. neanderthalensis),
which differentiates this type from modern
man (H. sapiens). Thus on the grounds of
special morphological characters it would
seem that Neanderthal man as much merits
generic distinction from Homo as Sinanthropus does from Pithecanthropus.

Apart from the fact that such consideration of separate morphological characters
exposes inconsistencies in the present
arrangement of the Hominide, there are
serious theoretical objections to the a
priori differential evaluation of morphological characters in classification. When
two different types are associated as different species of the same genus, it follows
that they are united by more resemblances
than would be the case were they classified
in different genera. The resemblances
which are taken into account are altogether
arbitrary. As Crow has remarked on this
subject,” ‘‘ each character, as it is observed
in nature, must be accorded equal weight;
there can be no evaluation of characters on
the nature of the characters themselves.”’

Emphasis can be laid on special characters only when it is impartially discovered
that some have a wider distribution among
different types than have others, and it -is

22 Journ. Genetics, Vol. XVII, 1927.
282

as they are widely or otherwise distributed
that these characters serve to differentiate
the different groups (Orders, Families,
Genera, Species) recognized in systematic
biology. Living forms are thus classified
by the sum of their physical resemblances.
To suggest on a priort grounds that any
one character is more important than others
in classification implies a far greater knowledge of the development of new characters
than actually exists. At the present time,
the correct basis for systematic comparison is the quantitative evaluation of all
characters, and the denial of this point of
view leads only to confusion. An example
will perhaps make this point clearer.

ANATOMICAL AND BIOMETRICAL
CRANIOLOGY

Morant has shown,”* by exact and extensive biometric study, that the Chancelade
skull (found in 1888 in a definite Magdalenian stratum near the village of Raymonden in the Commune of Chancelade)
cannot be differentiated in any measurable
character from the mean Eskimo type, and
in doing so he has demonstrated how readily
the eye emphasizes a cranial divergence
‘‘ which tested numerically is found to be
no mark of racial differentiation at all.’
In this he is simply confirming a diagnosis
made by many anatomists, including the
original describer of the skull, Dr. Testut.
It is on grounds to which he refers as
‘“anatomical’’ that Sir Arthur Keith,
however, comes to an opposite conclusion.”4
He states that he is guided by characters
whose value for purposes of race identification can be assessed by the unaided eye. In
stating this he is ignoring both Dr.
Morant’s demonstration of the fallacies to
which the unaided eye may lead, and the
fact that wherever they can, anatomists,
like biometricians, employ quantitative and
statistical methods. Measurement can only
increase the powers of observation. If it
were otherwise, one might be permitted to

 

23 Annals. of Eugenics, Vol. I, Parts 3 and 4,
1926,
24 New Discoveries Relating to the Antiquity of

Man. Williams & Norgate. London. 1931.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

wonder why anatomists, including Sir
Arthur Keith, constantly use it. Yet, on
the strength of a photograph showing the
position of the nasal bones in the Chancelade skull, before they were broken off, Sir
Arthur denies the evidence, presented by
the rest of the skull, of its Eskimo affnities.

The argument does not seem to be very
strong. If it is true that nasal bones
springing forward at such an angle as this
photograph shows, could not be found in
a large series of Eskimo skulls, there is yet
no evidence that the condition depicted by
this photograph is not one of posthumous
deformation. Moreover, if the type of
argument expounded by Sir Arthur is
pursued, it demands the very far-reaching
assumption that all the many characters in
which the Chancelade and Eskimo type
agree have been separately evolved in each
type.

Sir Arthur himself believes that they are
simply the results and evidence of similar
habits, resemblances of a _ ‘‘ functional
nature ’’ as he calls them. ‘Thus he writes
‘the conditions under which the Eskimo
have lived have called forth their great and
peculiar development of jaws, and seeing
that the European Magdalenians lived
under similar climatic and cultural conditions we may presume that their jaws
became modified in a manner similar to that
found in modern Eskimo.’’ Experimental
science, however, provides little, if any,
evidence in favour of such a view, and in
the circumstances it is far less strain on the
imagination to regard the conditions of the
nasals as of no particular account, than to
consider all the similarities between the
Eskimo and Chancelade man as due to a
kind of convergent evolution.

99

EVIDENCE OTHER THAN THE SKULLS,
RELATING TO THE SYSTEMATIC POSITION
OF SINANTHROPUS

The facts clearly suggest that neither
measurable cranial criteria, mor cranial
peculiarities which are not so _ readily
measured, can provide justification for the
seemingly unequal and inconsistent treatSINANTHROPUS AND

ment in classification of Sinanthropus,
Pithecanthropus, and Neanderthal man.
Up to the present, however, only skulls
have been considered, and possibly the
characters of its jaws and teeth might provide the explanation why Sinanthropus is
generically separated from Pithecanthropus
when Neanderthal man is only specifically
separated from Homo sapiens. Unfortunately, however, these remains do not
help, since corresponding Pithecanthropus
material with which a comparison could be
effected does not exist.

It will be remembered that the Pithecanthropus discovery consisted of a brain-case,
a femur, and three teeth, all found fairly
close together (over a radius of some fifteen
metres) between the years 1891 and 1808.”°
The relegation of these remains to the same
individual has always been a matter for
warm dispute. The recent discovery of a
new, and apparently more developed, type
of fossil man in a site in the Solo Valley
only a few miles away from the one in
which the Pithecanthropus skull-cap was
found, has thrown even more doubt on the
grouping together of the several Pithecanthropus remains than their own discordant
anatomical characters had already stimulated.

This doubt is strengthened by the fact
that the new skulls, for which Oppenoorth
has created a new species, Homo soloensis,
were found in a mid-Pleistocene stratum,”®
to which horizon certain well-known
authorities?’ are now referring the Pithecanthropus remains. ‘The circumstances of
this find plainly suggest the improbability
of ever deciding whether the Pithecanthropus fossils did all belong to the same
kind of individual. Both the femora and

25 A gap of six years separated the finding of the
last tooth from the recovery of the previous remains.
It may also be noted that a fragment of a mandible
had been unearthed some time before the skull cap
was found (1891). Just recently two more femora,
also found in the same period, have been described,
and referred to the same species as the other
remains.

26 Oppenoorth, W. F. F.: (a) De Mijningenieur,
Bandoeng, No. 6, 1932; (b) Natur und Museum,
Frankfurt, 62, 1932.

27 See Osborn, H. F.: Science, Vol. LXIX, 1929.

OTHER FOSSIL MEN 283

the teeth might have been part of members

.of the species H. soloensis,”* and it would

therefore be perhaps unwise to institute
comparisons between these teeth and those
of Sinanthropus in order to discover a basis
for the latter’s generic differentiation from
Pithecanthropus.

THE NEED FOR RE-CLASSIFICATION

On all sides difficulties have been encountered in the explanation of the unequal
significance attached in classification to the
peculiarities of Neanderthal man, Sinanthropus, and Pithecanthropus. ‘These difficulties point to one of two conclusions—
either Sinanthropus should be included in
the genus Pithecanthropus, or alternatively
the accepted classification of all extinct
Hominde should be revised. As the
inclusion of Sinanthropus in the genus
Pithecanthropus would in no way straighten
out difficulties in connection with Neanderthal man, a complete revision of the classification is plainly required.

The inconsistencies arising in the present
classification are due largely to the inclusion of Neanderthal man in the genus
Homo, a classification the arbitrariness of
which is amply demonstrated by its history.
Fortunately, the technique for exactly
expressing the differences between skeletal
remains has developed sufficiently far in
recent years to reveal the futility of ex
cathedra judgments regarding the correct
systematic allocation and phylogenetic
interpretation of new finds of human fossils.
Moreover, the time has come for a thorough
recognition in physical anthropology of the
fact that the species concept as used in
systematic biology is artificial, and that in
consequence it is necessary to define the
amount and kind of differentiation which,
in the Family Hominide@, should determine
either specific or generic status. Data
(such, for example, as those of Morant and.
Black) are already available to allow of this
being done, and it is not until it is done

28 The skulls referred to this species have thus
far only been superficially described. They show
many resemblances to those of Neanderthal and
Rhodesian men.
284

that due recognition will be given, both in
classification and phylogeny, to the fact
that such archaic types as Sinanthropus,
Pithecanthropus, Eoanthropus, Neanderthal man, and Rhodesian man, correspond
to one another in a greater number of characters of significance in their classification
than they do either to modern man, or to
men of the Upper Paleolithic.

Not the least unlikely result of a rational
classification would be the subdivision of
the Family Hominide into two subfamilies, the Paleanthropide and the Neanthropide (to use terms coined by Professor
Elliot Smith to emphasize the cultural con
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

trast in their industries), the first-named
containing archaic types like Simanthropus
and Neanderthal man, the second modern
man and men of the Upper Paleolithic.
But whether or not a rational classification
results in such a _ sub-division of the
Hominide, it will at any rate allow of both
the immediate recognition of the essential
similarities between different types, and of
more convincing speculation as to phylogenetic relationships than is possible at
present, when opinions in these matters are
largely determined by an unquestioned faith
in a classification whose history examination shows to be largely unscientific.

—— OGY

THE GALTON DINNER

will be held at

THE REMBRANDT HOTEL
SOUTH KENSINGTON

On Thursday, February 16th, at 7.15 p.m. for 7.30

The Galton Lecture
“MY OUTLOOK ON EUGENICS ”

will be given by
THE HONBLE. Mr. JUSTICE McCARDIE

Sir Thomas Horder, Bt., K.C.V.O., M.D., F.R.C.P., will be in the Chair

Fellows and Members are requested to get their tickets (10/6)
from the General Secretary as early as possible

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 4.
