POSITIVE EUGENICS IN PRACTICE

An Account of the First Positive Eugenic Experiment
By ALFRED DACHERT

(The writer, who is Vice-Président-Gérant of Les Jardins Ungemach of Strasburg, is
both the originator and effective director of a unique attempt to breed a better race.
Ais garden city 1s devoted to encouraging large families from young parents who

have been personally selected for health and other personal qualities.

The article has

been freely but, we hope, accurately translated from the original French.—ED.)

AVING been asked to give an

account of the eugenic aspects of

the city, Les Jardins Ungemach,
which it is my privilege to serve, I will tell
the history of the venture, and will leave
my readers to pick out for themselves those
aspects which are especially significant to
them.

My first encounter with eugenics was, I
believe, when, as quite a young man, I read
Darwin’s Origin of Species, in which the
eugenic doctrine, though never explicitly
stated, is throughout implicit. At that
moment, I think, the conviction took root
in me that the human species was capable
of improvement, and that only man’s good
will was required to raise the race to a new
and higher level. The idea had an immense
attraction for me and, realizing its poetical
and mystic charm, I found these great
hopes magnificently expressed in Renan’s
Dialogues Philosophiques. It was the
time, too, when Ruffenach was writing his
Gazon Prévost and his Val l’Evéque.

It is not without reason that I thus. stress
the effect of eugenics upon the imagination,
for if the general public some day takes an
interest in this group of sciences, it will be
owing to its religious and emotional attraction. There is a profound truth in the
lines of the German poet: ‘‘ It was Icarus
who led the Wright brothers towards the
sun; and to the unwieldy chariots of
humanity an invisible Pegasus is yoked.”’

Later I learned that in England an exact
science of eugenics was taught, and a Chair
for it founded. I knew the names of the

TS

distinguished leaders in this science and I
made myself familiar with their writings.

Among the many criticisms which disturb this new science there is one which
constantly crops up, and which declares
that eugenics must be opposed to charity.
But, as I understood, the day is now passed
of indiscriminate ‘ cash down’ charity, and
we are entering upon an era of a charity
which takes longer views. And what else
is eugenics if it be not just that far-sighted
charity?

At this time, when the first garden cities
were just being built, I took the opportunity to visit Port Sunlight, and I read a
description of Bournville.

THE BIRTH OF AN IDEAL

It must have been about 1902 that I
began to dream of creating a city which
would enable its families to live under the
pleasantest conditions; but I was then only
a very young and modest manager of a
small sweetmeat factory, and I had not the
least hope of ever seeing my dream come
true. This dream city I called ‘‘ Mount
Hymettus,’’ since it was to be an offshoot
of the confectionery business; but that was
all I hoped to achieve.

Towards i910 the first garden city,
“‘ Stockfeld,’’ was built in Strasburg, and
in watching it grow, I came to the conclusion that this marvellous instrument did
not assist, as it should, the progress of the
human species. Dwelling there I saw old
maiden ladies, widows, and sundry others
who had been chosen by the purest chance.
16

As time passed, the business I managed
grew; it employed over 500 persons, and
became a powerful instrument by means of
which important social changes might
some day be achieved. But, curiously
enough, it was the War which brought
about the realization of my schemes. ‘The
German legislation as to the distribution,
sale, and purchase of sugar-stuffs had the
extraordinary effect of increasing our profits
by 2,400,000 gold marks. It did not seem
to me possible to pocket this money, and I
suggested to my company that we should
transfer it to a special account, and administer it separately with the object of furthering some social work. My attitude was
completely understood by my chief, the
revered M. Ungemach, who had created the
Société alsacienne d’Alimentation (the proprietory company of the factory I managed)
and in whose honour the city I was to build
was named Les Jardins Ungemach. He
supported me valiantly and undertook to
persuade our directorate to adopt my views.

But to what social cause should we
devote these funds?

At this juncture my old schemes, matured
in my mind by the passage of years, came
to life; and I proposed that we should devote the money to building a eugenic city.
A low birth rate being the curse of our
country, my suggestion was approved.
Soon after I decided to retire from business
in order to devote myself body and soul to
the making of such a city.

FERTILITY—AND ANCESTOR-WORSHIP

From that time I prepared myself seriously for the task which awaited me. T
got up all the literature on the subject,
visited all the garden cities which had been
built in England and France, and attended
the Inter-Allied Housing and ‘TownPlanning Congress in London in 1920. But
when I wanted to get down to work I was
met with two great difficulties. First, our
funds, which had been invested in foreign
securities, had been sequestered ; and next,
there was not at that time any contractor
who was able to enter into a definite con
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tract as to price. Having left business and
not being able to devote myself to my new
work, I decided to go on tour and to acquire
all the knowledge I should need to get satisfactory results. My readers may perhaps
be surprised to learn that, with this object
in view, I went to China. Ancestorworship has considerable influence on childbearing and natural selection, and I wished
to study for myself the effect of this religion
on its followers. I spent nearly a year in
China, studying these problems, and concluded that ancestor-worship is, so to say,
the Old Testament which precedes the New
Testament of Evolution. It is not difficult
to conceive that a time will come when
eugenic convictions based on a sound science
will have considerable influence on the
modern life of old-world Europe.

A CHINESE GARDEN CITY

Quite by accident during my travels I
visited the garden city which is the oldest
in the world and which still remains the
model for all the rest, the Manchu town of
Pekin; and I also saw another garden city
which is probably the most remarkable of
our time, New Batavia in Java. In passing
through Tokio, I was struck at discovering
in the Maruzen library a whole shelf-full of
books on eugenics, a discovery which taught
me that a country prepared by ancestorworship is particularly favourable soil for
the eugenic seed. At home, in France, one
might search a hundred libraries without
finding a single book on the subject. I was
also happy enough to come upon an excellent synopsis of the subject, Applied
Eugenics, by Popenoe and Johnson, which
I read on my journey from Yokohama to
Manilla.

When I returned to Strasburg in the
spring of 1921, all the obstacles which had
stood in the way of our city had disappeared ;
and the town of Strasburg, realizing the
significance of our work, put at our disposal the ancient glacis (it was a fortress
once) of Wacken, which had the double
advantage of being near to the town and of
being planted with old trees. Very soon I
A POSITIVE EUGENIC EXPERIMENT

started the building of 200 houses, 140 of
which are now finished.

THE PRINCIPLES OF SELECTION

My ideas of the principles which ought
to guide us in developing the Jardins
Ungemach had matured during my
journeys, and I decided that to make the
city a means for perfecting the human race,
I should have to lay down two rules:

1. The inhabitants should be selected,
not from the point of view of their constituting good-paying tenants, but for their
human qualities

2. The laying-out and regulation of the
city and its houses should be such as to
promote the best development of the families inhabiting it.

Our object should therefore be not to provide houses for those families which happened to want them, but to help young
couples towards _ self-development. We
should not shelter large families, but create
them. And it was essential thus to encourage not only large families, but also
those whose mentality and physique would
be a real acquisition to the country.

But how were we to go about choosing
such tenants?

We must find young couples, in the best
of health, comely and vigorous, and who
really wanted children. Consequently, I
established a system of selection by four
Stages ;

The candidate begins by filling up a form
which contains a series of questions about
his age and state of health. Marks are
given according to the answers, and the applications are classified according to the
total marks obtained. I myself then interview the families obtaining the highest
marks. Next, I get to know them and
amplify their previous replies, and thereafter a committee visits them at home, in
order to see them in their normal surroundings and to find out their mode of life and
the tidiness and decency of their homes.
When the choice has been finally made, we
ask for a medical certificate from both husband and wife, so that we may have the
fullest assurance of their soundness.

17

HOUSES PLANNED FOR CHILDREN

The young couples thus selected are
placed in surroundings which are particularly suitable to their mental and physical
development. The city, which is in easy
reach of the town, is built in an airy,
healthy, and quiet place without any shops
or public-houses. Fach house is detached,
and is so planned as to avoid all unnecessary
labour for a young housewife who is expected
to have children, but cannot afford the help
of a servant.

1. All rooms are on one floor.

2. There is a big kitchen-dining-room.

3. A laundry, which is also a bathroom,
adjoins the kitchen-dining-room, so that the
housewife, without running about, can
attend at the same time to her children, the
cooking, and the washing.

4. Water laid on in all bedrooms, to
obviate the need for carrying slops.

s. There are regular deliveries of milk,
bread, groceries, and meat, so that the
housewife need not go shopping.

6. By the same token, the city has a day
nursery, where the babies and young children can be left. This also enables the
city’s doctor to watch every child from its
infancy and to warn the parents at the first
disquieting symptom.

Sometimes it happens, though rarely,
that the families thus favoured do not grow.
The Foundation then replaces them with
others who are more promising, for the city,
being made for children, must not be allowed to be occupied by families which
cannot or will not have any.

Since the birth of the city, seven years
ago, we have only had to take action nine
times. “This is the way to deal with the
mischief often referred to in eugenic literature, that families with small means cease
to be fertile when transferred to better surroundings.

And what have been the results during
the seven years our city has existed? The
following figures will give some idea of the
differences between town and city.
18

THE RESULTS AFTER SEVEN YEARS

Number of Number of Persons per

Year. Houses. Inhabitants. House.
1927 123 505 4.10
1928 132 569 4.31
1929 132 592 4.48
BIRTHS PER 1,000 LIVING.
Year. Town of Strasburg. Les Jardins.
1927 16.35 39.69
1928 16.80 35.15
1929 15.80 37.16
DEATHS PER 1,000 LIVING.
Year. Town of Strasburg. Les Jardins.
1927 II.72 5-94
1928 II.9o LF
1929 13.01 1.68

EXCESS OF BIRTHS OVER DEATHS,
PER 1,000 LIVING.

Year. Town of Strasburg. Les Jardins.
1927 4.6 35.6
1928 4.9 33-4
1929 2.7 35.6

It is true that these figures are not
strictly comparable, but they give an
approximate idea of the differences.

They suggest, in particular, that young
couples, placed in our surroundings, do not
shrink from having children to the same
extent that they do when living in a
densely populated urban district. This is
all the more striking since our citizens belong to just that class which is deemed the
most infertile, the small clerk and small
official class.

The figures also show that the sanitation
of the city is good. Indeed, we have had
no epidemics, and signs of tuberculosis in
the children have been few and slight.

As for the behaviour of the citizens, we
find that drunkenness is completely unknown in the Jardins Ungemach, and that
the police have never been called in sincé
the city’s birth. There has only been one
quarrel between neighbours.

‘There has been a steady improvement in

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the cleanness and tidiness of the houses.
The committee which visits the young
couples before they are admitted to the
city, gives marks, running from I to Io, to
each for tidiness and cleanness. Each
year the same committee visits all of the
houses in the city and gives marks, in the
same way, for the state of the interior of
each house. In comparing these marks
with those obtained before entry, we find a
rise, on the average, of 1.3. In professional
success there has been equal progress.
Husbands, freed from the usual worries
about the housing of their families and living in healthy and quiet surroundings, are
in a state to bring to their toil a lighter
heart which makes them better workers.
During the seven years of the city’s existence only once has a rent been unpaid, and
we notice many signs of increased wellbeing in almost every family. Families
often leave us to remove to better class
dwellings or to build their own houses.

It is also clear that the city has not only
a social but a moral influence on its inhabitants, though this is less easy to prove.

—AND LOOKING FORWARDS?

Can it be said, after this account of the

_ results of our work, that they have justified

the efforts made? The question is important, because in 1950 the Jardins
Ungemach will no longer be administered
as a separate estate, but will belong to the
town of Strasburg. If during this time of
experiment the results achieved are plainly
better than those obtained in other cities,
the town will continue along the road we
have opened. If not, it will not trouble to
follow in our steps, and our work will have
been in vain.

The field of experience which we have
been tilling is not ours alone: it belongs to
the whole eugenic world. It is to the interest of all the disciples of eugenics to
support us. Up to the present, our results
have been satisfactory ; but if experts have
any advice or suggestions to make, we
should gratefully welcome and apply them
to the reinforcement of our own experiment.
