DISEASE AND DEFECT

Some New Pedigrees from Rural England

(Charts are folded into the back of the REvIEw.)

“ OIL-WATCH ”’ Gallows was primarily responsible for the family
depicted on Chart I. He received

this cognomen because at one time, accord
ing to the tradition in his village of West

Coleton, he boiled his watch in a saucepan

while holding an egg in his hand to time it.

Since this story, with minor variations, is
usually told in every university of every
eminent professor with a reputation for absence of mind, the boiling of watches can
scarcely be considered an infallible index of
feebleness of mind. An ament, however,
Gallows undoubtedly was, although, like the
great majority of other aments in this
country, he was never certified—indeed, he
could not be, since he was born too long
before the passing of the first Mental Defciency Act for adequate legal evidence to be
obtained as to the state of his mind at birth
or at an early age. He was the butt of
the boys in the neighbouring small town of
Barchester, and was generally recognized as
a ‘village idiot’: he could probably best
be described as belonging to the mid-grade
of the feeble-minded. He died in the workhouse.

Of his wife nothing is known; but by her
he begot two children whose records and
families have been traced. It is doubtful
whether the eldest, Matilda, could be certified as an ament by present standards, since
she is self-supporting and more simple
than feeble-minded. She is in service on a
farm, where she is well looked after; and
the farmer’s wife declares that she is a good
worker when supervised. She gave birth
to the illegitimate child Jessie, who is feebleminded and in a certified institution.

George Gallows, the second child of ‘‘Boilwatch,’’ has never been certified, but he is

35

now in the workhouse, and is decidedly
feeble-minded. He married a woman whose
maiden name is not known: she seems normal, but lacking in initiative, and is also
in the workhouse. Of their six children
only one, Rose, is undoubtedly normal.

The eldest, Jessie, like her cousin of the
same name, is feeble-minded and in a certified institution. Next comes the normal
Rose, who married a man named Matthews
and is said to have quite a clean, average
farm-labourer’s cottage—the only one of
the family to have a home of her own.
They have two children, aged three and one,
who are too young for their mental condition
to be judged.

Maisie is feeble-minded and in a certified
institution; Minnie, aged twelve, is in a
children’s home and is described as ‘* not
bright ’’; Gladys, aged seven, and Jane,
aged four, are also both in the children’s
home and are thought, as far as it is possible
to judge at their age, to be feeble-minded.

Thus the feeble-minded founder of this
family has been responsible, with his unknown wife, for one simple and one feebleminded child, and for one normal, one subnormal, and five defective grandchildren.
Knowing nothing of “‘ Boil-watch’s ’’ wife,
of the begetter of the illegitimate Jessie, or
of the family of George’s wife, it is impossible to judge the precise genetics of this
particular form of amentia; but it apparently tends to be dominant to normal mentality. During recent years several cases
have been noted of types of amentia seemingly dominant to normal, and some of the
other families with which we shall deal here
give indications of the same phenomenon.
It is an important point which had best be
discussed later.
36

THE HAVERIDGE GROUP

The next family starts off fairly well with
old Mrs. Haveridge, whose achievement in
living to the age of eighty at least shows
vitality and is strongly suggestive of a sound
mind as well. Nothing is known of her
kin or maiden name, nor of her husband,
who is dead; but of their family of six at
least three are sub-normal.

The first (reading from left to right on
Chart II), the sub-normal Dora, married
Thomas Snow, who cannot read or write
without help. But though both are thus
evidently lacking in certain mental abilities,
they may fairly be said to do their fair
share of the world’s work. They have a
lorry and own a small haulier’s business ;
occasionally they buy a little timber, which
they saw and sell for firewood ; and they do
any other odd jobs that turn up. Their
home is a poor one, but very clean, and the
family seems genuinely respectable. Their
sons would be best described as willing, but
not competent; they help their father and
do work for local farmers, and one for a
time was a caddy on the golf links. The
individual records of the children of this pair
are :

(x) Sex unknown; died at ten weeks.

(2) Charles, married, but with no children; nothing known of either him or his
wife. —

(3) Florence, who married an unknown
man and has had three sons by him. Nothing is known of any of them.

(4) Edgar is certainly sub-normal. He
married Chloe, of whom nothing is known
except that her father is ‘ alcoholic.’ She
has three children, all under four years and
said to be delicate.

(5) John works on a farm.

The next three, all boys, are much alike,
and cannot read or write :

(6) Oliver left school at the age of fourteen and with the mental age of eleven.

(7) Roland left school at the age of fourteen and with the mental age of nine.

(8) Walter left school at the age of fourteen and with the mental age of seven.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW,

All of these three, therefore, may be said
to be mentally, if not socially, deficient.

(9) Oscar died in infancy.
(x0) Emily—nothing known.

The next child, a son, of the old Haveridges was killed in an accident, and nothing is known of him. His sister Ann has
a longer record. Herself sub-normal, she
married a sub-normal man, Walter Glutton,
who, moreover, drinks. This is important
from the economic rather than the biological aspect, since he is only a farm
labourer with an income of 32s. 6d. a week.
With luxurious tastes it would not be diffcult to spend that amount, quite reasonably,
on drink alone; and even one with a more
plebeian palate could spend nearly as much
without becoming entitled to the label of
either drunkard or ‘soaker.’ There is,
therefore, nothing remarkable, in itself, in
the fact that Glutton spends a large part of
his income on alcohol. The important point
is that farm labourers with families are evidently expected to be strictly teetotal—and
most of them are, or very nearly so. It is
in contrast with them that Walter Glutton
appears in a poor light, since, when his
children were small, he did not allow Ann
enough money to care forthem. He is also
said to have ill-treated her and them at
times. (These are factors which must be
taken into account when considering the
mental and physical condition of the children.) Now that the older children are
earning, conditions in the home have improved ; and Ann keeps the house clean and
does her best for the children. At the same
time, it is not such a good home as that of
the Snows’.

The children of the Gluttons have a remarkable record :

(1) Walter was insane and died in the
asylum.

(2) Edgar is sub-normal, a heavy drinker,
and grossly immoral and promiscuous. He
contributes little to the home, since he
spends his time and money with a neighbouring married woman of bad character
and with other women.
DISEASE AND DEFECT

(3) Lily is normal and has married a man
of whom nothing is known.

(4) Minnie is dull and backward, and has
married a man of whom nothing is known,
nor are any details available of their one
child.

(5) Dick was feeble-minded and was
killed in a road accident.

(6 and 7) Leonard and Colin are both
feeble-minded.

(8 and 9) Douglas and Kenneth are twins
aged eight, and both with a mental age of
six; it is therefore a strong presumption
that they are feeble-minded.

(10) Arnold is aged six and has a mental
age of four—again a strong presumption of
feeble-mindedness.

A GENETIC CURIOSITY

Returning now to the F, generation, the
immediate children of the old Haveridges,
little is known, not even the names, of the
next two sons, (a) and (b). (a) is unmarried ;
(b) has married a woman of whom nothing is
known, and they have two children who are
said to be delicate. Both men are normal
and self-supporting, according to reports.

Selina, last of the children, is, like her
sisters Ann and Dora, sub-normal. She
first gave birth, by an unknown father, to
an illegitimate child, Edith, who is feebleminded and has married a sub-normal man,
Soote. The young couple have one
daughter, who is too young for her mental
condition to be judged, and whom they keep
poorly clad and dirty.

After her affaire du caeur, Selina married Charles Barrett, who is in all probability perfectly normal. In addition to the
illegitimate Edith, who remained with her
mother until her marriage, they have had
three children :

(x) John is dull and backward.

(2 and 3) Charles and Martha are both
feeble-minded, and both left school at fourteen with the mental age of six.

While Selina is probably a worse manager
than either of her sisters, this home seems
to be on much the same level as that of the

37

Gluttons’; but financial circumstances are
better, and drink is not such a problem.
Barrett himself drives a road-engine, helped
by his feeble-minded son Charles, and
Selina worked in a factory until recently.
Consequently they were comparatively wellto-do. But since Edith’s marriage they
have had to support her, her husband, and
her child. Soote is out of work, and he and
Edith are said to drink and smoke all the
money they ever get, and to live entirely on
her people.

If Selina and her children alone were
taken into account in attempting a genetic
interpretation, one would incline to conclude
that theirs was a clear case of a dominant
type of amentia—since the children by both
fathers are definitely feeble-minded. The
description of Selina herself as only “‘ subnormal ’’ could plausibly be attributed to an
over-cautious diagnosis, as could John’s
* dull- and backwardness.’ The condition of
mind of her sisters and their families, however, is far more suggestive of a factor semirecessive to normal. It could be assumed
that one of the two old Haveridges—probably the man, since the old lady’s age does
not suggest defect of any sort—was the
simplex ‘ carrier’ of this defect, which he
transmitted to half his children, by pure
chance the daughters. Ann and Dora,
clearly enough, then inbred for the defect
by marrying Snow and Glutton, heretozygotes like themselves, and produced one
quarter normal children, one half heterozygous, and one quarter fully feeble-minded.
The fact that actually there is an undue
proportion of sub-normal and definitely defective children could perhaps be explained
by the smallness of the numbers involved
and by the added effect of the adverse conditions from which the Glutton children suffered. But to fit Selina into this scheme
we have to suppose that Charles Barrett, her
husband, is also a heterozygote, and that
the unknown father of Edith was either
heterozygous or fully feeble-minded. It
would indeed be a remarkable instance of
assortive mating for three heterozygous sisters to mate with similar men, and for one
of them to do it twice—to say nothing of the
38

fact that the daughter of that one has also
done so.

Edith and Martha, on the far right, seem
to bar out the hypothesis of a sex-linked factor, dominant in the male and semi-recessive in the female; but it is possible that
the condition is in some degree sex-limited
to the male, since those two are the only
females in the F, generation who are
definitely feeble-minded.

But neglecting for the moment the genetic interpretation, the gross facts are that
of the fifty-two individuals on this chart,
twenty-two are unknown, mostly the mates
or young children of the persons investi;
gated ; of the thirty remaining, five are normal (if we include old Mrs. Haveridgé) ; two
died as infants, and twenty-three are subnormal or abnormal.

INBREEDING FOR DEFECT

As doubtless the reader has gathered,
these two groups of families live in the
country. In fact, they and the larger group
yet to be dealt with are all thickly scattered
over a few square miles in a rural and isolated district of England—one of those investigated by Dr. E. O. Lewis when making his survey for the Mental Deficiency
Committee. He emphasized how for many
years past the ‘ drift to the towns ’ has been
draining the countryside of all the normal
and more vigorous men and women, leaving
behind a population largely composed of
dull, ineffective, and defective individuals.
These are consequently thrown back upon
each other and are forced, even beyond the
normal custom of isolated rural communities, to intermarry and so to inbreed for
defect.

Ruscombe, the district from which the
Bottles originate, is a neighbouring valley,
remote and wild, in which inbreeding has
probably always been fairly common; and
Easton Regis, the home centre of the Stars
and Youngs, lies in country of much the
same sort not very far away.

It is the draining off of the healthy stocks
and the fall in the death rate of the unhealthy which has accentuated the recent

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

concentration of defect in these remarkable
‘ pockets.” To Dr. Lewis and the Committee this seemed one of the most alarming
revelations of their survey. But when the
mind has recovered from the shock of it, so
to speak, it appears, on the contrary, to be
one of the most encouraging and hopeful
signs in the eugenic outlook. Racial decay
would indeed be imminent if our 300,000
aments—and probably about twice that
number of heterozygous ‘ carriers ’—were
mating with normal stock and tainting
the healthy blood of the nation. But
in so far as they are inbreeding they are
genetically isolated from the rest of us, and
are also rendered the more amenable to treatment. Moreover, they are to some extent
inbreeding to their own extinction. The
two cousin marriages on the right of Chart
IjI—all four normal persons—have produced at least six (out of fifteen) children
whose degree of defect must be at least some
check on their fertility. Had the four
parents lived in large towns, they would
most probably have married normal and unrelated individuals and so have broadcast
and perpetuated their recessive defects indefinitely.

These families, then, are a vivid but
fair example of the actual people investigated by Dr. Lewis, and of the conditions
which throughout rural England are responsible for over xr per cent. of the population
being certifiable aments.

THE BOTTLES AND STARS

Old Bottle died too long ago for anything
to be known of him; but his wife, who only
died last year, was definitely feeble-minded,
though not certified. They produced a
family of five, of whom three, all girls, were
as feeble-minded as their mother; the one
living son is apparently normal, and Edward, who is dead, is said to have been.

The first of the feeble-minded daughters,
Cecily, first married Dickon, of whom nothing is known and who deserted her, and
next settled down to live with Fleshly.
Neither is anything known of this man nor
of one daughter, Beatrice, except that she
DISEASE AND DEFECT

is in service in London. But two of their
children have been properly investigated,
and both are feeble-minded. Harry George,
however, having been in an institution, is
now self-supporting. He is working for a
bricklayer and living in rooms, where he is
well looked after.

Jenny, the next daughter of the old
Bottles, exemplifies the tendency of bad
stock, if allowed or forced to inbreed, to
do so to its own extinction. She was feebleminded, and married her cousin Bottle, a
cripple. She is now dead, and so is her son
William, who was feeble-minded and a
cripple; while Winnie, her daughter, who
also was feeble-minded and a cripple, later
became insane and is now safely housed, for
life, in an asylum. ‘Therefore the strain
represented by Jenny and her husband has
now committed suicide.

It would be best to leave until later
the large sub-group which starts with Ann
Bottle on the left and Crust on the right,
and to go on to son (a), a builder’s labourer,
who is rather a curious individual. Having
married a normal, but immoral, woman, he
openly approves of her continuing her trade
as a prostitute, in his own house, as it augments the family income. Apart from this,
they both seem perfectly normal; the children are not only healthy and normal, but
have even won prizes at local baby shows;
and the house is always kept clean and tidy.

Very little is known of the last of the
Bottles, Edward, or of his wife and family.
Edward himself, who is dead, is said to
have been normal, and so are his three sons,
though one of them approaches dwarf
stature. A social worker who knows the
family moderately well says the fourth
child, daughter (b), is ‘‘ the only respectable member of the tribe.’’ She is certainly
normal, and so probably is the tubercular
and immoral Margaret—next on the chart,
with the two illegitimate children.

With daughter (c) we link up with a new
defective group. The woman herself is
normal, though her home is dirty ; she married the Star son (d), who, while little is
known of him, does not bear a good character in the district. This looks like the mat
39

ing of two heterozygotes, for of their three
children one is almost certainly feebleminded, and the other two probably are.

MORE COUSIN MARRIAGES

Let us now move back four generations
to the founders of the Star tree, on the right.
Both are dead, and nothing is known of
them, but at least two of their three children
are normal. The daughter (e) married
Young, a shoemaker; both are normal and
respectable, and their home is described as
a very good one. It is true that after two
or three normal children they produced
Belinda, the mongolian imbecile with a
tubercular hip; brt without further evidence
this cannot be accounted significant, since
the hereditary nature of mongolism is still
doubtful.

Neither the next Star son (f)—now reading from right to left—nor his cousin-wife
can be regarded as feeble-minded, and theirs
looks like another marriage of heterozygotes. Both their two daughters, Flower,
aged twenty, and Vera, aged seventeen, are
feeble-minded and both are housed in an
institution.

Unfortunately the parents, who are
‘* very difficult ’’ people, consider that there
is nothing wrong with the girls; and the
mother has actually expressed the opinion
that it was quite time that Flower married.
She also speaks with much satisfaction of
the fact that Leslie, the certified feebleminded son, who is aged eighteen, is engaged
and will probably be married within the
year! Leslie, when last visited, was earning 14s. a week at a shirt and collar factory.

The last (i.e. eldest) of the children of
the old Star couple is dead ; so is his cousinwife, and nothing is known of them. They
produced eleven children. We have already
dealt with the first of these, son (d), who
married the Bottle daughter (c). His
brother (g) is probably normal, and earns
fairly good money as a quarry labourer.
Nothing is known of his wife, but she makes
the home a good one, clean and well kept,
and the only fault with the place is its size.
There is one living-room and what ought
40

to be one bedroom, which has been divided
into two by a wooden partition. Star and
his wife sleep in one of these ‘rooms,’ and
his two younger brothers (bracketed at the
right of the family) in the other. Fortunately there are no children.

The next sister, Olive, is feeble-minded
and in an institution, and then come the
three girls who died young of convulsions.

Nothing has been heard of the girl (h)
since her marriage; but before that she was
grossly immoral and promiscuous, though
probably not feeble-minded.

Girl (1) is normal, but nothing more is
known of her, her husband, or her children, nor of her sister (j). Lastly come the
two boys who live with son (g); both are
tubercular and of low mentality, and one is
lame and deformed.

ASSORTIVE MATING

This completes Chart III, except for the
remarkable sub-group which starts with
Ann Bottle on the left and with the man
Crust on the right. In this generation there
have been at least two marriages between
feeble-minded persons. First of all Loud
married Ann and next, on her death, Jenny
Ann. ‘This was only in 1929. Previous to
that Jenny Ann had been married to Crust,
now dead, and had borne to him four children, all of whom have been brought up in
the Poor Law Children’s Home. The
younger children, whose mental condition
cannot yet be judged, now live with their
mother and stepfather; Alec, who is “ not
bright,”’ is still in the situation found for
him when he left school; and the feebleminded George William is in an institution.
Between her two marriages Jenny Ann spent
many years in the workhouse, where she
learnt to keep things clean. Now, in her
new home, it seems that money will always
be short, since Loud never keeps a job long
and spends a good deal of what he does earn
on drink. Besides being feeble-minded, he
has always been a thoroughly bad character,
not only a drinker, but grossly immoral—so
those on the chart may not be his only
children.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Loud’s first wife, Ann Bottle, was feebleminded, lazy and slovenly, and a drinker ;
their house was always filthy, and they were
often without food or money. They produced six children, four of whom are feebleminded. ‘The first of them, Mrs. Lilly,
has made a clean and comfortable home;
and although she cannot read or write, she
can apparently manage money. ‘They live
in the neighbouring town of Slapperton,
where Lilly works, and their income, consequently, is better than a farm labourer’s.
The one eight-year-old boy, though delicate and probably feeble-minded, is well
cared for.

Chase, the husband of the next girl, who
is normal, is in the Navy, and only comes
home occasionally. She has a tiny house—
only two rooms—but she keeps it well, and
gives the children decent care. The boy
is too young for his condition to be judged ;
the little girl ‘‘ is cross-eyed and extraordinary looking, but, as far as can be judged,
is normal mentally.”’

The next three children of the Louds are
all feeble-minded. Dolly is in an institution, but whether she entered it before or
after the conception of her illegitimate child
(now dead) is not clear. Cedric and Hal are
at the same institution, the latter in its
special school; and the youngest of the
family, Cecil, appears normal.

Altogether there are 79 or 80 persons on
this chart, and of this number—

2I or 22 are not known,
23 are normal, or said to be,
27 are aments or strongly suspected of
being so,
4 died young,
4 have other grave defects of physique or
character.

Eliminating the unknowns and including
the last three groups under the one heading
of Defective, there are twenty-three normal
persons and thirty-five defective.

These pedigrees have all been collected
and the individuals investigated by a welfare
agency with experienced and reliable social
workers; and there can be no question of
the accuracy of the details. Only the reDISEASE AND DEFECT

counting of the facts thus supplied and the
attempts at their interpretation are the work
of the present writer. All Christian and
surnames have, of course, been changed,
though, for the sake verisimilitude, an
effort has been made to find pseudonyms
which correspond as exactly as possible with
the real names. A genuine Archibald, for
instance, was first re-christened Percival—
until it transpired that that was actually the
name of his brother! Also, since the district is one of those covered by the investigations of the Mental Deficiency Committee,
which was anxious to preserve the anonymity of the areas studied, towns and
villages have also been re-christened.

THE GENETIC INTERPRETATION

The number of ‘ unknowns ’ makes it unwise to indulge in more than the rough
summarized statistics already given for each
of the three sets of pedigrees; but the details are enough to show that no simple
genetic formula of the dominant or recessive
type can account for the facts. To begin
with, amentia is not a clear-cut character like
polydactyly, nor even as well defined as
musical talent. It is a generic term to cover
our ignorance of the details; and there may
be almost as many kinds of mental deficiency

 

~~

4I

as there are of physical deficiency. Hence
one pedigree may demonstrate a totally
different type of inheritance from the next.
Secondly, even if we study only one pedigree and assume that it is the same genetic
defect which is transmitted to all individuals, we have to remember that the normal

‘strains with which they mate will differ

genetically. A genetic factor which is
‘dominant,’ and causes amentia when
crossed with one normal cerebral or endocrine type, may well be recessive or semirecessive on mating with another of a
different normal physiological organization.
Some such serial combination of recessive
normal+dominant defect+ ‘super-dominant’
normal inhibitors seems at present to
be the most hopeful hypothesis, for it is
dificult even to advance a plausible theory
of multiple genes. The facts do not warrant
any more precise attempt at explanation;
and it seems, in our present ignorance of
the physiology of mental development,
that no purely genetical hypothesis can
satisfactorily account for such a haphazard
variety of grades and types of defect as are
at present included under ‘‘ amentia.’’ We
can only be sure that they are in practice
incurable, very undesirable, and in most
cases, such as these, strongly hereditary.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 1.
CHART II.

. CHART I.

Haveridge

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Dead OO 4 Mrs. Haveridgc “ Boil-watch " x His_ wife
N.K. | but alive at 80 Gallows | N.K.
i mo owes wemiz omcmsii Sthienmils sasmees = = co ee ee ee ao eg {
Race en SR __ _ ___ ee Died in workhose |
Thomas Snow -—~————- x —————~Dora Son Ann —————. » ——— Walter Glutton | ee EE “4
Cannot read or write | Subnormal Killed A ccident . Subnormal * Subnormal Son x” Son (b) ———~x ? Selina —————- x -Cnarles Barrctt I oo,
without help | | Drinks wie N.K. | Subnormal | Normal sin atilde George x— His wife
ek 7 ee ee . Oe - he . : U “NM, ‘orma
rs l | | | l | CE ; : Iwo eupacen yee l ~ self-supporting |
Died Charles Florence Edgar John Oliver Roland Walter Oscar Emily Walter Edgar Jily Minnie Dick Leonard Coli slaw . | -K. Soote---———. -—-- » ——-—- Edith John Charles Martha : . l Pr
infant “i “i Subqormal Normal “T= ———<—“aiiel el OF ic SC died infant N.K. Insane i dicd in subnormal Nopmal D. and B. F.M. ELM, EM. Douglas Kenneth arnold. Subnormal (s FM. D. and B. FM. iM. Ilosititaat Matthews jeuie Noomal Maisis Minnic Gladys Jane
. write Asylum mimora ee ‘ : | Ce. *M: Norma VM. Age 12; in Home Age 7: in Home er
> —— oo mitre 5 a M.A. . w.8 < } 1 Thy ae, € Age 4 in Honic
: * x ‘ hifdren eh ruiks <—— ? Twins, age 8: M.A. 6 ‘ at Girl BoM, _ . re “ Not bright ” Thought to be Thought to be
i 3 childs f Too young to judg | —_— ee F.M. F.M.
°N x — , x cna Two children
.K. aged 3 and 1
A
CHART III.
Mrs. Bottle x ?
F.M.
Died 1929 | Star - x Mrs. Star
—_ | ee N.K. f N.K.
se i i him Si gC = a i a a te er eer rr cr ee ee a ne a a at ee ee cee ome one ee eit aii Te |
Fleshly-————__- Cecily — yx— Dickon Jenny x -————Bottle, Ann —— »—_——- Loud ———__—' Jenny Ann———— x Crist | , j __ :
N.K F.M. N.K. F.M. a cousin F.M. | F.M F.M | NUK A Sou (a) < ? Edward x ? A cousin —— Son : ! .
ds M. -K, pparently Apparently ai , * . Son (f) ————_-X—--——-_A cousin Girl (e) x Young
Dead Cripple Deane | Immoral | Dead normal | normal; Said te ornanl been ules Nx Normal (sister to brother's Normal Normal
oO —— | —— | a | | | immoral Dead | | a, —___|
Harry George Beatrice Docs water Weineae atl odes x Chase — ne é | . u ; cd a ” | 7 | l | ! 7 --— | ces 8 comes ss fee cen mn wo gh to 2 or 3 | nildren Belinda
7M. K. M. .M. EM. C >irl _——_—_—_ » —_———— Chas olly edric a eci scorge William Alec Florence George Roy ~. , - l | | | | | | td "AN 1 Mongoliat
but self-supportin Cripple Insane FM. Normal N.K. F.M. F.M. “MoM. Z ars ; : ————— en — . Son Son Son ; 2 = iv i 71 ai i xi j a : slie Ve . norma soe
pporting aoe Cripple , . . F.M Appears normal F.M. “not bright” _ Children appear healthy and normal Said to be normal Said to be normal Normal Daugiiter 1b} Senet eet Na ay Daughter (c) x Sonn (4) aon oe 4, aids er on Gol hose, ith EE Flower Hetlie Vora Imbecile
—_ x Lilly | | Baby N.K. Still at school but very small and respectable; and immoral ” ' (1 at 7 days; 1 at 7 | i | and of low mentality “ ur ees we SIP
Bo | 8 N.K. Girl Boy Illegitimate ’ : i : men , oy x— ? months; 1 N.K., of x 2 x : x—-- 2? Qne lame and
y age Normal Too young to judgc Dead , 4 Child Child Child convulsions) { : . | deformed
Probably send Terk . Baby Childre
F.M. _————ee Probably Probably Almost . . to jude NK
2 illeg. children EM. I'M. Certainly 00 FORRES [0 JES NUN
aged 8 and 1% FM.
Appear normal

D. and B.=dull and backward F.M.= feeble-minded M.A.=mental age N.K.=nothing known

T.B.= tubercular Dotted line indicates illegitimacy
