MENTAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE SOUTH
AFRICAN NATIVE.

By Rev. A. T. BRYANT.
Adapted for Publication in EUGENICS REVIEW by
C. G. SELIGMAN, M.D.

THE most interesting and urgent problem now engaging attention in connection with the African mind is probably that
propounded by the following questions :—

Firstly, is there, or is there not, as some declare, any difference (a) radical and essential, or (6) transient and accidental,
between the mind of a South African Bantu native and that of a
European ? .

Secondly, is there, or is there not, as is so frequently
asserted (a) any arrest, partial or absolute, of the normal intellectual development, or, (6) still worse, any actual retrogression
or waning of ‘the intellectual powers already developed, occurtring amongst South African Bantu children, boys and girls,
between, say, the ages of 12 and 20?

Every student of South African native affairs will know
that, in South Africa at least, these are something more than
moot points. They are almost burning questions, hotly contested,’ amongst those who should best be able to answer them.
Without being dogmatic, we may venture to state our own
thoughts on these important matters, based upon more than 33
years of intimate intercourse with, and close observation of,
young persons and old, of both sexes, of the Zulu-Kaffir tribes.
For several years during this period we were engaged, in Natal,
in the actual teaching, at the same time, and in the same classroom, of both European and native boys; and in Zululand, in
teaching, under similar circumstances, a fair average assortment
of native boys and native girls, of all ages up to and beyond 20.

Throughout the whole time we were, further, in close daily con
1 See the conflicting evidence of native educational experts given in the “Report of a
Select Committee of the House of Assembly of the Cape Colony on Native
Education,” Capetown, 1908.
MENTAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIVE. 43

tact with native adults of both sexes. Some of the conclusions:
we have now arrived at, we regard (as far as we ourselves are
concerned) as certain and final. Others we regard as still somewhat doubtful, and liable to change under the influence of
longer study and increased enlightenment. Upon still other
points we have not yet been able to come to any definite conclusion at all. In a word, then, we find ourselves not wholly
able to offer any complete and decisive answer to the interesting
enquiries propounded above.

First of all, we believe that some innate difference does at
the present time exist between the mind of the average adult
male of the European race and that of the average adult male of
the African ; in other words, that the mental powers of the two,
as actually now possessed and manifested by them, are not equal
and identical; in some faculties the European, in others the
African, being superior. But, though innate, this difference is
not fundamental and permanent, but transient and accidental.

Secondly, that the mode and measure of mental growth
amongst the male children of the two races is not the same, the
difference taking the form of a comparatively precocious
development of the mental faculties in the African boy in the
earlier years of life (say, up to 12), rapidly succeeded (at some
time between the ages of 12 and 20), first, by a gradual arrest
of normal growth,’ then by an actual decline of mind-energy
and decrease of mind-power to a point below that already
reached in the preceding stage, which is never regained ; and in
the case of the European boy, a much slower and more gradual
development of the intellect, progressing continuously from,
say, the sixth year, through the puberal period (at which a
slight temporary arrestment may take place), until, somewhere
after the 18th year, the maximum of mental power, to which the
average African never attains, is reached.

Thirdly, that no appreciable difference is discernible, either
in the development of the mental faculties or in their power,
between the female sections, whether children or adults, of the
two races. :

1 By “normal growth” we here mean that growth to which we are accustomed
amongst Europeans.
44 EUGENICS REVIEW.

It may be added that the statements contained in the last
three paragraphs refer solely to Africans in the untutored state.

The African intellect, as exemplified in its manhood, is
simply incapable of reaching the brilliance or of attaining the
range of that of the European. Be it a matter of reflecting, or
of judging, or comprehending, or conceiving, the African is
everywhere hopelessly outdistanced by the European. Only in
the province of memory and of imitation can he bear a favourable comparison with him, for in these two respects the African
is decidedly strong.

But when we pass into the domain where intuition’ reigns,
there another story must be told. There the honours fall to
the African, and the poorly endowed European must perforce
fall to the rear. The African, in company with the lower
animals, is still possessed of certain instincts or senses which in
us, perhaps by atrophy through disuse, have entirely disappeared.

For instance, he is gifted with a remarkable sense of locality
or direction, easily finding his way out of a forest, apparently
by instinct alone, when his European companion has become
hopelessly lost; knowing to a nicety the exact position of distant localities, even when they are completely hidden behind
intervening hills and intricately winding paths; successfully
following, to us, quite imperceptible trails, as though, partly, at
any rate, by some power of ‘‘scent’’; readily discovering
objects lost on the veldt or in the bush, when the eyesight of a
European, though equally keen, has utterly failed to detect
them.

Then, again, he is endowed with some peculiar sense of
sympathy or telepathy, existent between himself and other living
beings, animals no less than men. Presentiments of impending
ill, or, still more frequently, a consciousness (sometimes spontaneously “‘ felt,’’ at other times effected through the medium of
dreams) of evil (e.g., illnesses, deaths, wars, and so forth)
actually happening, already passed, or about to occur, in distant
places—all are common experiences with him. His females

'1 By “intuition” we mean an immediate perception of truth without any exercise
of the reason. |
MENTAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIVE. 45

(especially) frequently assert that they ‘‘feel’’ the bloodrelationship of certain strangers—note the peculiar sense of
sympathy between twins; and between mother and child, frequently misnamed a mother’s ‘‘ love’’—even while otherwise
absolutely ignorant of any such family connection between
them. And as regards the animal world, it is a common experience with farmers and travellers that a startled horse or cow,
which its own European master can no longer approach, will
permit itself with the greatest docility to be caught and handled
by any casual native, though he be perfectly unknown to it.

Further, it is in this greater measure of intuitive sense that
we find the cause and the explanation of the great number of so-.
called witch-doctors or sorcerers (abatigoma, Z.) existent in
every African community. For the most part females (as we
might very reasonably expect), these are the clairvoyants of
their race, despite the fact that they themselves know nothing of
‘* clairvoyance ”’ and attribute their powers to the inspiration of
ancestral spirits.

We now pass on to consider our second proposition,
namely, our comparison of the mental powers of young males.
of both races. And here we find we have to deal with two distinct classes of such males, firstly, with such boys as have
grown up, so to say, in a state of pure nature, untouched by any
form of artificial education; and, secondly, boys of both races.
who have received a school teaching. |

Of Europeans growing up in a state of untouched nature—
as is the case with the great mass of our Africans—the writer
unfortunately has little experience, and is thus unable to make
a fair comparison between the two. The nearest example he is.
acquainted with of Europeans living in a state approximating
to African Bantu conditions is that of the backveldt Boers; and
certainly here he would not be prepared to say that either the
Boer boy or the Boer adult evinces any intellectual superiority
whatsoever over his Kaffir neighbours of like age. Developing:
under almost like conditions, the two types of mind seem to
tend to approximate and ultimately attain an equal level. At
the present time, and as things actually now are, of the two
races, the Boers, of European extraction, would seem to be
46 EUGENICS REVIEW.

intellectually in the worst case; for, despite the fact that their
sons have been reared under ‘‘ natural’’ African conditions for
some 250 years, they have not yet come to exhibit any signs of
that intellectual brilliance so conspicuous in the small boys of
Africa. Indeed, these latter, even in their untutored stage,
exhibit, up to the age of puberty, a mental smartness that puts
even the school-trained European boy in the shade.

On the other hand, as regards school-going children of the
two races our information is, in many respects, more complete
and precise and so permits of a better comparison. But here
again we find it advisable to divide the native boys into two
categories and distinguish between those, firstly, who commence
their schooling with the dawn of reason and continue it until
the years of youth are attained; and, secondly, those who, after
having spent their earlier years in their natural state, enter the
schools at or after the age of puberty.

As far as the former class of native boys is concerned, we
believe it to be the generally accepted opinion among European
teachers who have had personal experience of both European
and African pupils, that the general intelligence of native boys
between the ages of 6 and 12 is, or at any rate appears to be, in
every respect not only equal, but even superior to that displayed
by an average class of European boys of a like age. There is
about the native boy an intellectual vivacity and eagerness, a
brightness and sharpness, which the duller-brained European
boy rarely exhibits. But, mark you, we have employed the
phrase ‘‘ appears to be equal’ with the feeling that some qualification of our statement may possibly be needful. For, after
all, our judgment must needs be based solely upon the rather
inconclusive data which the primary school can produce—
secondary or higher education being a stage to which the South
African natives, in any adequate numbers, have not yet attained.
That is to say, our judgment must be based upon results gained
from a test in such elementary subjects (as reading, writing,
simple arithmetical processes, geography, history, grammar,
languages, drawing and singing) as comprise the curriculum of
the child during the first few years of its schooling. But it will
be noted that these subjects are those in which the imitative and
MENTAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIVE. 47

retentive faculties are principally involved ; and it is precisely in
this province of mind that the African excels. But whether or
not this mental superiority of the native boy would be maintained if he were tested against the White in such subjects (as
higher arithmetical, algebraical and geometrical problems) as
would require rather an exercise of the faculties of reasoning
and comprehension, is by no means so clear or certain. But
then, again, even the White boy himself could scarcely be
expected to achieve any brilliant success in such comparatively
abstruse subjects at the age (from 6 years to 12) here under consideration. In all probability, owing to undeveloped brains, no
test would be possible in either case, and both would prove
themselves equal failures.

Somewhere after the attainment of the 12th year the phenomena of puberty’ (in the European, at any rate, and presumably so also in the African) begin to take place; and such
momentous physiological changes, affecting, as they do, so
profoundly the whole nervous system, cannot but exert a very
considerable influence on the psychology of the individual.
This is said to be the case to a quite exceptional degree in regard
to the African. In how far, then, does a study of the facts of
the case confirm the supposition, first of all, as regards those we
are now considering (namely, such native boys as have been
attending school since their childhood); and, secondly, as
regards those who enter the school for the first time at or after
puberty.

Replying in a general way, and in reference to both classes
of native boys, we must record it as our opinion that a mental
change for the worse does really take place about the age of

puberty ; but the loss of mental vigour and power is not nearly

1The phenomena of puberty, so far as we are aware, have not yet been
scientifically investigated in regard to the African Bantu peoples. The Zulus date
the “change in life,” not from the first appearance of the preliminary signs (about
the breast, pubes, or pudenda), which, of course, may cover years in their gradual
development, but from the first actual emission of sexual fluid, which occurrence
is technically known, and duly celebrated, in both sexes. as the uku tomba. The
date of this, the writer, by personal investigation, has found to differ greatly in
different individuals and different families—in some families the ¢omba appears
earlier, in others later—and to be generally earlier in females than in males. Among
the individuals (both male and female) tested, the date of the nrst emission
fluctuated ‘between the ages of about 144 and 174, generally inclining to be later
than earlier.
48 EUGENICS REVIEW.

so marked in the case of the first class of boys as it is in that
of the second, and this despite the fact that, up to the time of
puberty (say, 12 years of age) both classes were, mentally,
equally precocious. The native boy who enters the school for
the first time at the age of 16 or 17 proves himself, as a rule, a
veritable booby and almost useless as a pupil. His former
powers of reasoning and comprehending seem to have suddenly
vanished, while those of memory and imitation are retained
only in a much diminished degree. But should the native boy
who has been school-trained throughout his earlier years, now
be provided with opportunities for continuing his studies, the
mental arrest, though there, will be considerably reduced. Will
he be able to hold his own indefinitely against the White? We
think not. Whereas heretofore he has not only been able to
hold his own, but has very commonly taken the lead among his
European class-mates, from this point onwards the latter will
gradually gain ground, and he as surely will fall to the rear.
Instead of experiencing any deterioration at this period of
puberty, the powers of reason and understanding of the European boy, and perhaps of memory, too, would seem rather to
gain in clearness and intensity ; until, at about the age of 18, he
will have reached a stage of intellectual ability much more
powerful, though not quite so dazzling, as that of the native in
his earlier years. But wherever the attainment of knowledge
depends upon the imitative faculty, or upon mere memory—
and a good deal of the syllabus even in the higher standards of
the primary school will still be of such a nature—there the
native will still remain, at the very least, the White boy’s equal.
Indeed, this is the explanation why native boys (or rather, we
should say, young men—for the majority of them would seem to
be within the region of 20 years of age) attending Amanzimtoti
and other such native colleges in Natal, generally prove themselves able to tackle the highest standards of the Natal Native
Primary School Code equally as successfully as White boys—a
fact by some supposed to nullify the truth of our general statement, but which, of course, it does not, because those “‘ powers
of reason and understanding ”’ in which we maintain the Whites
have now the advantage are scarcely brought into play, cerMENTAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIVE. 49

tainly are not adequately tested, by anything contained in the
primary school course.

But there is a difficulty that hereabouts confronts us, and
which at any rate we must honestly note, even though at present
unable to offer any very satisfactory explanation. Despite the
fact that our present opinion, based upon our general experience
of natives, is that described in the paragraphs above, we are
bound to own to a further special experience, confined to a
certain special class of native, which really does seem to be in
conflict with and to gainsay our general opinion already
expressed. For we find that practically in every case where a
South African native has had the opportunity of receiving an
education in one of the universities of Europe or America, that
that native has invariably been able to hold his own against all
White rivals and to pass as successfully as they the same
examinations in medicine, law or arts. Unfortunately, the
number of such natives is at present so exceedingly small—we
believe, scarcely amounting to more than a dozen men in the
whole of South Africa—as hardly to justify any modification of
our general position. Maybe the very fact of these individuals
having so far outrun their fellows as to be able to attain toa
university career in a foreign country already proves them extraordinary specimens of their race, exceptions to the rule.
