C. B. GDODHART
M.A., Ph.D., University Museum of Zoology, Cambridge

Biological Fitness in Man

HE WORD ‘“‘FIT,’’ as ordinarily defined
in the dictionary, means “‘well adapted
to the circumstances, in good health or
condition.” Lately, however, it has been
acquiring a new and different specialized
meaning in biology. To quote from Professor
Medawar’s recent Reith Lectures: “the word
‘fitness,’ then, has come to mean net reproductive
advantage, and geneticists do not deliberately
use it in any other sense.”’ Originally, geneticists
would usually have applied the word to particular
genes rather than to the organism as a whole,
but it is now being used in the sense that one
individual is said to be fitter than another if, and
only if, it is going to be represented by more of its
descendants in future generations. Biological
fitness is judged with reference to other members
of the same species, and it is not concerned with
the evolutionary adaptedness of the species itself,
in interspecific competition.

It is rather a pity that a common English
word is being taken over and given this quite
different meaning by biologists, especially as
its biological use probably derives from Herbert
Spencer’s famous phrase “the survival of the
fittest’, where it is used in the original nontechnical sense. When in 1867 he wrote:

Plants depend for their prosperity mainly on,
air and light ... Such of them as happen, by
variations in the mode of growth, to get at all
above the rest, are more likely to flourish and leave
offspring than the rest. That is to say, natural
selection will favour the more upright-growing
forms: individuals with structures that lift them
above the rest, are fittest for the conditions: and
by the continual survival of the fittest, such structures must become established.

by “the fittest” he clearly meant those that were
best adapted—the tallest and the strongest—
which he believed would thereby be enabled to
survive and leave most offspring for future
generations. It would not then have been
considered a contradiction in terms to suggest
that the “‘fittest’’ might possibly sometimes leave

83

fewer descendants, through infecundity or for
other reasons. But as geneticists nowadays use
it, the phrase “survival of the fittest” is merely
tautological: the fittest are by definition those
that do survive, whatever their adaptedness or
fitness in the ordinary sense of the word.

Fitness to Survive

It is well known that sometimes the individuals best adapted to external conditions do
not have the highest net reproductive advantage,
and are, therefore, biologically less “fit.”
Deliberate human selection can produce domestic breeds which would be quite unfitted to
survive in a natural environment, and sexual
selection in wild animals may favour conspicuous
clumsy forms, ill-adapted to life in general
apart from their advantage in breeding. The
same may happen when a species has become
fully adapted to stable conditions, with few
possibilities for further evolutionary improvement. Intra-specific selection does not then stop,
but it tends to become concentrated upon other
factors, especially those increasing fertility,
rather than on further adaptation to the external
environment.

Other things being equal, those that produce
the most offspring will leave the most descendants, and so they will be preferred in selection
even if in other ways they are less well adapted.
The “‘fittest”, biologically speaking, those with
the highest net reproductive advantage, will
be the types to survive but the competitive
advantage of the species as a whole, and its fitness
in intraspecific competition, may be undermined.
This is perhaps the reason for one of Evolution’s
most general empirical Rules, that the large
majority of species in the end neither survive
unchanged nor evolve into something else, but
become wholly extinct.

Selection in Civilized Man
In his lecture, Professor Medawar discusses

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1960, 52, 2.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the suggestion that mankind may now be going
downhill, our overall fitness undermined by
advances in medicine and hygiene, and by all
that goes with civilization and the Welfare State.
He points out that, if by “going downhill’’ is
meant “declining in biological fitness,” the
argument is self-contradictory. If what may be
considered inferior types are going to increase in
future generations, they will do so only if they
have a higher net reproductive advantage, and
so by definition they will have shown their
superior biological fitness in intra-specific
selection.

There are several ways in which the human
stock could appear to be degenerating. First of
all, as civilized man leads a physically easier life
than his primitive forebears, the relative selective
advantage of strength and hardiness, good eyesight and so on, will be reduced. Since selection
will tend to become concentrated upon other
characteristics, there is bound to be some loss
where it is relaxed. Provided these other
characteristics involve things like intelligence
and social adaptability, however, there will be
no overall loss in adaptedness at all, but a gain.
There is no question here of mankind going
downhill, and we would not wish to reverse the
trend, even if we could.

Secondly, advances in medical technique now
allow people suffering from certain specific
disabilities to live more or less normal lives.
Diabetes, severe myopia, even bad teeth, must
once have been practically lethal but they are
now no more than minor inconveniences, and
doubtless others will be added to this list in the
future. If those who carry such defects are
otherwise competitive they may prosper and
transmit their disabilities to future generations.
They will have become “fit” in the biological
sense of the word, at the expense of some loss
in the competitive vigour and adaptedness of
the species as a whole. That may not matter
very much, since the defective individuals will
presumably go on being able to maintain their
social effectiveness by artificial means. And if
some of them can make a contribution to the
human cultural inheritance, the biological loss
may be offset by a social gain.

Unfortunately, however, it is much easier to
preserve the lives of those afflicted with hereditary

34

weaknesses than to bring them up to full
effectiveness. Further improvements are to
be expected here, but it seems excessively optimistic to hope that there will ever not be
some residue who would better never have been
born. But although some of these may be able
to reproduce, the really defective are unlikely
ever to achieve a net reproductive rate to compare with the normal, and the quality of the better
part of the population should not be affected,
despite a decline in the average level. An
increasing proportion of defectives may constitute a serious social and economic burden on
the community, but it will not really be an
evolutionary threat to the biological future of
humanity.

Intelligence and Biological Fitness

It is not the obviously defective that are the
threat: the real danger lies in the possibility
that some large section of the population
marginally below the average standard may gain
a net reproductive advantage over the rest, and
so be preferred in selection. Domestic animals
show how selective breeding for a preferred
type can lead to large changes in quite a short
time, and not all of them are changes for the
better. The same could happen in Man, with
both his physical structure and his innate
intelligence. Intelligence is the most important
and most distinctive of human characteristics
and, as it is certainly inherited genetically, it
must respond to selection in evolution.

Human intelligence has evolved to its present
level because the more intelligent have been biologically the fittest, and have had a net reproductive advantage over the rest. There is no
reason to think that the human brain has yet
reached the limit of its evolutionary potentialities
and, if this selection continues, intelligence may
be expected to increase still further. But equally if
there is a change in net reproductive advantage,
so that the less intelligent become biologically
fitter and leave most descendants, the course of
evolution will be diverted, and the level of
intelligence will start to fall.

Any genetically inherited character is maintained in a population by a dynamic balance of
selective forces, and if these change the balance
changes with them, up or down. This may happen
BIOLOGICAL FITNESS IN MAN

slowly and it will be hard to detect, for there is no
question of the really defective suddenly starting
to outbreed the rest. The large majority of the
less intelligent half of the population consists of
normally useful and responsible people, but if
they should ever gain a net reproductive advantage over the more intelligent half, then

intelligence will start to decline and will stop |

doing so only if the balance of selective advantage
is again reversed.

Cultural Evolution

It has often been pointed out that the evolution
of human societies has taken on a new and
uniquely different form, because of the nongenetical mode of inheritance of human culture
and traditions. It may be true that this cultural
evolution is now much more rapid, and probably more important in its effects, than is the
biological evolution of the human species, but it

is quite wrong to conclude from this that natural 
selection in human populations has ceased, or
is likely to do so. Unless it is the result of inten
tional choice, any non-random elimination is 
properly to be termed natural selection, however
artificial the environment in which it occurs.
Until the breeding adults in each generation
represent a random sample not merely of all the
zygotes conceived but of all that potentially

could have been conceived, this will continue to

operate, and that will surely never happen.
Cultural evolution might well continue its
advance while innate intelligence was declining,
because of changes in the relative biological
fitness of different sections of the population.
It is a nice point whether we should then say

that human evolution was progressing “‘uphill”
or “downhill,” but most probably it would be
heading towards disaster. Some experts believe
that this may already have begun, but the eviddence is open to other interpretations and the
question is still in dispute. At least, there is here
a potential danger to the future of humanity,
and one that ought to be taken seriously.

Conclusions

_ As our physical, biological and social environments are brought more and more under control
we can no longer be content merely to applaud

or deplore the course taken by human evolution,

when it is possible deliberately to encourage or
to check its progress. This is, of course, already
being done, though quite unintentionally:
medicine and education, social conventions and
taxation, warfare, invention and commerce, all
of these must have had important effects upon
the | genetical inheritance of mankind, hard
though it is to determine precisely what they
will have been.

Man’s biological evolution will not come to
an end so long as he continues to exist, but

“we cannot assume that it must inevitably be

progressing in the most desirable direction.
There is little comfort in the thought that if
less desirable types are to gain a net reproductive advantage, this can only mean that they
have proved their superior biological fitness in
intra-specific selection. Man is beginning to
gain the power, and with it the responsibility of
making sure that those types which are best and
fittest to survive are, in fact, the ones that do
survive into future generations.

85
