MEDICINE AND EUGENICS*

y

By JOHN A. RYLE, MD., F.R.c.P.
Regius Professor of Physic, Cambridge University

memorates and the distinguished
records of its previous holders are, to
the newly elect, a clear index of responsibility. It is, I take it, intended that the
Iecture should provide not so much an
‘gnnual reminder of Galton and his work—
‘for such can scarcely be needed—as an
‘annual stimulus towards those objectives of
fwhich his prevision was the richest legacy to
this Society. Now, although I have long been
@ member of the Socvety and for a much
pnger period interested in eugenics, my own
-gontributions to that subject have, I regret
plo, say, been negligible. I must presume,
fmowever, that in the person of the physician
L your Committee recognize a student of man
i md his needs, and in the physician who is
miso a teacher one who must, both practically
ind ideally, desire to turn the thoughts of
those whom he teaches to what may be styled
* B ultimate aims and methods ”’ for the preserr tion of health and the prevention of disease
is individuals and communities.
=. Lhe science of medicine and the science of
i nics are both applied sciences. Their
ms are in many respects identical. In the
* 2 of a conversation with a critical friend
was recently asked what I considered the
Bmary goal of medicine to be. As an active
pical physician concerned with diagnosis,
B teaching of signs and symptoms, and the
a: hing of individual lives, he suspected,
ps ApS, that I might reply “ the curing of
2 when possible and the relief of suffer: rwhen cure is out of reach,” or words to
m effect. I replied in effect, ‘‘ the preserva
4 | ‘HE name which this lectureship com
  
  

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 

Wible health, happiness and efficiency for
. ¥ greatest possible number by prophylactic
= ures, including eugenics and social reation.” If this definition of the the goal

# Galton Lecture delivered before the Eugenics
i iron February 16th, 1938.

,

| Bot and the planning for the greatest |

of medicine be acceptable, then medicine
may be considered as a sister science, with
executive functions, to the science of
eugenics, which Galton defined as “ the study
of agencies under social control that may
improve or impair the racial qualities of
future generations either physically or mentally.”” We have been reminded more than
once recently that the scope of eugenics
includes the study of environmental as well
as heritable factors. The same is clearly true
of medicine. I believe it would be fair to say,
however, that medicine in the past has paid
too little attention to inheritance, and
eugenics too little attention to environment,
and that both in the near future will have to
invite a more active public interest in the
contributions both of nature and of nurture
to the good and the bad in all our racial
qualities.

Preventive Medicine

Curative and palliative medicine, although
we must continue to ply them with all the
earnestness and skill which our science and
humanity may command, must now and
henceforward be considered of secondary
importance when examined in conjunction
with preventive medicine. Of preventive
medicine it clearly remains for us to build a
more exalted and efficient structure. To its
earlier beginnings with sanitary laws, pure
water supplies, and the isolation of acute
infectious disease notable additions have
been made. By a variety of methods tuberculosis and venereal disease, the two great
infectious scourges, are coming perceptibly
and steadily under control. Factory Acts,
improved conditions of labour and housing
and health insurance—additional measures
bearing on environmental improvement—all
lend their quota. Ante-natal care and child
welfare are now making their contribution.
None of these, however, excepting the last
10 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

two and these only in a limited and not
always a far-seeing way, take cognizance of
the basic human material to be encouraged
and protected. None of them are concerned
essentially with the production of sound
stock or with the problem of what should
be regarded as the optimum quality and
quantity of man for given conditions of
environment, occupation and productivity.

Of late we have been plied with propaganda on behalf of a national health campaign, a movement largely concerned with
the improvement of physique by provision of
better opportunities for games and organized
drill, a movement with the undoubted merit
of contributing to the elevation of health
standards but launched without a proper
investigation of the limits of improvement
possible by these means in undernourished,
ill-housed or overworked communities and
in individuals of poor pedigree. There must
be many thousands in this country whom this
and kindred hygienic movements will scarcely
touch, because defects of one type and
another, both inherited and acquired, have
put them beyond the scope of the most
skilled remedial exercise or games. I have
paused to wonder whether the results for the
nation might not be better if the same expenditure of money and time and energy to be
devoted to instruction in health by physical
culture were diverted to instruction in health
by family culture. It must have been disappointing to many here that, among all the
speeches and press commentaries which
announced the launching of this campaign,
scarcely a word was said about the importance to the community and the state of
those foundations of health which only a
healthy stock can furnish. I had myself
hoped that a fuller appreciation of the
potentialities of eugenics had by now
penetrated to high places.

Medicine, Eugenics and Soctology

Now it is clearly a function of the medical
profession to advise the politicians in the
matter of planning for a healthier community. Of this there is a growing recognition. In the next decade or two, if the
politicians will keep us out of wars, and, let

us hope, will translate to social services and
reconstruction some of the vast sums at
present expended upon armaments, we may
expect new gains in health and physique
from nutritional reforms, including adequate
milk supplies ; from healthier herds and the
pasteurization of milk ; from further housing.
improvements ; and from other comparable.
measures now brought within the purview
of state medicine. But there will still remain
a more fundamental lesson for statesmen,
for communities and for individuals—the
lesson proclaiming the importance of pedigree and pride of pedigree and the importance of encouraging an optimum ReGLUEY.
rate.

The contributions which eugenic planning’
might make to national life cannot much;
longer be delayed or obscured. With th
preliminaries to such planning eugenists hav
long been concerned, but the doctors, with
their multitudinous problems and embarr
ments, have, I fear, been too busy for the
most part to be bothered. Scientific and
humane planning for national health and:
efficiency are, or should be, in the hands of:
the three great applied sciences—medicine, }
eugenics and sociology. The last two know)
their objectives more or less, but are still!
emerging from the theoretical, academic:
stage of their development. The first, I
regret to say, is so taken up with urgent’
practical affairs that it has scarcely found
time to consider what its true objectives are..
Between the three there is at present no true;
co-operation. Whether for the collection of;
essential information, for advice or for action, .
the doctor is, by reason of his direct contacts,
in better circumstance than either the:
eugenist or the sociologist. Individually, :
however, he is harassed, and collectively his!
profession lacks cohesion and a policy, lacks.
the necessary vision and organization for an
effective pooling and interpretation and
translation into action of the knowledge:
which it constantly accumulates. Nor has|
medicine yet come to a proper realization of
the influence which it might exert for the!
common weal, whether by educational pro- :

4

   
 
  
  
  

grammes or direct and informed persuasion’
or conversion of those who govern us.
3 MEDICINE AND EUGENICS II

Neglect of Eugenics by the Medtcal
EP rfavio

e My life has brought me in daily contact
math doctors of varied types, ages and modes
Sey: and with innumerable medical
Mdents, but, although all of these are perMaded from an early stage of the practical
: ne of family histories in their diagnostic
mad prognostic assessments, it is rare to meet
Song them a man with even the rudiments
: ‘genetics or more than a very superficial
merest in the prospect of race-betterment by
Be enic education or legislation. The possi| : ties of race-betterment by other methods
FE * social reorganization also receive too
Brsory 2 consideration at all stages of the
i etor’s career.

Fihe membership of the Eugenics Society is
“ pximately 650. Of this number only
path are medical men. The proportion
wuld surely be much higher and the total
ienbership greatly increased by an access
& Pmedical members. Can large and effecS policies ever come to birth at the
a 3 of the Eugenics Society without such
. r ccession ? Would not a programme to
t the fuller co-operation of medicine be
e effective than any propaganda devoted
Favalening interest in lay audiences ?
yen such co-operation and the spread of
rest derived therefrom a really promising
: de to large policy might surely then
e from a triple alliance between the
fe great applied sciences I have already
, between medicine, eugenics and

  
 
  
   
  
  
 
  
   
    
  
   
   
 
   
  
   
   
 
   
 
   
   
  
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
  

4

id so I have asked myself whether it
BF be possible so to infect such a large
eterogeneous and conservative a body
B doctor of this country with enthusiasm
ge-betterment, both by improved
ment and nutrition and improved
, that such an effective alliance
D fact, come into being. The full
ation of the medical profession would
; ential as it would necessarily provide
| : ormation bureau and, in part, the
tive of such an alliance.
g asked myself this question I next
the task of considering a pro
gramme having this end in view. If here and
there my hopes seem remote from realization and my remarks have the savour of
idealism rather than practical politics, please
do not condemn me too quickly. At heart I
am a cautious person and my problems are
approached as a rule, I believe, judicially.
But there are times when I grow impatient
with the lack of active idealism among those
scientific and social and political workers
whose concern is, or should be, the improvement of man’s lot. There are too many
ills which we know how to prevent but are
not as yet preventing.

An Educational Programme

The preliminaries to our utopian programme must, I conclude, be educational.
Compulsion and the proper pursuit and
application of knowledge cannot be reconciled in the democratic state. Education
must begin with the student, but must
simultaneously, if in different form, be extended to the profession as a whole. In either
case the education must be of a kind to
produce educators, for the doctor of the
future, as I envisage him, will far more than
heretofore bring his benefits by instruction
and precept. His name implies that he is a
teacher and such he must become. From
most diseases in which recovery is possible,
recovery occurs spontaneously ; some are
only recoverable with the help of the doctor
and the nurse; a few require the help of
specific remedies or surgical intervention.
Health, however, can be taught, although
only a limited number of diseases can in the
strict sense be cured. The medical man, while
retaining his privileged position as comforter
and -healer and in many emergencies as a
saver of life and limb, must discover a greater
privilege in teaching individuals, municipalities and governments that many forms of
chronic disease, disability and mental and
physical ill-health could be prevented, and
that we have as clear an appreciation of how
to prevent them as we have in the case of
many acute infections now becoming rare in
civilized communities. If the doctor, who is
already accepted as a servant and, in some
degree, as an instructor of the people, is
12 THE EUGENICS REVIEW - 3

enabled in course of time to state authoritatively that certain eugenic principles are not
only sound but practicable, he will be given
a hearing not only by his patients but also by
statesmen—a hearing which non-medical
eugenists, often far better informed but
lacking the doctor’s personal contacts and
sphere of influence, have sought in vain.

The Eugenics Soctety, as is well known, was
formerly called the Eugenics Education
Society, but its educational achievement was
limited, since only a small section of the community, already anxious to be educated,
came forward for the purpose. Although the
Society has greatly prospered and grown and
has frequently stirred new interest in recent
years, even in the political field, I believe the
criticism would still hold that, for all its good
endeavours and high scientific standards, it
is in the main a Soctety of the elect, and gains
influence slowly with the general public, the
medical profession and the councils of state.
This need not give us cause for despondency,
but only for revision of policy.

Now the public, in matters affecting the
health of themselves or their children, are
accustomed to appeal to the family doctor.
The family doctor, at present, is but rarely
prepared to give either spontaneous or
elicited advice in matters connected with
eugenic prognosis or with the size or spacing
of families, and is seldom even asked to
examine and report upon the health of intending partners in a marriage. He has not
been educated to consider these things as
important or coming within the natural
sphere of his activities. He could be so
taught.

Legislators, in matters affecting the health
of the community, are apt to approach distinguished men in the profession such as our
President, the Presidents of the Royal
Colleges, or the Secretary of the Medical
Research Council. Until recently these distinguished men have not been prepared, not
always qualified, to advise in matters so
fundamental as sterilization of the unfit, its
possible advantages and disadvantages; taxation relief for the encouragement of healthy
parenthood; the significance of population
fluctuations; the various causes of decline in

    
  
   
  
   
 
 
  
    
   
   
   
  
   
      
   
  
  
   
  
   
  
   
   
 
   
  
  
   
  
  
 
  

physical standards ; the origins of mentg
defect, and so forth. They had not beeg
taught to direct their thoughts along S
channels. They could be so taught and ¢
in fact, as we now know, learning to do s
The point which I wish to make is
that it is from the doctors, and not from tj
eugenists or sociologists, that both pri af
and public advice in these matters is apt
be and ideally should still be sought. ¥
In our British type of polity, which in thy
recent past has shown itself quite unwillt "
to consider prohibition laws, we have nev
theless witnessed an amazing and rapil
diminution in alcoholism within one generg
tion as a result of education, improved soci
conditions and minor legislation. For mag
of the same reasons which compelled a dg
trust of prohibition, it is evident that
country would be unwilling to consider ca
pulsory sterilization or compulsory exam in
tion for marriage certification, after a fe
tolerated or possible in a dictator-riddi
state. And yet I am convinced that ¢
educational campaign in connexion with t§
problems and practice of eugenics and sug
ported by the medical profession wow
eventually be welcomed with enthusiag
in all classes, provided the ground w af
properly prepared and policies wisely frameg
Never, perhaps, were the common peog "
more anxious to be kept informed in respeg
of the fundamental things affecting thé
health or more ready to accept advice with;
scientific backing. It is a sad comments
on our system that they should have to cag
tent themselves so frequently with quackery
doubtful literature, and the advertiser oi
hoardings. I have myself noticed, as otheg
must have done, the increasing willingne
on the part of men and women in all class
and among student groups to discuss matt 7
generally shunned under an earlier and mog
cramped régime, an increasing desire to knog
what is physiologically right in matte
affecting their married happiness and that ¢
their offspring or their future responsibiliti ’
as citizens. With a cautious and insufficient ,
instructed medical profession it often befaij
that they must seek their answers in book
of uncertain value or at the hands

hi i)

  

ew
eae
MEDICINE AND EUGENICS 13

psychiatrists or other specialists, who may
and often do give valuable help, but too few
of whom at present find time to correct their
psychology or specialism with a true physicianly perspective. With removal of the
restrictions imposed by religious thought
and by the silence of Victorian parents there
ts a general eagerness to be instructed in
matters biological, an eagerness which demands healthy and informed satisfaction.

The Individual Doctor

Before we proceed to consider our educa-_

tional programme for the medical student
and the doctor, who in turn are to become
the educators of the public and of the legisdators, we would do well to ask ourselves how
far the critical or hesitant doctor may be
justified in his doubts or misgivings about
the prospects of any effective co-operation
on his part in a national eugenic programme.
Our President pointed out quite recently how
gmedicine has tended to strike further and
farther at the root of things, turning its attenion by degrees from the individual patient
9 the control of infection at its source, or to
Measures for increasing resistance to it ; and
thence to other methods essentially preWentive and latterly in particular to infant
end pre-natal welfare. Now, as he has repninded us, we must needs go farther still,
planning our actions even more radically.
post of us here would endorse his contention
ahat eugenics might become “ the soundest
and by far the most profitable form of preve mtive medicine.’’ So we believe, but can
Seager the profession of the reliability
-our evidence and the efficacy of our
medies ? In larger issues such as the control

F population and the social problem group

e must admit that we are still exploring and

ek cing evidence. These are beyond the scope
immediate individual or collective solution.

Bere for the moment we are rather concerned
F h problems of domestic concern and so
jpre readily to be understood and handled.
cet us assume that there is no longer any
fed to detach medical opinion from the
Mear idea of human stud-farms and comMsory sterilization, neither of which measys has been advocated by this Society.

  
   
  

  
  
   
 
  
 

Let us assume also that the necessary information in regard to negative eugenics—
including measures of segregation, voluntary
sterilization and instructed contraception—
could without great difficulty be distributed,
albeit without conveying extravagant ideas
as to the rate of betterment likely to result
therefrom. Such measures, it is agreed, must
be mainly directed against the propagation
of mental defect and a limited number of
rare physical abnormalities and heritable
nervous and blood diseases. At this point
the practising doctor will still be wondering
where his duty and effectiveness begin, for
the cases of hemophilia and Huntington’s
chorea and such rarities seen by him in a
lifetime could be counted on one hand, his
total of mental defectives in a year would not
be very significant, and in any case adjudication for these would involve consultative
advice and action by a public body.

Ask him, however, to keep a record not
only of his genetic rarities, of his mental
defectives, epileptics, alcoholics, and manic
depressives, but also of his very considerable
body of physical defectives, the puny and
ailing and undersized, and of the unhappy,
the unmarried and the childless and the
workless for these reasons, and of the frail
and nervous children traceable to known
dysgenic marriages and homes. Ask him
how often he has discussed with patients or
parents the undesirability of marriage or of
children or of additional children in the
presence of certain types of heritable defect
or in certain cases of consanguinity. Ask
him if he has considered the poor physical
and nervous histories of many of the near
relatives of the insane. Ask him how often,
when advised of an impending marriage in
the family of any one of his patients, he has
recommended the medical examination of
the intending partners or discreet inquiry
into family history. Ask him how often he
has been at pains to encourage a healthy
married couple, practising contraception for
inadequate reasons, to improve their prospects of health and happy life together and
to serve their race by bearing children, or the
timid with one healthy child to have another.
Ask him how often he has advised his poor
14 THE EUGENICS REVIEW j

and anemic and debilitated patients harassed by too many or too weakly children to
prevent and how to prevent or to space the
arrival of others. Ask him whether he has
openly discussed such actions with his
colleagues or sought information in connexion
with these problems at medical meetings or
elsewhere. Then, I believe, but always with
some notable exceptions, you will find that
the eugenic conscience, through lack of
knowledge and encouragement, is scarcely
as yet awake in the profession, but also—for
doctors are a willing and devoted, although
often a tired and troubled fraternity—that
the conscience would be very glad to be
stirred and could long since have been stirred
had proper provision been made in the
medical curriculum for such prophylactic
studies or had a proper interest been cultivated by frequent planned discussion in the
friendly circle of the local medical society.
The problem of time in a busy doctor’s life
is a very real one, but as the individual practitioner is relieved by degrees, by means of
public clinics and extending hospital services,
of certain of his tasks, there is a real opportunity for the development of new interests
and fresh lines of activity in connexion with
many enduring physical and psychological
problems of daily practice. In his occasions
for eugenic judgment a false sense of delicacy
or a needless sense of despair may often have
been the deterrents, but a greater deterrent
has been the lack of scientific backing which
an organized and educated professional
opinion might supply. Neither general practitioner nor consultant has yet appreciated
how much greater his contribution to preventive medicine might be. Few things
would better serve to correct the loss of
prestige which we have sometimes suffered
as a profession, in one way and another,
whether fairly or unfairly, than an openly
expressed willingness to serve the community
in new ways and to teach the fundamental
principles of health and healthy breeding and
their supreme importance to the family and
the race, a willingness also to consider a
concerted programme for the training of
students and doctors in their new réle as
educators of the public in these principles.

With recognition of these new functions th
voluntary system would remain undisturbed.
the co-operative principle would have free!
scope, and both the individual approach in!
the home or the consulting-room and state-*
aided organization could play their respec-: E
tive parts. We could also, I feel confident, :
expect in due course the intelligent co-opera-!
tion of existing health organizations, of the.
press, of the accredited broadcast lecturer:
and of the public.

The Medical Curriculum |

And now I pass to that vexed question—
approached by no medical educationalist
without a sigh—the medical student’s curriculum. I need not remind you of the}
trouble which this has given us and of the*
numerous committees which have met toj
consider it in recent years. With a minimum$
of six years necessary for qualification and aj
syllabus already overloaded with subjects
to a scarcely supportable degree it would
seem folly to suggest the addition or ex-g
pansion of yet another subject. With jealous
insistence the various sciences and specialisms have put their several obstructions im
the way of curtailing the time allotted ta
their subjects, and new specialisms have tried
to find a footing. Fundamental though they;
be, how shall we find more room for
instruction and examination in animal and
human genetics in the pre-clinical period o
for a review of the principles and possibilities
of eugenics and of the other domestic o
sociological contributions to preventive medi
cine in the clinical period of the student’s
career ? How can we secure a fuller recogni
tion of the far larger preventive rédle whick
medicine could and should be playing ?

In this regard, Lord Horder, our President
has again hinted wisely that room should be
made in the curriculum by the omission o
less important studies. At present there is
no systematic reference to or instruction ir
the grammar of genetics after the first yez
of study. Of what is taught then the greateg
part is forgotten before the beginning of thé
clinical period. Animal genetics might wel
replace more of the routine morphologica
study in zoology. Reproduction, genetics

 
   
   
   
   
 
  
  
 
  
   
  
   
   
   
   
  
  
   
  
  
MEDICINE AND EUGENICS 15

growth and nutrition might surely command
some of the time allotted to the more specialized biochemistry and biophysics which now
loom largely in the field of physiological
study. Elaborating and refining the ancillary
sciences we stand to-day in danger of forting Man in the education of students who
will have to devote the greater part of their
to his study. Scientific education is
oming analysis without synthesis. There
3a real danger that extensions of the newer
fue chemistry or retention of an excess of
ial anatomy may serve to exclude some
a those larger essentials of mammalian
cture and physiology which preserved

e human interest of earlier teaching.
it would be reasonable to replace some of
ane test-tube work—appropriate enough for
e non-medical physiologist—by broader,
i at present less detailed, studies in nutrimion and endocrinology and human inheri; bance , all of which find apt and frequent
eeust ation in the clinical field and some
i pects of which can be successfully demonae rated by animal experiment. Mendelian
\ a aciples, sex-linked abnormalities and other
Msenomena can be explained with certain
in n diseases as well as with plants and
MBimals, and there is no reason why the
wemonstration should be entirely reserved
t the student in the clinical period. Con. tutional variations abound and should
e.susceptible of closer study. Their imMatance in clinical medicine is everywhere
Wearent. More than fifty years ago
athan Hutchinson told us that “ we negB povisely the study of those differences
ween man and man of which, for the most
Bays oy takes no cognizance, but
poh may yet prove of much importance in
iifying the processes of disease.”’* Might
2 oth “anatomy and physiology begin to
Bemore frequent cognizance of these
- ber ences between man and man ”’ for the
; @ of medical students and their future
pits ? Some of the commonest mistakes
| me sdicine depend upon the prevailing lack
jpowledge among doctors, both young and
: what is best described as normal

- ag

Ee The Pedigree of Disease, London, 1884.

 
   
  
  
   
   
 
   
 
   
 
  
  
   
  
 
    
 
  
 
 

variability. In the clinical period bacteriology for a time usurped too much of the
field, with the result that the seed has been
studied to the neglect of the soil. In the
wards the “ interesting case ’’ has been employed too much for teaching, and elaborations of diagnostic method rather than
frequent references to the etiology, natural
history and preventability of common diseases have been the accepted custom of the
bedside talk.

Briefly, I should like to see genetic principles given fuller consideration from the
first year of biological study and continued
in proper proportion and with appropriate
illustrations until the final clinical year, and
the various other means and possibilities of
prevention in medicine more frequently
stressed at all stages. In the student mind
“ public health ”’ savours too much of drainage systems and by-laws and is still too
commonly regarded as something to be
relegated to the M.O.H. Ideally every doctor
should regard himself as an active participator in the general preventive scheme, and,
indeed, with eugenic and hygienic advice, a
more generous intimacy with the public
mind and needs, and more frequent representations to employers and the public
authority, he could contribute to it far more
liberally than he does at present.

Post-graduate Instruction

Let us next consider how interest in human
genetics could better be fostered in the profession as a whole. Here it seems to me that
the Eugenics Society, by making new and
wider contacts with the medical societies of
the country, might play a helpful and important part, even while we wait and plan
for larger developments. If these societies,
or a proportion of them, could be persuaded
of the value of at least one lecture or discussion a year on the various aspects of
positive and negative eugenics, and if an
offer of speakers could be made when none
could be provided locally, an awakening of
interest would soon follow. In any case,
such a plan would be more likely to achieve
practical results than lectures to the laity.
In certain instances the medical societies
16 THE EUGENICS REVIEW | i

might think the occasion suitable to invite
lay persons to their meetings, and thereby
help to establish the principle of free intercourse and co-operative concern in matters
of obvious social and national importance.
The imputation of aloofness has not been
altogether undeserved by our profession.

In considering the help which eugenic
organizations might give to the doctors, we
must also have regard for the services which
the doctors might render in return. If a
group of local societies undertook to pool
the information accessible to their members
and relating to dysgenic agencies ‘recognizable in daily practice, or to start a collection of family histories in connexion with
known heritable diseases and constitutional
liabilities, information of value alike to
human genetic science and to health propaganda could be steadily accumulated.
Out-patient clinics at some of the larger
hospitals to be devoted to heritable disease,
constitutional disorders and the provision of
eugenic prognosis and advice might also give
good service.

Let us freely admit that physicians have
made many and valuable contributions to
human genetics, particularly in connexion
with the study of certain rare diseases like
hemophilia, angioneurotic oedema and colourblindness. The waste of valuable human information, nevertheless, remains one of the
tragedies of practice.

Observational ability and historical aptitude are frequent in the profession, and with
a more specific training could be applied to
advantage. With no other apparatus than a
good system of recording and indexing the
observant family doctor could accumulate
through the years important observations
bearing upon many problems of constitutional defect and heritable disease.

Let us also remember that medicine has
much to say on the dysgenic influences of war
and of present defects in our industrial organization, and should say it more often.
When the fear of war and economic crises
has receded it will become easier, but even
more imperative, for us to advise many who
have the necessary health and means but are
at present declining parenthood that the

 
 
    
  
   

state and their own health and happin
would be better served by a minimum cot
tribution of three children.

In 1934, under Dr. C. P. Blacker’s editor:
ship, a pioneer book was published entitl
The Chances of Morbid Inheritance. In hi
introduction to this book Sir Hump
Rolleston wrote as follows :

‘“‘ The accuracy with which medical men could
give eugenic prognoses would be greatly enhancedt
and the scope of preventive medicine much ex:
tended by a more active interest on the part of.
the medical profession as a whole—those in:
general practice who have the most ample
opportunities, Medical Officers of Health, and
consultants with a special knowledge of genetics. .
Much could be done by their co-operation in the;
collection and analysis of information, and or
of the chief objects which the Eugenics Soctetgj
has in presenting this book is to bring about thig
much-needed collaboration of the medica
profession.”’ .

     
 
 
  
  
    
  
  
   
  
   
    
   
   
   
  

I suggest that this much-needed collabors
tion must also be sought in other ways. Tha
keeping of pedigrees by doctors themselves
and, with their encouragement, by intelligent
families well known to them, and the forma
tion of groups and clinics, for studying what
Jonathan Hutchinson called the pedigree
of disease, commend themselves as possible
developments. While mental defect and th@
‘carrier’? problem will be investigated by
those endowed with special training, facilities
and aptitude—I have in mind such workers
as Lewis, Lidbetter and Penrose in this
country—it should be possible, for a medica
society, by means of a Pedigree Subcom
mittee, to prosecute an investigation, she
we say, of the familial incidence of the
accepted allergic diseases, and of peptic
ulcer, goitre, hyperpiesia and the psycho
neuroses. In all such inquiries the Eugentes
Society could give valuable help in respect of
the methods of recording, the preparation of
pedigrees, and the analysis of results.

Research

There remains another pathway whereb
progress must also be furthered—the path
way of particular research. Here I would
advocate a strictly limited number of research
chairs or readerships in human genetics. The
MEDICINE AND EUGENICS 17

number at first should probably not exceed
two or three in the whole country and the
posts should be filled only if men of outstanding promise were forthcoming. A training in
both medicine and genetic science should
generally be considered necessary.

' At Oxford and Cambridge generous schemes
for the furtherance of medical research are
now coming into being. In both places an
appropriate atmosphere and the necessary
contacts with the biological and clinical
‘Sciences and, through the hospitals and their
follow-up departments, with the field of
practice, are to be found, so that conditions
should be particularly favourable for the
establishment of research centres concerned
with morbid inheritance in man. In my
view it is essential that the academic and
applied biological sciences should find their
‘opportunities in close geographical proximity.
The growing recognition of this principle in
‘the older haunts of learning seems to me one
of the most hopeful modern trends in scientific education and research. If human genetics
jould find a footing in close association with
al genetics and the biological sciences
on the one hand, and with the clinical
sciences on the other, the prospects of new
#dvancement in all of these subjects would
‘¢learly be better assured than by any more
spolationalist policy. Asa single example of a

 

if * The applied sciences having a direct bearwig on human needs must, in the present
feentury, and with no undue delay, be given
2 very possible opportunity of development
pand service. Man has too long neglected the
satady of his own problems of existence and
ival.

: The Influence of the Society

. -Dr. Blacker has recently drawn attention
Bin the REVIEW to some of the eugenic
reroblems needing research.* One paragraph
gpt-his I should like to quote and amplify :

e: “TI do not much reproach myself,’ he says, in

7 seference to the Society, “‘ that our membership

 

* October 1937, p. 181.

has increased but slowly. I believe that, largely
through our activities, a eugenic conscience,
stronger and more discriminating than ever
before, exists in the country to-day. I believe,
moreover, that our essential propaganda will be
readily done for us by others if we can establish
our contentions on scientifically solid grounds.
Indeed, I doubt very much whether the “ outward and visible ’’’ success of the Society will
ever be commensurate with its real success. I
would even go farther than this. Real eugenic
results—the favourable influencing of the trend
of births and the appropriate guidance of legislation—will not, I believe, be mainly attained
through the publicly recognised agency of the
Society ; they will rather be achieved by other
societies and organisations which our Society can
influence.”

Of the other bodies with which the Eugenics
Society could seek co-operation I would
particularly emphasize (in addition to the
medical societies) the Royal Colleges and the
Universities, for through these the trends
of education, whether pre-graduate or postgraduate, and the encouragement of research
are in the main determined.

Ultimate Planning

Without a stirring of the eugenic conscience
in medical students and doctors, I must
repeat, we can scarcely hope to stir the
eugenic conscience of the public effectively.
It must still, however, be admitted that,
with our present lack of co-ordination within
the medical profession and our present
reliance on local enthusiasm and sporadic
individual efforts, progress in the various
directions indicated must be slow. And so I
cannot but ask myself whether we ought not
to visualize in connexion with our special
problems, and in fact with the whole problem
of preventive medicine and the national
health services, a more drastic reorganization and a bolder plan.

In industry and economics and in many
other directions it has become customary to
talk of ‘‘ planning,” but outside the Soviet
Union we can nowhere perceive any largescale endeavour to carry such planning to
its logical conclusion. In Russia alone (if we
are to accept the evidence of the Webbs, of
Sir Arthur Newsholme and Professor Sigerist)
is medicine being planned with the wide
18 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

objects which we all in our hearts commend.
I make no comment on the general method
or prospects of Sovietism, but in Russia
alone are the potentialities of an organized
state medicine (with the emphasis always on
prevention and embodying the principles of
disinterested service and of full co-operation
between prevention and practice, research
and administration, doctor and patient)
coming to realization.

With an end to unemployment ; with a
gradual reduction in the hours of labour ;
with equal payment of and opportunity for
the sexes; with sixteen weeks’ holiday on
full pay for the expectant mother; with
consultative clinics for recent or intending
parents; with a complete abolition of
patent medicines and the evils connected
with their sale and advertisement ; with a
relationship between doctor and community
only possible where fee-getting is no longer
necessary; with “five-year plans” for
health administration in one district after
another, and popular instruction in and
campaigning for the reduction of epidemic
disease ; with early marriage made possible
and prostitution a vanishing profession,
order is coming out of a chaos far worse than
we have ever experienced in this country,
and the achievements in only twenty years
are, to say the least, remarkable. That there
have been muddles and abuses, mistakes and
failures, largely engendered by urgent situations and inexperience, we cannot doubt, but
we would be ungenerous if we did not accept
the simultaneous evidences of progress and
some at least of the major lessons of this
gigantic experiment.

In a recent epidemic emergency in this
country the lack of co-ordination in our
health services was a-cause for comment.
This same lack of co-ordination is, I believe,
everywhere retarding the effective handling
of other insidious and far more dysgenic
agencies. Ought we to require an outbreak
of streptococcal or typhoid fever or agitation
about an industrial disease to remind us of
all that is haphazard in the present evolution
of our national medicine? There is growing
evidence in the United States as well as in
this country that our colleagues are not

universally satisfied with the existing order.

In his contrast between the Soviet pro-,
gramme and existing Western modes, Sigerist;
says : ;

   
    
   
  
   
  
 
    
  
  
 
   
 
  
  
  
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
 
   
   
  

“, . . the systems of protecting the peoples’
health are in all capitalist countries compromise
systems. Medical service is given to the popula
tion by various agencies in various ways. Unde
capitalism, state medicine, insurance medicine
charity medicine, and private medicine exist side
by side. The fight against disease is not led b
one general staff but by a multitude of staffs
among which there is often very little co-opera-~
tion. Even in countries that have established
ministries of health, like England and France,
the ministries do by no means control all the
health activities of their respective nations. It
is obvious that such systems necessarily have all
the deficiencies of a compromise.”’

It may be that our policy of gradualism
and educational measures alone will lead us:
sufficiently fast towards the goal we visualize.
It may be, on the other hand, that we shall
have to learn our lesson from the U.S.S.R.,'
and be grateful for the experience and mis-j
takes of that régime, but in the meantime we
have no excuse for postponing the better
education of thé doctors and the public, an¢
inviting the co-operation of both in our own
“ five-year plans ’’ for human advancement;

A state medicine which does not embody,
at any rate in its preventive code, many o
the newer principles cannot with full succes
encompass the control of infectious and in
dustrial disease, the nutrition and housing
and health-education of the people, or indi
cate the conditions which make for a healthy
fertility.

Conclusion

Let us now briefly summarize the recom
mendations that have seemed to me immedi
ately desirable.

First, I conceive that there should coms
into existence a national council embodyin
a triple alliance between medicine, eugenic
and sociology, with representatives in eacj
instance of the academic and the applie@#
sciences, and appropriate contacts with th
ministries and research departments
health, agriculture and labour. The function
of this council would be the direction, in a
MEDICINE AND EUGENICS 19

advisory capacity, of education and research
in human genetics and social reorganization,
on the one hand, and, on the other, the
regular transmission to the legislative councils
of the country of the information accumulated, with suggestions for reforms based
thereon. In the preventive field such a
council might stand in the same relationship
to the Government as the Medical Research
Council stands at present in regard to all
the problems of medical research and its
applications to practice.

- Secondly, as a part of a general reform in
medical education, modifications of the
curriculum calculated to lay more stress
‘upon all preventive aspects should be visualized. The preservation of health by nutritional and other social reforms and by
applications of human and animal genetic
studies to eugenic education and legislation
‘should receive fuller emphasis, both in the
pre-clinical and clinical periods. In the
clinical period physicians should recognize a
‘special duty in connexion with the teaching
of the prophylactic aspects of medicine.
“How could this have been prevented ? ”
is a question which should occupy the
thoughts of teachers and students far more
frequently than it does at present.

’ Ido not excuse my frequent references to
‘Butrition, for we have increasing grounds for
‘believing that undernourished mothers can‘not make first-class babies and that undernourished children do not grow to first-class
parents. Thus, although not inherited, sub‘Rormal diets come within Galton’s category

of agencies which impair the racial qualities
of future generations.

Thirdly, with the help of existing organizations, eugenic and sociological, an endeavour
should be made to interest the doctors of the
country, through their medical and scientific
societies, in the preventive and educational
role which they might themselves fulfil by
instruction in domestic eugenics both positive and negative. The preservation of
health as a primary function, with the treatment of disease as a secondary function,
should become the new ideal.

Fourthly, a limited number of research
chairs or readerships in human genetics, preferably to be held in universities where the
medical and biological services already
flourish side by side, should be established.

I hope it may seem to you that some of
these suggestions are practical and possible,
or at any rate that they are worthy of fuller
consideration, and that with their fulfilment
results might in time be achieved which can
scarcely be hoped for with our present lack
of a concerted policy or under any system of
dictatorial compulsion.

In my own profession I believe that a host
of willing collaborators could be found, but
without the help and instruction and advice
of the many pioneers and research workers
in human, animal and plant genetics and in
the eugenic field, they would indeed be helpless. Between us, by the means outlined, we
could surely come to organize and invigorate
the eugenic crusade in a manner which would
have gratified its founder.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXX, No. 1.
