C. O. CARTER,
B.A., B.M., M.R.C.P.

Promising Families:

Some Conclusions

promising families which had been carried

out, on the initiative of Dr. C. P. Blacker,
by a sub-committee of the Eugenics Society.*
This paper sets out some conclusions about the
social policies which the results of this survey,
and other considerations, suggest might improve
the present trend towards a eugenically desirable
differential fertility.

Since 1958 there has been increasing recognition in countries with complex and closely
integrated cultures of the value of citizens who
possess intelligence, energy, and also temperamental qualities which enable them to use their
abilities to the advantage of their fellow men.
There is developing a spirit of competition
between the great national powers in devising
educational systems which will make the best
use of whatever talent is available in each
generation of children. There is a popular
tendency, however, even shared by some biologists, to regard as a fixed quantity the talent
available to be found and polished by the educational system. Little thought has been given to
bringing about differential fertilities of a kind
which will increase the proportion of children
who are born with the genetic potential for
developing high intelligence and other socially
valuable qualities, and which will increase the
proportion of children who are born into homes
which will supplement the efforts of the schools
in developing these genetic potentialities.

E 1958 1 reported on three surveys of

The Eugenics Society’s Surveys

The Societys three surveys were based on a
little over 250 families. These families were

* THE EUGENICS REVIEW, 1958. 50, 1959.

ascertained by asking heads of schools in three
areas to nominate children who appeared to
them to show promise, in character as well as
intellectual ability, of developing into exceptionally valuable citizens. The series is a small one,
but the findings are in accord with most people’s
experience and probably reliable. These findings
are summarized below:

a. The method of ascertaining promising
families through one child, nominated by a head
of a school, appeared to have considerable
validity. The reports from heads of schools on the
“promising” child’s brothers and sisters showed
that they too were, in general, much above the
average in their promise; though, as one would
expect, not on the whole so promising as the
nominees themselves. The qualities of these
brothers and sisters left little doubt that further
children born into these families would mostly
be well above the average of their contemporaries
in socially valuable qualities of mind and character,
and that many of them would be of exceptional
promise.

b. The families ascertained came from all social
classes, though upper middle class parents were
proportionately better represented than lower
middle class parents, who in turn were better
represented than working class parents. Many of
the parents in relatively unskilled occupations, and
with low incomes, showed evidence of energy and
ability in their leisure time activities; and many of
them had reached positions of responsibility in the
Armed Services during the war.

c. Inaconsiderable proportion of the promising
families, a little more than a quarter, both parents
would have liked at least one more child, some
would have liked two more and a few three more
children. In about another sixth of the families,
one parent, usually the wife, would have liked
more children, but the other parent was content
with the size of the family.

d. The promising families were a little below replacement rate; they averaged two and a half chil
197

THE EUGENICS REVIEW January 1961, 52, 4,
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

dren.* But if (including only the instances where
both parents were agreed) the parents had been able
to have the family size they wanted, their fertility
would have been above replacement rate, and
above that of the general population: they would
then have averaged nearly three children (and
another ninety children would have been born
into these particular families).

e. The main obstacles to parents realizing their
wishes as to size of family were stated by them to
be social and economic, rather than medical. This
is supported by the finding that among these
promising families it was the parents in the lower
social classes, with lower incomes and with less
education, who had most often been deterred from
fulfilling their wishes about the size of their
families.

Financial Aid

Four measures suggested by the parents, as those
which might have enabled all of them to have
had as many children as they wished, were, in
order of frequency: increased family allowances,
increased educational grants, help with housing,
and increased income tax allowance for children.
These were also the chief measures recommended
by the Royal Commission on Population (1949).

One may reasonably conclude that it would
not be difficult to encourage other parents, who
are in a similar position to those studied in the
survey, to have larger families; and that further
children born into these families would, on
average, be a national asset. Eugenic education
might have a greater effect than social changes,
but the best results will come if social policies and
eugenic education are combined.

It is the province of voluntary organizations
such as the Eugenics Society to help the less
confident parents of promising families to realize
that they have something of value to transmit,
both genetically and culturally, to their children.
Parents need to know that if their first children
show promise in their school work, hobbies and
play, their later children will probably do the
same. Parents should also know that if they
themselves possess abilities of special value to
the community, their children are more likely to

* This average becomes 1-9 if allowance is made for the
exclusion of childless families and for the fact that the
likelihood of a family being discovered through a child
is proportioned to the number of children in it. The
national average for size of family is now about 2:2,
which is close to the replacement rate.

198

possess the same abilities than are children taken
at random.

Economic help to all but a few parents is
beyond the scope of voluntary societies, and is a
field for Government policies. It is a matter of
dispute among eugenists whether such economic
help need be deliberately selective. Two of the
four measures suggested by the parents in the
Society’s survey: increased family allowances
(assuming these are flat rate allowances), and
help with housing are not directly selective. It is
the author’s personal viewpoint that almost any
measure which lessened, but did not reverse, the
economic handicaps of parents with larger
families would be indirectly selective in a community in which all births are planned. There is
no danger in Britain at present of over population. Average family size is just about replacement rate, and an increase in the size of planned
families will be needed to balance the fall in the
size and number of unplanned families as all
sections of the population learn to use contraceptive techniques, natural or artificial, effectively. On the whole, people enjoy doing what they
do well, and, other things being equal, it is
parents who make a success of rearing say their
first two children who can be encouraged to go
on to a third or a fourth child. In communities
where there is a danger of a too rapidly growing
population even though all families are planned,
non-selective help to parents might be inappropriate.

The other two main suggestions, income tax
allowances and increased educational grants,
would be selective. Increased income tax allowances for children would benefit the more
financially successful parents, and it is probable
that on balance these are parents whose increased
fertility is eugenically desirable. Similarly, the
proposal of special professional schemes of
family allowances put forward by the Royal
Commission on Population, such as already
operate for the staffs of Universities and the
Medical and Agricultural Research Councils,
would be eugenically desirable. Many promising
families, however, would not benefit from either
of these proposals.

Educational Grants
Much the best form of selective help to parents
from the eugenic viewpoint is, in the author’s
PROMISING FAMILIES:

opinion, the fourth suggestion, an increase in
educational grants. This proposal would meet the
fear of many parents, that by having further
children they will prejudice the educational
chances of the children they already have. This
fear is felt particularly by potential parents of
promising families, who tend to value education,
and of whose children a relatively high proportion have the capacity to benefit from
advanced academic or technical training. This
fear may affect an expensively educated father
in one of the professions, who limits his family
because he does not see his way to paying for a
similar education for more than one or two sons.
It may equally affect an intelligent skilled worker,
determined that his children shall have educational chances that he himself missed.

There are two stages of education or training
involved here, that from the end of the compulsory school period until the age of eighteen,
and that after eighteen in University, Technical
College, Teachers Training College or other
institution of higher education. Grants at the
second stage, provided that the unrealistic means
test is abolished, are not ungenerous, covering
living expenses as well as tuition fees for all who
are accepted by these institutions. In some cases,
for example the cadet colleges of the Armed
Services, the students are also paid small
salaries. The principle is becoming accepted that
young persons of eighteen, nowadays full-grown
at this age and three to seven years past puberty,
should be financially independent of their
parents.

The anxiety of parents as to whether they will
be able to do all they would like to do educationally for a large family will therefore be
concentrated on the years between compulsory
school leaving age (soon to be raised to sixteen)
and entry to higher education at eighteen or
nineteen. This period is in fact a difficult one for
many parents in clerical and other less well-paid
occupations, if more than one child is taking a
sixth-form course at school or other full-time
unpaid training. It is also often a difficult period
for the child, whose less gifted and ambitious
contemporaries are already wage-earning, and
have money to spend which has made it worthwhile for manufacturers and advertisers to pay
this group special attention.

SOME CONCLUSIONS

It is the author’s view that it is desirable that
all children judged suitable for full-time training
beyond the age of sixteen should be awarded
grants. The amount of the grant should be less
than the girl or boy could earn at work, but
sufficient to cover living expenses and such that
the children are not, and need not feel themselves
to be any financial burden on their parents. The
armed services have already appreciated this
need, and offer substantial pre-cadetship awards
tenable for the final two years at school. As a
first step, the principles of pre-cadetship, flexibly
interpreted since a child should not be tied to a
profession too young, might be extended to other
occupations of national importance for which it
is difficult to find good recruits. Later, grants
should cover all sixth-form school work or its
equivalent. If it was necessary at first to subject
these awards to a means test, as was the case
with University grants, considerable weight
should be given to the presence of other dependent children in the family, and it should be
recognized in principle that the means test should
be abolished as soon as this was practicable.*
In the case of University awards, the grants are
paid direct to the child. It is pyschologically
desirable that part of any post-sixteen-year-old
educational or training grant should be paid to
the child, though part should go to the mother in
the form of an increase in the family allowance
which she already receives for every dependent:
child after the first.

It should be noted that the Eugenics Society
will be moving with, not against, existing trends,
both in encouraging potential parents of
promising families to plan a family size well
above replacement rate, and in advocating social
measures which will allay parents’ fears, that,
by having a large family, they will prejudice the
chances of their children. There is already
encouraging evidence in countries with western

 

* It must be recognized that the independent boarding
schools provide a special problem in England (less so in
Scotland and Wales, and hardly at all in other countries
of the Commonwealth or on the Continent of Europe).
It would not be reasonable to give national grants to
cover all the cost of sixth form education in these schools;
but children in these schools should receive the grants that
they would have had if they had been attending an
equivalent local authority day school.

199
ER—C
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

European culture that within those sections of
the population who plan their families, the
trend is for average family size to become positively correlated with the intelligence and educational achievement of the parents.* At the same
time the economically unfavourable position of
the large family has become widely recognized as
a result of social surveys. Certain ameliorative
measures have already been taken, such as the
flat rate family allowances, income tax relief for
children, the school meal service; others will be
taken. The author suggests that from the viewpoint of eugenics the order of priority of new
measures to equalize the standard of living of
families with many, and families with few
children, should be:

1. The extension of grants to include maintenance as well as educational fees for full-time
academic, technical or craft education from
minimum school leaving age till the age of eighteen.

2. An increase in the amount of complete or
partial exemptions from income tax for each
dependent child, together with the exemption
from income tax of the flat-rate cash allowances
for dependent children.

3. An extension.of professional schemes of
family allowances.

4. Help to parents of large families in the hirepurchase of private houses with four or more

* The basis has already been laid for a direct relationship between a man’s fertility and his intelligence test
score in Sweden (Quensel, 1958) and between a married
woman’s fertility and her educational status in the U.S.A.
(Freedman, Whelpton & Campbell, 1959).

200

bedrooms, and with the rent of municipally owned
houses of this size.

5. An increase in the flat-rate cash family
allowances for third and later children.

Eugenic Scholarships

Finally, as a catalyst to Government or Local
Government action, and for its eugenic educational value, the author would like to see the
Society itself award scholarships each year,
initially three in number, each to run for two or
three years. The main conditions for scholarship
being as follows:

1. The candidate proposes, and is suitable, to
undertake a sixth form course which includes one
of the biological sciences.

2. There are at least four children in the
family.

In the final selection weight should be given to
the promise of all the children in the family, as
well as to that of the child up for selection. Three
scholarships annually, of the value of £100 per
annum, is perhaps as much as the Eugenics
Society could manage from its own resources,
and it might be necessary at first to limit the
offer of scholarships to only one or two local
education authorities. The author would, however, like to see the Society appeal for funds to
extend the scheme, with perhaps the removal of
the limitation to those who include biology in
their sixth form studies, and the reduction of the
family size qualification to three children.
