SOME PROBLEMS
OF REPRODUCTIVE PHYSIOLOGY"
By A. S. PARKES, M.A., Ph.D., ERS.

National Institute for Medical Research, Hampstead, N.W.3

X | YE hear a great deal these days
about reconstruction, but the setting up of the Royal Commission on

Population is bringing home to many people
what was already well known to a few, that
a long-term reconstruction of the population
is necessary if other forms of reconstruction
are to be fully effective. The chief, though not
the only, cause of our threatened demographic
difficulty lies in the continuous decline which
has taken place in the birth-rate over more
than a generation. It- seems to me that
three groups.of people are involved in any
remedial measures.

(2) The politician must see that conditions
of life are such that people will feel
justified in implementing their natural
desire to have children ;

(6) The medical man and the biologist must
see that involuntary sterility is reduced to the minimum ;

(c) The eugenist must urge, and if possible .

ensure, that replacement of the population is differentially from good stock
rather than bad.
In these circumstances the Eugenics Society
obviously has a great responsibility and a
great opportunity.

It is impossible in our present state of
knowledge to assess exactly the factors responsible for the decline in the birth-rate.
Most authorities, however, agree that the

primary factor has been a decreasing desire

to have children, coupled with increasing
knowledge of how to avoid having them.
It is unlikely that medical factors have been
seriously involved in the decline, i.e. that
there has been a serious increase in involuntary sterility. On the other hand, there has
always been, and still is, an appreciable

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on November 20th, 1945.

19

eggs of frogs and toads.

amount of involuntary sterility, which is
often highly distressing to the individual,
and involves loss to the community. It is
not my purpose on this occasion to talk
about sterility ; rather, I want to be more
positive, and discuss some of the facts which
make up the biological background of
fertility. ’ |

Evolution of Parental Care

In all the higher animals the essential
feature of the reproductive processes is the
union of two germ cells, the ovum and the
spermatozoon, to form a new individual.
This process, comparatively simple so far
as the parents are concerned, has been
greatly complicated by the introduction of
devices by which the new individual is protected and nourished for a longer or shorter
period by the parent organism, that is, by
the introduction of parental care. I say
parental care, rather than maternal care,
because in many species the male is actively
concerned in the care of the young. The
degree of parental care is extremely variable.
In many fish, for instance, it is almost
absent ; masses of eggs and spermatozoa
are shed into the water, and fertilization is
largely haphazard and the young fend for
themselves from the beginning. The simplest form of parental care is the provision
of a food store, the yolk, with the egg, upon
which the young animal can live for some
time. A small food store is provided in the
A larger food store,
involving a larger egg, is provided in some
fish, in many reptiles, and in birds. In the
latter the egg is incubated externally by
the parent or parents during the early
development of the new individual. In
some of the lower vertebrates, the large egg
is incubated internally—the beginning of
viviparity. The laying of a large egg and
20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

its incubation by the parent is carried over
into the lower mammals, as with the duckbilled platypus, but in this case the process
is further complicated by the addition of
specialized glands in the mother which pro-vide milk for the young animal after it is
hatched from the egg. The. most compli‘cated expression of maternal care is seen in
all the true mammals in which there is a
period, usually prolonged, of internal gestation of the embryo, followed by a period of
suckling during which the young animal is
wholly or partially nourished by the mother.

The evolution of parental care has had a
number of interesting consequences. In the
first place, where the care devoted to the
young by the parents is elaborate, the
number of young must be greatly reduced.
In some fish, for instance, a single pair may
give rise potentially to millions of offspring
in the course of a year. In some of the
higher mammals, on the other hand, the
maximum capacity is perhaps one offspring
in two years. The relative number surviving, however, will not be very dissimilar,
unless a species is rapidly increasing or
decreasing in numbers. This means that
the evolution of parental care has cut down
the number of individuals upon which
natural selection can work, and, moreover,
by protecting the young from their environment, has cut down the chance of natural
selection coming into play.

Mammalian Reproductive Cycle

From my present point of view, the
interesting thing about parental care is the
resulting complexity of the reproductive
mechanism in the higher mammals. Internal
gestation implies internal fertilization, and
this in turn necessitates,
devices, a mechanism for making the two
sexes attractive to each other, at least
temporarily. Among other consequences,
part of the reproductive tract must be
modified to form an organ in which gestation
can be carried out, that is to say, to form
a uterus; there must be a mechanism
whereby the reproductive organs of the
female are ready for the reception of the
fertilized egg at a time when the fertilized

among other.

egg is likely to be available; and the end
of the gestation period must be co-ordinated
with a birth mechanism, and with the start
of functioning of the mammary glands. In
practice, a regular cycle of events is found
in the non-pregnant female, and a longer
and more profound cycle when pregnancy
occurs. The central feature of the cycle in
the non-pregnant female is the liberation
from the ovary of a ripe egg, the act of
ovulation. In many animals there is some
externally visible sign of the occurrence of
ovulation, and in nearly all animals, man
and monkeys being the main exceptions,
sexual receptivity is restricted to this time.
Following ovulation a small body known as
the corpus luteum develops from the remains
of the follicle which produced the egg.
Coincidently with the growth of this body
the uterus undergoes development which is
designed to facilitate the implantation of
the fertilized egg. If fertilization is not
effected the predecidual tissue of the uterus
degenerates and is removed by absorption
or hemorrhage; then the cycle starts again
by the growth of a new follicle to produce
an egg at the time of the next ovulation.
If the fertilized egg is received and embedded
by the prepared uterus, cyclic activity ends
for the time being, and the organism settles
down to the gestation of the young animal.

It is obvious that coitus can result in
conception only when an egg is available for
fertilization. The existence of the cycle

just described means that an egg is produced

only at fairly regular intervals; in the case
of the human female, about every 28 days.

The length of time during the cycle when

coitus can result in conception will therefore
depend on the capacity of the egg and of
the spermatozoon to survive in the female
reproductive tract. According to modern
biological knowledge, the time of survival
of the germ cells in the female tract, except
in one or two odd species, is very short and
probably does not amount to more than
24 hours in the case of the ovum and three
days or so in the case of the spermatozoon.
In each cycle, therefore, there will be a
fertile phase of only about four days.

From what has been said it will be seen
SOME PROBLEMS OF REPRODUCTIVE PHYSIOLOGY

that this phase must be somewhere about
the middle of the intermenstrual period, but
its accurate determination is a matter of
some difficulty. In women, the overt fixed
point of the cycle is not ovulation but menstruation, which results from the failure to
implant a fertilized egg, and only within
the last twenty years has it become generally
accepted that ovulation occurs at a fairly
definite time in relation to menstruation.
Moreover, since menstruation results from

2r

obtained, from the fallopian tube on their
way down to the uterus. Thirdly, changes
known to be associated with the time of
ovulation or with the immediate postovulation phase occur in the reproductive
tract and can be examined and assessed in
relation to the occurrence of menstruation.
Such investigations indicate that, on. the
average, ovulation takes place some 13 to
15 days before the next menstruation is due
or in a cycle of conventional length a similar

Time during which
intercourse can
lead to fertilization

———L——"
Menstruation

Life of
spermatozoa

Se

 

: ff 7 on a B

at
Kf fi
u

—_TI
to

Ovulation

Menstruation

Life of ovum

  

Days after the beginning of menstruation

failure to implant a fertilized egg, ovulation
is related to the next menstruation rather
than to the previous one.
the next menstruation can only be prophesied
on the basis of past cycles, obviously difficulties arise.

Time of Ovulation

However, several different lines of investigation point to the general time relations
shown in Fig. 1. In the first place, there
have been extensive examination of the
ovaries at operation or post mortem.
.secondly, newly ovulated eggs have been

As the time of —

time after the preceding menstruation. The
time of ovulation, however, is subject to the
variation which is inherent in all biological
material. Firstly, the time of ovulation
may. vary even in the conventional 28-day
cycle. Secondly, the length of the cycle
itself may vary within comparatively wide
limits without any suggestion of real abnormality. Thus, in calculating the presumed time of ovulation in any particular
cycle the previous variability in cycle length
must be allowed for, and some authorities
suggest that calculations should be based
on the greatest variation over the preceding
22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

year. Thus, a woman whose cycles had
varied in length during the preceding year
from 27 to 30 days would have a calculated
ovulation time 12 to 17 days after the beginning of the previous menstruation, or allowing for the longevity of the germ cells, a
fertile period from g to 18 days. I need
hardly add that this information has a most
important bearing on problems of fertility,
and is likely to be most valuable to people
of low fertility. Unfortunately, the fertile
period seems mainly to have been studied
from the point of view of contraception.
This is a totally wrong emphasis. No amount
of information concerning the normal time
of ovulation in women can provide a complete basis for a system of contraception
foolproof in all women at all times and in
all circumstances, and failures have distracted attention from the real value of the
information in promoting fertility.

Regulation of Female Cycle

I now want to discuss the regulation of
the cycle in the female reproductive organs.
The regulation is partly through the nervous
system—I shall give an example later—but
for the most part the regulation is hormonal,
that is to say is effected by chemical substances which are produced in one organ,
secreted into the blood stream, and carried
to another organ whith is thereby stimulated
to activity.

The control of the oyele j in the uterus and
vagina is comparatively simple: changes
preceding and associated with ovulation are
regulated by a substance produced mainly
by the follicle which liberates the egg. This
substance, from its association with the
period of oestrus (sexual receptivity) in
lower mammals, is known as an cestrogen.
Changes after ovulation, designed to facilitate implantation, are regulated by the
substance, known as progesterone, which is
produced by the corpus luteum. The regulation of the ovarian cycle itself is a more
complicated matter. For a long time it
was thought that it arose from some inherent property of the ovary itself. It is
now known, however, that the ovarian cycle
is regulated largely by the activity of

another organ, namely the anterior pituitary
body, which is situated in the base of the
skull, and this mechanism forms a particularly interesting example of hormone control. The basic facts may be shown readily
by removing the pituitary body, in which
case all cyclic ovarian activity stops, and
by injecting extracts of the pituitary body,
in which case the ovary is stimulated to
abnormally great activity. The anterior
pituitary body appears to produce at least
two substances, one of which is concerned
with the growth of follicles in the ovary,
and the other with the subsequent development of the corpus luteum. It is not yet
clear by what mechanism the pituitary body
manages to produce alternating effects in
the ovary, and ‘the discovery of the gonadotrophic hormones of the pituitary body
has only removed from one organ to another
the problem of how the periodicity is
achieved. It is evident, however, that
although the pituitary body has this profound effect on events in the ovary, events
in the accessory reproductive organs must
in turn be able to influence the production
of hormones by the pituitary body. For
instance, when a fertilized egg becomes implanted, some message must be sent to the
pituitary body so that the production of the
appropriate hormone stimulating the corpus
luteum may be continued. How this is
effected is not known.

A good example of a different kind of coordination is well demonstrated in the
rabbit. This species is unusual among
mammals in that there is no regular ovarian
cycle in the non-pregnant animal. During
the breeding season ripe follicles are always
present in the ovary, but ovulation only
occurs after the act of mating. If the
pituitary body is removed within one hour
of mating ovulation does not take place.
If the pituitary body is removed later than
one hour after mating ovulation does take
place. It is clear, therefore, that the act of
mating causes the pituitary body to secrete
rapidly the hormone required to produce
ovulation. This effect is known to wr

through the nervous system.
SOME PROBLEMS OF REPRODUCTIVE PHYSIOLOGY 23

Clinical Effects of Gonadotrophic Extracts
The discovery of the gonadotrophic hormones of the pituitary prompted the hope
that: it would be possible to remedy conditions of under-activity of the ovary by the
injection of appropriate extracts. This hope
has not been realized entirely as yet, and
in most cases the injection of pituitary
extracts causes ovarian activity of a rather
chaotic nature. This is due partly to the

difficulty of regulating dosage, but also to |

the fact that the different hormones of the
pituitary body may be present in the extract
at the same time, and the ovary is.therefore
subjected to indiscriminate stimulation in
place of the regulated stimulation found in
the normal animal. It may be anticipated,
however, that further knowledge of the
biological action of these substances, and of
their preparation from the pituitary body,
will in time overcome this difficulty. Even
now it is possible to produce some extraordinary effects. For instance, it was early
shown in the work on the anterior pituitary
body that the implantation of glands from an
adult mouse into an immature mouse would
cause wholesale ovulation from the immature
ovary. This same effect of super-ovulation
can be shown very well in the. rabbit, in
which an injection of pituitary extract may
cause dozens of eggs to be liberated from
the ovary at one time.
is then artificially inseminated a very large
number of fertilized eggs may implant in
the uterus and start to undergo normal
development. So far, however, it has not
been possible to carry through such a superpregnancy to term. Degeneration of large
numbers of the embryos takes place in the
second or third week, and the size of litter
may ultimately be less than normal.

Survival of Spermatozoa

I have just mentioned artificial insemination, and I want now to refer back to a
statement I made earlier, namely that the
length of life of the spermatozoon in the
female reproductive tract is limited to a
few days. This survival time is in marked
contrast to that found in the male reproductive tract. In mammals large numbers

the epididymis intact.

If such an animal

of spermatozoa are stored in the epididymis,
an organ attached to the testis, and it is
possible to remove the testis while leaving
By mating animals
at successive intervals after the testes but.
not the epididymides have been removed
one can find out how long the spermatozoa
retain their fertilizing power. In laboratory
animals, spermatozoa isolated in the male
tract are known to retain their fertilizing
power for several weeks. This comparatively long survival, as compared with that
in the female reproductive tract, is presumably due to the existence of particularly
favourable conditions in the epididymis. A
somewhat similar explanation must apply to
the well-known, case of bats, in some species
of which mating takes place in the autumn,
but fertilization is delayed until the spring.
During the whole of the winter.the spermatozoa lie quiescent in the vagina or uterus,
but retain their fertilizing power. . This case,
so far as I know, is the sole exception to
the rule that the spermatozoa survive for
only a very short period in the reproductive
tract of the female mammal.

These considerations lead to the question
of how long the spermatozoa can be maintained im vitro, a problem which has been
much studied in farm animals in connection
with ‘artificial insemination and which may
become important in relation to the human.

The general rule is that spermatozoa kept

in vitro retain their fertilizing power for a
comparatively short time, for a few hours
or a few days, depending on the conditions
and the species of spermatozoa. The survival time is greatly affected by a number
of factors such as nature of medium, temperature,andsoon. The temperature must
be kept well below body temperature to
restrict activity, and the medium, if an
artificial one, must be such as to allow for
the physiological requirements of the spermatozoa. These facts all relate to spermatozoa kept above freezing point. The
spermatozoa of most species will not survive
at temperatures slightly below freezing
point. Quite recently, however, some highly
suggestive experiments have been carried
out on the vitrification of spermatozoa at
24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the very low temperatures which can be
obtained by the use of solid carbon dioxide
(—79° C.) or of liquid nitrogen (—195° C.).
The spermatozoa of most species do not
survive this treatment, but it has been
found that the spermatozoa of fowl, if
partially dehydrated, survive for an almost
indefinite period at —79° C., and resume
motility on rapid thawing. Fertilizing power
is also retained, but in the experiments so
far reported the development of the fertilized egg was abnormal, possibly owing to
the preliminary dehydration of the spermatozoa. It is of considerable interest,
however, that human spermatozoa show a
greater resistance to vitrification than those

of any other species yet examined. Human
spermatozoa show good motility, on rapid
thawing, even after prolonged vitrification
in liquid air. It is quite uncertain as yet
whether the power of fertilization will have
been retained by such spermatozoa, and if
so whether there will have been any interference with the genetic properties of the
spermatozoa. It is not certain how information on these points can be obtained, but
one should not overlook the fact that it may
be possible, by the use of this technique, to
overcome some of the limitations imposed
by time and space on the propagation of the
human species.

 

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

Articles appearing in forthcoming issues :
PHYSIOLOGY OF THE SILKWORM.

Stanford University.

Edited by W. C. ALLEE, Professor of Zodlogy, The University of Chicago.
Quarterly by the University of Chicago Press.

English Agents: CAMBRIDGE’

I. GROWTH AND RESPIRATION OF BOMBYX MORI
DURING ITS ENTIRE LIFE CYCLE. By T. Y. Hsvex and P. S. Tane, Hua University.

TOTAL AND TISSUE RESPIRATION IN RELATION TO BODY WEIGHT; A COMPARISON OF
THE KELP CRAB WITH OTHER CRUSTACEANS AND MAMMALS. By
J. M. Crismon, V. E. Hatt, H. S. BELDING and JOHN FIELD II.

MORPHOGENIC FUNCTIONS OF PAPILLA IN FEATHER REGENERATION. By Hs Wane,
Whitman Laboratory of Experimental Zoology, University of Chicago.

OXIDATION-REDUCTION PATTERN IN DEVELOPMENT OF A TELEOST. By C. M. CuiLp,

    
    
  
 
 
 
 
 

F. W. WEYMOUTH,

Published
Subscription : 35s. 2d. per year.

UNIVERSITY PRESS
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXVI, No. 1

 
