G. C. L. BERTRAM,
M.A., PH.D.

A Population Picture of

British

NE OF THE placards, carried in the
(_) pst processions through George
town, British Guiana, on the day before
the riots of February 16th, 1962, carried the
slogan “ The Budget means Birth Control”.
Another, in a different vein, read ‘Capitalists
are not Angels but we still need them’’. Muddled
thinking and mixed motives were very evident in
this land of kindly, courteous people now so
sadly reft by racial tension between those of
African and those of Indian origin.

The political background in B.G. is not for
discussion here though its ramifications and
influence are quite inescapable. The whole
Caribbean region is both one of great demographic interest and one which offers immense
scope for intensive humanitarian effort.

British Guiana, which totals just on 600,000
people, has now one of the very highest rates of
population increase in the world, at 3-43 per
cent per annum.* There has been a spectacular
fall in mortality in the post-war years. This
results primarily from the almost complete
eradication of malaria from the populous
coastal region following an intensive campaign
actuated and led by Dr. Giglioli, the eminent
malariologist. Anopheles darlingi is now virtually
extinct: a strongly anthropophil species of
mosquito, it was exterminated by spraying the
inside walls of all dwellings when D.D.T. first
became widely available immediately after
World War II. The decrease of infantile mortality has been astonishing. Unemployment and
under-employment are rising. The educational
problem is increasingly severe through the mere

'  * See 1960 Demographic Yearbook, the latest issued by
the Statistical Office of the United Nations. The British
Guiana rate of population increase is only exceeded by
(American) Samoa 3:45; Grenada 3-46; St. Vincent
3-52; Cook Islands 3-56; British Honduras 3-67; Surinam
(Dutch Guiana) 3-77; and Brunei 4:5.

83

Guiana

pressure of numbers. Active ‘“development’’
programmes are in operation.

Whatever the outside view may be, the internal
opinion on the demographic position is the
one that is reflected in local policy. In this field
there is indeed wide divergence at present
between the two. Reminding ourselves that the
limitation of conception—the work of the International Planned Parenthood Federation and of
national Family Planning Associations—has
two primary reasons, the one personal and
humanitarian, the other demographic and
economic, let us view the British Guiana scene.

At present there is seemingly complete local
belief that “‘development” will be sufficiently
rapid to take care of the spreading population
increase, indeed that such increase may even
be valuable to help forward ‘‘development”’’.
British Guiana, by Caribbean standards, is a
large country, some 83,000 square miles of the
South American continent. A single island in the
mouth of the Essequibo River exceeds in area the
whole of Barbados which supports nearly a
quarter of a million people, tight packed though
they may be. The present population of British
Guiana is confined to little more than coastal
and riverine strips totalling perhaps two hundred
miles long and about five miles wide. The remainder of the country is occupied by few other than
some thousands of Amerindians. The “‘development of the interior’—hydro-electric power,
forestry, ranching, gold and diamonds—is a
goal which raises high hopes beyond the present
reliance upon bauxite, sugar and rice. Potentiality
may glitter, but feasibility is always open to
debate when real attempts are made to appraise
the situation. Further, the observer will probably conclude that whatever developments may
come they will not be such as to demand large
numbers of individual men and women for

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1962, 54, 2.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

their advancement. Capital and vigour, expertise
and a few skilled men, would seem the real
requirements. The outsider may think that the
actual rate of the “development of the interior”
will by no means be commensurate with a
population increase already as high as 3-43 per
cent per year, a doubling in under twenty years.
The previous doubling in numbers took just
forty years, which is about the present rate for
the world as a whole.

On the other hand local opinion is totally
different: there is faith that “development” will
absorb all the extra hands which the years will
bring. There is faith that gifts and loan capital
will flow in (or ought to flow in) from the outside world to speed such development. There is
determination that mainland British Guiana
shall provide for its own and not for the overspill populations fast-multiplying in the Caribbean islands. Any suggestions that contraceptive measures are desirable on demographic
and economic grounds at present find few listeners. Local belief of this kind among leaders is,
however, inadequate to check an outward flow
of individuals who, making decisions for themselves, seek opportunity in the United Kingdom
and elsewhere.

In the realms of family planning, in terms
personal and humanitarian, the position in B.G.
is very different in one sense, yet similar in
another. Political emotion and _ insinuation,
racial tension and the desire for a maximum of
voters, all aid the burying of heads in sand. No
political leaders nor public figures will outspokenly demand or strive for a programme of
birth control, even on purely humanitarian
grounds, to relieve a maternal misery which is
appalling. Private discussion with potential
leaders or activators of opinion demonstrate
clearly the difficulties in which they find themselves. They are aware, but seemingly they cannot
act even though they aver that substantial efforts
in family planning would be acceptable almost
everywhere. Opposition they regard as small and
likely in any event to be ephemeral—if only
somebody would do something, somebody not
inhibited by local political and other pressures.
The Roman Catholic difficulty here is not large
and experience elsewhere has demonstrated its
wasting nature.

84

Contrasting, and somewhat simplifying, the
racial and other divergences, the urban people
in B.G. are mainly of African origin and nominally Christian; they are fortunate in the possession of a markedly higher standard of living
than is common in the whole Caribbean region.
The rural people, in general of Hindu Indian
origin, live much closer to the earth, and are
mostly engaged in the cultivation of sugar or of
rice. To the urban population, whose wants are
now largely met by imported articles of every
kind, contraceptives are available as from
chemists’ shops in England. The ignorance of
the majority, rather than lack of availability
and opportunity, is there the obstacle. In the
rural areas the standard of living is low by
contrast with the capital, Georgetown, but less
low than in the majority of the tropical areas
of the world. Total ignorance of contraception,
lack of availability and lack of facilities are,
as elsewhere, the normal features of this mode
of life.

The condition, in particular of rural Indian
mothers, is now so often one of indescribable
dejection and anxiety. The marriages still are
mainly arranged and the young girls start their
pregnancies as soon as biological fertility
arrives. The seventh or eighth pregnancy at age
twenty-three is far from rare and by that early
age the total figure is not yet reached by half.
Until fifteen years ago malaria took its toll of
infants while now all, or nearly all, just live.
The marriage bond is far from secure so that
the increasing economic burden often leads the
man to wander, the woman to bear the fruit in
progressive anxiety.

Of high significance was a paper read by the
eminent Dr. B. P. Bhattacharya (the head of
the Maternity Hospital in Georgetown, B.G.)
to the Caribbean Medical Conference in April
1959. His paper dealt with mortality in relation
to multiparity, and the sterilization of “grand
multips”—i.e. women already with ten or more
children. There are many who bless him for his
aid in a hospital much overcrowded through
sheer population pressure.

Of birth control clinics there are none at all
save the one run privately by the redoubtable
Nurse Rose in Georgetown. She, recently, was
greatly encouraged by a personal visit from
A POPULATION PICTURE OF BRITISH GUIANA

Mrs. Ottesen-Jensen, the President of the I.P.P.F.
and Mr. T. Griessemer, the Secretary of its
Western Hemisphere Region. Her work is remarkable, but she is alone. Additionally there is
information that birth control advice is available
from one clinic run by a Christian denomination.

The government rural hospital services are
very importantly enlarged by the philanthropic
efforts of the Bookers group of companies.
This group has many activities among which its
management of 80 per cent of the sugar estates
of British Guiana is notable. In this activity
Bookers are substantial employers of labour,
largely of cane cutters who are very subject to
miscellaneous injuries and ills. Kindness has
led now to an embarrassment, in the extension
of care to the families of employees. And that
means maternity work both in the provision
of estate midwives, and in the hospital treatment and after-care of worn-out girls. The propriety of contraceptive advice and facilities under
these conditions would be debatable quite
apart from the usual difficulties in the humble
homes in which the women live and breed. It is
noteworthy, but not novel, that the midwives
are paid on the basis of actual deliveries. Their
help with contraceptive advice would naturally
be problematical.

The outside observer may note with interest
the historical evolution of social customs which
has led to the wide acceptability in peninsular
Indian villages, of voluntary sterilization of
men with three or more children, in government
clinics. Among people of like antecedents a
few generations back but now living in B.G.,
sterilization is so far a special medical aid for

weary women already with ten or more children.

Turn now to the future. It must be admitted
that in the world setting B.G.’s population and
importance are not great. Yet its 600,000 people
have almost the highest natural rate of increase
in the world. Its women, in particular the rural,
suffer a misery which is avoidable only by the
rapid growth of family planning facilities.
However, if prophecy is to be made it is that
in fact there will be no early amelioration of
their present distress through local effort.
Further, whatever nucleus there may be of
potential local leaders in this area of sorely
needed social service, those leaders are likely
for some while to feel so restricted by special
impediments that mere monetary aid and
encouragement will be insufficient. This normal
form of encouragement to indigenous effort may
on occasion be inadequate. If the observer may
be permitted a judgement, it is that, in the special
local circumstances pertaining to B.G., the need
is for outside aid in the form of clinics set up
with outside money and outside staff, both
provided by a philanthropic international organization or great foundation. That would be
the yeast which might then in quite a short space
of time activate local leadership and so leaven
and transform the Guianian family pattern
towards a personal happiness which is not
possible for a multitude of women to-day. In
the first instance the minimum local requirement might be an informal assurance from the
Prime Minister that any internationally reputable
clinic organization would receive no official
obloquy. It is not too much to hope that such
an assurance would become available.

85
