THE DEPOPULATION SCARE

A Criticism of Various Statistical Prophecies

By C. V. DRYSDALE, O.B.E., D.Sc, F.R.S.E.

became a clearly established tendency,

prophecies of impending depopulation
have appeared at more or less frequent intervals. The latest of these is by Mr. R. R.
Kuczynski in his Balance of Births and
Deaths, which was reviewed in the July
issue of this REVIEW, and commented on by
Dr. Fisher in the October issue. I propose
to deal with this in the following article,
but a short preliminary account of previous
prophecies may be of some interest, and may
help to clarify a subject which has been
beset with fallacies.

The first prophets made the delightfully
simple assumption that a falling birth rate
per se meant depopulation, and actually
labelled it as such. It took some time to
convince them that, so long as the birth rate
exceeded the death rate, the population
would increase, and that there could be no
true depopulation until the former fell
below the latter. When this was at last
driven home, their next step was to assume
that the death rate would remain at the
level then prevailing, so that at the pace
at which the birth rate was falling it would
sink to this value in a certain number of
years, and depopulation would then set in.
Prophecies of the impending depopulation
of France, in which the margin was very
low, were frequent over thirty years ago,
but have not yet come to pass, although the
French birth rate has now fallen considerably below the death rate of those times.

The champions of the Malthusian doctrine and of birth control pointed out that a
considerable proportion of the people of all
European countries were seriously undernourished at that time, owing to the pres
! tec since the declining birth rate

sure of population, and that the very object
of their propaganda for family limitation
was to diminish poverty and the unduly
high death rates. The present writer
showed, by putting the vital statistics in
the form of diagrams, and by the method of
correlation, that there was a very close
correspondence between the variations of the
birth and death rates in all long-settled
countries, and that in Holland and Germany
the death rate was falling even more rapidly
than the birth rate, so that the natural
increase of population was actually accelerating as the birth rate declined, indicating a
rapid rise in the mean duration of life.
Before the fall of the birth rate set in, the
average length of life in Western Europe
was probably only about 35 years; now it
is close on 60 years, and is still rising
rapidly.

At this point the actuaries and statisticians began to take part in the discussion,
and their first contribution was the widespread fallacy, which still sometimes crops
up from eminent authorities (including Mr.
Kuczynski), that the death rate per thousand could not be less than a thousand
divided by the average length of life. At
that time the writer had been claiming that
a death rate of 10 per thousand, which had
for some time existed in New Zealand, was
the ideal to be aimed for in this and most
other countries, and could be attained by
reducing their birth rates to 20 per thousand. This was derided on the score that it
would involve an average duration of life
of zoo years, and that a longevity of 50
years was about the limit, corresponding to
a death rate of 20 per thousand, so that the
birth rate could not fall below the latter
figure without causing depopulation.

251
252

RISING LONGEVITY

Both of these objections have been completely falsified. Our own birth rate has
fallen to under 17, with a death rate of 12;
Holland, Denmark, Australia, and New
Zealand, and many large European towns
have had death rates of about 10 per
thousand for some years; and the average duration of life in these countries is
now probably rising rapidly in the sixties.
The famous formula, 1,000/longevity=
death rate, is only true for a stationary
population, and the writer has shown that
for a slowly increasing or diminishing population a closer formula is 1,000/longevity =
Y(birth rate+death rate) or the mean
between the birth and death rates.*

For example, the longevity of fifty years,
assumed by the actuaries of that time as the
limit, would certainly imply a death rate of
20 if the population were stationary, but it
would be equally attained with a birth rate
of 21 and death rate of 19, or of 22 and 18,
23 and 17, etc. If, on the other hand, a
longevity of 70 is possible—as the writer
then contended, and which certainly does
not now seem absurd—this would mean a
birth and death rate of 14.3 for a stationary
population, but it would also be attained
with a birth rate of 14.3+1.7=16 and a
death rate of 14.3 —1.7=12.6, or with a birth
rate of 17 and death rate of 11.6, which are
about our present figures. True, we have not
reached that longevity, but our birth and
death rates have only been at these figures
for a very few years. Had our country
since the War been able to support its preWar increase of population of about 10 per
thousand for a long period, a birth rate of
20 with death rate of 10 would have been
possible if the longevity had increased to
70 years. But the diminution of our economic prosperity since the War appears to
have reduced our power of supporting an

 

* More strictly, on the assumption of uniform
longevity, and constant birth and death rates,
log b—log d, .
L=2,303 ~~ bra where L, is the average duration of life, b and d are the birth and death rates
per thousand, and logs are to base 10. This reduces
to the above simple formula when b—d is small.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

increase of population to about 5 per thousand, and so long as this continues, our
present birth and death rates would appear
to be reasonable figures.

TWO RECENT PROPHECIES

Disconcerted by the obstinate refusal of the
facts to fulfil their prophecies, the depopulateurs have recently been discovering certain “‘latent tendencies ’’ which are supposed
to be operating towards future depopulation,
although they are at present masked. One,
which aroused a great deal of attention not
long ago, was based on the abnormally low
birth rates of the War years. ‘This has
resulted up to the present time in a higher
proportion than the normal of persons at the
reproductive ages, and therefore a higher
ratio of crude birth rate to fertility rate. In
a few years, however, when the smaller proportion of children come to the reproductive
age and the present parents pass beyond it,
these proportions will be reversed, which,
ceterts paribus, will cause the crude birth
rate to fall; and on this basis we are told
that our population will become stationary
within a few decades.

That this tendency exists is undeniable,
but the prediction of a stationary population
based on it has no greater justification than
preceding ones, as will be seen after we have
dealt with the latest contribution to the
subject—that of Mr. Kuczynski.

Mr. Kuczynski has discovered another
latent tendency, which I hope I may be
forgiven for describing as a mére’s nest. It
is simply that, in spite of our present excess
of births over deaths, our women are not
reproducing themselves. He has proved by
figures, which probably cannot be disputed,
that in this and most other Western European countries each woman at the reproductive ages is producing on an average somewhat less than one girl who will grow up
to those ages, so that the female population
has virtually already commenced to decline.
He therefore claims that a general decline of
the population, leading to ultimate extinction, is bound to commence before long.
This appears at first sight unanswerable,
and it has, of course, been generally
THE DEPOPULATION SCARE

accepted ; but a very little examination reveals the usual fallacy. At the end of
Chapter III of his Balance of Births and
Deaths he states in heavy type :

© According to the fertility and mor
tality in Western and Northern Europe
im 1926, 100 mothers gave birth to 93
future mothers cnly. With the fertility
of 1926 the population 1s bound to die out
unless mortality of potential mothers decreases beyond reasonable expectations.
And fertility continued its downward
path in 1927.”’

In the first place, this statement is wrong,
unless we put the word ‘‘ potential ’’ before
‘‘ mothers ’’ in the first as well as in the
second part. Probably this was only a slip,
but it is a vital one, as the whole question
turns on it. It is quite true that 100 women
at the reproductive ages are under present
conditions likely to be followed by only 93
women at those ages in the next generation,
but this 1s not because the fertility of our
marned women is too low, but because so
many of our women are unmarried.

Even before the War there was always a
deficiency of men as compared with women,
and the War has greatly accentuated the
disparity. According to the last Census of
England and Wales in 1921, the total number of women at various ages and the numbers married were as given in the attached
table :

Age. Total Married. Per cent.
Women. Women. Married.
20-24 1,703,067 459,789 27.1
25-29 1,620,290 ... 920,986 56.9
30-34 1,519,649 ..._ 1,059,538 69.8
35-39 1,471,913... 1,089,287 74.2
40-44 1,378,121 - 1,035,109 75-1
45-49 1,243,968 919,283 74.0

The precise effect of this low proportion
of married women on the birth rate cannot
be calculated. But it is quite evident that
if the majority of women married in the
early twenties, and the average number of
children for each married woman remained
as at present, the number of births and of
gitls would be so much higher as to cause a
fairly rapid increase; and that it would

253

probably be even more rapid if the
extremely low proportion married in the
twenties were raised, and the average duration of marriage were therefore increased.
This simple fact, which is fairly generally
known, gives quite a different aspect to
the question. In a monogamic state of
society, in which women are practically debarred from maternity outside marriage,
those who are unmarried do not count as
mothers, and the birth rate for a given
average number of children per marriage
depends on the number of men who marry.
The War not only killed or mutilated a
very large number of men who would now
be at the marriageable ages, but it checked
economic prosperity and caused many to
remain unmarried; and it probably caused
a greater proportion of those who married to
be sterile.
A simple diagram will help to make the
matter perfectly clear (see next page).
Suppose we have a country such as our
own in which the population is steadily increasing at the rate of 5 per thousand
annually, and for simplicity let us suppose
the numbers of the sexes originally equal.
As is well known, the birth rate of boys is
slightly higher than that of girls, but this
is offset by a somewhat higher infantile and
child mortality among boys, so that approximately equal numbers arrive at maturity;
and we shall assume that all marry. If we
take the average length of a generation as
35 years, the above rate of increase would
require each woman to have 2.38 children
on an average who survive to reproduce, or
about 15 per cent. more, say 2.75 live born
children to allow for early deaths. (On this
basis 2.5 live born children per woman
would cause an increase of population of
about 2 per thousand per year, which seems
to agree with the experience of France.)
Now suppose that from some cause, such
as the War, the male population at the martiageable ages is suddenly reduced by 25 per
cent., without affecting the fertility of marriages. The result will evidently be that 25
per cent. of the women are virtually
sterilized. If they could be removed it
would simply mean that the population
254

would be reduced to 75 per cent. of its
former value, and would then go on increasing at the same rate as before, but
always 25 per cent. below the value it would
have had without the check. As, however,
the 25 per cent. of unmarried women are not
removed, they will simply gradually die out,
so that there may at first be an actual diminution of women, followed by a stationary
state, and finally a renewed upward trend
until the whole of the excess women have
died out and both sexes increase together
again. All this means is that in a monogamic community the numbers of the sexes
tend to equality (which is the best biological
justification for monogamy). But Mr. Kuczynski, having discovered this tendency
statistically in its early stages, has not
troubled to find its cause, and has simply
assumed that the decline of women will continue at its present rate—another example
of the inherent tendency of statisticians to

z

Population

    

252 loss of Males
at marriageable ages.

  

   

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

assume the constancy of any phenomenon on
which they focus their attention.

It will be observed that the decline in the
female population in the above example can
co-exist with a rise in the total population,
if the excess of births over deaths in the
portion of the community who marry is
greater than the number of deaths among
those who do not marry; and, on Mr. Kuczynski’s own figures, this should be the
case. Of course, the actual facts are more
complicated than our simple example, as
there was already a considerable disproportion between the sexes before the War, but
this does not affect the fact that if the
number of men is suddenly lessened the
number of women will tend slowly for a
decade or two to do the same. During the
war an outcry went up concerning the loss of
men and the increase of ‘‘ superfluous ”’
women, and now that nature is beginning to
redress the balance, Mr. Kuczynski raises

o=”
a”

Males & Females

Kuczynski's ;
assumed decli
of emales ecline

140 Years,
THE DEPOPULATION SCARE

the cry of diminishing womanhood and impending race extinction ! :

POVERTY AND POPULATION

The fact is, however, that neither this
‘ tendency nor the one concerning the reduction of the birth rate during the War will
really have any deciding influence on our
future population. Even before the War
there was a considerable deficiency of men,
and a certain proportion of those were unmarried, simply because of poverty which
caused emigration of some men and prevented others from marrying. Whatever
may be said to the contrary, the Malthusian
doctrine has still to be reckoned with, and
is as essential for the understanding of
social phenomena as Darwin claimed it to
be for the understanding of evolution. It
was poverty, due to over-population, which
caused the emigration and celibacy before
the War, and the War itself : it is poverty
due to overpopulation which is responsible
for the amount of celibacy in men which now

255

exists, and the extent to which birth control has been carried. The population of
the future will not be determined by the
tendencies we have been discussing, but by
our economic progress or retrogression. If
the present tendency to slackness and hampering of industry continues, our population
will very likely become stationary or begin
to diminish even before the time predicted
by the statisticians, whether families are
further restricted or not. If, on the other
hand, we realize that we are going on the
wrong economic and eugenic tack, and
strive to increase our industrial efficiency,
economic prosperity will increase, and we
may be quite sure that our population will
increase with it. At present we are all

quarrelling over the distribution of an insufficiency, instead of co-operating for the
production of a sufficiency. If and when we
see the error of our ways and turn our efforts
in the right direction, the spectre of impending depopulation will vanish for at least
many decades.

 

THE EUGENICS SOCIETY
STUDY AND DISCUSSION MEETINGS

At 8.0 p.m. at the Rooms of the Linnean Society,
Burlington House, Piccadilly

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 1ith
Poor Law

E, J. LIDBETTER

TUESDAY, MARCH 11th
Unemployment
JOHN HILTON

W. A. APPLETON

TUESDAY, APRIL 8th
Delinquency

Dr. M. HAMBLIN SMITH
His Honour JUDGE MOORE

ee ee LE SSA shee Pe ess sshcsenencussesesnssnesnotevavvntanapenmmmnsmaaesamepsseees

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 4.
