CORRESPONDENCE

YOUR HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT

To the Editor, The Eugenics Review

Sir,—In thirty years of writing books, I have only once before commented publicly on a
review, and that was when the reviewer and the editor of the journal, aware of moot points,
asked me beforehand to prepare a rejoinder, which was published simultaneously with the
review.

I am now impelled to protest what was written about my book, Your Heredity and
Environment, by R. J. Berry in THE EUGENICS REVIEW of December 1966 (58, 210). I do
not know who or what Dr. Berry is, or why his review reveals such undisguised hostility
to my book, and perhaps to me, personally. A reviewer has a right to express his opinions.
It is quite another matter when he charges an author with wholesale inaccuracies and
ignorance on the basis of outright misquotations or of points on which he himself may be
inadequately informed; and when he deliberately distorts or ignores the clearly designated
nature and purposes of a book. In these respects he goes beyond the acceptable boundaries
of criticism into the area of slander. Moreover, he has maligned not only me but the many
professional colleagues and consultants who aided in the preparation and editing of my
book—close to sixty individuals listed in my ACKNOWLEDGMENTS, who include some
of the most respected human geneticists and other scientists, and of whom the reviewer
makes no mention. I refer to these individuals not to impute to them responsibility for
anything in my book—which I alone assume—but to emphasize that this book (which took
five full years of my time), was not carelessly or incompetently tossed off, as the reviewer
implies.

Let me now document my case against the reviewer and his review, to the extent
permitted by my limited time and the space available (although, unfortunately, much more
is required to repair damages than to inflict them). First, here are the specific points—
presumably the most glaring examples Berry could find (I’ve added the italics)—on which
he bases his charges of a “mass of minor inaccuracies”’:

I allegedly gave the incidence of porphyria among South African Whites as ‘‘0-1 per
cent” instead of “0-03 per cent”. This is untrue. I referred not to “South African whites”
but to White Afrikaners of South Africa (p. 601)—something quite different; for no more
than a fourth of the whites of South Africa are Afrikaners, and it is among this inbred
group that porphyria is largely concentrated. As for the incidence I gave, of ‘“‘about
1 in 100°’, this came from a most reliable source—Professor Curt Stern’s textbook.’

I am again misquoted as having said the sickle-cell disease is “‘confined” to African
Negroes: I wrote it “afflicts chiefly Negroes” (p. 324) and is “found Jargely in African
Negroes and their descendants” (p. 600)—clearly implying that the disease also occurs in
other groups.

Regarding my challenged reference to Hindus as a racial group, I had written (p. 605)
““Many Hindus, of the White race, have darker skins than many Negroes.” But Hindus
have been called a racial group by various authorities: for instance, Anthropologist
Stanley M. Garn, who lists the ‘Hindu local race . . . light brown to dark-skinned”’.®

On anencephaly, my challenged statement that “in many instances it may be caused
by recessive genes” comes from Professor Curt Stern, among others.§

The reviewer cites as further errors “‘. . . outdated statements of ignorance such as
about the heredity of goitre or congenital dislocation of the hip’. What I wrote regarding
goitre (pp. 214, 215) is fully supported by such recent authoritative reports as those by
Dr. J. F. Stanbury,® and Dr. Rody P. Cox and Dr. Colin MacLeod.? What I said about
congenital dislocation of the hip (that it gives evidence of a hereditary susceptibility
discriminating heavily against females, prenatally, for reasons explained: footnote, p. 218)
is derived from another recent authoritative source, Dr. Cedric O. Carter.1

My six-page discussion of the genetic effects of radiation (pp. 570-575) was checked

145
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

as correct and adequate for my book a few years ago, but whether or not it needs any
qualification now, there is hardly reason for listing among my “mass of inaccuracies” my
failure to mention “‘dose-rate” or ““chromosomal repair effects’’.

Regarding the “confusing”? Appendix listing of two British journals with American
addresses, the reviewer may have failed to note that the British edition had been printed
in the United States (as stated on the copyright page) from plates of the American edition,
wherein the addresses given were those of the American publishers who distributed the
periodicals. Failure to change the listings in the British edition was an oversight not
chargeable to me.*

The evidence I have presented so far is a sad commentary on what the reviewer had
offered to support his charges of wholesale errors, ignorance and incompetence. However,
these charges are not my only grounds for complaint. In the reviewer’s preoccupation with
nit-picking he has ignored or misrepresented the whole nature of my book. Again to be
specific:

He says “This is not a book for students”—implying, by his stress on technicalities
and medical aspects, students of medical genetics. But the students (among others) for
whom the book was intended were definitely not those taking specialized courses in
genetics, but primarily those enrolled in college courses in the social sciences, as well as
secondary school students, who, in numbers approaching close to two million, have long
used my books for supplementary reading. In addition (as set forth on the jacket), the book
was written for both general readers and professional persons in many fields other than
genetics, who wish to learn how heredity and environment interact in shaping human lives
without having to master a maze of new technicalities. Indeed, my objective (given in the
Preface, p. xviii) was “‘of stating the facts with the thought not so much of always aiming
for technical preciseness as of conveying to readers the most accurate impression—which
might often mean, as in ballistics, aiming somewhat away from the target in order to come
closest to hitting it’. Elsewhere in the Preface (p. xvi) I say “. . . in viewing matters from the
readers’ standpoints, I have tended to place more stress on what I think people generally
want to know about, rather than what may often seem most important to the scientist’’.

Yet, totally ignoring the foregoing statements, Berry demands of my popular book a
technical preciseness not found in many technical treatises: as when he condemns my
“half truths” for speaking about dominant and recessive “‘genes’”’ and not explaining that
“characters” are meant. One example of a treatise which speaks similarly throughout of
dominant and recessive genes and not “characters” is Dr. J. A. Fraser Roberts’ notable
work on medical genetics.® I may also quote Professor Lionel S. Penrose: ‘‘Strictly speaking,
dominance is a property of characters . . . but for convenience, geneticists refer very
frequently to dominant and recessive genes’’.*

The reviewer devotes his longest paragraph to saying sarcastically that the book is a
“delightful repository of recondite facts’”—not revealing that each of the facts listed was
used pertinently in a specific discussion. (The “fattest humans” in the section on obesity;
eye defects in Old Masters with regard to genius and abnormality; and so on.)

The review asserts “‘there is little information about the Y-chromosome”. My Index
shows that the Y and its effects are described on about thirty different pages.

What the reviewer failed to say may be even more significant than what he did say.
Most amazingly, a review written for the leading eugenics journal, whose readers are
primarily interested in eugenics, makes no mention whatsoever that a large part of my
book—including almost the last 100 pages of text—is devoted to eugenic problems
(ancestry, parentage questions, birth control, population quantity and quality, mankind’s
genetic future, etc.).

Finally, as if to argue that eugenics has nothing to do with the subject, and that my
detailed discussions of prenatal development, behavioral genetics, human evolution, and
racial origins and differences are also wholly irrelevant, Berry maintains that my book

* Had the British edition not made use of the American plates, it could not have been brought out at
four guineas, for while this may seem high to the reviewer, it is low to-day for a volume three times the size

of an average book, and with 100 illustrations, including many set-in half-tone and colour plates. Only
anticipation of a large sale—happily fulfilled in the United States—made the price possible.

146
CORRESPONDENCE

“is only incidentally concerned with human genetics’’. In making this sweeping judgement,
he particularly ignores the following statement in my Preface (p. xvi):

So human genetics, as I have viewed it and am seeking to present it, is far more
than a limited scientific specialty dealing with the mechanism of human heredity—to
be spoken of in terms of recessives, dominants and other genes, and of such and such
inherited traits. Rather, I have regarded human genetics as an introspective, allembracing science which can reveal people in the round and help us to see why we as
individuals and groups are what we are, and what our inborn capacities might enable
us to be for the better.

It was in the light of this concept of human genetics, and of the objectives I had set
forth in writing about it—and not of the meanings and aims improperly imputed to my
work—that my book should have been appraised. AMRAM SCHEINFELD
41 Fifth Avenue
New York, N.Y. 10003

__

. Carter, Cees O. In Congenital Malformations. (Proc. 2nd Intl. Congr.) Intl. Medical Congress (N.Y.),
1964. P. 308.

. Cox, Rody P., and MacLeod, Colin. 1962. In Methodology in Human Genetics. (Ed. Burdette, W. J.
Holden-Day.

. Garn, Stanley M. 1961. Human Races. Chas. C. Thomas. P. 129.

. Penrose, L. S. 1959. Outline of Human Genetics. Wiley. P. 27.

. Roberts, J. A. F. 1960. An Introduction to Medical Genetics. 2nd edition. Oxford University Press.

. Stanbury, J. F. 1960. Familial Goiter. In The Metabolic Basis of Inherited Disease. (Ed. Stanbury,
Wyngaarden, Frederickson). McGraw-Hill.

. Stern, Curt. 1960. Principles of Human Genetics. 2nd edition. Freeman. P. 721.

. Stern, Curt. Ibid. P. 116,

on AnNRW bO

POPULATION POLICY

To the Editor, The Eugenics Review

Sir,—In your Notes of the Quarter (December 1966, 58, 178) you quote the two questions
asked by the Minister of Health and Population in France, and you seem to find it somewhat
incompatible that one should inquire into legislative measures which would raise births,
and at the same time consider the possible liberalization of birth control facilities.

If one could achieve by the latter a reduction in the births of unwanted children, and
could offset this by the former which might increase wanted children, one would certainly
achieve a great deal.

In a report published in New Society of 9th February, Professor Hans Forssman and
Inga Thuwe of Gdteborg, Sweden, have studied the lives of 120 children born to mothers
whose applications for an abortion had been turned down. The controls were children of
the same sex registered next in the same hospital or parish.

Sixty per cent of these unwanted children had an insecure childhood, going to foster
homes or hostels, as against 28 per cent of the controls. Rates of psychiatric referral,
delinquency, receipt of public assistance were all more frequent among unwanted children.
More of them needed special schools, and only seventeen compared to forty-four of the
controls, went on to higher education. More of the unwanted children married early,
twenty as against fourteen. Twice as many were rejected by the army. Only 48 per cent of
the unwanted children attracted no unfavourable notice compared to 68 per cent of the
controls. H. E. LOBSTEIN

41 Copthall Gardens
Twickenham,
Middlesex

147
