SIR MACFARLANE BURNET
O.M., F.R.S., Director, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research

Migration and Race Mixture from

the Genetic Angle

gration is chiefly important to Australia

for the overall changes that it will eventually make in the genetic character of our
population. Every growing country that receives
substantial immigration from other parts of
the world is in a sense a melting-pot from which
new combinations of body-build, of skin colour,
and even of personality, may eventually emerge.
The process is immensely complex and can
only be described in broad outline. In many ways
our description can be no more than an attempt
to interpret the human observations in terms
of genetic ideas that have been developed from
the study of such very different animals as
fruit flies and mice. Yet the very fact that
basically similar gentic laws are evident in the
behaviour of mice, of fruit flies, and of bacteria,
makes us confident that they are equally applicable to man.

Pe THE LONG-TERM point of view, immi
The Genetic Background

It may be desirable first to give a very brief
recapitulation of the facts of human inheritance.
All human beings belong to a single species
and healthy male and female individuals of any
two races can produce healthy children who,
in their turn, are fertile. In terms of the genetic
mechanisms that are responsible for inheritance,
this means that all human beings have the same
number of chromosomes and that each chromosome has a basic structure common to all
human types. Differences between human beings
that are not due to simple environmental
* This paper was prepared at the request of the Department of Immigration for discussion by delegates at the
Australian Citizenship Convention. The views expressed
in it are those of the author and do not necessarily

represent the official views of the Department.
It is printed here by kind permission of the author.

5—ER

effects such as sunburn or scars, depend on
the existence of differences between the corresponding units at certain parts of one of the
chromosomes. In one sense a chromosome
is like a string of beads and when mating occurs
male and female chromosomes temporarily
unite, bead for bead. The rules: by which the
units which we call genes in the double string
of beads are derived from one or other parent
and are duplicated and redistributed to offspring can be found in any textbook of genetics
and need not be described here. All that needs
to be said is that any given human chromosome
can be equated in detail to the corresponding
chromosome in any other human being. No
matter how extreme the difference between the
parents, Nature can see to it that a self-consistent
healthy offspring will result. In a rough sort of
way, every visible difference, e.g. in skin colour
or hair texture, will depend on one, two or
more unitary differences between parental
genetic units. A child will receive the units
which make up his chromosomes, one from
each parent, and it is the interaction of these
pairs of genes which will determine the characteristics of the child.

One of the most important genetic processes
occurring in the course of race mixture is
heterosis or hybrid vigour. In very simplified
and not quite accurate form, one can vizualise
this as resulting when there are very many gene
differences in each corresponding pair of
chromosomes. In general, the body tends to
develop according to the pattern of the “‘better”’
of each pair of dissimilar genes and with so many
choices available the overall result is likely to
be better than when each parent contributes
many similar mediocre genes. This is a positive
advantage of hybridization to which may be

93

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1959, 51, 2,
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

added the related potentiality of new gene
combinations providing on occasions an imdividual with exceptionally valuable new character
istics. And sometimes, of course, we must.

also expect exceptional but undesirable characteristics.

For most of the qualities, like height, strength
and intelligence, which are socially important,
as well as for others like skin colour and body
build, it is close to the truth to say that these
characteristics show blending inheritance in
that children will, on the average, exhibit
characters intermediate to those of the parents.
It is, however, a necessary consequence of the
way the genes control inheritance that this
blending is, as we might say, rather lumpy
in the sense that an occasional descendant
will strongly favour one of the parental strains
in some particular character. There are other
characters which do not blend, such as eye
colour, but it would probably be correct to
say that if a Negro-European marriage produces
offspring who in all successive generations
marry Europeans, the offspring after four or
five generations will almost all be within the
range of variation seen in the rest of the white
population.

Mating Groups

If a nation were really a single melting-pot,
any type or proportion of human beings could
be absorbed to produce a variable but basically
homogeneous community within, say, five
generations. In real life, however, this does
not occur, primarily because of the existence
within each community of social, racial and
geographic barriers which divide into what
have been called mating groups. Gene mixing
is only free within the mating group.

As an example, we may mention a study of
the extent to which various European nationalities were assimilated in the Boston area of
the United States. A formula was used in estimating proportion of marriages within the same
language group so that a value of 100 indicated
that all marriages took place within the group,
while 0 represented marriage completely random as to racial group. The figures were:
Italians 91-8, Swedes 75-9, Irish 64-7, English
28-8, French 25-4. Obviously French and

94

English will be absorbed into the melting-pot
much more rapidly than the Italians.

If we are to make the best use of our immigrants in Australia, it is important that careful
statistics be kept of the extent to which marriage
outside the new Australians’ own racial group
is occurring. Geneticists are not yet unanimous
on the best way to, as it were, collect the bonus
of exceptional vigour that hybridisation offers.
Some consider that what has virtually always
happened as a result of social forces may be
biologically the best compromise. This is to
allow the existence of unabsorbed groups of
aliens of a single race who, by fairly close
intermarriage, maintain a stock of genes different
from those of the country at large. With each
generation there will be a proportion escaping
from the group to marry outside and confer
the resulting hybrid on the offspring. Yet it is by
no means certain that the freest possible range
of marriage, i.e. random mating as far as race
is concerned, would not give even better results.
Certainly if our objective is a homogeneous
national population every tolerable step should
be taken to break down and enlarge the mating

groups.

Race Mixture in the Pacific

One of the most famous examples of racial
mixture is that of the Pitcairn Islanders. Most
Australians know something of the Mutiny
of the Bounty, of Captain Bligh’s epic voyage
in an open boat from the central Pacific to
Timor and of the vicissitudes of Fletcher
Christian, the leader of the mutineers. Eventually
eight of the mutineers, with a group of Tahitian
men and women, reached the uninhabited
Pitcairn Island and settled there. After a few
years of incessant conflict and murder, all the
Tahitian men were dead without offspring.
One Englishman and six Tahitian women survived with a total of twenty-five children,
every one of whom had an English father and
a Polynesian mother. By a complex of circumstances, the community developed wholly from
these twenty-five half-breeds with no significant
entry of other elements for several generations.
It is almost the only example of a half-breed
group growing up without cultural contact
with either of the parental cultures. As is well
MIGRATION AND RACE MIXTURE FROM THE GENETIC ANGLE

known, the Pitcairn Islanders flourished as a
healthy, intelligent and socially advanced community despite the disparity of the two human
stocks that gave rise to them. Medical and
anthropological study of these people gave
no evidence of any type of genetic abnormality
that could have been derived from either their
hybrid origin or from the close inbreeding that
subsequently occurred. Their teeth were poor
compared with those of most Polynesians
but no worse than those of our own people.
Early visitors commented on the special vigour
of the first generation, who were significantly
taller than either parent group, good looking,
and in their marriages achieved an amazing
fertility averaging 11-4 children for each married
pair. The absence of disease on the island was
probably in part responsible, but as loss of
fertility in the offspring is the most direct sign
of genetic incompatibility, we can at least
conclude that there was nothing biologically
unsatisfactory about the first generation of
Pitcairn Islanders.

In 1856 the whole group was transferred to
Norfolk Island where most of their descendants
still live, now as Australian citizens.

Another region where interbreeding between
widely separate races has been physically and
socially satisfactory is the Hawaiian Islands.
Here there was the important social factor that
during the vital period of race mixture the ruling
class on the Islands was Polynesian and it was
often economically and socially expedient for
a European man to marry an upper class
Polynesian woman. This automatically created
an important group of half-breeds of high social
status. Once this was established it was impossible for any general stigma of inferiority to
be attached to persons of mixed blood.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Race Mixture

Extensive reading has failed to locate a
single example where it can be shown that
hybrid races or individuals living under circumstances where no social disability attached
to their condition, were demonstrably inferior
to both parents. Where healthy typical individuals of each race are concerned, the offspring
can be expected to show greater physical
health than either and—though here the

evidence is slighter—a greater likelihood of
exceptional mental ability.

Serious attempts have been made to show
that where different racial groups mingle,
there the likelihood of an outcropping of genius
is highest. Kretchmer considered that where
the Alpine race containing Neanderthal genes
made contact with Nordics in the Germanspeaking parts of Europe, there had appeared
an exceptional number of outstanding men.
Toynbee generalized that “the geneses of civilization require creative contributions from more
races than one’’. It seems to be the general rule
that there is a lag period of a few centuries
between the beginnings of race mixture in a
given region and the full flowering of a new
culture or civilization.

There are potential genetic disadvantages of
race mixture and it is probably true that particularly in later generations than the primary
hybrid, occasional individuals with discordant
characters, e.g. teeth over-large for the jaw that
carries them, can be seen. It has not been shown
decisively that such discordancies are more
frequent than in people not descended from
recent racial mixture.

Of the same general quality are the more
subtle genetic discrepancies laid bare by what
the public knows as Rh babies.

Where husband and wife have genetic differences in the composition of their blood cells,
it is possible for the embryo to have cells quite:
different from those of its mother and to set:
going an interaction that ends by the mother’s:
blood destroying the baby’s cells and sometimes:
also damaging the brain. It has been suggested!
in view of the very high incidence of Rh negative:
character in the Basques, that this particular
gene was introduced into Europe by the progenitors of the Basques. As far as I am aware,
there is no evidence that such incompatibilities
are more common in marriages between very
dissimilar races than within the normal community. On general grounds, one might expect
a moderately increased incidence but probably
not one that could be recognized without careful
study of the point.

Occasionally a mutation may flourish in a
particular race for special local reasons which
have no relevance elsewhere. In Africa there is

95
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a very common abnormality called “sickle
cell” which is due to a recessive gene. If an
African has two such genes he will probably
die young of a severe anaemia; but if he has
only one he will, as a result, have red cells in
his blood which will resist the malarial parasite
much more strongly than normal cells. In other
words a single dose of the gene is positively
advantageous in a malarial environment, but
a double dose is lethal. Obviously a balance
will develop which gives the best compromise
for survival and in heavily malarious African
regions some 30-40 per cent of individuals
carry the gene in single doses. In a non-malarial
country the single gene has no advantage and
from the fact that it seems to have become
significantly less frequent in American negroes,
it is probably mildly harmful. Probably other
local characteristics of similar genetic significance
will be recognized in the future. It is too early
to say for certain what effect the entry of such
genes into a European community would be
but everything suggests that in fact the “‘dilution”’
of the trait would be so great that there would
be almost no chance of the appearance of individuals with a double dose.

At the purely genetic level the entry of any
dissimilar group that can be effectively assimilated into the community is on the balance
desirable. The only types of genetic disability
to be expected are likely to be of much the same
type and number as those shown by a standard
population. From the gentic angle, there would
be no objection at all to the entry of a small
proportion of non-Europeans into Australia
and probably much to be gained. In the real
world, however, where mating groups are
relatively small and prejudices against marriage
with any one outside the group often extremely
strong, the position is entirely different. The
community gains no genetic benefit and may
develop a major social problem when an immigrant group remains a closed mating group
so that no blending of characters with the bulk
of the community can occur.

The Virtues of Diversity

There is one very important difference
between ourselves—considered simply as a
mammalian species—and any of our domestic

96

animals. In any domestic animal we strive
to maintain “‘pure breeds’’ composed of uniform
animals possessing just those characters which
appeal to us as best for a given purpose. Any
such ideal for a human community would be
quite fantastically wrong. With every development of scientific, technical and social skills, a
wider and wider range of human aptitude is
required. There are special tasks for small
men and others that only the big fellows can
do. And we pay special tribute to the man who
can do something supremely better than his
fellows, whether this is running a mile in record
time or writing Hamlet. Supreme achievement
probably always demands a unique genetic
combination—and of course much else, but the
genetic contribution above all.

It is fortunate that no opportunity is ever
likely to arise which will allow deliberate
breeding of human stock towards a desired
pattern. It would be only too easy to make
terrible mistakes. But if within the realms of
practical policy I were asked to say how best
our physical and mental vigour could be improved by genetic means, I believe the following
points would have to be included in any answer.

1. There will always be mating groups within
the community, but every artifice should be
used to make these as extensive, as fluid and as
variable as possible, e.g. by providing free opportunities for the movement of young people in
the community and by making every effort to
incorporate groups which for any reason resist
the process.

2. A steady inflow of foreign genetic material
will probably help to maintain vigour and diversity, always provided there is opportunity for
the foreigner to find a spouse amongst the home
population.

3. Appropriate incentives might be provided
to influence those who carry grossly harmful
genetic defects to have few or no children.

The essence of this can be summarized
very simply by saying: Provide for everyone the
widest possible opportunity to find the mate
he or she desires and put no additional barriers
in the way of any form of inter-racial or intercommunity marriage.

In recent years, it has been generally accepted
than an Australian marrying a non-European
MIGRATION AND RACE MIXTURE FROM THE GENETIC ANGLE

can as an act of grace confer Australian citizenship on the spouse. From the genetic angle,
there is much to be said for allowing into the
country as much non-European genetic material
as the community can safely assimilate. The
practical approach to this is perhaps to establish the rule that the spouse of any Australian
citizen of European blood, is automatically
admissible to citizenship irrespective of race
or nationality. Experience everywhere indicates
that it would be disastrous to open the doors
to a large dissimilar minority introduced to
provide cheap lower grade labour. Experience,
however, equally points to the acceptability
of upper class cross-racial marriage and, where
this is accepted, clearly no general contempt
for the half-breed can develop. Smail dissimilar
groups provide as a rule no social problem.
With these points in view it might in the long
run be wiser to foster, or at least not dissuade,
marriage of non-European students working
in Australia to Australians of European stock.

However, the important feature is surely to
make the most of the genetic diversity that has
come to use from Europe and the British
Isles, and will continue to come in future years.
There are good human reasons for believing
that for the first generation like will tend to
mate with like, and that complete assimilation
will be a gradual process. On the whole, we
are on safe ground if we strive both to bring
about the full cultural absorption of all migrant
groups and in the process make it easier for
an increasing proportion of marriages to take
place outside their own racial group. In this
way we can feel reasonably certain of maintaining the genetic stimulus needed to create a
vigorous nation drawn pre-eminently from
European stocks, but, I should like to think,
also willing to accept into the “gene pool’ of
our community a contribution from any section
of the human species that has a worthwhile
inheritance to offer.

 

Around the World News of
Population and Birth Control

The only international journal concerned solely with the world-wide problems of population and birth control.

—requested by libraries, universities, and sociological organizations ;
—quoted by public speakers and newspaper correspondents.

Published ten times a year by the
INTERNATIONAL PLANNED PARENTHOOD FEDERATION

The IPPF, a federation of voluntary associations for family planning and governmental agencies in twenty-two

countries, believes that
—family planning is a fundamental human right;

—a favourable balance between the populations and natural resources of the world is an indispensable condition of

lasting world peace;

—that such a balance is unattainable unless knowledge of planned parenthood is extended.

Annual subscription to the News, 10/-; $2.00. For information and sample copy, write to: IPPF, 69 Ecc.eston

SguarE, LONDON, ENGLAND.

97
