FALLING BIRTH RATES

shows what corrections are necessary to refine the
calculations for errors arising from the grouping
process. The corrections are smaller than the errors
of the data available for most countries, and thus the
paper is of academic rather than practical importance.

An Analytic Simulation Model of Human Reproduction with Demographic and Biological Consequences by J. C. RIDLEY and M. C. SHEPS.

This note relates to the use of Monte Carlo methods
on an electronic digital computer, i.e. a class of
procedures designed to derive approximate estimates
of distribution functions by simulating a random
process. The essence of the method is given in a
“flow chart” (Figure 1) showing the possible
happenings to women of reproductive age. For some
of these happenings there are statistics available;
for others, only reasonable guesses are possible.
But statistics and guesses can be combined in the
model and the result compared with other ascertained data. The results of some experimental
attempts to represent Indian natality are given, but
the degree of success is not very great, and the
authors conclude that their model falls short of
realism in many respects.

A Problem of Estimating a Contingency Table Arising
in Demographic Analysis by SAW SWEE-HOCK.

The problem is to estimate the number of births and
deaths in Malaya, according to State and race, for
years 1942-45 when the country was occupied by
sapan. A statistical method of maximum likelihood
is used.

Changing Population Characteristics in Tibet, 1959
to 1965 by M. FREEBERNE.

A brief commentary on some figures issued by the
Chinese. The population of Tibet is only about one
million.

A Note on Nursing Practices in an American Isolate
with a High Birth Rate by G. E. HUNTINGTON
and J, A. HOSTETLER.

Short intervals between pregnancies are attributed
to favourable diet, short nursing periods and early
supplementary feeding.

P. R. C.

Falling Birth Rates

in the United States of America
SOME FACTS

THE NUMBERS OF births in the USA first
exceeded 3 million a year in 1921, the peak of
a post-war boom. They did not reach this level
again until 1943, but after the Second World
War they jumped to 34 million and thereafter
climbed steadily to over 44 million in 1959. In
1965, however, they were down again to 3}
million, and it is with the fall in the last six
years that this note is concerned.

Some details are given below in tabular form:

BIRTH RATE FERTILITY RATE
per 1,000 per 1,000 women
YEAR population aged 15-44
1950 24:1 106-2
1955 25:0 118-1
1960 23-7 118-0
1961 23°3 117-2
1962 22-4 112-1
1963 21:7 108-4
1964 21-0 104-8
1965 (provisional) 19:5 96:9

The birth rate per thousand population can
be a misleading index if there has been a change
in the proportion of women able to bear children.
The right-hand column of the statement
corrects for this to some extent but, in spite of
some interesting variations of pattern from the
column of birth rates between 1950 and 1960, it
confirms that a fall of about 18 per cent occurred
between 1960 and 1965.

It is natural to expect to find that the change
in trend must be largely attributable to the
contraceptive pill, which was indeed first used
in June, 1960. Expectations are reinforced on
learning that it is estimated that the proportion
of married women of reproductive age who are
using it could now be a high as 25 per cent
(although this assessment may be overstated).
What it would not seem reasonable to assume,
however, is that all these pill-users are totally

171
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

inhibiting fertility: such a considerable proportion of couples can hardly have ceased all
family-building completely. If the pill had been
the first reliable birth control measure in the
USA this might well have been so, but efficient
methods were in fact in use when American
fertility was well below the level of to-day, and
the pill has replaced them as much for its
simplicity as for its contraceptive quality.

While, therefore, it would be unreasonable to
assume that the pill has had no effect in reducing
fertility since 1960, its influence is thought
likely* to account for no more than onehalf at most of the 18 per cent fall shown
above.

To verify that this is so, it is necessary to
explain the residue of the decline in other ways.
For this purpose it is helpful to analyse the
data by cohorts, that is according to the year
in which the mother was born. Such analysis
shows a steady fall in fertility down to year of
birth 1910 or thereabouts and a steady rise
subsequently. Thus the average cumulative
family size at age thirty-five has proceeded as
follows:

YEAR OF BIRTH TOTAL
OF WOMAN ““FAMILY SIZE””
1880 2:8
1890 2°6
1900 2:3
1910 1:9
1920 2:2
1930 2°8

The ‘“‘total family size’? shown represents the
sum of all the birth-rates at successive ages, and
thus includes a due proportion of women who
did not bear any children, including those who
did not marry.

It will be observed that this cohort analysis
requires a big time-scale. In half a century,
people’s ideas and aspirations regarding family
size could have changed substantially. It will be
noted, however, that the fall and rise have about
them the quality of a wave-motion—a motion
that could, in fact, have been caused in part, at
least, by a “‘secular’’ effect in the data, that is,
an influence on fertility attributable to the
experience of calendar periods. As the 1930s are

* Natality Statistics Analysis, 1963. Series 21, No. 8.
U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare.

172

well known to have been a period of economic
depression associated with late marriage and low
fertility, and the 1940s were disturbed by war,
while the 1950s were largely free from such
distortions, there can be little doubt that such a
secular effect has had some influence.

Further analysis requires a greater subdivision
of the data—for instance—into individual ages
and years of birth, and between first, second and
third children. It would also be desirable to
study the experience of different ages at marriage
and births classified by duration of marriage,
but such information is not available in the USA.
Even the sub-divided data do not, however,
explain people’s motives and aspirations; American demographers have therefore carried out
sample surveys in order to obtain a better idea
of the forces at work. The conclusion they have
reached is that fertility, as measured by the
usual indices, was unusually high in the 1950s
for two special (and temporary) reasons.

First, couples whose family-building had been
held up in earlier years had had enlarged
fertility in the 1950s in an attempt to approach
more nearly their aspirations of a reasonable
family size. Secondly, in the prosperous 1950s it
was possible for couples to marry relatively early
and have children sooner within marriage than
in the past; such a trend can readily be shown to
cause a “bunching up’’, and thus a temporary
increase, in fertility rates whether or not the
youthful trend is maintained.

On both these counts, the 1950s were a period
of exceptionally high birth rates in the USA,
and much of the fall during the last six years
could be no more than an effect of the ending of
the exceptional circumstances. Only time can
show for certain whether there are any further
conclusions to be drawn from the data, such as a
further change in the concept of a “‘normal”
family size.

It is of interest to note that in Britain the total
number of births fell by over 10,000 in 1965.
This is the first fall after ten years of steady rises
in which the total increase was nearly 25 per
cent. Is this the beginning of a series of falls
such as have been experienced in the USA? Such
a development is not impossible but it seems
unlikely, in spite of certain basic similarities
with the American situation.
