HEREDITY AND DESTITUTION
By W. C. D. WHEtTHaM, F.R.S.

DurRinG the last week of May the problem of the prevention of
destitution was prominently before the public. A Conference
met to consider the question in all its aspects, and accounts,
though meagre ones, of the papers read by specialists to the
various sections of the Conference appeared in the daily
newspapers.

The Conference culminated in a general meeting in the
Albert Hall. The opening speech was made by Mr. Arthur
Balfour, who not only performed his primary function of attracting the notice of the reporters, but also made a characteristic
and suggestive address, well worthy the attention even of the
specialists who listened to him.

Mr. Balfour passed lightly over the more obvious causes of
destitution—causes which may be prevented or alleviated by
better organisation or improved environment—and devoted the
main part of his speech to the more difficult and more fundamental
question of the influence of heredity on the problem the Conference had met to consider. He pointed out that advancing
knowledge had discredited the older optimistic theory ‘‘ that you
had only to improve one generation and that, by the mere operation of heredity, the next generation would be better than its
predecessor, and so on into an unlimited future of social progress
based upon physiological improvement. . . . The best of
scientific opinion now holds that, broadly speaking, we cannot
count upon the inheritance of acquired gifts or acquired qualities
in dealing with the causes which produce the future improvement or the future deterioration of mankind.” Thus, in the
face of forty years of compulsory education, and of that great
improvement in the environment of mankind on which the last

century plumes itself, we must cease to believe that there is ‘‘ any
4
132 W. C. D. Whetham :

ground for thinking that there are great causes in operation
which are to improve the physical basis on which, after all,
education and the environment of social influences have to
work.”’

But, if we are to rule out of court the effect of changes in
the environment as a possible cause of racial improvement, we
are left with the sole alternative of natural selection acting on
those variations in hereditary qualities which all living beings
show. A strong man lives to have a quiver-full of children, a
weakling dies in infancy or youth, and leaves no offspring to
perpetuate his defects. Thus the race is moulded to suit its
environment. This, broadly, is Darwin’s explanation of evolution, and to this process we must look to elucidate the changes
which have taken place, or will take place in the average composition of our race. Hence it follows that the fundamental
problem of the biological sociologist is to determine the relative
rates of increase of the different sections which make up our
people, for it is by a differential birth-rate alone that the inborn
character of the nation, considered as a whole, is modified from
age to age.

But, on this point, Mr. Balfour had a question to put to the
believers in selection :

“Some of their speculations—indeed I have no answer, and
do not pretend to have an answer to the arguments they advance
—leave me somewhat doubtful, because I cannot see that experience supports them. For example, we are told, and I am afraid
we are told truly, that the birth-rate is rapidly diminishing in
the best class of the artisan population, in the middle classes,
and indeed in all classes except the least fortunate. And they
deduce the uncomfortable conclusion that the population of the
future will be drawn from those whom they plausibly describe
as the least efficient members of the community. I have no
answer to that. But I havea question to put about it. If we
really can divide the community in the way they divide it, I am
unable to understand how we have failed to have a segregation
of efficiency in the past between those who are better off and
those who are worse off. In other words, it seems to me that
there must be a cause in operation on their theory which would
HEREDITY AND DESTITUTION 133

divide us into the prosperous by their own merits—those who
have got gifts which have made them prosperous and who then
married the daughters of those who were also prosperous, which
made them more prosperous—and those who, on their interpretation of the theory of heredity, are less prosperous and have less
efficient children. That has been going on for centuries. All
through history you have had the men who make a success of
life rising in the social scale, to use the current phrase—and
those who fail in life sinking in the social scale. You have had
this interchange, and as the result surely on strict hereditary
principles you would in the end get by heredity a better quality
of everything that makes for this kind of efficiency at all events,
at one end of the scale, and a less efficient quality at the other.
And we are to be divided, not merely by one man having a better
chance of education than another, but by the innate physiological
character of his efficiency. I do not see any trace of that in
fact. I do not see that that is going on.”

When the selectionist has thanked Mr. Balfour for calling
public attention to the importance of heredity in social phenomena, and for a generous appreciation of the importance of
racial studies in general on the future well-being of the nation,
he will turn to this problem which is left for his consideration.

His defence may well be put in the time-honoured legal
form: (1) that the plaintiffs contention is not true; (2) that, if
true, justification may be pleaded in the special circumstances of
the case. In other words (1) there is, in fact, evidence of the
segregation of special types of ability between one part of the
social scale and the other, and (2) the reason why this segregation is not more marked is to be found in the want of really
effective and continued natural selection for ability in our past,
and still more in our present, social environment.

Let us take these pleas in order. In face of the whole
tendency of popular thought during the past fifty years, it is
difficult to convince a majority that differences in surroundings,
education and opportunity will not explain the markedly greater
tale of eminent men that have come from the upper and middle
classes in proportion to their total numbers. Nevertheless, to
134 W. C. D. Whetham :

most of the observers who have studied the subject closely, the
superiority of those classes as a source of great men is too clear
to be referred solely to a more favourable environment. We
will describe shortly three pieces of evidence.

Sir Francis Galton showed statistically, by a study of the
families of the Judges of England between 1660 and 1865, that
the chance of the son of a Judge showing eminent ability was
about five hundred times as great as that for a man taken at
random from the population. There is an obvious retort based
on the power of Judges, especially of those in high places, to
secure public recognition for the merits of their younger relatives.
But that retort loses much of its point when we find that, as a
class, the fathers of Judges are nearly as able as their sons, while
even their grandfathers are much abler on the average than the
bulk of the nation. It is true that the son of an eminent
politician is said to have chiefly rejoiced over his ‘‘ century ”’ for
Harrow at ‘‘ Lord’s’’ because of its probable influence on his
father’s career. But, before the days of cricket-worship, the
power of a son to help his father to eminence in time to be of
use must have been much restricted. The fathers and grandfathers of eighteenth century Judges, at all events, probably
stood on their own merits.

De Candolle investigated the parental history of a large
number of European men of eminence. He found that a very
high proportion were sons of the Protestant Clergy. Now
among professional men at all times the pressure of selection is
great. Family influence now counts for much less in business
or in government employment than when government posts
were in the unrestricted gift of the governing class.

A statistical study of the pages of the Dictionary of National
Biography shows that, in the eighteenth and early nineteenth
centuries, our country possessed a remarkable group of closely
allied families in the aristocratic class, among whom the average
level of administrative ability was very high. The number of
members of those families who showed undoubted ability—not
merely occupied prominent posts—seems far greater than can be
explained by any superiority of environment, or greater opportunities for the display of their talents. The Dictionary of National
HEREDITY AND DESTITUTION 135

Biography, it should be remembered, was planned and written
by literary men, and to say the least, suffers from no under-estimate
of the importance of literary as distinguished from administrative
ability. Its bias tells against the conclusions to which one is
forced by a study of its columns.

But, when all the available evidence in favour of the
superiority in special types of ability of the upper and middle
classes has been reviewed, the fact remains that that evidence
has been overlooked by, or has failed to convince, such an acute
and open-minded observer as Mr. Balfour, and is unknown to
the vast majority of the people of this country, to whose ways of
thought, indeed, it 1s quite foreign. Why is it, then, that this
segregation of ability has not gone farther, so as to be patent to
all men? Why is it that careful statistical investigation is
needed to make it manifest ?

The answer is complex. First, perhaps, we should put the
fact that, while selection is keen enough while a family is rising
in the social scale, it becomes relaxed when an assured position
has been reached. It is usually the ablest men that rise; it does
not always need great ability in the sons to maintain their
position. Places are found for them whether they be competent
or not, while well-dowered daughters tend to find husbands whom
their own merits did not deserve. Selection, effective for a time,
is not always permanent, and the family tends to revert to a lower
plane of ability.

But, if natural selection cannot be relied on to maintain
its stringency, very little social selection has hitherto taken its
place. Mr. Balfour suggests, as the normal thing, that those
whose gifts make them prosperous, marry naturally the daughters
of those who are also prosperous. But what we have just said
weakens this argument. If selection largely ceases when a
family reaches an assured position, some of those who are
“prosperous” are not necessarily of high ability, and even the
daughter of a prosperous man will not necessarily be a satisfactory
mother. But, broadly, the argument is sound. If able men
married wisely, their progeny would, on the average, be much
abler than the bulk of the nation. But, too often, a man who Is
destined to rise rapidly and far, marries too soon to take
136 W. C. D. Whetham:

advantage of the extended choice of mates his ability should give
him, or, engaged in the struggle to excel, he marries not at all,
or too late to leave a full complement of offspring. One or two
children are not enough to give his ability a fair chance of
making its mark in the next generation.

Even if an able man who hasrisen marries appropriately and
leaves a large family, that family has still risks to run. Galton
has shown the disastrous effect which has been produced on
some of the ablest stocks which have come to the front during the
last two or three centuries by the desire to secure their financial
position by marriage with an heiress. An heiress is usually an
only child, or one of a small family. She comes of a probably
infertile race, and want of offspring destroys the family into which
she marries. In case after case, Galton traced the extinction
of a rising family, full of promise of benefit to the nation, to this
cause. If, on the other hand, the parental ability is of the type
which secures great wealth, a newly rich family does not always
attract the best type of aspirant to the honour of entering it.

To one who has studied the pedigrees of many families
with the hope of tracing the causes to which they owed their
rise or fall, the whole question resolves itself more and more into
a right choice of mates. Where there is ability on both sides,
especially if that ability be of the same type, a large proportion
of able children becomes almost a certainty. If physical
soundness accompanies ability, and fertility gives the combination
a proper chance, the family will go up in the world,—not
necessarily of course in wealth, but in ability, usefulness, and
reputation—in the next generation. If one parent be unsatisfactory, the chances of success are diminished very greatly.
When we think of the difficulty of securing a succession of
appropriate alliances, we need not wonder that the segregation
of ability has not been complete.

It is probable that a somewhat greater opportunity of making
suitable marriages explains the recurrence of ability of the
political, administrative and military types in the group of
governing families to which reference has already been made.
During the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries the
aristocratic governing class formed to some extent a close
HEREDITY AND DESTITUTION 137

corporation, the members of which married amongst themselves,
especially in a few markedly able families. It seems difficult to
avoid the conclusion that this circumstance was the cause of the
supernormal number of statesmen, administrators and soldiers,
belonging to those families, whose abilities were great enough to
earn them a place in the Dictionary of National Biography.
Members of those families found a society ready to their hand
permeated with administrative ability. From that society it
was customary for them to look for mates, and a race in which
able administrators were common was the result.

The comparative difficulty of demonstrating other cases of a
similar kind has two causes. The more homely types of administrative ability—those types required to manage a steady family
business or to keep a household in good order—do not usually
win their possessors a place in the records of the nation. And
the possessors of ability of special types—literary, scientific or
artistic—who do find their way into the Dictionary, are not
usually placed in their youth in a society in which that ability is
specialised, and from which they can easily and naturally find a
mate. Class distinctions, if class distinctions coincided with
different types of ability, would be a most valuable aid to the
racial development of diversified efficiency.

Though the answer to Mr. Balfour’s question is complex, I
believe that a complete answer can be found on the lines I have
indicated.

But Mr. Balfour had another difficulty for the believer in
selection as the determining factor in human racial problems.
He said: ‘‘There is a certain inconsistency between these
theories of heredity and hygiene, which almost everybody at the
present moment regards as the great and fundamental interest
of a modern civilised community, because hygiene must protect
those who, on the strict theory of the survival of the fittest, had
better not live and had better not have children. . . . But
disease is supposed to be the only method by which, under the
principle of natural selection, the destruction of the unfit is
allowed to work at all in civilised societies, and, if we do succeed
in producing a community in which no zymotic disease at all
exists, it is impossible to doubt that after a certain number of
138 W. C. D. Whetham :

generations a society would exist that would be weaker to resist
disease than the society in which we live.”’

All that 1s quite true; and it is to guard against the dangers
of the inevitable relaxation in the protection afforded to the race
by disease in the past that a more conscious selection will be
necessary in the future. Our fate is delivered into our own hands.
By an improved tone of public opinion, by a more careful choice
of mates, by control of those who through mental defect are
unfit for parentage but not responsible for their own actions, we
must mould the future destiny of the race as blind natural
selection has moulded it hitherto.

But, when Mr. Balfour implies that no convinced believer
in selection can conscientiously support efforts at improvement
in the hygienic environment, a conclusive answer can be given.
It is quite true that specific infectious diseases tend to improve
the race by cutting off those of weak and unsound general constitution. That function, from a racial point of view, is probably
an unmixed good. But they cut off also many whose only
defect is a susceptibility to one particular disease. Now
immunity from certain special and preventible diseases, though
useful in our present stage of civilisation, is not the highest ideal
for the future of mankind. At present, Nature has to face an
enormous waste of life in her attempts to protect the race in an
imperfect environment. If we improve the environment, this
waste can be prevented, and more energy left for selection—
conscious or unconscious—to work in other directions.

For instance, many of those specially liable to tuberculosis
possess valuable qualities of mind or body. In some of their
offspring it is probable, that, in accordance with Mendelian
inheritance, the valuatle qualities will appear separated from
the tendency to tuberculosis. We know too little yet about
heredity to acquiesce in the indiscriminate wiping out of all with
a tuberculous tendency. In some cases, it is true, tuberculosis
is but one sign of a stock generally unsound. Different members
of the family will suffer from tuberculosis, mental defect, criminal
propensities, physical deformity, or a combination of these evils.
That stock should go. Public opinion, or compulsory control in
suitable homes, should prevent the possibility of offspring. But,
HEREDITY AND DESTITUTION I39

in other cases, a tuberculous tendency is the only weakness in an
individual of otherwise sound stock, and brilliant mental endowments. The selectionist wishes his good qualities to be perpetuated, and supports with a clear conscience the medical
crusade against consumption.

And so with other zymotic diseases. If the infection can be
banished, it is wasteful to go on gaining complete immunity at
the cost of the loss of valuable strains of blood. That wasteful
process was necessary in past ages, when none but the blind
selection of Nature was at work. But now that a new revelation
has been given to mankind, we have the knowledge to guard
against the dangers of an improved environment. The power of
relaxing the cruelties of natural selection has been put into our
hands at the very time when we have come to realise the dangers
of that relaxation. If we wilfully refuse to act on the timely
light which has been bestowed on us, we shall deserve the fate
which inevitably will be ours. A failure to replace diminishing
natural selection with a gradually increasing conscious selection,
as our growing knowledge of heredity warrants its application,
will be followed by certain retribution. Though the mills of
God grind slowly, yet they grind exceeding small, and a wrongly
directed selection, though its effects only become apparent with
the lapse of generations, will destroy a race more effectively
and completely than fire and sword. Where now is the power
that was Rome, or the glory that was Greece?

But, for the purposes of the Conference at which Mr.
Balfour’s address was delivered, the consideration of the very wide
questions he proposed at the outset is not necessary. Mr. Balfour
recognised the sinister import of the recent differential fall in the
birth-rate, though by throwing doubt or the power of the
selectionist theory to explain other facts, he sought to suggest
hope that its results need not necessarily be as fatal as some
have predicted. The significance of the deliberate and voluntary
restriction of the birth-rate, which, though unacknowledged till
lately, has been the most important social phenomenon of the
past forty years, is not merely, or even chiefly, that it affects the
upper classes more than the lower. The really serious thing is
that it affects the most thrifty and far-seeing parts of each social
140 W. C. D. Whetham :

class more than the thoughtless and reckless. With few
exceptions, the best stocks of every class, the best families in
each rank of life, are being supplanted by the progeny of the
residuum.

This is the real answer to an obvious criticism of much that
has been written above. It will be said, and said truly, that, if
it be admitted that the upper classes are not markedly and
clearly more efficient than the lower, however that partial want
of segregation of ability be explained, the significance of the
selective birth-rate, as against class and class, is much lessened.
We shall be justified in hoping for a succession of great men,
drawn from the classes now below, and not markedly inferior in
number or ability to those given by the upper classes in the past.

But, when we find that the fall in the birth-rate is not only
greater in the upper classes as compared with the lower, but is
greater in the most efficient sections of each class, the comparative
failure of selection to bring about a wholesale segregation of
ability in the upper class ceases to be so consoling. The
prediction that the differential birth-rate will lead to average
race deterioration, and to a loss of the net efficiency of the nation,
is seen not necessarily to depend on the proof of complete class
segregation of ability, but to have behind it the whole of the
overwhelming and almost undisputed evidence for the inheritance
of physical and mental characters from ancestors to descendants.

And this is the difference in the birth-rate which in fact we
find. To take but one instance, we may turn to the oft-quoted
returns of the friendly societies on the one hand and the families
of the feeble-minded on the other. The birth-rate among the
thrifty and careful artisans who use the benefits of the friendly
societies has fallen to less than half what it was thirty years ago.
On the other hand, the average number of children in the families
of the mentally defective inmates of the special schools for the
feeble-minded is 7.3, while the average in those that use the
ordinary elementary schools is about four. A pair both of whom
are afflicted with the hereditary type of mental defect seem never
to produce a normal child, and yet their reproduction is allowed
to go on unchecked. Several years ago, a Royal Commission
reported in favour of the compulsory and permanent care and
HEREDITY AND DESTITUTION I4I

detention of the feeble-minded. All competent to judge agree
with their conclusions. Nothing has been done to carry their
recommendation into effect. Whatever be the cause of the delay,
it is a disgrace to the Government and to Parliament. The case
is urgent. The degradation of a long list of new victims, and a
continually growing load of their incompetent offspring for
society to support, is the result of each year’s dereliction of duty
on the part of those who are supposed to watch over the welfare
of the nation.

The bearing of this horrible tale on the problem of destitution
is obvious. No one denies that much, perhaps the greater part,
of pauperism is due to causes which are not the fault of those
who become dependent on the poor-law. To meet their case,
all efforts ought to be made at a better organisation of the labour
market, at more sensible education than that with which the
theorists of 1870 afflicted us, and greater provision against
‘* blind-alley ’’ occupation for boysand girls. The philanthropist
and the politician will always find reasons for pressing forward
reforms which salve their feelings of pity for suffering, and
secure votes from their constituents. These problems received
their full share of attention at the Conference, and are never
likely to be overlooked when the problem of destitution is
considered.

But everyone who has to administer the poor-law knows
that a certain number of paupers become destitute from congenital
defects of mind or body. They are physically unable to compete
with their more competent fellows, and inevitably become a
burden on society. Ina recent number of the EUGENICS REVIEW
many pedigrees were given of families, members of which
generation after generation fill the workhouse, the infirmary and
the prison. The women are prolific, and return to the maternity
wards again and again. Their children grow up, if they grow up
at all, with hereditary defects which cause the evil to spread in
ever-widening circles at an ever-growing rate. Here is one part
of the problem of destitution the cause of which is known with
certainty, the cure for which is clear. It needs but the courage
to assume the permanent care and control of these defective
members of the community for one generation to prevent all the
142 W.C. D. Whetham :

misery and degradation to themselves which follows their socalled liberty, and to cut off for ever the evil strains of blood
which uncontrolled they will disseminate through the nation.
The expense would be saved in a very few years in the lessened
cost of poor-law and police, while, infinitely more important, the
contamination with which they threaten the race would be
prevented. The problem of destitution is complex; but there is
one section of 1t which can be, and ought to be, solved once for all.
