50 | | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

discusses in detail the movements of population in England and Wales since the middle
of the nineteenth century and the developments and present status of population
policies in France, Belgium, Italy, Germany
and the Scandinavian countries. Whether

for consecutive reading or for reference this
is an indispensable work for serious students
of population. In a later issue we shall deal
with the bearing of Mr. Glass’s data on
eugenic policies to-day and in the period of
post-war reconstruction.

THE HEALTH OF WORKING WOMEN*
By M. L. SPRING RICE, M.A.

country is richest which nourishes

the largest number of noble and
happy people.’’ Eugenists do not need to be
reminded of the truth of this dictum, which
is indeed the guiding principle of their work.
But eugenists besides, perhaps before pursuing this exalted activity, are taxpayers,
politicians, members of the fighting forces,
business or professional people—mere men
or women working and planning to acquire
or maintain for themselves and their dependants that standard of physical well-being,
culture and leisure to which they are entitled
as human beings. They have undoubtedly
learnt, what Ruskin appeared sometimes to
forget, that these benefits depend to a large
extent on the means to buy them ; especially
is this so under modern conditions which
demand many auxiliaries, such as week-end
cottages, private secretaries, cruises, psychoanalysts, etc., to say nothing of the almost
indispensable accessories like motor cars,
telephones and central heating. The Chancellor of the Exchequer is going to put our
capacity for nobility and happiness severely
to the test when he deprives us, as he
threatens to do, of many of these helpful
props.

What then of those, the vast majority of
the population, who, far from having ever
known any luxury, have with difficulty
acquired the minimum, or less than the

* Substance of a paper read at a meeting of the
Eugenics Society on January 25th, 1940.

“r | ‘HERE is no wealth but life. That

minimum, to maintain healthy bodies, with
no margin at all for the spirit ? It is not, I
believe, exaggerated or sentimental to assert
that a very large proportion of the people of
this country, especially of the women, are
leading existences in which not only happiness and nobility are impossible, but which
are composed of so severe a struggle to keep
alive, that life itself is a euphemism which
hardly applies to them.

I want to speak to-day about the women
in this section of the community, and
particularly about their physical health.
Whether or not physical health is the most
important of our blessings, biologically it
comes first. The body’s demands must be
satisfied, before we can look for leisure or
culture of the spirit. But good health is not
Just a matter of being alive, or of satisfying
the basic demands of the body. It needs
much more than that. It needs enough of
certain kinds of food, enough rest, enough
leisure, enough fresh air, warmth and
exercise. The people of whom I speak are
alive, because they have been able to meet
the minimum physical demands. But they
are not healthy because they cannot get
enough of any of the right sort of commodities for good health. It is not in any
way their fault, though more might perhaps
be done with their very slender resources, if
they had the opportunity to learn more, to
buy scientifically and economically, and to
pool a great deal of their labour. But the
more they need good health to do their work
THE HEALTH OF WORKING WOMEN 51

in life, the less able are they to attain it (or
to maintain it, if they have ever had it), and
consequently the harder and less efficient
their work becomes, and the more rapid the
decline in their health. It is more than a
vicious circle. It is a tragic one for the
individual sufferer, and a terribly dangerous
one for the nation. The health of these
people must not be thought of in comfortable
middle-class terms. Whereas ill-health may
be irksome or painful to the comparatively
well-to-do, they, generally speaking, have
no one but themselves to blame for it. They
can lead healthy lives, eat the right sort of
food, keep warm, have enough air and
exercise, leisure, rest and recreation. When
they fall ill they can take immediate steps
to get well again. And what is more, their
world does not stand still while they lie
abed. But the working mother, upon whose
labour the health of her whole family depends,
cannot command any substitute for her
work, and if she gives way half a dozen other
people may suffer very seriously indeed.
She needs good health to a degree which the
middle-class woman finds it very difficult to
understand. It seems to me that the first
function of a civilized nation should be the
provision of all the fundamentals of good
health for all its citizens, but first and foremost for its working-class mothers, whose
labour is the most indispensable in the world.

Let us, as far as we can, look at the facts.
It is true that there is no official measurement of ill-health in this country. Certain
statistics help us to form a rough estimate of
the state of the nation’s health. We have
birth and death rates ; we know the ages at
which people die, and, generally speaking,
the causes, or the immediate causes. We have
maternal mortality rates, and infant mortality rates, and we have the opportunity of
observing and counting those people who
come for treatment to the hospitals or centres
for special diseases, whether they do so
voluntarily or are compelled to notify their
condition. We have regular inspection of
certain classes of people, for instance school
children (three times in their school life!),
army recruits, police-force recruits and so on.
Moreover, we know that we spend about

300 million pounds a year on the cure of illhealth, with probably another roo million on
time lost through ill-health. We can analyse
insurance statistics, and we can count the
blind and the deformed and so on. Many of
the great industries have excellent medical
welfare supervisors who really watch the
good health of their employees as well as
treating their ailments. But we can only
make a wild guess at the morbidity of that
vast section of the community with whom I
am concerned, the mothers who come under
no insurance scheme, who work in no
factory and under no supervision, and whose
home conditions are not subject to any
inspection as a factory is, unless they fall
obviously and dangerously below a certain
very low level (for which even then there is
often no remedy at all).

Luckily, however, there are occasions when.
the mother impinges upon the public conscience, namely when she is bearing a child.
The public and the Ministry of Health began
to be seriously alarmed a short time ago at
the figures of maternal mortality, and a
departmental enquiry was held. High mortality figures imply a widespread morbidity,
and it was suggested in the Final Report of
the Departmental Enquiry on Maternal
Mortality (published in 1932) that there was
a very great deal of ill-health amongst
working-class mothers which could not be
assessed. Moreover, the report stated that
while much ill-health was due to insufficient
care in child-birth and during pregnancy, and
to lack of post-natal care, probably a great
deal dated back much further in the woman’s
life, and might be traced to certain diseases—
such as rickets—in early childhood.

At this time (1932) I and some colleagues
had been running a women’s welfare centre
for eight years. Our function had been
originally to give scientific birth-control
advice to poor women who were unable to
pay the fees asked by the very few doctors
who at that time knew anything about this
branch of medicine. We had found to our
dismay that well over 50 per cent. of our
patients, coming only for contraceptive advice,
needed treatment for post-natal conditions
of some sort or another. Moreover, it was
52 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

clear that their general health was extremely
poor. They were often anemic, nearly
always badly constipated, often rheumatic
and very seldom indeed in what could
properly be termed good health. We sent
them at first into hospitals or special clinics,
but it became clear that we could only deal
adequately with the gynecological ailments
by treating the minor ones (i.e. those not
needing operations) ourselves.

As a result of this experience and of reading the Final Report of the Maternal
Mortality Committee, I consulted Mrs.
Hubback and we formed a small representative committee to investigate the general
conditions of life and health of married
working women. We made dossiers for 1,250
women from all parts of the country, and
taken seriatim so that there should be no
selection of those who were known to have
bad health. The results can only be treated as
a sample, but I think it is a fair sample, and
that other figures bear out our discoveries.

I can only summarize our results. About
one-third of the women appeared to be in
good health ; another third were obviously
in very bad health; and the remaining
third in indifferent health. They received no
medical examination nor were any medical
records about them referred to. The investigators were for the most part municipal and
county Health Visitors. Now it is interesting
to compare these figures with those of the
Army Recruiting Board. In 1936 from onethird to one-half of all recruits for the Army
and the Air Force were rejected. Again,
during the last war medical examination of
24 million men revealed approximately the
same proportion of good, bad, and indifferent
health as amongst our group of 1,250 women.
It is pretty clear that the life and functions
of the average working-class mother impose
a far greater strain on health than a young
army recruit is subject to, and therefore that
if these 1,250 women had been medically
examined a far larger proportion would have
been found in poor health ; conditions would
have been found the presence of which would
not be suspected by the women themselves,
although they might be aware of a general
feeling of discomfort, pain or debility.

What are the causes of this poor health
and how can it be treated, or better still
prevented ? |

The main cause is of course poverty. The
woman is simply not able with her income
to buy sufficient food and decent housing
conditions for a family of more than two or
three children at the outside. And where
there is not enough of these things to go
round, she will inevitably do without her
share of them. Poverty causes all the
difficulties under which she labours. The
work of a poor house is heavier and more
difficult than that of a good one. She has
fewer utensils to clean or cook with, and this
adds to her problems. She is longer hours at
work which means less rest and leisure. This
in its turn means less time to take the precautions to maintain good health both for
herself and her family.

The avérage number of pregnancies for
the 1,250 women was 4:6. For the 400 in
really bad health the average was 5:6; for
the 400 in apparently good health, the average was 3:6. This tells its own story. A
woman in normal health should be able to
bear five or six or seven healthy children
without any injury to her own health. But
when the arrival of each child after the
second means that everyone in the family
has to do with a little less food or good
clothes or warmth, and when in these respects
the mother is the first sufferer, then a large
family directly impairs her health. Her work
grows heavier, and yet with each arrival she
is able to get less rest after the birth and must
get back to her daily tasks sooner. She
becomes progressively less able to keep her
pace. Only a very few know how to control
the numbers of their children, or to provide
for proper intervals between their births.
We are recruiting the next generation from
the poorest and weakest class, simply because
the large family is frequently the direct
cause of poverty, and poverty is the direct
and fundamental cause of ill-health.

A difficulty about treatment is the woman’s
heroic, often indeed very foolish indifference
to her own health, and the absence of any
teaching or empirical knowledge which might
have enabled her to form a high standard of
THE HEALTH OF WORKING WOMEN 53

good health. Knowing as she does that upon
her ability to keep going depends the wellbeing of her family, she will only ask advice
in the very last resort, i.e. when her condition
gets to the point of crippling her work. It
was clear in our investigation that ailments
of this nature received a far higher percentage of treatment than those which could
be overlooked. Women with bad legs, for
instance, or with rheumatism or gynxcological disorders, sought for advice far more
readily than those with anemia, headaches,
or constipation. Another trouble is that the
remedies for much ill-health are quite
beyond the purse or the resources of the
average woman. Thus, when told that for
the treatment of anemia—the commonest of
all the conditions on which advice was
sought—they must eat more nourishing food,
and get more rest and more fresh air, the
patients’ comment over and over again was
“ That is quite impossible.”

Another factor is ignorance. These women,
like most of us, received practically no health
teaching while they were young. Women of
the middle classes have at least been brought
up in healthy conditions, and to a certain
extent instinctively follow the habits of their
childhood in matters of general health. But
even that knowledge is denied to the workingclass mother, whose mother before her was
equally ignorant and had as little opportunity to give herself or her children the
fundamental conditions of a healthy life.

- What then should be done? The workingclass mother cannot be forced to submit
herself to medical examination more often,
or to follow a treatment which she cannot
afford. It is quite clear that the main
emphasis must be on preventive measures.
At little or no cost, according to her means,
all the conditions which are necessary for the
maintenance of good health must be made
available for her. Psychologically, this is of
the greatest importance. The answers given
by our 1,250 women showed that whatever
knowledge they had gained about health was
not in the course of consulting their doctor
when they were ill, but while visiting the
welfare centres with their children, and
talking to a medical woman (that it is a

woman is very important) about their
children and not about themselves. The
Maternity and Child Welfare Centres of this
country are the greatest experiment in
preventive medicine that we have ever tried,
and it is along these lines that we shall find
the most encouraging results in the field of
women’s health. Of course there are other
desperately needed reforms as well; better
and more scientific housing, more free meals
for pregnant and nursing mothers, and
allowances for children. These are all
reforms for which we cannot afford to wait.

But what has happened now? We were
just beginning to think about these matters
seriously, we were becoming “ fitness-conscious,’ and then the bottom falls out of this
brave new world, and we are told that all our
plans must wait. All our money and savings
and energies are to go to one end only, the
prosecution of the war. The dysgenic effect
of war is a commonplace ; the selection of
the youngest and strongest for sacrifice is a
first-class national tragedy, but there is more,
to it than that. Not only shall we be left to
carry on without these young men, the
fathers of the next generation, but our efforts
to provide decent conditions of life for that
next generation are frustrated at the very
outset. Surely we need such efforts more now
than at any other time. This is not the
moment to make it more difficult for this
generation of mothers, for those whose young
and unborn children are to replace the men
who are killed, to provide for themselves and
their families the essentials of good health.
For whom do we fight if not for these? I
can imagine no more evil a confusion of
thought than to see in the problematical
victim of an air raid a patient more worth
treating than the present victim of tuberculosis or an underfed pregnant woman.

One of the most dangerous and insidious
effects of war is that the effort needed for its
immediate prosecution is allowed to destroy
what is most worth saving. Homes are being
broken up, children are being deprived of
normal educational opportunity, and about
1,500 people a month are being killed on the
roads as a direct result of our efforts to
protect ourselves against air raids. It may
54 - THE EUGENICS REVIEW

be the right policy, but at least we should
not let those things go which need not go,
and in the preservation of which alone this
sacrifice and slaughter can be justified. If at
the end of this struggle we have allowed an
increase of the rot and wastage already far
too extensive amongst that section of the
community on whom so much of our hope
for the future must depend, we shall have no
nation worth trying to save. We must be
ready to make the sacrifices as the Chancellor of the Exchequer and the Prime
Minister have told us. But not all for guns.
. . . Nor must we ask for sacrifices from
those who already have less than enough to
live upon. If they are fortunate enough to
find themselves with more to spend, let them,
encourage them to spend it in any way which
will procure for themselves and their young
families a little more of those material
benefits which lie at the very base of a
healthy and civilized nation.

SOCIETY

The Eugenics Society stands for a type of
progressive and constructive thought of
which we were never in greater need than
during the devastating progress of war. It
must cling to its ideals with all the force at
its command, and oppose all legislation or
orders in council which threaten the quality
and quantity of the life from which we must
draw in the future. It must insist on a full
measure, a far fuller measure than we have
had hitherto, of those protective social
services, especially those for women and
children, which are the most valuable
concrete contribution to the vital wealth of
the nation. It must see that no energy,
whether of money, thought or work is withdrawn from these fields, for if it is, the
victory which we hope to win over the evil
forces we are fighting will turn to dust and
ashes in our mouths, and our struggle will
have been utterly in vain.

OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION

* For the promotion of knowledge of the course of legislation in different countries, more particularly in the
several parts of His Majesty’s Dominions, and in the United States.”
President : The Rt. Hon. 8S. M. BRUCE, C.H., M.C.
Chairman of the Executive Committee: The Rt. Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.C.V.O.
Honorary Secretaries: C. E. A. BEDWELL, Esq.
Professor H. C. GUTTERIDGE, K.C.

Annual Subscription = 
One Guinea

Address: 1 Elm Court, Temple, London, E.C.4

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXII, No. 2.
