EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE. 9

the eugenic ideal in the mind of the children of to-day, you
will be taking a definite step towards ensuring the racial
progress of our nation in the future.

THE DIFFICULTIES IN INTRODUCING THE SUBJECT OF
EUGENICS INTO THE ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS.

By Mr. W. A. NICHOLLS
(Ex-President of the National Union of Teachers).

THE study of eugenics is a very fascinating one, and it is
with some regret that I turn from the charming way in which
the President dealt with the subject to the more prosaic manner
in which I shall have to deal with it. You will see that my
position is ostensibly one in opposition to that, but I simply
read this paper in order that a full discussion on both sides of
the question may take place.

I think the first difficulty is expressed in the words of Sir
James Barr, the President of the Liverpool Branch of the Eugenics
Education Society. He says “The science of Eugenics labours
under great difficulties at present, because it is popularly misunderstood.” One may go a step further, I think, and say that comparatively few people have taken the pains to find out what it is
that the Eugenist is really trying to achieve. In the public
elementary schools we cannot wisely and safely attempt to go far
in advance of public opinion. The Board of Education, Education
Authorities and teachers generally are to a considerable extent
influenced by what they conceive to be the most urgent needs of
the pupil in the short term of his school life. Nor are we helped
very much when we turn to the definition of Eugenics, formulated
by Sir Francis Galton, the founder of the Eugenics Education
Society. “Eugenics is the study of agencies under social control
that may improve or impair the racial qualities of future generations
either physically or mentally.” On the face of it, any critic of our
primary schools would be inclined to say that the subject was not
suitable for children drawn largely from the working classes whose
school life ends at fourteen or earlier.
10 EUGENICS REVIEW.

That there are portions of the science of Eugenics which may
be suitably treated in a public elementary school I am quite ready
to admit. At the same time it must always be remembered that
in treating any science it is extremely difficult to deal with a section
without relation to the whole.

Mr. Russell defines the science as “the study of the conditions
under control which affect the quality of children at birth” and the
art of Eugenics he defines as “the steps by which the knowledge
gained from that study may be turned to practical account in the
interest of children yet unborn, and ideals yet unrealised.”

One can easily see that here we should come face to face with
heredity and Mendelian law. As long as we confined ourselves to
plants and horses I can quite understand that we should have quite
an interested class; the difficulty would arise when we came to
apply the fundamental principles of the laws of heredity to the
human kind. I do not myself see how the transition is to be
effected. It is quite easy to speak of the fertilisation and the
propagation of plants even in a mixed class, and, of course, whereever Botany is taught the organs of propagation are fully explained.
I think the difficulty would be to pass on the question of the
propagation of the human species; and surely that is the very
essence of Eugenics, the choice on the part of the fit of a mate who
is also fit. It is too early in life I think to speak of such things
except perhaps in regard to moral fitness.

Assuming however that it is right to explain sex and the
responsibilities accompanying the knowledge of sex to young
children, I maintain that in the present condition of public opinion
the only persons who can do it with safety are the parents ; and
every parent must at present at all events be left to judge for
himself or herself. Some parents have even ventured to explain
the mystery of birth to very young children indeed. That is a
matter of individual judgment, but in this relation the teacher has
no claim to exercise individual judgment.

The serious difficulty is that not only public opinion but many
Education Authorities would view with reprehension any attempt
to explain in the most elementary way the question of sex.

It must be the preliminary duty of the Eugenics Education
Society to educate the Board of Education, His Majesty’s
EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE. II

Inspectors, Local Education Authorities and the teachers themselves in regard to this duty. And when this is accomplished I
venture to think the parent ought to be the final arbiter. It is, of
course, quite possible to treat the question of race improvement
from the purely ethical standpoint, but does this meet the view of
the Eugenist ? If this is all that is meant I venture to say that it
is being done already, the importance of temperance, of cleanliness,
and so forth as factors in the production of a healthy race present
no difficulties beyond the fact that in some districts the teacher
would come across the parent.

An attempt, however, to do what the Eugenist would desire
us to do, z.2., to come to close quarters with the children in regard
to the most sacred of all subjects—the question of sex—seems to me
to be irreconcilable with a collective system of teaching. One
would imagine that these things would only be spoken of in a quiet
talk with the individual child. I can imagine a parent possessing
the full confidence of a child, in a position as it were to feel his
way to the heart and conscience of the child, doing it, but I cannot
imagine a teacher in the presence of a number of children venturing
upon such a topic. One would require to keep a delicate hand
upon the pulse of the child’s consciousness to know exactly how
far to go and when to stop. One is therefore bound to conclude
that it could find no place in the curriculum of an ordinary school,
where, unless one is fully acquainted with the home environment,
more harm than good is likely to accrue.

At a later stage a teacher of influence and power and personal
sympathy with the peculiar needs of young people from fifteen to
seventeen might render great service by an earnest talk on the need
of purity, but in this case the teacher must be a person of rare gifts
and clear insight. I know of one case where the Head Master of
a large commercial evening school has earned the gratitude of
many of his pupils by this direct dealing with a known danger.

The larger aspect of this question dealing with the “control of
agencies” that may impair or improve the racial qualities of future
generations is, I submit, quite beyond the scope of the instruction
in a primary school.

Lastly, it may be taken for granted that no persons are more
deeply interested in the question of racial improvement than the
12 EUGENICS REVIEW.

teachers in the people’s school, and none can bear more eloquent
testimony to the sad results of physical and mental deterioration.
Here and there a devoted man or woman essays to begin at the
beginning and tries to give a right and true perception of fundamental truths, in one case at least within the knowledge of the.
writer, with disastrous results to himself, arising from prejudiced
local opinion and the want of support from the Authority under
which he served.

Such a subject requires such cautious handling, and must be so
carefully and gradually led up to, that I can see no prospect, in
view of the little spare time left to the teacher in an already
crowded time-table, of its being incorporated in the school
curriculum.

It is possible that something may be done in an incidental
way to which, however, one can attach but little importance.

HOW THE DIFFICULTIES IN TEACHING EUGENICS MAY
BE OVERCOME.

By Mr. J. H. BapiLry
(Headmaster of Bedale’s School, Petersfield).

WE are probably all agreed as to the difficulty of teaching
eugenics, or, if I may be allowed to substitute a name of rather
narrower import, which expresses more nearly what I regard
as the subject of my contribution to this discussion, I would
rather say of teaching sex-hygiene in the school. The difficulty
is there: the only question is how is it to be overcome? For
as to the need to face and overcome it, there are not, I hope, two
opinions about that. We all know that, if the facts are not
learnt in the right way, they will be learnt in the wrong; or,
worse still, not the facts themselves, but some distorted and
degraded view of them from which perhaps they may never
afterwards be entirely freed. Even to risk this is a crime alike
against the child and against the race. I shall not therefore
stop to discuss whether sex-hygiene ought to be taught to
children, but only can it be taught? and if it can, then how?

First, then, can eugenics, in this sense, be taught at school
at all? I must say at once that, so far as the elementary school
is concerned, I have no right to attempt to answer the question.
