REVIEWS OF BOOKS

same Department involving rehabilitative and preventative psychiatric programmes. The
latter will include genetic counselling and a comprehensive psychiatric programme for
deaf children.

JOHN C. DENMARK

Etzioni, Amitai. Studies in Social Change. New York, 1966. Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Pp. xii + 226. Price 32s. Paperback.

AMITAI ETZIONI IS well known for his stimulating contributions to sociological theory,
particularly in the field of social organizations. In this book he has brought together a
number of studies, all, with one exception, published previously in various journals. By
adding introductory comments he uses them as case-studies for theoretical arguments on
social change. In the first section he offers two illustrations of biologically derived models
for sociological analysis. In one case (the formation of elites in a Kibbutz) a process of.
differentiation is demonstrated to show that a social unit contains in its simplest or rudimentary form all thestructures which, in thecourse of development, will become differentiated
until the unit achieves the complexity of an advanced system. A second model is suggested
in another study (the formation of international unions) where a social unit is shown to
acquire new parts, not previously present in rudimentary form. For such a process Etzioni
uses the concept of epigenesis. The second part of the book deals with “the differences
among strategies that seek peaceful change” (p. 54) and is illustrated by a study of the formation of the European Economic Community and by a particularly interesting analysis of
the American-USSR detente in 1963. In the third section Etzioni deals with the problem
of consensus formation and this is supported by two more international studies. In a final
part we are offered three case studies of social change, two dealing with Israel and one with
the religious organisations of American Jewry.

Those who have learned to accept the often heavy and clumsy American sociological
style of writing in the tradition of Talcot Parsons will welcome this book even though one
is not convinced that the various theoretical formulations are fully supported by the material
offered. Two small criticisms are the relatively high price for a paperback and the author’s
failure, in his last chapter, to provide explanations for Hebrew and Jewish religious terms
which are used in a paper originally addressed to a Jewish readership.

| JULIUS CARLEBACH

ECONOMICS

Stassart, Joseph. Les avantages et les inconvénients économiques d’une population stationnaire.
Collection Scientifique de la Faculté de Droit de L’Université de Liége 20. Liége and The
Hague, 1965. Faculté de Droit, Liége, and Martinus Nijhoff. Pp. 256. Price 18 guilders; 36s.

THE OBJECT OF this book is to review the strictly economic issues concerning population
growth in a developed economy. In this, it succeeds admirably. The discussion is set against
a background of slow demographic growth in Belgium, where for a period the net rate of
reproduction fell below one, and where population trends have caused a great deal of alarm.
The book is not concerned, however, with the problems of a declining population, but with
the economic effects of having a higher level of fertility rather than a lower one. The
arguments in favour of lower fertility are first presented and every possible objection is
assessed. Then the same process is adopted for the arguments favouring higher fertility.
Each issue is treated lengthily but clearly, and the book should be easily understandable by
those without a prior knowledge of economics.

277
