THE DESCENDANTS OF SIR GEORGE.
- -VILLIERS*
By PAUL BLOOMFIELD

T the present time the public interest
As genealogy, such as it is, rather tends
‘Ato be concentrated on the pedigrees
of horses. This subject is suggestive enough.
For instance The Times of April 8th, 1946,

discussing two famous sires of steeplechasers,

mentioned that a stallion called Marco was
the link between them. ‘ Marco was also
the grandsire of Hurry On, who was the
grandsire of Bogskar. My Prince was a son
of Marcovil, who was by Marco. Cottage’s
dam, Casetta, was by Marco. It is evident,”
said The Times correspondent, ‘‘ that the
line of Marco still continues to dominate this
field of sport.”

This is interesting, but how much more
interesting if we were to find that the line
of some human sire dominated a field
humanly even richer than sport. And this
is what we do find—a startling discovery, I
think, and not only in one case, but in no
case more so than that of an Elizabethan
gentleman who died in the year 1606 after
being married twice and having had five
children by each of his wives. You or I
might have some occasion for pride if we
were descended from him, a probability
against which the chances are no more,

roughly, than 2,000 to 1. Most people would 
agree that a 2,000 to'I winner in the other
field I was alluding to would have been
worth backing.

Our Elizabethan gentleman’s name was
Sir George Villiers. It will be suspected that
he had something to do with James II’s
favourite, the Duke of Buckingham. This
is correct : he was the Duke’s father. I had
not heard of him myself till about three
years ago, when I came across his name in
a paper which Lord Keynes had slipped into

a little book mainly about economists.

* Adapted from a broadcast talk given on March 12th,
1947.

63

Lord Keynes had been reading the late Mr.
W. T. J. Gun’s Studies in Hereditary Ability.
I was so intrigued that I began looking
things up, and the more I looked the more
my interest grew. Then I resorted to
Galton’s Hereditary Genius. I was moved to
see that that great man had been very warm
on the track of this astonishing genealogy,
without however once in his epoch-making
work mentioning the name of Villiers.

Galton’s conviction that a certain general
ability is strongly inherited has been amply
borne out by science in the last forty years.
In his recent report on Intelligence and
Fertility Sir Cyril Burt says: “‘ There is now
overwhelming evidence to show that, of the
individual differences revealed by tests of
this ‘ general factor,’ the greater amount is
due to the individual’s innate or inherited
constitution.”” Galton was not on such firm
ground when he used the Bach family to
illustrate the inheritance of artistic ability.
In such matters a man’s powers lie more
between him and his Muse—or the grace of
God. But he was amply justified when he
took several groups from the Villiers Connection (though, as I say, without’ mentioning that name) to prove the persistence of
their practical endowments. Let us see what
these amounted to.

Sir George Villiers, dying in 1606, was
quite unaware of his significance as fountainhead of what Lord Keynes called * the true
blood-royal of this country.’ He was
unaware of it because, when he died, his
second son by his second marriage—the
future Duke—had not yet attracted the
king’s attention. From the moment he did
so the die was cast. To begin with, the
leading men or mistresses of the Stuart kings,

and of William III, and of Queen Anne, were

all descendants of Sir George. This brings
us to the most significant fact about the
whole Connection, namely that the field in
 

; ' ‘ehramaty ‘sAquosuog ‘039 ‘sratdeny 943
‘099 ‘sharuKIS (281foAou 943) SYSEPUSAB ‘safrAuBis) ‘xoq souref sopeyD
‘stg Ture Fy surppry Aruazy SJ2M05)-UOsaAa] JO s10jsa0uy
jo rosso jo sous ‘sBuIp[.y jo sys.UYy !
oTEB VA] = UOITUIBEY JO ayNC] 367 Paoussoc] jo [eq ysiqued jo “| pus mere? | eee
t | | uysunpng jo oma puz ‘aBs0e5) vns= XagsNG jo [eq
UBSNS = Ys quad] jo [sey weysurypINg JO syn] yr ‘aB1oer) «= Ave Buy yo “q ‘saydoyswqD

: 3 :
(sjUBpUsosep Ia] oI] Bs9Y432 PUB PetITeU Inoj WIOYA JO ‘WorIp]TYya oOUT oAt sa} t |
qwoumnveg Arey] (pUZ)=SUAITIIA ADYOAD UIS

‘d: “SISTTIIA “d “D Jo ‘079 ‘UIByUsyeY ps0]
pus * S usreiog 343 tueyan¢y p4o’T
uopuarE> paol jo Joysoouy jo sory
bop) jo “q 381 , Aassaf ? “a pat
WBnosoq.ng |
(YstepAey pso7y jO SJB 943 JO ssansoouy Sasiof jo “gq puz uzeng
Bulpnpur ‘uos.3suUOD YsLy 38213 ey) III Gey jo ssexnsiy k queseid Ing jo sJ0js90uy
’ AdUxIQ Apey hasiof Jo “FJ l
ART = GMb RpUl joa weal pmapal eo ed jo “a
(aUmMOGPH *039 ‘Yeas
Pso’y Jo osye A[quqosd) uepy = -epeBD ‘psoyzseyy JO ssonb
"239 ‘zaqseqUey] ‘299 “ssrdoryjuepigd Auoywy aN jo siojse0uy =— = BIA Pez ie Jojsouy
0 $9 ‘yjno ay2 ‘Am
i Gimaeaee - = “(aiompty) sowed Preyyory jo aes mee jo ayng
‘ ue ‘YIM Jog ‘ySnosoqi ss tet
, jo omc an jo Joyo] 0 snd ” s0}NsoUy uarpiry i JO Om],
II soureferjaqery = A2IZPOH *JOD ySnosoqisey tT oe sopreyy
| | settee

yeaqiayy Asupis jo pus

‘ eyoqun JO sq rs" jo

°990 ‘QynouTEGg yryeqezyq = [[TYyImy> uozsurpy US few dant ima po oes souerye senbeeqne © A ane

39 S]IER Yl JO Sz0I sas | ° ae 931005) pzempy UNBITTEAA ‘sSarp]IYo sem oBerzeUr LL
08827 “M= 40qUZzT BuePE = eyeIg uyof 1g LO | | auTIAY IVD = ayoIqUIEg ‘P’]

t | _
: uYyof 2g weqreg= preMpy UIT

UOIBUIYSBAA "AA aS omy 32]990g pro wieqeaita
pT

(UepUsosep pEY PUL Peleus Inos ase) WOYM JO ‘UaIPIIGO 9AI,J) |
me ssepuneg Aospny (381)=SYAITIIA JDYOAD UIS
THE DESCENDANTS OF SIR GEORGE VILLIERS 65

which Sir George was a “ Marco” was the
political field. It is a remarkable tale.
From Walpole to Mr. Attlee there have
been forty-two Prime Ministers. Seven of
them have been descended from Sir George.
Two others in the Connection could have
been Prime Minister if they had wanted:

a Lord Waldegrave and a Lord Clarendon. |

The actual seven were Chatham, Portland,
Grafton, Pitt, Russell (Lord John, grandfather of Bertrand Russell), Derby, and Mr.
Winston Churchill.* Nobody should imagine
that this exhausts the Connection. Far
from it. Seven Chancellors of the Exchequer trace their line from Sir George,
and among the ten Foreign Secretaries of
this stock Castlereagh was one and Mr.
Eden the last up to date. There have been
hardly any administrations without their
representatives of Sir George Villiers, the
two in the present Labour Government being
Lord Listowel and Lord Pakenham.

In a superficial view the ascendancy of
Sir George’s offspring was less a matter of
hereditary ability than (granted certain
worldly advantages to start with) of judiciously marrying into other powerful families
and having plenty of children. Of course
these two things ave very important. But
we cannot so simply account for the way the
Villierses swept those kings and queens off
their feet and, before long, the whole nation
as well. Our first obvious inference from
what we know about the inheritance of
general ability is that even opportunity is
less important than heredity. The point is
not that the Villierses were rich and grand,
and that they filled high offices. The point
is that they were effective: intelligent, and
singularly apt to pass on their effectiveness
to their children. Though to-day we may
fairly hope that more equal opportunities
will level up people’s condition we must not
jump to rash conclusions beyond that. On
any level of society there are greater differences in intelligence and ability between
individuals in that class than between theiy

* Lord Melbourne makes a probable eighth. There
seem to be good reasons for believing that his father
was Lord Egremont, who was a descendant of Sir
George Villiers.

average and the average of other classes.
What does this indicate where the Villierses
are concerned ? This: that we should be
making a mistake if we underrated their
hereditary ability—as by insisting that, after
all, in the seventeenth century Buckingham
and his cousins had a flying start because
capable middle-class men and women were
not yet in a position to compete with their
social betters. What we should consider is
that the Villierses were in competition with
an established and powerful community of
Cecils, Howards, Talbots, Dudleys, Sidneys
and so forth—and really, they won hands
down. The two Buckinghams, father and
son, were the two most prominent men in
England in three reigns. But the versatile,
vicious second Duke left no children. The
key man was the first Duke, that strange,
glamorous figure who so enraged Parliament
that he may almost be given credit for the
Petition of Right. Buckingham was a
shameless nepotist, if one may extend the
reference of this word to half-brothers and
brothers-in-law. It is, however, necessary
to note that being a successful nepotist, a
successful favourite, required certain outstanding qualities. Robert Carr, who preceded Villiers in the king’s affections, lacked
those qualities and ended his life in serious
disgrace. Villiers was impeached and not
long after assassinated, but he held his head
high to the end—by which time the nest had
been feathered.

Let us see if we have any clue to the
developments that followed. It seems clear
we have. Many of these people had two
qualities among others which leap out at us
both from the written and the painted
descriptions we have of them. They had
great charm. And they had a certain core
of toughness. That amazing gold-digger,
Barbara Villiers, Duchess of Cleveland, had
great beauty as well. We can quite understand why Charles II had a passion for this
lady who, by him, was the ancestress of so
many eminent people. But it was not the
beauty of Sir George’s great-great-granddaughter, Arabella Churchill, that inflamed
James II. Charles rudely said that his
brother’s confessor must have chosen her for
66 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

him by way of penance. What Arabella
had was the fateful charm—her brother, the
great Marlborough, had the looks. Elizabeth Villiers must have had the charm, too:
charm and force of personality, or else how
should she, with her squint, rather than any
of the other, beautiful, talented ladies of the
court, have won the austere William III’s
heart ?

We must pass on—to the Pitts and to Fox.
Fox like the Younger Pitt was seventh in
line of descent from Sir George Villiers. It
is astonishing! I am far from wanting to
claim any merit if I put my stress here on
something that escaped Galton. But the
facts are striking. What happened was that
a great nabob, nicknamed “ Diamond ”
Pitt, had made a fortune in India. He had
a son Robert who became father of the
future Chatham. There was evidently
plenty of practical ability in the Pitts, but
I doubt whether the Pitt character by itself
was enough to inspire Chatham, in the crisis

of the 1750’s, with the conviction that he»

was the one man who could save England.
He said: “I can save this country—and
nobody else can:’’ All this I attribute to
Robert Pitt having married Harriet Villers.
This is the family in which saving England
(in a certain sense) has run since Marlborough’s day. It is of genealogical relevance
that Harriet’s paternal grandparents were
cousins : both descended from Sir George.
The Chatham earldom became extinct ;
the Younger Pitt never married. Eminence
is not enough ; there have got to be children
—and in most Villiers branches there were
quiversful. Fox, however, with a certain
appropriateness, also died childless—died
within a year of Pitt, close to whom he lies
buried in Westminster Abbey.
There is no space to say much about the
descendants of Sir George who mustered in
such force to pass the great Reform Act of
1832, or about the extravagant, brilliant
Lord Durham, son of a Villiers mother, who
showed the way to turn the British Empire
into a Commonwealth of Nations. I ought
at least to make some mention, in passing,
of the wickedness that has been regarded as
a conspicuotis feature of the Connection.

There was the bigamous Duchess of Kingston.
There was that great rake, the Marquess of
Hertford, to whose son and. illegitimate
grandson we owe the Wallace Collection.
There were plenty of others, among them
Lady Caroline Lamb—if we can call her
wicked. I confess it impresses me to think
that the wickedest man and the secondwickedest woman I have known myself were
both descended from Sir George. They were
both charming, and are both dead now,

‘having died young. They burned the candle

at both ends. It would be absurd to take
them as having been specially representative
of the Connection, though most of the
famous ones have been worldly—the genes
they carry, their special genes, seem to be
for that practical general ability which
Galton affirmed to be transmissible. Nevertheless the great philanthropist, Lord Shaftesbury, was one of them.

It is an amiable tendency in the public

-. that they like to hear of men and women

rising in the world through their own efforts,
From Log. Cabin to White House: admuirable! But surely it should not be thought
less of a satisfaction to be able to trace the
line of a man who has emerged from obscurity —
and has the additional social virtue of being
able to transmit his valuable qualities to
his descendants. We cannot say that Sir
George Villiers started from nothing. Perhaps
it was the enterprising Villiers who may be
presumed to have come over with the Conqueror who was the new variation—who had,
I mean, the seed of ability which only
ripened five hundred years later. I think
the significant ancestor was further back
than that, but this is because I am tempted
to accept Burke’s statement that the family
came from L’Isle Adam. A descendant of Sir
George however informs me that the earliest
forebear of whom he is certain is Alexander
de Villiers of Kinalton, who lived in the reign
of Henry II.

Before Sir George’s time there was a
French Villiers who as Grand Master of the.
Knights of Malta proved himself a remarkable man. Three centuries later his descendant, Count Villiers de l’Isle Adam, was
a distinguished writer. One of the pleasures
- NOTES AND MEMORANDA 67

of genealogy to which I look forward is
testing Sir George’s link with L’Isle Adam ;
another is tracing the marriages of the
French Villiers women. I shall be surprised
if these researches do not turn out rewarding.

We may or may not admire Marco for
being a sire of notable steeplechasers. It
would be a wretched, backsliding social
philosophy—and a highly unscientific one—
that made us hesitate to value the emergence
of capable and tenacious breeds of men.

NOTES AND

Positive Eugenics: A Proposal
FELLOwsS and Members will be interested to
know that Dr. C. P. Blacker’s contribution to
the April 1946 REVIEW under the above
title is now available to a wider public.
The article has been reprinted in British
Thought 1947,* an American publication
devoted to the ‘“‘ most significant of to-day’s
writing on such varied themes as Sociology,
International Affairs, Literature, Science,
Economics, Politics and Art by Britain’s
most eminent writers and thinkers.”’

Institute of Sociology

FIELD study meetings will be held in Denmark (island of Als and Copenhagen) from
August 15th to 26th, and in Switzerland
(Rhone Valley and Berne) from August 14th
to 27th.

The annual conference will take place from
September 3rd to roth at Ashburne Hall,
University of Manchester, with “ Searchlight on Community : theory and practice ”’
as the main subject of discussion. There will
be lectures by specialists on the historical,
psychological and sociological aspects, and
reports on present-day experiments in community. Visits will be arranged to community centres in Manchester. Information
may be obtained from the Hon. Organizer of

*New York 1947. The Gresham PressInc. Pp. 461.
Price $3.75.

For my part, I should be happy to be able
to trace my descent to Sir George Villiers.
If I had my choice in these matters (not that
I am dissatisfied with' my own ancestors) I
should prefer to Sir George a Quaker gentleman who in 1672 astonished the people of
Aberdeen by walking through the streets of
their city in sackcloth. His name was
Robert Barclay, among whose many remarkable descendants was Francis Galton
himself.

MEMORANDA

Field Studies, Le Play House, Ledbury,
Herefordshire.

Family

THE new quarterly journal* under this title,
edited by Crystal Herbert in collaboration
with the Family Relations Group, deserves
every success. Founded in the belief that the
family tradition is vital to the physical and
moral] well-being of the nation, and to democracy itself, it will deal with such subjects
as education, religion, child welfare, social
service and town planning; and with the
many problems that arise from a failure of
family life, such as child neglect, delinquency
and divorce. As an indication of the spirit
with which the editor is approaching her task
it may be mentioned that she has sought, and
been fortunate in securing, the collaboration
of Lord Horder and Mr. Cyril Bibby as
advisory editors. The journal is pleasant to
look at and read, and it may be hoped that
before very long there will be enough paper
available for it to be produced at shorter
intervals and in much larger numbers.

Birthday Honours
Two awards will give particular satisfac~
tion to readers of this REVIEw : the honour

of knighthood to Dr. W. Norwood East,

* Single copies, 1s. 3d.; subscription, 5s. a year.
