THE SIZE OF FAMILY OF THE BUSINESS,

PROFESSIONAL AND TITLED CLASSES®
By A. SPENCER PATERSON, W.A., M.D., F.R.C.P.(Ed.)

OW that the country is awakening
N to the seriousness of the falling birth

rate, many theories have been propounded to explain how such a situation has
come about. Professor Carr-Saunders, however, has said that before any population
policy can be framed, a search must be made
for more facts. It is with the object of making
a modest contribution to such knowledge
that I have ventured to present this paper,
which is based on an analysis of over 4,500
biographies taken from Who’s Who, 1940,
the volume which gives conditions in the
last year of peace.

The psychiatrist is interested in that aspect
of eugenics which is concerned with the
limiting of unhealthy stocks, and I had the
privilege of addressing the Soczety on this
subject eleven years ago, the lecture being
based on some thousands of mental patients
in London hospitals. When, however, the
psychiatrist turns in some dismay from the
prolific: pedigrees of stocks burdened with
severe mental or nervous diseases, he is confronted with healthy young professional men
in his private practice who tell him that in
their occupation marriage has become an
affair almost of middle life—that they are
encouraged to live a monastic existence till
the age of 33, or even much later. In some
occupations young men are even asked to
sign a declaration that they will not marry
for some years. There seemed to be something radically wrong in discouraging men
from living an emotional life appropriate to
their years, and in urging them to prolong
indefinitely the uncomfortable emotional life
of adolescence. No one, however, seemed to
know what the actual facts of family life
were in the upper classes, and so it occurred
to me that one might analyse a large number
of biographies from Who’s Who. By further

* An Address to the Eugenics Society on October
26th, 1943.

37

utilising such volumes as Crockford’s Clerical
Directory, the Law List, the Medical Directory, Who’s Who in the Theatre, the Directory
of Directors and Whitaker’s Almanack, one
was able to obtain a fairly large sample from
the various occupations. JI have been
fortunate enough to interest some students
and others sufficiently to secure their
collaboration in this study, and to them I
am very grateful.

_ A study of “ successful ”’ men is of interest
because they include those whose example
and precept help to form public opinion.
Contrary to the view that “he travels the
furthest who travels alone,’ men who are
“successful ’’ enough to appear in Who’s
Who probably have an average size of family
larger than their less successful colleagues.
It is hoped to substantiate this by a comparison of the present sample with their
“less successful ’”’ colleagues and contemporaries as far as the general census material
allows such a comparison. In the U.S.A. the
graduates of Harvard and Princeton (see
Osborn, 1940), who were considered to have
been the most successful had about twice
as many children as the “‘ least successful.”’
It is, therefore, likely that those men
included in the present series had more
children than their less successful colleagues.
It may be noticed that the number of children
is that of surviving children only. In this
connection a study of Cattell is of interest,
which shows that only 2 per cent of professional men’s children fail to reach
maturity (see Rumney, J., 1936).

With regard to the reliability of the
entries, the editors send out questionnaires
every year for alterations and additions. It
is very unlikely that many omissions of
children occurred, especially as other details,
such as the wife’s name, are given in nearly
every case. It is also unlikely that those
whose life work was spent abroad failed to
58

keep up to date, as nearly all these had
returned home and were in retirement. In
most studies of this nature, the writer deals
only with completed generations, and I might
therefore have dealt only with cases from
Who Was Who, in which volume all the
individuals who are mentioned are deceased.
However, I desired to deal with the generation just preceding the war. Nearly all these
men were over 50, but I included those under
50 who had been married twelve or more
years. The number of children omitted must
therefore be very small. If any error of
sampling was present, this would not matter
much because the same criteria were used
between the various groups. In any case, it
will be seen from Table I that the mean age
in 1940 of each group was between 60 and 70.

TABLE I
Mean Mean Mean Per No.of
Group Sub-Group Age Age Size cent Cases
in 0 of in
1940 Mar- Family Bach- Group
Peerag: 62 30k ee 6
e eee see wes .» 62°9 30°4 2°43 “I 15
Dukes, Margqs. & Earls — — 2:62 6°6 229
Viscounts & Barons ... — — 2°32 gr 386
Industrialists ... ves tes «» 65°O 29°5 2°66 4°7 365
First Generation 68:6 29°0 2:61 3°7 188
Later Generation 6r-3 29°8 2°97 5°97) IZ
Forces ... tee awe bas . 63°6 32°9 1°49 13°8 443
Army ... 3 7s. 63°6 33°7 I°42 I2°g 233
Navy ... aes -» 63°6 32:0 I°59 14°8 210
Learned Professions (ex I.C.S.) . 61°F + 32°5 1°74 13°97 2,103
Bar... wie « 60°2 3x°8 1r°90 10°8 344
Teaching oe - 56°r 30°9 1°83 17°6 289
Head Masters - 50°4 29°r 2°15 16°0 I31
Professors ... - 60°79 32°7 «1°56 «18°44 8609158
Medicine --5 62°6 33°2 1°62 12:8 15
Home eee +» 59°4 32°0 I°92 g:O 477
Services & Abroad... 66:1 34°4 1°29 16°9 438
Civil Service ... +. 57°3 32°0 1°80 14°0 200
Home eee -» 57°9 32°0 1°80 15:0 100
Abroad (I.C.S.)__... 56:6 32:0 1°80 13:0 100
Church vee -- 65°4 33°0 1°79 20°0 454
Home - 67°2 32°9 1°96 13°5 317
. Abroad . 61°6 33°2 1°46 35°0 137
Artists ... o— as -- 62°5 33°5 1°16 17°3 «197
Actors ... .. §8°2 30°9 I°09 13°0 54
M.P.s.... wee tes tee - — «m8 — 439
Conservative ... —- — «r198 — 306
Labour ae ~— — 144 — 133
F.R.S. ... wee waa . oe — = 30°90 17H 208
F. Brit. Acad. ... wee wee ws = 32°6 1°69 QI 109
1. The first problem was to find out

whether the type of occupation influenced
the size of the family for the different groups
examined.

2. There was also the question of whether
those whose work took them abroad had
fewer children.

3. Age on marriage. The question arose
whether those who marry early have more
children on the average than those who marry
late, or similarly whether those with 4 and 5
children marry on the average at an earlier
age than those with o, 1 or 2 children.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

4. Tests were made to see whether those
who had had a relatively expensive education, that is, at a public school or Oxford or
Cambridge, had a larger size of family than
those who had been educated elsewhere. In
other words, is the man with the old school
tie more of a family man than the others. A
special investigation was also made at a
leading public school to ascertain whether its
pupils came from families which were smaller
than others in the same social group.

5. Next, one examined data concerning
the wife, whether access of income from her
side added to the number of children. In
most cases the name of the wife’s father was
given, and those men whose father-in-law’s
occupation or distinguished address indicated
wealth were separated out from those whose
fathers-in-law were not mentioned other
than by name. |

The size of family of men who married
university graduates was also examined,
while another study was of peers who married
commoners.

6. One then tried to discover if degrees
of success hindered or favoured the production of children. We have already seen that
those who were successful enough to appear
in Who’s Who possibly had larger families than
the professions as a whole, but a further investigation was made of those who were the
most successful in their profession, Admirals
versus Commanders in the Navy and Generals
versus Colonels in the Army. In civilian life
a knighthood in Medicine or the Civil Service,
Bishops, Royal Academicians, Fellows of the
Royal Society and Fellows of the British
Academy, were also separated out and
compared to their less successful colleagues.

7. Another problem was whether religious
belief influenced size of family. Those of the
Roman Catholic and Jewish faiths were
therefore examined. :

8. Again, a special study was made of
Conservative and Labour Members of Parliament. If they were family men themselves,
they would possibly be more sympathetic to
legislation designed to help parents.

It should be noted that each of these tests
was carried out independently from the
others, and it is, of course, possible that any
THE SIZE OF FAMILY 59

one of the comparisons is biased by the
others. Thus those who worked abroad may
have had fewer children because on the whole
they were poorer. Whilst such bias may
upset the result of any particular test, due
consideration was given to it when interpreting statistical results. It is hoped to
investigate certain possibilities of bias in a
more detailed statistical investigation.

1. Size of Family in relation to Occupation

Table I shows the mean size of family of
each of the groups examined. It will be
noticed that the mean size of family varies
considerably, being highest in the case of
aristocrats and industrialists and diminishing
through the learned professions and the
Forces to artists and actors.

Figure 1. Here are shown the main groups
which have been separated out. For each
group the average size of family is given,

 

EERE
Lit Tee eye
Pt td dine

 

   

and the average age on marriage. It will be
noticed that on the whole those groups which
marry later have smaller families. It will
also be noticed that on the whole those with
larger incomes have larger families.

Those with the smallest families are characterized by financial insecurity, unsettled
abode, or residence abroad. Long training
seems to make for late marriage, although

industrialists of the second or later genera
tion were nearly all at the university.
It will be noticed that actors marry early

but have few children. Their conditions of

pay and livelihood are notoriously bad. The
Editor of Who’s Who in the Theatre appends
pedigrees of talented stage families, but these
are almost all dying out. :

It should be possible to draw a horizontal
line in Figure «1 somewhere between 2-0
and 3-0 to indicate that if a group appears
above that line, it is probably surviving as a

ue
mm
Lj i
LT
it

    
  

  

  

Pr ee
Ltt oo

  

    

        

To show regression of mean number of surviving children in each group (bachelors being counted as childless
parents) on age on marriage. On the whole the later the marriage, the smaller the family. The Industrialists and
the Peerage are the only groups which are possibly surviving (see text).

Key; IND I, Industrialists of the first generation ; IND II, ditto of the second or later generation ; H.M.s,
Head Masters; ACT, Actors; ART, Artists; C.S., Civil Service (Home and Indian); R.N., Royal Navy;
PROFS., University professors; MED., Medicine.
60 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
= AAT? A> CORAIED

A TOLLE LLL eee LEE LELEELLLLLLLTT LLL LILLIE LILI ILL LOL
ON Seem NN er i
Per Cent EN DERM TT ie tL AANA oS
iit ee eee eee a ide A Reet IT
FCCC Oe
ai seo] Tt Tt il eT TT PT rt rc
ryt rr tT TT a a Te eee a

Pit tT aS rr

Lo ee ee a
Set Tr rer rr

30 tt

"Are eee pete
pe errs EE er eee ro a rr rrr
20 CHEECH LL LCL CCE a
ev eT TT TTT rT rr
mA ee eee Tr rr TT

iE |
10 tt pe eee
te eee eee rr r@
SCRE CCE EEE EEE EEE EE He

tt a Vj

ee a a ro rr
a a rrr
. CEPT Tee eer) PE eee ttt ett

te aS a Te oa ee oe

eee eer

BH He ee ele

eg bral Pek | TT a

Por Geir Lt tt
ee ee er Fe eee

G Fit ttt TE ee TT rr rt co eo
“EIT TAPS PAN CO Are es CCCI TIA ICP LO AA MLE PI LLL
30 Le oe CN I
° Pt a eer te See eee rr C1
ptt eee ee ec ooo

pp TT PP er
eee ooo eer oa

dy ttt eee reece}
: alee TEE eee eee eee eee oeoea6e&©n
: prfesttenbe | tt TT ee eee eee
ati tte ee cor cae
et eee ero

20 eee ere Ory RT OT eae eee)

: un
tel ha so eee eee
CCH EEE CEE EEE EE EEE HR Ee

tte TL reer tt Lt

pe ee sr a eee eee
me TT ee OOOO a Oe oe eae
HCCC Tee Hee

FA se He Peete HH
lO Feet eee PCC eC Re ete ttt
Ce LL ECC ECC CCR CSO Cee
CRC Ceo ERC
CETTE eo eee
ORCC
COE EEE
POLL LEE PCO ECC eee
? SCC Eee
BECCA ee
PET TT ae eT Tey ery pte TTT PTT Pr ra er rece ececcceceeec.ccec.e
oO ( 2 3 dy. $+ oO 1 a 3 4. 5+* Me. of Children No of Children

The histograms show the percentage in each group which has 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 or more children. The
figures above each panel give the percentage of the whole group, which has that size of family. Note that in the
Forces, those with 5 or more children make up only 3-2 per cent, but in the industrialists 14-8.” .
THE SIZE OF FAMILY 61

group. It is, however, debatable where this
line should come. Glass stated in 1932 that
there should be 2-37 children for every
woman in the country. Titmuss (1942) says
that every married woman would have to
bear at least three children in order exactly
to replace present numbers. It was found,
however, that in the industrialists, the group
with the highest number of children, the
married men had a mean size of family of
only 2:77 children. This figure is not strictly
comparable with Titmuss’s estimate, however, as deceased children are not included. In
this connection, Cattell’s finding that only
one child in fifty of professional men fails to
survive to maturity is of interest. In the
present series, however, children who were
killed in the last war or died in adult life are
omitted. It is doubtful, however, if the
inclusion of these would have brought even
our most fertile group much above the
survival line.

Differences in the average size of family in
the various professional groups are apparent
from Table I. These differences were tested
for significance by the ,? test (see Fisher,
1941). In the first place, groups were compared as a whole by classifying all families
into those with 3 children or more, as opposed
to those with 0, 1 or 2, and noting the comparative frequencies of the two classes of
families in each group. Certain professional
groups were then compared in separate x?
tables in which the respective frequencies of
families with 0, I, 2, 3, 4 and 5 children were
entered. The following results were'obtained*:

There are some significant differences in
size of family between the peerage, the industrialists, the learned professions, the Forces
and the artists and actors. When the same
method was applied to. the different professions it was found that teachers (head
masters and professors) had significantly
larger families than artists and actors at the
I per cent level. Another fact that emerged
was that the head masters’ size of family was
greater than that of professors, but at the
5 per cent level. Men in the Forces had

* These suggest that the Registrar-General’s Census
figures would be more valuable if a finer subdivision of
classes were made than is given at present. All our
groups are, I think, included by him in only one class.

significantly smaller families than those in
civilian life at the 1 per cent level.

Figure 2 shows the distribution of cases
according to size of family. The figures on
the top of each panel show percentages.
Thus out of every 100 Army and Navy
officers only 3:2 have 5 or more children
compared to 14-8 industrialists. It will be
noticed that in every group the most likely
size of family that the young man embarking
on the occupation is likely to have (the mode)
is none at all, although in the case of the
industrialists the number with no children
is the same as those with 2 or 3 children,
namely 20 per cent.

One hears a good deal nowadays about the
increase in the number of only children, but
in fact not more than 8 out of 243 children
of business men are only children, and only
13 out of 173 children of professional n men
have no brothers or sisters.

If you see a child coming out of school
and its father is a professional man, it will
most probably come from a 3-child family ;
next, a 2-child; a 4-child; a 5-child, and
only lastly from a 1-child family.

TABLE II
NUMBER OF CHILDREN BORN TO DIFFERENT GROUPS (Bachelors excluded)
ANSELL, 1874
Nat. Life Ass. Sog. Figures
Clergymen eee eee wee tee tae ese ose §°25
Profession. ‘ was wets sien ene _ we «6518
Medical Profession . 4°82
General (Aristocracy, Merchants, Bankers, Manufacturers, etc.) .. : 39

Table II is given to contrast the average
size of such families in 1874 (see Drysdale,
1913). It will be seen that the average size
of family was then nearly double those at
present, although it should be remembered
that we are comparing births with surviving
children.

Figure 3 shows percentages without
bachelors, so that one can compare them to
what Osborn (1940) considers the ideal
distribution of family sizes in order to keep
the population stationary. For a hundred
families to produce 262 children, the accompanying distribution is possible. It will be
seen that professional men do not reach
even that standard. I doubt, however, if
Osborn’s suggestion is of much practical
value, for it has been found, in fact, that
where a population is about stationary
62 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a
‘

Se |
a
a
8
Ndi
AD |
ott}
Cty

a Vt 4
EEOC CCAP ICE Ds

ob fh.
dot)

|

Lt
LETT
PEEP E

|
a
r
eeeee eras
a
Cee
a

Ce TT
aE a a se ae
rT TTT TT
Rel tol PRoaidgee 1 TT
Pe

|
ge

it
CEE Eee eee eee eee re

Pt
TTT ET TTT Ter TN TT Te
z aah td ent fat mht lm rT TT
~ Pp ET PTLitt tt LTT TT ET EA ALD ON a a
GG GEER CCCC CCC CNC ISS Ce St
ada aE EE tere et ea] | Se et fern ttt ||
LETT rr mere eee eee
PCCCCCCCCeELLE LLL eeeee ELLE LLLLLELLL ELLE LLL LEL-LLLL LLL LLLL LLL ELE Baan
Per G Yt te tt tai

pet he Tt PET
rT a te PEE EEC EEC EEE E+

30 jt rT ieee tt maa a nt ad
: 7)
\ ~ FREER EEE EEE tre EEE REE

CoO ees
; 20 TTT TTT ee

TPT Lee —o oo
TL UTE TTT ee a

* TTT TTT TT Trt a Te SC,
ri Titi PTT rere eer TT eee ae ee a eee ae
rTrT tT ey a
to a tt tt tt Thott TTT Te
PITT TET TTT a a a i eT
PEE CECE EEC ECC EEE EEE EEE EEE SBE

rT TT Te TT Ta a a SF:
TET TTT a a le hI TT a ee a a

TLL CT a a let LE
CE tp

PTT TC rr a a it PEt tT TT a Peet
a eeneuaeee REECE CECE EEC
oC 2 3 &# 5+ | OI 2 3 & St
Th. of Children No. of Children

The histograms show the percentage of men in the learned professions, the Forces, and Industry who have
0, I, 2, 3, 4 and 5 or more children, bachelors being excluded so as to compare them with Osborn’s hypothetical
distribution, which would produce an average family of 2:62 children.

LIT
THE SIZE OF FAMILY 63

the number of those with 5 or more children
is about 20 per cent, and we are more likely
toavoid depopulation by encouraging families
of 5 and more, than by aiming at 3.

2. Residence Abroad .

In the professions of the Church, Medicine
and the Civil Service, those who lived abroad
were separated out. By “abroad” was
meant India, the Tropics or outlying districts,
but not Canada, Australia, New Zealand or
South Africa. Thus in Medicine those whose
work was in Great Britain had an average
family of 1-92, but those abroad 1-29, while
for the Church the figures were 1-96 and
0°66. Both these differences are significant.
There is a marked contrast, .however, when
we compare the Home Civil and Indian Civil
Service, for they have the same figures, 1-80
children per family. Men in the Indian Civil
Service often earn about £1,000 a year after
five years’ service, that is, about the age of 28.
In the Home Civil Service, however, those
in the same grade would only earn about £450
at the same age (Sir H. Morgan, Careers for
Boys and Girls, pp. 177 and 249). It would
appear then that the greater rate of pay of
the Indian civil servant, even taking into
consideration his additional expenses, counteracts the disadvantage of living abroad.

Officers in the Navy and Army live out of
the country for at least some part of their
career, and, as we have seen, have significantly fewer children than civilians. The
Navy marry about two years earlier than the
Army in this sample, 31-95 as against 33-71,
and have 1°59 as against 1*42 children. It
would seem to be impolitic for a first-class
power like Britain to be so indifferent as to
whether its fighting men reproduce themselves.

3. Relation of Age on Marriage to Size of
amily

We-have already seen in Figure 1 that on
the whole men in occupations where marriage
tended to be late, had fewer children. In
order to examine this further, we arranged
men in one occupation into groups according
to 4-yearly intervals at which they married
{Figures 4 and 5). It will be seen here that

if size of family depended on length of married
life, and not on natural or artificial sterility,
the curves would run downward and to the
right. There did indeed appear to be such a
tendency. There was, however, an unexpected feature noticeable, particularly in the
Navy, the industrialists and the peerage. It
was that there was a small group who married
in the late thirties but had large families. It
would seem that these men throw themselves
unreservedly into their work and only marry
after they have a considerable income. It
would seem that hitherto conditions have
been so arranged in various professions as to
encourage men to marry late. These figures
seemed to show that a few of those marrying
late succeeded in having large families. This
late-marrying fertile section had the effect of
giving a higher median age on marriage for
those with 5 children than those with 4
children in the case of the professions, the
Forces and industrialists. The undesirability
of this encouragement of late marriage,
however, will be discussed later.

Figures 4 and 5 can be viewed from two
standpoints. Firstly, on the whole those who
married late, especially those who married
after 40, had fewer children than those who
married in the twenties. Late marriage is
therefore itself responsible for many unborn
casualties. Secondly, for those who did
marry early, their period of married life was
long enough to allow of many more children
than were actually produced. There was,
therefore, artificial limitation of size of
family. There was evidence that this depended on financial considerations, e.g. expenses of education, since those occupations
where there was a relatively large income at
an early age (industry, the peerage, head
masters—who are often appointed young—

‘and the Indian Civil Service) showed rela
tively large families.

4. Education and the Birth Rate

The first question to be answered was
whether boys at an expensive public school
came from families which were more sterile
than others in the same social group. For
this purpose a master at one of the expensive
public schools sent to me figures showing the
64

No.

0

Childre

This shows the mean number of children born to men marrying at increasing 4-yearly intervals.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
“hee oN MarriAGE AND SIZE oF Famy

EECCA EEE EEE EEE ECE EEE EEE EEE oe
pt Ee eee ee eee ee
PREECE EEE EE EEE EEE EEE EH EH
St tT Pt
| PET tT Pt
Pp Pt ee ee eee
Lit ei Pt ee pte ttt ET
Lp Peer ee eee
SRR ESR: OS CR RR AE
Piet tT et ee et ET TT er eT
tt es EE AT eee
Pp tT ees NEE ae eee
ptt eet A ere NN Te
Ltt Lt eit Ee PTA er ee
Pept ae TN To TIN TTT
Pitt et TE Pp eee eee
Lp tet re ET EN TT AT Pe
Poe ttt tei nee TE a ere
se eT Pete TL tek AT Tr
ee a eA TT aS TTT EN ET
pt heer tel PTE Pe EN Pee eT ee
Teer | | te PT TT REA
ret a TT eT a TN ee
Pe a er TT
EE ated bt tt ati tt a tt Pt
PT ETT i tet ET Te ee PN TT
ott tt tt tT TET YS pa TT A SE
pete a Pt PT a eT
SEE EEE EEE EEE
ppp pt tT a tt a tt Ld

ptt ia tt SEE EEE EE PEE EE EEE EEE pt tT
CORE EEE EEE EEE EEE EEE EE EEE CECT EEE EEE pe
Ltt tT Pe ee ee Seen

EEE EE EEE EEE EEE EEE EE EEEEEE EEE EEE
BEES EEE EEE

pt TE Ee ee TT | |
pee Te EE TT
Pett EE TEE ET EEE EE ET
eT
tt ie TT et TT lel Tt lab el | te tt de
pp er Aa ep aA Pie ee eee
ptt et eT he er
pitt tp Adel lanl i i Afarmade TT TT TT pt
PE ee
Ht
LLELTter TT Terr rEer rer rey eye ee eee ot
pt EERE EERE REECE EERE EEE EEE

Although,

on the whole, those who marry early have more children, there are a small number in each group who marry late
and have relatively large families, best seen in industry and the Forces.

size of family of 177 boys at his school. Table
ITI shows the distribution of size of family in

To show the percentage of boys ‘at an expensive public school who came

from families of 5 or more, 4, 3, 2 and r, compared with similar figures

for the Professions and Industry in this series.

Size of Family
5+

4
3
2
I

TABLE III

this group of 177 public school boys and their
brothers and sisters compared with the
distribution of size of family in the professions
and also in industry. It was found that only
4°0 per cent of them came from families of

Professions Industry At PublicSchool 5 Or more children, yet in my series of sucae 33°3 ang cessful business men who had surviving
27°6 22° ‘ ; ‘ ; ‘
shez 3. 36-4 children, 33°5 per cent of their children
7°8 370 6-5 came from families of 5 or more, that is,

Note.—The percentage of public school boys from biggest families is
the small familios

relatively small, and from

relatively Lares. eight times as many as the public school
THE SIZE OF FAMILY 65

group. The corresponding figure for the
professional class was 16-3 per cent or four
times as many. Again, the percentages of
the relatively sterile 2-child and 1-child
families at the expensive school were 36-4
per cent and 6-5 per cent, which was considerably in excess of 15-1 per cent and 3-0
per cent for the business class, while the

There is, therefore, some evidence that boys
at public schools come from the more sterile
sections of their particular social group.

The next task was to take the Bar, the
Church, Medicine, the Teaching profession
and the Army, and to separate those who
had had an expensive education from those
who had not had that advantage. The first

Figure 5
No. of OWi Lael, toilet ae) t .
aos~LLEU COC
COO eo
COE CCCP REFER
PCP eee SSS eee ee
PCCP ERE AC ey SSC CCC ee
rh) Re a ee Ne
PTC Pr Ce rr
PCCP TEE es
PCT eae ee
TTT PTT YONA
PsSCOOCOCC RTC CCC reer
CTC
PCC ea er
PCCP Rae Cee
PCC eas red te Cr
PoOlLOCO OT REC re
COCs rr
POCO oor
SOCCER cee
POCA eee or
05°C
SEE oe
PE eee
PEC eee ce
POC eee
COCCI er eee eee
'7 a AS Aq 3B 37 A $5t
age on Marr race,

Same as Figure 4, but showing the learned professions. Note that the number of children depends
surprisingly little on the length of married life. This shows either that men purpoéely limit their families, or else
that large families are a bar to the distinction of appearing in Who’s Who.

figures for the professional class were 25:2
per cent and 7:8 per cent. Table IV com
TABLE IV
To compare mean size of family of boys from an expensive public school
with those of successful professional and business men.

Public school boys ... bee eae - 2°42

Professional men {childless excluded) - 2°71

Business men (childless excluded) - 3°33

The mean size of family of the parents of boys at this school is

just significantly smaller than that of the professions (tested by Poisson
distribution), which (see Figure 1) is well below replacement. _
pares the mean size of family of this group
of boys with the mean size of family of the
industrialists and professional men who had
any children. The parents of the public
school boys have significantly smaller families
and are very much below replacement.

group comprised those who had been at a
public school or Oxford or Cambridge. A
“public school’? was defined as a school
which was mainly a boarding school and
whose head master attended the Head
Masters’ Conference. Certain schools, however, where the day boys predominate, such
as Dulwich, Tonbridge, Westminster, Clifton,
Bedford and Cheltenham, were included. It
was found that those- with an expensive
education had significantly larger families
than those who were educated elsewhere.
This applied to the Bar and to Medicine and
to the professions as a whole. The Church
and the Army taken alone, however, did not
66 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

show a significant difference between the
two groups.

It would appear, therefore, that although
boys who go to public schools come from
relatively sterile families, yet within the
professions they do have more children than
those educated elsewhere, although still not
replacing themselves.

It may be mentioned again here that head
masters of 134 leading schools in the country
have the highest birth rate of any professional
class, and it is therefore likely that they will
be sympathetic to an alteration of conditions
designed to preserve these families.

Another fact that emerged was that the
public schools appeared to train boys more
for some professions than for others. Thus
36 per cent of Barristers wear the old school
tie as against 20 per cent of Fellows of the
Royal Society and 23 per cent of Fellows of
the British Academy which comprises the
leading scholars in the country.

5. The Successful Man’s Wife

In the present study it was not possible to
elicit the age of the wife on marriage. It is
known, however, that for the nation as a
whole the wife is, on the average, about one
year younger than her husband and it is
unlikely, except where the man marries late,
that there is very much more difference than
this in the present series. An attempt was
made to separate those who had married
into families where the occupation or distinguished address of the father-in-law
suggested that there was considerable unearned income which might help to increase
the size of the young family. A careful study
was made of this in the medical profession,
but there was no significant difference in the
number of children between those who
married into such families and those who did
not. This applied to all the sub-groups,
which were separated out to avoid the results
being biased by other factors, public school
men, non-public school men, those marrying
before 30 or after. 30, those at home and
those in the medical services. The findings,
however, are vitiated by the difficulty of
distinguishing between those who really were
rich and those who were not.

Reference is sometimes made to the
destroying influence of heiress’s blood.
Wagner-Manslau’s article in the EUGENICS
REVIEW (1932) regarding the Prussian
aristocracy having fewer children if they
married commoners supported the theory.
In the present series it was found that 245
aristocrats who married aristocrats had
significantly larger families than 320 of them
who married commoners, at the 5 per cent
level. As the latter are, however, likely to be
younger than the former, this difference may
be due to the general decline in family size.

It was found that twenty-six members of
the aristocracy who married American girls
had an average family of 2-81 children,
which compares with an average of 2-54 for
the rest, a result which is not significant.

Fourteen medical men married university
graduates and the mean size of their family
was 2°42, but the number was too small for
comparison. |

6. Success and Size of Family

As already stated, it would appear probable that in the professions, those who are
successful enough to appear in Who’s Who
have an average-size of family which is
larger than those who do not appear.

TABLE V
SUCCESS AND SIZE OF FAMILY
Av. Av.
No. No. Standard No. No. Standard
I Rank of of Devia- Rank of of DeviaSalaried . Cases Chil- ion Cases Chil- tion
dren dren
Navy* Admirals Capts.
and Vice an
Admirals 69 1°81 +0-162 Comrs. 94 1-16 +o0°r1I1
Army F.M.s to Cols.
Major- and
Gens. | 47 1°72 +0-r9r Majors 138 =. r°32 +0°098
ps Bishops 87 2-16 +0°158 Rest 230 1°85.+0-°090
i
Service Knights 45 1°76 +0°198 Rest 55 1°84 +0:'183
II
Private
Practice
Medicine Knights 211 1:65 +0°088 Rest 704 1°62 +0-°048
Bar Judges 49 1:98 +0-201 K.C.s 97 1°86 +0-°097

(High Ct.)
Note.—In the Navy, the more successful have significantly larger

families (at the 1 per cent level*). In the Army and Church the differences
are barely significant.
Table V shows the average size of family
of Generals in the Army, Admirals, Bishops,
Royal Academicians, medical knights and
knights in the Civil Service. I have compared each group separately by attaching
standard deviations to the average number
THE SIZE OF FAMILY 67

of children, assuming that the number of
children follow a Poisson distribution, and
found that the Admirals have significantly
larger families than Captains and Commanders. The differences in the Army

between those above the rank of Brigadier’

and those below are barely significant, as
also in the Church the difference between
Bishops and the rest.

This correlation between success and larger
size of family may to some extent be due to
the money factor. Thus high ranking officers
in the Navy were earning larger incomes at
‘an early age than the less successful. Again,
both in the Navy and elsewhere, a large
unearned income might be an aid to pro
fessional success as well as an aid to having

a large family.

With regard to the aristocracy of intellect,
neither Science as represented by the Royal
Society nor Scholarship as represented by
the British Academy are keeping up their
numbers. Two hundred and eight of the
former had only 1-75 children apiece, anu
the latter a mere 1-69.

7%. Religious Belief

Twenty aristocrats educated at Roman
Catholic schools had the largest families of
any group, averaging 3-I apiece, compared
with 2:3 for the other aristocrats. This
result, however, was not significant judged
by the x? test. There was no apparent
difference between Jews and the others from
the small numbers examined.

The Legislature

It seemed likely that men who had goodsized families themselves would be more
sympathetic to legislation which would
encourage the youth of the nation to found
families also. We have already seen that
the peerage have an average size of family
of 2°43. They are the most fertile section
next to the industrialists. The House of
Lords has already debated the issue in the
most statesmanlike manner, as recently reported in the EUGENIcs REVIEW (July 1943).

A study was also made of 306 Conservative
Members of Parliament. These were found
to have an average family of 1-98 children,

while 133 Labour Members of Parliament
had an average family of 1-44 children. As
a number of these, however, gave very little
information about themselves, they may
have omitted to mention their children. One
of them had 13 children, the largest number
recorded.

DISCUSSION

I. The Problem of Quantity

The results of the present study amply
support the conclusions of Dr. G. F. MacCleary (1937), who writes: ‘‘ By the use
of Kuczynski’s methods it has been demonstrated that if fertility and mortality in this
country remain at their present level, or
change as recent experience suggests that
they are likely to change, we are doomed to
extinction.’’ Or to quote the Official Historian to the Home Office of the Social
Services in war-time, Mr. R. M. Titmuss
(1942): ‘Assuming the continuance of
present trends, our population will ultimately
diminish by one quarter in each generation.
The war may make this position even more
serious because if a fall similar to that of
1914-18 occurs and there is no change in the
attitude to parenthood, then we shall be on
our way. to halving our population every
generation.”

Intellectual background of the falling birth
rate. It is a remarkable fact that in the
upper classes marriage as an institution for
keeping up the population has signally failed.
It is therefore worth while to inquire what
the intellectual outlook was of the generation
which allowed this to come about.

We have already seen that in 1874 matters
were satisfactory, the average size of family
being about 5, but despite the fact that a
high birth rate was necessary for our prosperity and even for our survival, some
sociologists repeatedly attacked the large
family. John Stuart Mill had already
written, ‘‘ Little is to be expected in morality
until the producing of large families is
regarded with the same feelings as drunkenness or any other physical excess’”’ (see
Carr-Saunders, 1922). Cotter Morison wrote
of ‘‘the devastating torrent of children.”’
Havelock Ellis stated that the falling birth
68 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

rate was not a national danger and that the
day of the large family was over.

Drysdale (1913), in his book The Small
Family System, rightly spoke of the need to
limit unhealthy stocks, but he used arguments in favour of the small family which
are still heard, but which have been proved
to be wholly fallacious. He thought that a
fall in the birth rate would lessen the chances
of war, yet the German Press before the war
repeatedly used our falling birth rate as an
argument that we were degenerate and
unable to defend ourselves.

Drysdale also stated in his book that the
falling birth rate would be counteracted by
the falling death rate, a thesis which we now
know to be totally wrong. He even wrote as
follows: ‘‘It is difficult to find words
adequate to deal with the attempt of the
medical profession to stem the tide of the
declining birth rate.”’

In 1913 the falling birth rate in the professional classes could be viewed with relative
calm because there was always a surplus
from the artisan and other classes to take
the place of the unborn casualties. Now,
however, the campaign against children has
been so successful that their place can only
be taken by immigrants from other countries.

The two deliberate methods of limitation—
Late Marriage and the Misuse of Contraception

1. Late Marriage. Jt should be clearly
understood that in a society where artificial
contraception is not used and where there is
an average family of 5, any stock which is
seen to die out is either doing so because of
physical disease or else because social conditions, such as famine or slavery, prevent
reproduction. In such cases demographers
speak of infecundity and of infertility. This
seems to imply that the causes are physical,
or at least beyond the control of society. In
present-day. Britain, however, the fall in the
birth-rate is the result of deliberate choice.
It has been brought about by the setting up
of two institutions, namely, late marriage
and artificial contraception.

It is, therefore, misleading to refer to sterile stocks. It is preferable to speak of the
shunning or fear of children as tecnophobia.

It is convenient to describe persons or
tendencies which do not favour an abundance >
of healthy children as tecnophobic, the
opposite terms being tecnophilic and tecnophilia. These words imply correctly that the
problem is essentially psychological.

At present the average age on marriage is
33 and for more than half professional men
it is an affair of practically middle life—33
and over, yet according to various authorities
(see Ellis, 1933) it ought to be 25 for a man
and 24 fora woman. Nature intends man
and woman to marry about that age. Early
marriage means a smaller maternal and
infantile mortality. If late marriage becomes
an institution, it entails many social evils, as
Carr-Saunders (1922) has pointed out:
prostitution, irregular sexual unions, and an
increase of venereal disease. It is a disastrous policy to tell the average professional
man that he must lead a monastic life from
18 to 33. It is a fundamental tenet of mental
health that, as already stated, a man should
live an emotional life appropriate to his years,and there is no doubt that by 25 he ought to
be the head of a family. Early marriage
would mean that by 55 the man would
already have several grandchildren, but at
present the professional man at the age of
60 has only one or two unmarried children
in the twenties. It is not usually realized
that the difference between these two results
is the difference between a social group which
has a potentially vigorous future and one
which is dying out. |

I would recommend as the first step to
remedy late marriage that each profession
sets up a body of men to discuss how conditions may be altered so as to favour earlier
marriage.

2. The Misuse of Contraception.. Probably
the most commonly accepted view among
eugenists in the past regarding contraception
has been that married people should be
entirely free to choose whether they will
have children or not, and therefore contraceptives should be available to every one. It is
said that where these articles are prohibited
the unfit outbreed the fit and that such evils
as venereal disease and artificial abortion
increase. In democratic countries, it is held,
THE SIZE OF FAMILY 69

people must be free to decide these matters
for themselves.

Now apart from the medical fact that no
woman should have a baby much more
frequently than once in two years, I confess
that I have the deepest mistrust of family
planning as at present conceived. The whole
idea is to my mind a result of the institution
of late marriage. Young men should marry
at 25, and the begetting of their first four
babies should be an act of faith. At present,
for parents in the thirties, abstention from
parenthood is considered an act of prudence.
The maternal instinct is slow to develop
and is only at its strongest after the mother
has borne and suckled two or three babies.
Osborn quotes facts, which I can bear out
from clinical experience, that planning of
babies at irregular intervals interferes with
the natural urge to maternity.

I would suggest, however, the advisability
of a number of clinics where members of all
classes could seek advice on all marriage
questions. Each individual case could be
dealt with on its merits. The individual
citizen would obtain advice on all matters
relating to building up a family in the
twenties. Further, it is only from such
clinics that the State could collect the
information which is so urgently needed for
dealing with the problem. It could then
distinguish between those objections to
parenthood such as chronic ill-health for
which there is no remedy, and those objections to parenthood such as the excessive
expensé of a confinement (at present possibly
£40-£70 for the white-collar class), or the
excessive expense of education, objections
for which it is vital that the State find a
remedy.

Il. The Problem of Quality

Professor Fisher’s theory (1930) that boys
who rise in the social scale come from the
more sterile sections of the community
would seem to be supported by the results
of my investigation at an expensive public
school, if these are further substantiated.

It is certainly satisfactory, however, to
find in the present study that, although
relative sterility in the parents led to the

‘advancement of an ambitious boy, neverthe
less he in his turn is not sterile because of his
success. On the contrary, in most groups
success is correlated with fertility.

In conclusion, I would make a plea for
greater facilities being given to research into
this problem which, as I have said, is the
most vital which confronts the nation at the
present time next to winning the war. If it
is solved, then this country will not only
look back on a great past, but will also look
forward with confidence to a vigorous future.

SUMMARY

I. Over 4,500 biographies from Who’s Who
1940 were examined with the aid of various
professional directories, and the number of
surviving children was correlated with type
of occupation ; whether work was at home
or abroad ; age on marriage ; type of education; wealth in wife’s family; success in
occupation ; and with religious faith.

2. The industrialists and the peerage were
the only classes that were possibly keeping
up their numbers. The size of family progressively diminished through the learned
professions to the Forces and artists and
actors. There were significant differences
between the size of families of different
groups. In every group except business
men the most likely number of children which
the recruit would eventually have (i.e. the
mode) was none at all. For the business men
there was an equal chance of having 0, 2 or
3 children. |

3. Those medical and clerical men who
lived in outlying dominions other than
Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South
Africa, had significantly smaller families
than the stay-at-homes. The Indian Civil
Service, however, had the same size of family
as the Home Civil Service, the disadvantage
of living abroad probably being neutralized
by their having much larger pay five years
after joining the Service. The Army and
Navy had significantly smaller families than

- Civilians.

4. On the whole, the earlier the marriage,
the greater the number of children. There
was, however, in most groups, particularly
the Navy, the industrialists and the peerage,
70 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a number of men who married in the late’

thirties and had relatively large families.

5. Education and Size of Family. A group
of 177 boys at an expensive public school was
examined. It was found that of these boys
and their brothers and sisters only 4:0 per
cent came from families of 5 or more
children, yet in my series of successful business men who had surviving children, 33°5
per cent of their children came from families
of 5 or more, that is, eight times as many as
the public school group.’ The corresponding
figure for the professional class was 16-3 per
cent or four times as many. Again, the percentages of the relatively sterile 2-child and
1-child families at the expensive school are
36-4 per cent and 6:5 per cent, which is
considerably in excess of 15-1 per cent and
3°0 per cent for the business class, while the
figures for the professional class are 25-2 per
cent and 7°8 per cent.

Nevertheless, in Medicine and at the Bar,
the families of public school men, although
still below replacement, were significantly
larger than those of men educated elsewhere.
This also held for the learned professions as
a whole—the Bar, Medicine, Church and
Home Civil Service. (Teachers were not
examined in this way because nearly all were
at public schools or Oxford or Cambridge.)
Head masters had more children than members of any other profession. Public school
boys prefer some professions to others, thus
34 per cent of successful barristers were at
public schools, but only 23 per cent of
Fellows of the British Academy and 20 per
cent of Fellows of the Royal Society.

6. The Wife's Status and Occupation. A
special study was made of professional men
to see if marriage into a family the father of
which appeared to be wealthy led to an increased size of family, but the results were
inconclusive. Fourteen medical men, however,
who married university graduates had an
average surviving family of 2-43 children.

Aristocrats who marry commoners have
significantly smaller families than those who
marry aristocrats.

7. Success. Those who reached the very
highest naval ranks had significantly larger

families than the lower ranks mentioned in
Who’s Who. In the Army and Church the
larger families of Generals and Bishops,
compared to the less successful men, showed
a barely significant difference. Two hundred
and eight Fellows of the Royal Society,
representing Science, had an average of 1°75
children, and 109 Fellows of the British
Academy, representing Scholarship, had
1-69 children.

8. Three hundred and six Conservative
M.P.s had an average of 1-98 children, while
133 Labourmembers had 1 - 44 children apiece.

g. In the small material examined, no
evidence was obtained of differences in
fertility of different religious groups, e.g.
Roman Catholics and Jews.

10. The seriousness of the fall in the birth
rate is emphasized. This is brought about by
two institutions—late marriage and the
misuse of contraception. It is suggested that
committees be set up in each profession to
alter conditions so as to favour marriage at
25 instead of 33.

1r. Earlier marriage has elsewhere been
found to lead to less misuse of contraception
because younger people face the future with
more confidence. The authorities in each
profession, particularly in the Forces, must
ensure as far as possible that fertility is not
a bar to advancement.

REFERENCES
CaRR-SAUNDERS, A. M. (1922) The Population

Problem, Oxford.

CaATTELL, R. B. Quoted by Rumney (1936), p. 13.
DRYSDALE, C. V. (1913) The Small Family Sysiem,

London, Fifield.

Exuis, Havelock (1933) Psychology of Sex, London,

Heinemann.
FISHER, R. A. (1930)

Natural Selection.
FisHerR, R. A. (1941) Statistical Methods, Edin
burgh, Oliver & Boyd, 8th edition.

Grass, D. V. (1938) Eugenics Review, 30, 117.

MacCreary, G. F. (1937) Menace of British Depopulation, London, Allen & Unwin.

OsBorn, F. (1940) Preface to Eugenics, New York,

Harper & Bros.

Paterson, A. Spencer (1932) Eugenics Review, 24,

Igi.

Rees: J. (1936) Population, November 1936.
Titmuss, R. M. and K. (1942) Parents’ Revolt,

London, Secker & Warburg.

WAGNER-MANSLAU (1932) Eugenics Review, 24, 3.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXV, Nos. 3 and 4

The Genetical Theory of
