EUGENICS IN GERMANY
By C. P. BLACKER, M.A.. MD. MRCP.

found a translation of the German

Sterilization Act, which was made
public on July 25th, 1933, and which will
come into operation on January Ist of next
year. The implications of this Act will best
be appreciated if it is compared with the
Bills which have been drawn up by this
Society—i.e. the shorter Bill, limited to mental defectives, which was introduced into the
House of Commons by Major Church on
July 21st, 1931, and the wider Bill, set forth
at the end of the Society’s buff pamphlet
Eugenic Sterilization, which applies, in addition to mental defectives, to mental convalescents and sufferers from hereditary
diseases and defects other than mental
deficiency and insanity.

The German Act differs from our Bills in
one important respect, which dominates its
whole intention and sense. In Section 12 it
gives legal sanction to compulsory sterilization. This implies that the initiative in
applying for sterilization can be taken by
persons other than the candidate for
sterilization himself, such as a Medical
Officer of Health or a Superintendent of an
Institution. The compulsory nature of the
Bill further necessitates the provision of
Eugenic Courts, to which applications for
sterilization have to be made, and which are
empowered to authorize the operation, and
also of Higher Eugenic Courts, to which can
be addressed appeals by refractory subjects
against the decisions of the lower Courts.

By many English newspapers, the German
Act was also represented as differing from
ours in another very important respect—
namely, that sterilization can be applied on
penal grounds. In view of the fact that many
of the occupants of German prisons have
been sentenced for political reasons, this
possibility gives obvious grounds for disquiet. But careful perusal of the Bill does
not make it by any means certain that this

found «ta in this issue will be

B

interpretation is justified. Essentially the
situation appears to be that in Clause 3 it is
stated that sterilization may be proposed for
the inmates of punitive institutions and
reformatories by the Superintendents of
these places. Taken by itself, this passage
points to the conclusion that compulsory
sterilization would be possible on penal
grounds. In Clause 1 of the Act, however, it
will be seen that eight hereditary diseases and
hereditary alcoholism are specified as conditions justifying sterilization. It will also be
seen that crime is not included in the list.
If, therefore, this clause governs the rest of
the Act, it would seem that the superintendents of punitive institutions would only be
justified in recommending the sterilization of
inmates provided that they suffered from
one of the nine conditions specified in the
first clause. It would presumably be possible
that inmates of punitive institutions might
exhibit symptoms of feeble-mindedness, early
schizophrenia, hereditary epilepsy, hereditary
physical deformities, or severe alcoholism,
and that these would constitute grounds for
recommending their sterilization.

The crux of the matter appears to be in the
opening words of Sections 1 and 2 of Clause
I. These read as follows: ‘‘ Whoever is
hereditarily ailing can be made barren by
surgical operation . . .”, and “ hereditarily
ailing in the sense of this law is anyone who
suffers from one of the following diseases .. .”’
Do these two sentences imply that no one
can be regarded as hereditarily diseased
in the sense of this Act who does not
exhibit one of the nine specified conditions? If this is the case, it would be
impossible to sterilize a person with
hemophilia or with polycystic disease of the
kidney. The Act says that sufferers from
any of the nine specified conditions can be
regarded as hereditarily diseased. It does not
say that only such persons can be so regarded,
and it might be inferred that the list of

157
158

hereditary conditions which justify sterilization is not necessarily exhausted by the nine
specifications which follow. It is, in fact, not
quite clear whether the German Act is, in this
connection, carelessly phrased, or whether it
is very carefully and subtly phrased to admit
extensions of the principle of sterilization. I
have written to Germany asking for information on this subject.

It will also be seen that the German Act contains none of the provisions which the Soctety
has been at pains to elaborate in its Bills to
safeguard the individual against abuses of his
liberty. Thus, in addition to the consent of
the subject concerned, our Bills require that
the consent of the spouse or, if the patient
be unmarried, of his parent or guardian, be
obtained. No such provisions are to be
found in the German Act. Reports of the
German Act reached this country in the last
few days of July. It was not surprising that
they constituted an important news item and
that they were given much publicity in most
of our newspapers. But these announcements had more than an ephemeral news
value, for they have provoked a number of
signed and unsigned articles which have given
rise to correspondence. It would appear that
several of the authors of these articles have
failed to grasp the essential differences
between the aims of the eugenic movements
of Germany and of this country, since they
assume that if sterilization were legalized in
England it would be made compulsory, as it
has been in Germany.

The Council of the Society has not, at the
time of writing, had the opportunity of considering the German Bill. It has, however,
passed a resolution, bearing indirectly upon
Nazi eugenics, which runs as follows: ‘ This
Society deprecates the use of the term
Eugenics to justify racial animosities.’’ In
my capacity of General Secretary of the
Society, I was, moreover, authorized to write
to The Lancet a letter commenting upon a
draft Bill published in the issue of June roth
of that journal. My letter ended with the
following paragraph : ‘‘ At present a departmental committee is in this country giving
detailed consideration to the problem of
sterilization. It is as yet impossible to fore
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tell what attitude it will adopt in its final
report. Should the committee pronounce a
cautiously favourable verdict that voluntary
sterilization has a limited application to carefully selected persons within certain general
groups, it is to be hoped that public opinion
will not run away with the idea that the
adoption of such a policy will be the logical
prelude to its misuse as an instrument of
tyranny by racial or social majorities. No
biological innovation of social significance
is free from possibilities of abuse; and all
such innovations are likely to find different
legal expressions in different countries. If
the principle of sterilization is, with appropriate safeguards, adopted in this country, it
can be taken as certain that it will be applied
in a way that expresses the social consciousness which prevails in England rather than
that which is now sweeping through Germany.”

In view of the publicity which is being given
to the German Sterilization Act and of the
misconceptions to which it has given rise in
the Press, it is essential that Fellows and
Members of this Society should do their best
to dissipate the view that to legalize sterilization necessarily implies compulsion or even
the smallest infringement of individual
liberty. The Report of the Departmental
Committee now considering sterilization is
due to appear in the late autumn. It is
extremely unlikely that the Report will be
influenced by recent happenings in Germany ;
but it is probable that its reception by the
public may be so influenced, especially if the
public has been led to suppose that Nazi
eugenics is the only kind of eugenics.

One of the most frequently repeated and
rhetorically effective ciiticisms of sterilization is the one directed in the House of
Commons by Dr. Hyacinth Morgan against
Major Church’s Bill—that its logical fulfilment would be the installation of a body of
so-called eugenists at the apex of the social
pyramid, which would dictate to the British
working woman how many children, if any,
she was to have. Dr. Morgan’s body of
eugenists sitting on the apex of the social
pyramid has something in common with the
Nazi Higher Eugenic Court. That Nazi
EUGENICS IN GERMANY

eugenics is the logical fulfilment of the
Society’s eugenics is doubtless sincerely
believed by many people who, on religious
or other grounds, hate eugenics. Such persons will feel it their duty to give the widest
publicity to such beliefs. From pulpit and
platform, in the Press and doubtless also in
Parliament, they will warn the trustful
British public that in supporting the Soczety’s

159

policy it will, in fact, be unwittingly taking
the first step down the slippery declivity
that leads to compulsion, bureaucracy and
the tyranny of racial or social majorities.
Fellows and Members of this Society would
therefore do well to seize all available opportunities of pointing out what this Society
does, in fact, stand for.

 

SCIENTIFIC BOOKS

 

Current and Standard ENGLISH, FRENCH and GERMAN Literature
in Chemical, Biological, Medical, and Physical Science supplied from

stock, or obtained promptly to order.

A visit to this Department is respectfully suBgested.
Please write for CATALOGUES, mentioning interests.

H. K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd.,

136 GOWER STREET
LONDON, WC. 1

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 3.
