VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION

Report of the Conference at the Caxton Hall on May 23rd, 1932

IR ALLAN POWELL, lately Chief

Officer of Public Assistance of the

London County Council and now a
member of the Tariff Advisory Committee,
took the chair at the morning session of this
Conference, which was arranged by the
Eugenics Society.

In the early days of the depression after
the post-War boom, he said, it was put forward by one of the leading industrialists
that this country was over-populated, and
could never again maintain a population on
the then-existing basis, at least not on the
standard that the post-War population expected to be maintained. If that were true, then
how much more was it the case to-day! It
was doubtful if we should ever again be able
to spend freely those vast sums on
the care of the unfit to which we had
been accustomed. Any decrease of population should be sought in the weakest of the
stock, the medically and physically unfit.
Unfortunately, it was the reverse which was
happening to-day. Our social and economic
conditions demanded imperatively that
whatever steps could properly be taken
to bring about a decrease in the army of
defectives should be taken. It seemed to be
agreed on all sides that mental defectives
should not have children, but there was, in
addition, the ‘‘ social problem group ”’ to be
considered.

The outlook of future generations towards the problems under discussion would
probably be very different from that of the
moment, and it was most desirable that in
our day and generation some contribution
should be made, even if by tentative and
limited steps, towards the progress which
was inevitable.

Dr. R. Langdon-Down followed with an
address on the medical aspects of sterilization, distinguishing it, in the first place,
from castration. ‘The only change it produced was to render procreation impossible,

and as a medical procedure it was safe,
effective, and harmless.

It was not necessary, however, for medical opinion to maintain that by it defectiveness could be completely eliminated in a
short time. If this measure could be shown,
when properly applied, to reduce to some
degree this grave evil, it was justifiable to
ask that the legal ambiguities and obstacles
should be removed, and that safeguarded
voluntary sterilization, interwoven with
other measures, should be made available.

It could be claimed that medical opinion
was almost unanimous :

1.—That certain cases of mental deficiency might be prevented by the means
described.

2.—That there were no other means that
could reduce the heritable type of mental
deficiency.

Quite apart from the transmission of
defect, it was undesirable that children
should have parents who were mentally deficient, and consequently that mental defectives should conceive or beget children.

Sir Thomas Horder said that sterilization
did not differ from birth control in principle, but only in efficiency. Cutting of the
human body might be regarded as mutilation, although where an operation was
undertaken on behalf of the health of the
patient, the offence was presumably theoretical, provided reasonable skill and care
were shown. Sterilization was frequently
undertaken for women in whom child-bearing involved a danger to life. It was not
often that a doctor would undertake sterilizing operations for reasons other than
health while the legal cover remained so
slender. The hospitals, moreover, refused
to sterilize patients on eugenic grounds, and
it was undesirable that there should be a
discrepancy between hospital practice and
private practice.

133
134

PARLIAMENTARY PROGRESS

Wing-Commander A. W. H. James said
that owing to the fact that in the present
Parliament all private members’ time had
so far been taken by the Government, the
small and very keen non-party Committee
of private members which had been formed
in the present House of Commons to forward the idea of sterilization, had not, in
these circumstances, actually discussed
their Permissive Sterilization Bill, for it
would have been a waste of time. The Committee had simply endeavoured to focus the
attention of other members of both Houses
on the general question of voluntary sterilization.

During the short time he had been in the
present Parliament he had tried to obtain
the views of other members in what might
be termed a cross-section of opinion. ‘The
results were :

Out of 42 members approached (of all
parties)

16 expressed unqualified support.

16 expressed personal agreement, without
necessarily binding themselves to support
the measure.

5 were entirely non-committal.

5 expressed unqualified non-acceptance of
the idea.

In the present House of Commons, when
private members’ time was available, it was
confidently hoped that if a Bill was introduced it would secure something like a two
to one majority.

Mr. Cecil Binney said that the law as to
sterilization was not simple, since a sterilizing operation had clearly to be distinguished
from a surgical operation for the benefit of
the patient.

The legality of sterilization was doubtful
in the case of a normal adult, and there was
little doubt that it was unlawful to sterilize
a defective.

The sterilization of sane persons was
already done, and there had as yet been no
prosecution. The fact that it might be
illegal made sterilization a luxury of the
rich, since State, municipal, or charitable
institutions could not venture to do it.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The argument that sterilization was
directed against the working classes made
little impression on those with knowledge of
criminal courts and of the immense gulf
separating the respectable workman from
the vagrant, criminal class.

FOREIGN EXPERIENCE

Mrs. C. B. S. Hodson, dealing with Sterilization in Other Countries, said that in
1928-9 she inspected the case records of the
American survey of sterilization in practice.
The principal points which emerged were :

1.—That the operation did not detrimentally affect health, mentality, or sex-life, but
only prevented procreation.

2.—The higher grades of the feebleminded, who were suited for life in the community after training in institutions, could
readily be taught to co-operate voluntarily,
and to regard the operation as a benefit.

3.—Relations of these cases were not
deterred from committing them to institutions where sterilization was usual before
release on licence. On the contrary, they
sought admission for their charges with the
object of securing the operation.

4.—Subsequent and infertile marriages
were frequent and were particularly successful among the feeble-minded.

5.—There was a diminished tendency to
promiscuity after the operation, four-fifths
being promiscuous before sterilization, and
only one-twelfth afterwards.

She also said that the general care for the
feeble-minded, epileptics, and the insane
had improved during the sterilization era;
that there was an awakened sense of
responsibility in the community in regard to
sex-life and parenthood ; and that economies
were early felt from the reduction in the
number of children to be brought up at the
public charge.

Miss Pocock’s contribution to this aspect —
was in substance the same as her article on
page 127 of this REvIEw.

Professor R. Ruggles Gates took the chair
at the afternoon discussion on the Social and
Moral Aspects of Sterilization. One of the
rights, he said, of every individual, was to
be born with a reasonably healthy body and
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION

mind. The feeble-minded and seriously unfit, if they propagated their kind, were
obviously increasing, directly and inexcusably, the misery and unhappiness of the
world. Voluntary sterilization would effectively check the multiplication of defectives,
and so help to raise the standard of fitness
and happiness of the race as a whole.

For countless ages Nature had subjected

her species to the pruning-hook of natural
selection, with the result that in the vast
majority of animal species the individuals
which survived to adulthood were all relatively perfect specimens of their kind.
- Those having grave defects rarely survived
long enough to pass them on to later generations. ‘This was also true of man in his
aboriginal state, but in civilized mankind
this selective process had often been suspended or even reversed.

The time had come when man must consciously take a hand in his own evolution.
Races improved or degenerated according to
the selective forces which were acting upon
mating and the production of offspring in
each generation. It was therefore essential
that if the race was not to deteriorate, those
who became the parents of the next generation should represent at least an average
sample of the present generation.

Just as medicine was the application of
biological sciences to the health of the individual, so eugenics was the application of
the principles of biology to racial welfare.
In this sense it was the most fundamental
and important of all applied sciences, because it dealt with the raw material of the
race itself.

Professor Carr-Saunders said that we had
long ago generally agreed that we had a
moral obligation to make human surroundings the most favourable possible to secure
full development of the innate potentialities ;
it was now beginning to be realized that we
had an equal obligation to secure good
innate potentialities.

We found that there was no abjention to
sterilization when performed in the interests
of health, and there could be none, therefore,
to the operation in itself, but only to the
object of it.

135

There were persons certain or likely to
have children seriously defective in those
mental qualities which were the indispensable basis of a full and useful life; and it
was a moral obligation not to bring such
children into the world. Thus, provided
that it was not otherwise objectionable, sterilization might be approved.

Sterilization was not proposed as an alternative to segregation, but as an adjunct to
it—for those who did not need to live permanently in institutions. Prohibition upon
marriage, the other alternative to sterilization, would be ineffective, and, passing this
over, there were serious objections to it. It
was humiliating, and again, since marriage
and home life formed for most people the
best basis whence to develop what was in
them, prohibition upon marriage would
render the position of the penalized hard.
There was little reason, unfortunately, to
think that sterilization would decrease promiscuity and venereal disease, but there was
no reason to suppose that it would aggravate
them, while the prohibition of marriage
most certainly would do so. The chance of
genius arising in a mentally defective
strain was infinitely less than of it arising
in a strain of super-normal intellectual capacity. The chance, therefore, of losing genius
when defectives did not produce offspring
was remote, whereas under these circumstances it was certain that much deficiency
would never occur. |

Mr. C. J. Bond explained the movement
now going on under the auspices of a
provincial Health Insurance Committee
(Leicester) to spread a knowledge of
heredity and the necessity for eugenic marriage among the insured workers in that
area. By the spread of biological knowledge, including the principles of heredity,
among school teachers and adolescent citizens, it was hoped that something might be
done to prevent marriage and procreation
among persons who exhibited in their own
persons, or who carried in their germ cells,
the seeds of serious mental and bodily defect
of an inherited kind. The question of voluntary sterilization was dealt with, its nature
explained, and the absence of injurious
136

effects on individual health and the sex-life
pointed out.

Mr. Bond quoted cases of blind persons
and individuals suffering from other forms
of transmissible defect, who had undergone
voluntary sterilization with satisfactory
results. If carriers of mental defect could
also be induced to accept sterilization, he
added, then we might hope for an appreciable reduction in the incidence of mental
deficiency in the population even in the near
future. He mentioned instances which gave
ground for hoping that there would be increasing numbers of such carrier cases.

Mr. Bond also said there were two ways in
which citizens might approach the moral
aspect of sterilization—the way of authority,
after the manner of the Roman Catholic
Church, or by endeavouring to form a sound
judgment for themselves on the subject. If
this second way were followed there was
every hope that a sounder mental attitude
towards voluntary sterilization and other
means of preventing racial deterioration
would gradually spread among our people.

Mr. J. C. Pringle said that voluntary
sterilization might be supposed to be a
novelty, but it would be found that the principle involved—and that was what mattered
socially and morally—extended throughout
the last three civilizations. During 400
years the formule employed at nearly all
marriages in the English-speaking world
had strongly emphasized the principle, and
the evidence went to show that it had been
emphasized during the preceding 500 years.
Couples were bound together in marriage
for three reasons :

1.—Because they required an outlet for
the sexual impulse which would not lead to
social chaos.

2.—For the procreation of children whose
adequate nurture was provided for.

3.—For ‘‘ mutual society, help, and comfort.”’

As children were never produced without
satisfaction of the sexual impulse, it was
clear that our civilization had throughout its
course regarded the sexual impulse as some
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

thing to be provided for in itself, and not
only in connection with the procreation of
children. The discovery by medical science
of a mechanical aid to an arrangement inculcated by civilization was clearly a boon
not to be neglected or suppressed, but to be
put at the disposal of all those to whose
adjustment to life it was a help.

At times the tribe or State might have
wanted more people for its purposes; at
times the family might have wanted more
hands. But to-day the situation was clarified on this island, and the fundamental
social and moral principle involved could be
applied unhampered by these requirements,
in view of our enormous over-population.

Wing-Commander James and Dr. C. P.
Blacker wound up the session with an outline of the Practical Proposals of this
Society, the latter saying that the reduction
in the incidence of mental deficiency attainable by legalizing the sterilization of mental
defectives would be small. This end could
only be adequately realized by making it
possible for all sufferers from hereditary
diseases, disabilities, and defects to be
voluntarily sterilized. It was especially important that facilities for voluntary sterilization be made available for the assemblage
of socially burdensome and parasitic persons
described by the recent Mental Deficiency.
Committee as the ‘‘ Social Problem Group.”’
Whether the best way to do this was by Act
of Parliament or by trying to popularize the
operation in the right quarters, disregarding
in the process the uncertainties in the
present state of the Law, was an arguable
point.

The foregoing account is only a highly
condensed summary of the points made by
the principal speakers at the Conference. A
full report has now been issued, as a separate
publication, by the Sterilization Sub-Committee of this Society, and it includes the
informal discussion on all the aspects of
sterilization which took place in the evening.
The price is rs.

ey

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 2.
