FAMILY PLANNING IN CHINA
By HAN SUYIN

RETURNED to Peking in May 1956 and
[ox three months in China. Much of

this time was devoted to making myself
acquainted with hospitals, public health
work in all its forms, and of course, the
recent trend towards family planning. On
family planning the policy formylated by
the Chinese Government in Peking is very
clear: The Health Minister, who is a woman
and a Christian, Madam Li Teh-chuan, made
it one of the topics of a long report which was
presented to the National Assembly in June
1956, and supported by several other
delegates. There has been a lot of derisive
and ill-mannered comment in the Western
newspapers on some items culled out of
these speeches. Perhaps this article will
make the whole concept of family planning
in China clearer to readers.

A Demand for Family Planning

Madam Li said that after six years of
Communist régime in China, there has come,
through the many offices of the Women’s
Federation of China (which comprises many
social welfare and health workers), a definite

demand on the part of women, whether in

villages or cities, for family planning.

Family planning, she emphasized, was not

being forced upon the people; it was a
positive demand from the women themselves.
Therefore it had to be considered. To many
in China it was a new concept; men,
especially, were vaguely against it, even
though they could feel the pinch of increasing
numbers of children on a limited salary and
within a lmited space. This was felt

especially among the new industrial workers ,

in the new factories, where. dormitory
accommodation was limited. There the
husbands were more willing to consider limiting their children. The problem, however, is of
nightmare dimensions. There are 600 million
people in China, of whom 500 million are
peasants, living in small villages or farms

contraceptive.

To provide first the contraceptive materials,
secondly to train the nurses in contraceptive
techniques, and thirdly to send these nurses
to the villages all over China, is a Herculean
task. “‘ We could never envisage confining
ourselves to the towns and factories ’’ said
Madam Li, very sensibly. ‘‘ That would
merely be side-stepping the problem.”’

Without even mentioning the problem of
training enough nurses or workers and
educating them in contraceptive techniques
so that they may, in turn, educate the public,
the problem of a supply of adequate contraceptives is staggering enough. What contraceptives should be used? There could not be
too many failures; the population as a whole
was fairly ignorant, and one failure in a
village would discredit the whole process.
There were no factories to make these
contraceptives, no raw materials, no source
of supplies except purchase from the outside
world. The public health resources were
strained to the utmost with the magnificent
campaigns against cholera, smallpox, tuberculosis, plague, leprosy, the building of
hospitals and clinics, and it was not possible
to spend a great deal of money on such a
project without first making sure that the
best means would be utilized.

Research for an Oral Contraceptive

That is where the suggestion was made by
one delegate, Mr. Shao Li-tzu, of devoting
some money to research into an oral
Mr. Shao reminded the
National Assembly that contraception was.
not a new thing in the world: Time and
again, people had tried various means of
limiting births. Thus, in the old Chinese
pharmacopeia, he knew of a “recipe’’ in
which tadpoles taken by mouth were said to

‘prevent conception.

81

This story of “tadpoles’’ was eagerly
seized upon by some western journalists and
a lot of sardonic laughter was heard.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW July, 1957. 49, 2.
82.

Actually it is not more strange to mention
tadpoles than to mention calves liver extract
for permicious anzmia.

What Mr. Shao meant to convey was that
he felt the answer to the problem, at least in
China, lay in an oral contraceptive. He is not
alone in thinking so; the subject is being
given much thought both in the United
States and in some laboratories in England.

At the moment contraceptives are freely
sold in all the pharmacies in the cities of
China. Contraceptive advice is freely available from doctors. It is, however, impossible
as yet to look upon this as a definite

‘campaign ”’ in favour of family planning;
China is too vast a country for such a thing
not to require careful planning over a good
many years.

Abortion and Sterilization

_ Recently, due to the health campaigns,
which have drastically reduced. the death
rate, the increase in population at the pace
of a million a month has become very
evident. Things move swiftly in China: from
announcing a campaign for birth control and
the search for an oral contraceptive, the pace
for curbing population increase has led to the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

legalization of abortion. Sterilization, especially voluntary sterilization in the male,
because it is such as easy procedure, was
advocated in June 1956 by the same
representative who aroused so much controversy with his “ tadpole ” recipe, Mr. Shao
Li-tze. Mr. Shao is an old man nearing
seventy-five; in a country where the male is
proud of his fertility, traditionally, it was a
bolder and more controversial suggestion to
advocate male sterilization than any other
measure. Yet at the moment it is being

‘ advocated as superior to sterilization in the

female, which is a more lengthy process,
demanding a fairly high-grade operation and
general anesthesia.

Owing to the fact that the Government
of China is able to use the press, films,
radio, and all other means of propaganda to
exhort the people to population control,
there will probably be very little resistance
to the idea of sterilization, even among men,
as compared to the resistance it would arouse
in less disciplined countries.

One thing is certain: Family Planning has
come to China, and there have been no
barriers of Government prejudice or organized religion against the idea; we shall have to
watch further developments with interest.
