REVIEWS

rapidly acquired speech, and his IQ score rose.
At eight he entered a school for the blind, and at
sixteen the Royal Normal College for the Blind.
At eighteen he was a well-poised young man
with considerable charm and good looks, and
wide interests. The remarkable change in mental
and emotional development was due to skilled
teaching, warm interest and affection.

HILDA LEWIS

Aspects of Family Mental Health in Europe.
By various authors. Public Health Papers,
No. 28. Geneva, 1965. WHO. Pp. 124. Price
8s. 6d.

THIS BOOK, CONTAINING papers written by
psychiatrists, therapists and other workers from
a number of European countries, is evidence of
the current widespread interest in the family.

The first paper is a stimulating account by
Dr. H. Hoffmeyer of the work done for the
mother and the family particularly in Scandinavian countries, through family protection
schemes, and specifically in Denmark through
the famous “Mothers’ Aid Centres”. These
centres provide legal, social, medical and
psychiatric services for unmarried as well as
married women. They have a duty to interview
and help women seeking abortion: to provide
contraceptive advice, to supervise adoptions,
to support with financial and other aid overburdened mothers, and to help resolve family
discord. There is much in these schemes which
is relevant to the revision of our own abortion
laws and the Seebohm Committee’s inquiry into
better ways of integrating our local authority
and personal social services.

Among the papers dealing with practical
social welfare, there is an interesting account by
a psychiatrist of the slowly changing situation
in the employment of women in Spain—a
country particularly late in making use of this
reservoir of labour and talent. Various supportive schemes and centres to protect the family
from breakdown have already been found
necessary, although at the same time the
cultural value of widening the women’s horizons
has been recognized.

OF BOOKS

Monsieur A. Isambert describes the development of the well-known “Schools for Parents”
which have been successfully developed in
France since the last war, having been founded
in 1929 as part of a scheme to overcome the
indifference of parents to their children’s sexual
and emotional problems. The school in Paris
at first concentrated on teaching parents about
child development, based on psychoanalytic
principles, but was later drawn into much
broader fields of educational psychology and
sociology. It also provides personal psychological
help for the parents themselves, marriage
guidance, and advice for young people. M.
Isambert enumerates similar organizations in
other European countries, but comments on the
relatively slight interest shown in Britain.

Among other papers dealing with the role of
individual and group psychotherapy in clearing
up family upsets, an account by Drs. Jirina
Knoblochova and Ferdinand Knobloch of the
methods practised at the Psychiatric Department
of the University Polyclinic, Prague, shows how
far such efforts have advanced in Central
Europe.

The British contributions include an account
of the Family Discussion Bureau at the Tavistock
Institute of Human Relations, and of the Child
Therapy Clinic at Hampstead, described by
Mrs. L. Pincus and Dr. Joseph Sandler
respectively. a

HILDA LEWIS

ABORTION

Abortion: An Ethical Discussion. London, 1965.
Church Information Office. Pp. 70. Price 4s. 6d.

THIS REPORT IS the work of a committee set up
by the Board for Social Responsibility of the
Church Assembly of the Church of England,
under the chairmanship of Canon I. T. Ramsey,
Nolloth Professor of the Philosophy of the
Christian Religion at Oxford, the secretary being
the Reverend G. R. Dunstan. It is lucid, impartial,
and thorough, and presents a cogent argument
for a limited reform of the present law, while
stopping short of the proposals made by Lord
Silkin in the Bill which has recently been before
the House of Lords.

167
