MARY STOCKS
B.Sc., LL.D., Litt.D.

Reflections on a Changing Class
Structure’

HEN COLIN BERTRAM Suggested that I

should give this lecture, I was conscious

of the great honour implied in the
invitation. I was even more conscious of my
inability to live up to it. I explained to him that
I knew nothing about eugenics, that I was no
scientist, and that the subjects of earlier Galton
lectures—and still more the names of the
lecturers—inspired me with icy terror. But he
reminded me that I had lived in the world a
long time (which is all too true), that I must
have absorbed a good deal of human experience,
and that what with one thing and another I
ought to be able to put up some sort of a show.

I will endeavour to do so; though the kind of
life I have led, sliding on thin ice from one
superficial field of observation to another, constitutes a better qualification for a quiz artist
on the Light Programme than for a Galton
lecturer.

I have at any rate lived through five generations, known them all, from my grandparents
to my grandchildren, and observed their ways of
life and the impact of external events upon them.
We are all Londoners; we are all professional
class. We haven’t a business man amongst us,
nor a manual worker. Forgive this autobiography—but it is only honest to indicate the
nature of the window through which I have
observed human goings-on. Seen from this
angle then, I have come to believe that it is the
professional class that has borne the brunt of
the spectacular social revolution through which
we have passed during the last fifty years. It is
the professional class that has yielded most and
reaped least.

The Professional Class and the Social Revolution
In recent analyses of class structure by economists, it has been customary to indicate four or

* The Galton Lecture delivered in London on February
18th, 1959

II

five distinct categories—differentiating, for instance, skilled from unskilled workers; the
learned professions occupying a place near the
top but as one among several higher income
groups. Seen from my window, the pre-revolution scene approximated rather to Disraeli’s
“two nations” pattern. My parents inherited
from their parents and I inherited from them,
hereditary membership of a privileged class.
We shared it with senior business executives,
and members of the aristocracy. We called no
man Sir. Socially we were a homogeneous group
—separated by a gulf of habit and tradition from
the great majority of our fellow citizens. We
dressed differently, we talked differently, we ate
differently and at different times, we were
entertained differently.

It was, of course, a class system and not a
caste system. Because given abnormal ability
and energy (plus a little bit of luck) individuals
could climb into the upper air and within a
generation breathe its atmosphere with ease.
The public schools with their open doors to feepaying parents, helped this process of assimilation. It did not, of course, disturb the class
pattern.

In my own childhood I experienced the reality
of this “‘two nations” set-up in its purest and
bleakest form: the tall house in Kensington
(now five flats) with its basement where the
servants worked and the attic where they slept;
the two bells on each side of the front door, one
marked “‘visitors’, the other “servants”; the
nursery and night nursery; the surrounding
streets of tall houses in single family occupation
(now all flats or hotels or hostels) from the doors
of which every afternoon nannies in grey suits
and black bonnets would emerge with children
for the afternoon walk in Kensington Gardens.
I am sure that we were the nearest thing to the
chemically pure specimen that social scientists

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1959, 51, 1.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

long for when they contemplate with envy the
clean test-tubes of the physical science laboratory.

Two things, more than anything else, contributed to our sensation of belonging to a privileged class. One, the lesser of the two, was the
upper class monopoly of mobility. We were the
holiday makers—the long-distance travellers by
train. The others were the day trippers. Apart
from the recognized areas into which the day
trippers poured themselves at certain seasons of
the year, the holiday resorts were all ours. It
was for us that the lodging houses and the
hotels catered. And because, in proportion to
the unprivileged there were so few of us, it was
all very pleasant. Few things contribute so
effectively to the sense of belonging to a privileged class as the power to move about while
the rest stay put in their slums or villages or
industrial areas.

But even more potent as a contributory factor
to this sense of otherness, was the prevalence of
domestic service. We were so utterly dependent
on it that we didn’t even give a thought to the
fact of our dependence. There it was, there it
always would be.

I am sure that insufficient attention has been
paid by social scientists to the role of the domestic servant in the evolution of British society.
She was the “back-room girl” of the female
social reformer. She let loose into the arena of
public life an army of well-educated leisured
women: Florence Nightingale, Octavia Hill,
Emma Cons, Beatrice Webb, Millicent Fawcett,
Eleanor Rathbone—out of their homes they
streamed, kicking their domestic chores behind
them for someone else to do—to devote themselves unimpeded by anything (except perhaps
trailing skirts) to the task of transforming the
social structure whose shape had conditioned
their leisure. Karl Marx has pointed out that
every social system carries within itself the germs
of its own destruction. Seen thus the well-trained
domestic servant might be recognized as one
among many obscure but potent little germs.

It is unnecessary to elaborate further the
nature of a class structure whose features are
doubtless familiar from early experience to many
here present. If you want an arresting example
of its extreme rigidity turn to Beatrice Webb’s
autobiography, My Apprenticeship. There you

12

will read of how, wishing to see how the industrial
working classes lived, she adopted an elaborate
disguise and, with the help of an old servant, got
herself accepted as a convalescent sempstress
in the home of a Lancashire textile worker. Her
adventure reads like that of an infidel British
explorer sojourning in disguise among the tents
of Bedouin with a view to writing traveller’s
tales about their strange manners and customs.

It is, I suppose, a truism to say that the two
forces which held this class pattern in situ were
inherited wealth and the monopoly by the
privileged class of educational opportunity. The
educational programmes of the two classes were
wholly distinct. For the great majority an elementary school leading to wage earning at
thirteen or fourteen. For the privileged minority,
a more complex and protracted system. The
form familiar to my childhood was for girls, a
day school or governess; for boys, the painful
experience of a preparatory boarding school at
nine or ten, leading to a public school (except for
potential naval officers), followed by Oxford or
Cambridge (except for potential army officers),
or perhaps initiation into the senior ranks of
business or law. The boys thereafter were
expected to earn their living. The girls were not.
If they pursued higher education or a gainful
occupation, as indeed some of them did, that
was an uncovenanted benefit. Nobody thought
the worse of them if they pursued leisure.

But it was this male educational background
that gave access to the professions and to the
higher ranks of industry and commerce—to
occupations in which one enjoyed responsibility
and exercised authority—and in the intervals of
which, thanks to high income levels, one lived
graciously and moved about freely. The higher
incomes which they commanded were shielded
from competition by the majority because the
majority were not qualified to compete. Thus
the minority, being protected by a sort of ring
fence of educational opportunity achieved
incomes on which it was possible to save, as
well as to buy exclusive education. This provided
a further element of firm cement for the class
structure of their lives, because those who failed
to earn had the support of unearned income
from capital. The system was thus self-perpetuating.
REFLECTIONS ON A CHANGING CLASS STRUCTURE

The Redistribution of Purchasing Power

I am not going to continue these platitudes by
elaborating in detail the causes which have in
our own time transformed this class pattern
into something rich and strange. And in any
case the pattern was not quite as simple as the
one which I seemed to see through my Kensingtonian window. State-aided secondary education
under the Balfour Act of 1902 was coming into
the picture. So were the civic universities. Both
were affecting the growth and magnifying the
significance of that intermediate class sometimes described as the black coated proletariat:
the class that according to Karl Marx was
destined to be squeezed out of existence by the
inevitable polarization of exploiters and exploited. And how wrong he was; for it has grown
in such a way as to blur the whole pattern—of
course for reasons which Marx regarded as
major if not exclusive social determinants,
namely, changes in the mechanics and organization of the productive forces.

The important thing is that to-day the whole
ring fence of educational opportunity has
collapsed. The underprivileged are breaking in
all along the line. The social conscience has
willed it to be so—and rightly for the honour of
human justice and the liberation of human talent.

But the social conscience, driven by pressure
of events and the demands of an enfranchised
majority, has done more than that to crack and
batter the outline of our old class structure. By
the combined operation of graduated direct
taxation, the evolution of social services in a
welfare state, and full employment stimulated
by successive small doses of inflation, it has
brought about a revolutionary redistribution of
effective purchasing power.

Differences of mobility have gone. Differences
of dress are on their way out; one can still
distinguish the Dutchess of Kent from a shop
assistant but one can no longer distinguish a
Somervillian from a mill hand. Differences of
speech have not gone; they have, however,
become irrelevant as a determinant of social
acceptability. Indeed in the entertainment
industry they are a passport to success. Meanwhile at many points the higher levels of wages
are lapping over the lower professional salary
levels.

One striking feature of the scene is the acute
awareness by advertisers of vast new fields for
cultivation in the wide expanse of purchasing
power offered by working-class wives and
affluent teenagers—of this, more later.

But if the old social contours are in process of
obliteration, are there no subterranean imbroilments at work which may produce new ones?
And if so, how long does it take for a new
economic category to evolve the distinctive
habits of a social class? It is tempting to let the
imagination play round such a question even
when convinced that it cannot be answered.

Let us then—just for fun—direct our attention
to one perceptible phenomenon of the new
material equalitarianism: to the fact that to some
extent the levelling down of professional class
spendable incomes in relation to the majority
has not to the same extent affected the world of
big business. In so far as the levelling down is
the result of taxation, sections of the business
community have managed to remain above the
battle. The result is a perceptible differentiation
in their standard of life.

How precisely this has come about remains to
be analysed in. a book which remains to be
written. It is a reproach to our contemporary
economists that it has not been written already.
Chancellors of the Exchequer are fumbling and
their policies are drifting for want of it. Its title
is The Incidence and Effects of Taxation in the
Welfare State. In it we shall learn of the proportion which expense allowances bear to taxable
income and of the varied and sometimes obscure
forms which they assume. We shall learn too of
the various ways in which industrial and commercial organization is adapting itself to patterns
devised for tax avoidance rather than for
maximum productivity at minimum cost, and
how far, if at all, these distortions violate the
canons adumbrated by Adam Smith for an
economically sound system of taxation in a
free-price economy.

Unfortunately the author of The Incidence and
Effects... will probably find himself incommoded by one remaining element of class
discrimination: the immunity of the rich from
factual inquisitions. Since the days of Charles
Booth the poor have presented a fruitful field for
the questionnaires of social scientists in search of

13
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

precise knowledge. House to house visiting has
played a large part in it, and its results have
contributed significantly to our understanding
of social phenomena. The writer of The Incidence
and Effects ... may here find himself at a disadvantage. He may wish to know from sample
inquiry how many of the cars outside the
Dorchester on a given day are company cars,
or what proportion of the guests lunching
inside are entering their bills on expense sheets.
It has been found possible to extract reliable
information from persons who can be convinced
that they have something to gain. It may be less
easy to deal with those who may fear that they
have something to lose.

The moral of all this, which may have led us
into certain irrelevances (and there can be no
doubt that it has) is that while old class cleavages
disappear the possibility of new ones may be
indicated. And I would particularly commend
this thought to the Labour Party, some of whose
members are concentrating a lot of thought on
the attempt so to order our educational policy
as to prevent the emergence of a grammar
school aristocracy while an aristocracy of a
very different kind may be in the egg—one whose
liquidation will involve a more intensive effort
of thought than has yet been bestowed on it.

All this leaves us with a number of speculations which seem to arise directly out of the
grand transformation of our class structure from
the Disraelian ‘‘two nations” pattern to a considerable and still ever-increasing degree of
equalitarianism in educational opportunity and
effective puchasing power. What is likely to be
its effect on the population problem, on the
position of women, on human psychology, on
popular culture? (You will observe how wisely I
have kept off the inheritance of intelligence; for
reasons indicated at the outset of this lecture.)

Overpopulation and a National Population Policy

I would suggest, then, that this new equalitarianism is about to confront Great Britain with an
overpopulation problem for the first time in
history—but we have not yet begun to consider
the possibility of a national population policy.
Until recently national population policies have
been rare things. France had one between the
wars when family allowances were advocated—

14

and indeed introduced—to counter the effects of
an inadequate survival rate. India and Japan
have definite population policies to-day in face
of growing numbers in relation to insufficiently
expanding material resources. I suppose that
we came nearest to having one in the eighteenthirties when the Malthusian population theory
captured public imagination and focused attention on the expansive possibilities of a natural
birth rate unaccompanied by those distressing
positive checks which had, as Malthus was able
to show, kept human numbers at bay since the
dawn of history. Dealing with rational human
beings, Malthus advocated the substitution of a
prudential check, and this he envisaged as the
maintenance of an economic individualism so
uncompromising that no man would dare to propagate beyond the measure of his own unassisted
individual family resources. This, he believed,
would generate moral restraint. The Government
believed so too; and the deterrent poor law of
1834 represented its acceptance of the Malthusian gospel—though not so wholehearted
an acceptance as he would have wished, because
he wanted to abolish the poor law altogether.

The mood passed—though we met a pale
reflection of it a century later in the opposition
of certain liberal economists to the family
endowment agitation. It was increasingly repugnant to the social conscience—but what was
more important—it was rendered increasingly
irrelevant by the vastly expanding material
resources of Victorian England and in due course
by the development of a new prudential check in
the form of contraceptive birth control. This
last development was not a response to insufficiency of material resources, but on the contrary
to rising standards of life. It had nothing whatever to do with population policy. It was the
result of spontaneous action by individuals;
and in so far as it came later to owe something to
propaganda, that propaganda was inspired by
considerations of maternal health and family
welfare rather than by any Malthusian fear of
over-population—of which I think it would be
true to say there was no sign.

Twice since then we have looked the population problem in the face, only to dismiss it with a
shrug and a murmur of “pass friend and all’s
well”.
REFLECTIONS ON A CHANGING CLASS STRUCTURE

The first occasion was the publication in 1919
of Maynard Keynes’s Economic Consequences of
the Peace. In his chapter on Europe before the
war, he makes a sombre forecast of Europe after
the war, faced with a probable decline in the
purchasing power in terms of food, of a unit of
labour applied to industry.

The economic Eldorado of the Victorian age
(he wrote) lost sight of a view which filled with
deepseated melancholy the founders of our
political economy. Before the eighteenth century mankind entertained no false hopes. To
lay the illusions which grew popular at that age’s
latter end Malthus disclosed a Devil. For half
a century all serious economical writings held
that devil in clear prospect. For the next halfcentury he was chained up and out of sight.
Now, perhaps, we have loosed him again.

But we hadn’t. He was well and truly chained
up between the wars. And the second occasion
on which we looked the population problem
in the face was from quite a different angle.
Shortly before the second world war, a brief
panic was occasioned by public contemplation
of a statistical formula called the ‘‘net reproduction rate” which seemed to indicate that existing
trends, cumulative in their operation, would
involve us in national race suicide within measurable time.

On the tide of that fear, family allowances
rode to victory, birth control propaganda had
to adopt a somewhat apologetic attitude, and a
powerful Royal Commission on population was
appointed.

By the time its report appeared, that fear too
had passed. To-day we have in Great Britain a
stabilized population with birth control and
death control more or less in equilibrium—and
this not as a result of any conscious population
policy but rather as the development of death
control in response to concern for individual
human welfare and the development of birth
control as the response of freely acting individuals to the same incentive.

Our national concern with the problem of
population, in so far as it exists, is centred on
overseas territories where death control has
been achieved without comparable progress in
birth control. And in my opinion that concern
is a wishy-washy milk-livered brew; weakened
partly no doubt, by fear of the Catholic vote,

and partly, I suspect, by an easy but dubious
assumption that where death control is imposed
from above by the World Health Organization
or by a benevolent government, birth control
will be an automatic individual response to it as
was the case in civilized, literate, social-serviceminded Great Britain. However, that is by the
way.

It is a fact well known to social historians that
we tend to discuss the problems of to-day in terms
of ideas based on the conditions of yesterday.
Or, as Professor Tawney puts it in his essay on
Equality: “‘Life is a swallow, theory is a snail”.
If we envisage our own population problem today in the economic terms familiar to readers of
economic text books, we shall be creeping with
the snail while the swallow flies over our heads.
In those terms it is doubtful if we have any overpopulation problem in Great Britain at all. The
net productivity per head would in all probability not be increased if there were fewer of us—
which economists have hitherto regarded as an
indication that we have exceeded the optimum
population conditioned by our present environment.

We should undoubtedly have exceeded it long
ago had our international contacts not enabled
us to concentrate on providing the world with
industrial products and commercial services
whose provision allows us to concentrate large
numbers in small areas. Many of us may be
plagued by an uncomfortable feeling that our
high standard of life under these conditions is a
very brittle thing—that our whole economy is
most precariously dependent on overseas political and economic policies over which we have
no effective control. Many of us may feel unresponsive to the comfortable words of politicians
who assure us that the people of this country can
in the near future enjoy a vastly improved
standard of life if only they work hard enough
and skilfully enough. But our fears may be liars
as were the fears of Malthusians in the eighteenthirties or of Maynard Keynes between the wars.

Now—if we stop thinking of population in
terms of the marginal net product of labour, if
we shake off our nineteenth century “workshop
of the world” mentality, if we relate the question
of population to our new equalitarian class
structure—and if at the same time we think of

Ig
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

man as a consumer rather than as a producer of
wealth—we can indeed see a very serious overpopulation problem looming ahead of us. The
Devil which Malthus unchained has got loose
again. The fact stares us in the face that with
our new diffusion of purchasing power each
individual takes up a great deal more room. The
only people who take up less room than they did
are the professional classes who are now
occupying single floors where they formerly
occupied whole houses with attics and basements—and even they have more cars and impede
more road space than they did before the last
war.

Indeed, one is sometimes tempted to view this
fact of individual expansion in nightmare terms.
Somebody once described Great Britain as a
lump of coal surrounded by fish. When the
nightmare is on me I feel tempted to describe it
as a congested car park in an ocean of radioactive sewage.

It is indeed a solemn thought how much
more room a given population takes up when
the standard of life reaches a certain point. For
geographical reasons the Russians don’t have to
worry about this, nor, I suppose, do the Americans. Nor do our self-governing dominions
which are from every point of view—economic
as well as cultural—underpopulated. But we
do. And I doubt if we worry enough. One
symptom of our tenancy of a fool’s paradise is
our present concentration on roads and houses
and our absence of concentration on water
conservation and supply as well as on sewage
disposal. Perhaps this is because, in a working
democracy the taxpayer must be offered the
most immediately obvious advantages of public
expenditure. The gay abandon with which he
plunges into a sea of sewage at his coastal
holiday resort does not suggest that massive
expenditure on this particular service will
redound to the electoral advantage of the government which incurs it.

What can we do about it? Emigration is not
likely to help us, because I doubt if there has
ever been a case of emigration—that is to say
mass emigration—from a high standard of life
to a simpler or harsher standard ; unless of course
the emigrants are driven by persecution or fear
of persecution. We can, however, mitigate the

16

problem by concentrating much more thought
on such matters as the better distribution of
industry, the staggering of hours and holidays,
and the realities of our sewage and water
problems. Meanwhile let us keep an eye on the
birth rate which, under the civilized conditions
now prevailing in Great Britain, has become
increasingly responsive to external stimuli. And
this brings us to the position of women.

The Position of Women

There can be no doubt that the coincidence of
birth and death control has been a wholly beneficent factor in the lives of women in this generation—all women (or nearly all now that the
habit of birth control has worked its way down
the social scale). On balance it has greatly
reduced the burden of maternity. I say on balance because, thanks to higher standards of
child care, all kinds of requirements have to be
satisfied which were not satisfied in the old days
when one had eight and buried four. One can
thus question the proposition which used to
be enunciated by critics of the social services,
that they relieved mothers of responsibility.
They did not. They magnified responsibility.
They required mothers to do all sorts of things,
such as mouth-cleaning, milk-sterilizing, clotheschanging, bathing, powdering and heaven knows
what, which many mothers had never bothered
to do before. But on balance to bear three babies
and rear them all, even under the eye of a
critical health visitor, is a less exhausting and
more satisfying business than to produce eight
and rear four.

Our increasingly equalitarian society with its
welfare services, its wide diffusion of purchasing
power, and its full employment bringing decent
living, elegant clothes, domestic gadgets, entertainment, travel, varied diets, and glossy
women’s magazines into millions of homes, has
certainly declared a handsome dividend of
material well-being for women as a whole.

It is the professional class women who have
borne the brunt of it. For them the two decades
between the world wars offered a golden age, a
golden age which had never existed before and
may never come again. I was one of its beneficiaries, since the most active years of my life
were passed in it.
REFLECTIONS ON A CHANGING CLASS STRUCTURE

At the beginning of that blessed period the
sex barriers which had hitherto deprived women
of professional opportunity and the more
interesting responsibilities of citizenship, fell one
by one. Opportunity opened out. Not until a
generation later was it once again curtailed—this
time by the withdrawal of domestic service, first
by war work, later by full employment and rising
wage costs.

The result is that whereas formerly the professional class woman’s day-to-day experience
diverged sharply from that of the working class
woman, to-day that experience is shared. And
her professional work, if pursued after marriage,
is pursued under difficulties which I, and my
generation, never had to face.

Incidentally those difficulties are maximized
by a system of taxation which treats the combined income of husband and wife as a single
income for income and sur-tax assessment. This
makes it difficult for the professional work of
the wife to be a paying proposition—sufficiently
so for her to be able to pay for the modicum
of expensive domestic service which enables her
to pursue her outside job. It will remain for the
author of The Incidence and Effects ...to estimate
the influence of this frustrating fiscal practice
on the volume of women’s professional work
and the consequent wastage of talent—as well as
on the conventional morality of the professional
classes in view of the financial inducement it
offers for irregular unions. This effect may
become more potent in the future, as conventional morality becomes less compulsive.

Birth Rate and Social Policy

But what about the influence of this social transformation scene on the birth rate, and incidentally, on the differential birth rate as between
professional and non-professional class women ?
Paradoxically, professional class domesticity
seems to act as a stimulus to judge from statistics
(admittedly compiled from a limited sample) in
Judith Hubback’s book Wives Who Went to
College. For, so my daughter who is of this
class and generation assures me, if you have to
make up your mind to a life of full-time domesticity you may as well make a real job of it and
have four children instead of two. Meanwhile
for the others, the non-professional class

3—ER

woman whose plan of existence remains much
the same though at a higher material standard,
and for whom birth control information is now
widely available, we may—I suggest—expect
much the same pattern of family.

In Czechoslovakia, I am told by one who has
recently been there, Government policy is being
operated with a view to the encouragement of
women’s work outside the home. Amenities such
as radio and TV sets, furnishings and laboursaving gadgets, are being made available as a
stimulus to such earning—créches and communal meals are provided to make it possible.
Such measures do make it possible with a oneor two-member family. With three or four
children it is not so easy. The result is a very low
birth rate which seems to be causing some concern. What this shows is the responsiveness of
the birth rate to social policy in a literate
industrialized community with inherited standards of material consumption. And the moral
for us is that if we choose to limit numbers for
aesthetic or economic reasons it can be done by
manipulating the conditions of women’s work
outside the home. Women are very ready to
work outside the home if it is not made too
difficult for them. Whether or not this is good
for the children is another matter. The answer
depends partly on the conditions under which
it is done, partly on one’s estimate of the
importance of full-time maternity in the home.
The children of the privileged classes in the
past seem to have done very well without it.

A *‘Classless’’ Society

But if we are, in fact moving towards a classless
society, will such phrases as “‘professional class”’
or “‘wage earning class’”’ have any relevance?
What we profess to be moving towards is a
society in which equal opportunity will enable
individuals to apply such talents as they are born
with to the full, without frustration of the able
or exaltation of the sub-standard. The national
gain will be a volume of human talent which
now runs to waste for want of cultivation. Such
an ideal was implicit in Mr. Butler’s 1944
Education Act. It is true that some people
regard this ideal with more enthusiasm than
others and that there are varying views regarding

17
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the speed with which we should proceed towards
it. But it commands very general lip service.
For some, however, it has its own terrors: for
instance the emergence of an_ intellectual
aristocracy which may in due course harden into
a class presenting hereditary variations of taste
and behaviour if not of speech and dress.
Presumably it is for this reason that the Chinese
Government is insistent that its intellectuals
shall perform their quota of unskilled manual
work. In our own country it plays a part in the
strong prediliction encountered in left-wing
circles for comprehensive as compared with
selective schools. It is certainly difficult to
believe that mediocre children brought up in the
homes of the higher functionaries will not tend
to react to their more rarified environment and
acquire ideas above their station—or rather
ideas which relate their own importance to their
father’s ability rather than their own mediocrity.
In this connection it would be interesting to know
something of the effect upon their children, of
the notable privileges conferred by the Russian
Government on members of the Academy of
Science—privileges which include cars, dachas,
differential purchasing power and much else.
Therefore, when our great text-book on The
Incidence and Effects of Taxation in Great Britain
has been written, there remains scope for
another: an examination into the nature and
results of contemporary national policies concerned with the control of class structure. But it
is to be feared that if the author of the first book
is likely to be impeded by the reluctance of the
rich to co-operate in factual surveys, the
author of the second may encounter even more
cageyness on the part of iron curtain governments required to submit the intimacies of their
social scene to the scrutiny of foreign investigators.
In Great Britain, however, such fears have
not yet materialized. Our policy, conscious or
half conscious, perhaps in some cases unconscious, and in many cases reluctant, has been
based on the recognition of an open road for
natural talent. We have gone a long way along
that road and we have further to go—but we will
doubtless get there in the end.
When we do, we shall for the first time be
able to sing with a clear social conscience that
hymn which reminds us that:

18

“The rich man in his castle,
The poor man at his gate,
God made them high and lowly
And ordered their estate.”

When that hymn was written it was certainly
not God who ordered their estate but the manmade environment in which they were born.
Realizing this, many an enlightened parson
caused this verse to be omitted when rendering
that otherwise attractive hymn. In future we
need not be so squeamish. The dichotomy will
in fact have resulted from God’s providence
rather than from man’s injustice—provided, of
course, that the rich man is not wastefully
opulent or the poor man destitute of necessities.

We shall in fact be citizens of a community
whose members are relieved of one great source
of bitterness and psychological tension: a sense
of frustration: of being the victims of injustice.

They will also be relieved of one great source
of comfort: the infinite comfort of being able to
say—and still more, to believe—that if they
find themselves in the less interesting and less
remunerative jobs, it is someone else’s fault.
Never again will a man be able to say to himself
as he gazes up at a top dog: “I’m as good as
you. If I’d had your chances I’d have been where
you are’’. Alas the obvious answer will now be:
*““But my dear chap you did have my chances.
Clearly you are not as good as I am.”

But, of course, it all depends on what you
mean by “‘good”’.

If only our second great book were written
and available to us, overseas experiments on the
working of what have been called ‘‘meritocracies” might throw some light on whether such
deprivation of comfort does or does not cause
more psychological disturbance than the old
sense of frustration imposed by external social
and economic inequalities. But here again it all
depends on what you mean by “good”. In a
wholly materialist society one might anticipate
that human assessment of the “‘good” would be
geared to worldly success as expressed in spendable income and public esteem. In which case
the causes of maladjustment will be potent. In so
far as we can shake ourselves free from the
tyranny of these standards—and get a little
nearer to the Kingdom of Heaven—we may be
REFLECTIONS ON A CHANGING CLASS STRUCTURE

able to attain mental serenity even in a “meritocracy”’.

But can we shake ourselves free from those
standards? Does our new class pattern offer
better or worse prospects of our being able to do
so?

Education and Taste

It is a solemn thought that our new class
structure with its wide distribution of purchasing
power, offers more dazzling opportunities than
ever before, for the profitable exploitation of the
common measure of human taste. Most
human beings are more interested in persons
than in policies; most human beings would
rather be entertained than educated. For
the satisfaction of these interests they are
prepared to pay—and they can pay. Therefore
in a preponderantly free-price economy there
will be found those who are prepared not merely
to satisfy those interests, but to inflate them—to
blow them up and keep them at full blast.
To-day they have been given a new and powerful
instrument in the form of commercial TV. So if
teenagers with money to spend on gramophone

records appear to like boy pop singers, find a.

boy pop singer—advertise him—organize “‘fan
clubs” for him—promote a press campaign on
his life story—mobilize teenagers to swoon and
screech round him and then advertise the fact
that they have done so in order that other
teenagers may know what is expected of them.
And when they are tired of that boy singer, drop
him and find another! I would call your attention
to the newly expanded massive circulations of
the popular Sunday papers and ask you to note
what proportion of their contents are concerned
with personal stories and the entertainment
industries.

Aye, there’s the rub; widespread purchasing
power in a free society, and lo! mankind is at
the mercy of its own widespread weaknesses.

The late Miss Rose Macaulay took a very
dim view of our cultural future when she said,
addressing the Society of Authors:

We are faced with—and we had better face
it—the frightening formidable impact of the

great mass of scarcely educated minds on taste,
literature, imagination, language and the arts.

‘*The only remedy,” she added, “‘is education.”

And that, of course, is what our equalitarian
society is offering, freely, to all. There will have
to be a devil of a lot of it if we are to counter the
diseducative forces of commercial exploitation—
provided of course, we stick to those essential
freedoms which Milton defended with such
potency in his Areopagitica and I fear we must,
even though it involves the defence of a freedom
with which he was unfamiliar: freedom to
exploit the lowest human instincts in the interest
of commercial profit.

Well—a good many people are doing their
best: the education authorities and the universities and the Arts Council and the Old Vic and
the non-profit-making newspaper trusts—and
the B.B.C., now somewhat crippled by the
necessity of winning TV viewers from commercial
programme companies dependent on mass
appeal in the interest of advertisers.

The trouble is that education has a “fifth
column’.

There was published many years ago by a
French author a book entitled La Trahison des
Clercs. I propose to borrow that title, translate
it as ‘‘the treason of the intellectuals”, and use
it for a purpose quite other than that of its
author.

The treason of the intellectuals made itself
felt very potently some years ago during the
campaign for commercial TV. For those of us
who fought to the last ditch in the resistance
movement, it was the most depressing aspect of
what would otherwise have been a clean straight
fight against an honest commercial racket. It
was natural and reasonable that the company
directors of advertising agencies and radio
industries should campaign inside and outside
Parliament for new and shining sources of
profit. It was neither natural nor reasonable that
historians and journalists and economists with
no personal interest in these material possibilities, should assert in public and in print (as they
did) that one man’s taste is as good as another’s,
and that if you venture to say that Bach’s
Matthew Passion is better music than a rock and
roll recital by Elvis Presley you are adopting a
“‘holier than thou” attitude, since all you have
a right to say is that you happen to like it better
but there is no reason why anyone else should be
encouraged to do so.

19
THE EUGENICS REVIEW .

This fifth column is very potent to-day. It is
fellow-travelling with a conception of democracy
based on the notion that the greatest happiness
of the greatest number consists in finding out
what people want—or what interested parties
can make them think they want—at a given
moment, and then taking steps to give it to them.
Indeed many of these treasonable intellectuals
who assisted the campaign for commercial TV
did so in the name of democracy. It was a word
often on their lips or on their pen nibs as the
case might be.

Now this conception of democracy applied to
the government of a fully enfranchized equalitarian community, exposed to the full impact of
mass communication by advertizers, is as dangerous to its politics as to its taste. And the growing
dependence of governments on Gallup polls and

the ministrations of public relations officers
makes that danger the more imminent.

At the back of this intellectual treachery there
is, I think, a great fear—and fear is a bad
determinant of human activity. It is a paralysing
fear of being thought a prig. And it is a subtle
fear because it has attractive disguises. It can
parade itself so sweetly as altruism or humility.
The Russians and the Chinese do not suffer
from this fear, and this is a great source of
strength to them.

Am I right in thinking that the Eugenics
Society is not afflicted by it, that its members
are prepared to evaluate quality as distinct from
quantity, and that in the human society which
is weaving itself new patterns under our very
eyes, they will not hesitate when occasion arises
to use such expressions as good and bad, trivial
and enduring, admirable and shoddy?

OCCASIONAL PAPERS ON EUGENICS

EUGENICS IN RETROSPECT AND PROSPECT.
CyriL Burt
THE TREND OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE.

INTELLIGENCE AND FERTILITY.

2nd Edn. Price 2s. 6d.
Price 2s.

Price 2s.

C. P. BLACKER.

GODFREY THOMSON

The Galton Lecture, 1946, with a Symposium in 1947 by ALEXANDER CARRSAUNDERS, CYRIL Burt, LIONEL PENROSE and GoDFREY THOMSON

PSYCHOLOGICAL
Lewis M. TERMAN

APPROACHES TO THE BIOGRAPHY OF GENIUS.

Price 1s. 6d.

POPULATION TRENDS AND THE WORLD’S BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES.

G. C. L. BERTRAM

PROBLEM FAMILIES IN BRISTOL. R. C. WoFrInpEN

Price 2s.
Price 2s. 6d.

EXPECTATION OF MENTAL INFIRMITY IN THE DANISH POPULATION.

Kurt H. FREMMING
FAMILY ENVIRONMENT. Joun D. Nisser

Price 3s. 6d.
Price 3s. 6d.

SOME ASPECTS OF WORLD POPULATION AND FOOD RESOURCES

SIMON OF WyYTHENSHAWE

Price 2s. 6d.

Fellows and Members may obtain these pamphlets at a reduction of 25% on the
above net prices direct from the Eugenics Society

THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

69, Eccleston Square, S.W.1

 

and CASSELL & COMPANY, LTD.

35, Red Lion Square, W.C.1
