22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

for the 1931 data. The results are not
entirely comparable with those of the earlier
study, for a somewhat different class grouping has now been adopted, derived from
Alba M. Edwards’s study for the United
States. But a general comparison is permissible, and Dr. Tietze concludes that the
total paternity rates show “a _ rapid
decline of the birth rate in all social-economic
groups from 191I to 1931,” and that this
“has resulted in a narrowing down of the
difference between the least and the most
fertile section of the population.”

The third study, relating to the United
States, is the most interesting both in the
nature of the basic material and in the way
this material has been handled. It is based
upon the National Health Survey undertaken in 1935-6, and relates to a sample
of 596,474 women aged 15 to 44 years in
some 632,000 families, geographically representative of the urban white population of
Eastern, Southern, Central and Western
United States. From the statistics collected,
Dr. Karpinos and Dr. Kiser have been able
to compare the fertility of the population in
various income and educational groups,
using not only crude birth rates and legitimate fertility rates, but also gross and
estimated net reproduction rates (the mortality data for estimating the net reproduction
rates was derived from a Chicago study by
Dr. P. M. Hauser). For the first time,
therefore, we have an accurate analysis of
reproduction by income classes. The authors
conclude that when reproduction rates are
used, “the traditional inverse relation
between fertility and socio-economic status
is found still to be consistently and sharply
manifested.’’ In fact, the gross reproduction
rates range from 0-46 for the classes with
an annual family income of 3,000 dollars
and over, to 0-86 for the income group of
1,000 to 1,499 dollars, and to 1:17 for whole
group with incomes below 1,000 dollars
(including a higher gross reproduction rate
for the population on relief). The present
writer does not, however, find that these
numerical results conflict with the data
given in other studies mentioned in this
review. Dr. Karpinos and Dr. Kiser have

produced a superb analysis of differential fertility, but it is, by the nature of the material,
related to only one point of time, and it gives
no grounds for deciding whether or not the
differential has been narrowing in the past
twenty years. The study will need to be
repeated at fairly frequent intervals in the
future if it is to throw light on the process of
historical change. For the moment, if the
present writer is permitted to refer once
more to his own very brief study, it seems as
if the differentials in the urban white
population of the United States have about
reached the position found in London in
1931, when the borough with the highest
index of economic status—Hampstead—had
an estimated gross reproduction rate of
0:43 (Westminster, second on the scale, had
a rate of 0:42), and the borough lowest
on the scale—Poplar—had a rate of 1-07.
Yet the evidence plausibly suggested a
significant decline in the differential in
London in 1931 as compared with 1911. It
is not at all unlikely that a similar process
has been at work in urban United States.
D. V. GLAss.

SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY

Bartlett, F.C. ; Ginsberg, M. ; Lindgren,
E. J., and Thouless, R. H. (Editors).
The Study of Society: Methods and
Problems. London, 1939. Kegan
Paul. Pp. xii+-498. Price ras. 6d.

The Study of Society is a symposium on the
methodology of the different branches of
social psychology, written by a number of
experts who formed themselves into a
group for the purpose of the discussion of
their problems and the integration of their
points of view. The volume that emerged
is of interest to the intelligent general reader,
but is more especially intended for research
workers. It should help them to overcome
the difficulty encountered to some extent by
all specialists when they follow the ramifications of their subjects over the border into
other territory, to find that they are not
really competent to judge what they discover there. Often the efficiency of one’s
REVIEWS OF BOOKS — 23

thinking in one’s own scientific sphere is
partly dependent on a just appreciation of
the value of discoveries in other spheres ;
and that evaluation can usually only be
done if the methodological snags are already
clear in the reader’s mind.

The introductory papers by Professor
Pear and Professor Bartlett outline the most
important and interesting problems currently
under discussion among social psychologists,
and suggest problems for further research.
Dr. Thouless considers problems of terminology and of statistical method, Dr. P. E.
Vernon the use of questionnaires and rating
scales. The bulk of the book consists of
papers on intelligence testing and ways of
assessing other psychological factors, on
child psychology, methods of social anthropology, and on the making of social surveys.
The final chapter 1s a very valuable comparative survey by Professor Morris Ginsberg
of the sociological field as a whole, describing the methods and main conclusions of the
foremost masters of the science, and thus
forming a necessary framework or background into which the specialized discussions of the other essays can be fitted. He
brings out the importance of the comparative
method, whose primary object is “‘ to provide a social morphology, or a classification
of the forms of social relationships, with a
view to facilitating causal analysis.’’ The
earlier papers provide some of this causal
analysis.

Some of the essays are of special interest
to the eugenist. Dr. Thouless points out the
confusion of terminology pervading social,
as well as general psychology. His longer
paper explains clearly the statistical methods
in general use among psychologists and
sociologists ; it is simply written and can
be read by the non-mathematical reader.
Attention is drawn to the pitfalls which less
careful workers so often fail to avoid, and the
writer remarks that statistical methods do
not provide a technique for drawing trustworthy conclusions from untrustworthy
data.

Another section of special interest is Dr.
Audrey Richards’s learned résumé of fieldwork methods in social anthropology, and

Dr. S. F. Nadel’s discussion of the application of intelligence tests in the anthropological field. He warns us against too
naive an assumption that intellectual
organization is sufficiently similar in totally
different cultures, for intelligence tests designed for one to be valid in the other. In
our present state of knowledge it is not
possible to say whether the white races
are intellectually superior to the more
primitive or not.

In so far as some of the data used by
eugenists are derived from family records
collected by social workers, Miss Clement
Brown’s chapter on social case work will
be found of value. Her attention is directed
mainly towards case work with problem
families or individuals, but some of the
methodological points she raises are relevant
to the collection of data of other kinds.

Several of the writers discuss the need for
awareness on the part of the scientific
worker of his own personal bias; facts are
looked at through the screen of the researcher’s own view of life. In any sociological study this has particular dangers,
because facts are fluctuating, tremendously
complex, and often form unique concatenations of circumstances which can be recorded
once and never again. Personal bias may
determine, in this complex, which part is
noticed, which remembered, and which
considered important. It is possible, however, to study one’s own weaknesses in this
matter, and to some extent guard against
them. This warning is of special importance
to eugenists, whose subject presents these
difficulties in a marked degree.

This book has been given a unity by careful editing and the fact that the writers have
obviously fully assimilated each other’s contributions. Study of their references back
and forth would be greatly helped, however,
if in future editions the chapter and paragraph number could be given at the head
of each page.

Readers who wish to bring their reading
up to date on any of the topics dealt with
will find a useful and not unwieldy bibliography at the end of each section.

EVELYN LAWRENCE.
