PROFESSOR L. C. DUNN,
Sc.D., Columbia University

Cross Currents

in the History

of Human Genetics’

HAVE RECENTLY BEEN re-examining the

history of genetics in the formative period from

1900 to about 1930. I have gained the impression that influences which played on human
genetics during that period had a good deal to do
with delaying its progress in the next twenty years
and have not yet ceased to operate. It was then
caught up in thecross-currents to which all studies
of man are exposed. The effects of science on
human life are always immanent, yet never so
immediately apparent as when man himself
is the object of inquiry. In the period of which I
speak, his confidence as controller of his own
destiny had been aroused by recent scientific
discovery and by social and political conquests
of new environments. Rapid translations of new
knowledge into terms applicable to improvements of man’s lot is at such times likely to take
precedence over objective and sceptical evaluation of the facts, a danger of which cautious
scientists have long been aware. The testing of
hypotheses by factual observations and the
construction of general theory, the normal
methods of science, are certainly no less important when human beings are involved, yet one
often finds these neglected in human genetics
in that period. Progress in human genetics
seemed to have been impeded less by lack of
means than by lack of a clear scientific goal,
and this at a time when the major problems of
genetics were taking a clear form. The particulate nature of the transmission mechanism of
heredity had focused attention on the means

* A shortened version of the Presidential address at the
meeting of the American Society of Human Genetics,
May 3rd, 1961. It was printed in full in The American
Journal of Human Genetics, March 1962, 14, 1-13. Here
we have omitted Professor Dunn’s opening remarks ;
other omissions are indicated thus: .

by which genetic elements reproduce and maintain their continuity with opportunity for change
and evolution, and on the means by which genes
control metabolism and development. But most
observations on human heredity were not
oriented in any clear way toward such problems.
Matters of greater moment seemed to be the inheritance of “‘insanity,” of “feeblemindedness”’
and other then vaguely defined mental ills, the
effects of parental age or alcoholism or social
status on the offspring, and similar studies
pursued for immediate social ends.

An interesting comparison, which I shall not
be able to pursue in detail, is that between
such dominant interests of the period as those
just cited, and the direction initiated by Garrod’s
paper of 1901 on alcaptonuria and especially
by his Croonian lectures of 1908. One reads
to-day those lectures as published in successive
issues of the Lancet for that year with admiration
for the depth and breadth of Garrod’s scientific
understanding of genetics and of evolution, and
then turns with amazement to the reports of
discussions on human heredity at the Royal
Academy of Medicine which ran through five
later issues of that same volume. Except for
Garrod’s strong supporter and genetical adviser,
William Bateson, there is little evidence that the
numerous participants in those debates realized
what, in fact, the problems were. ... Garrod’s
work had little effect until many years had
passed; while those interested in the social
applications proposed by eugenics largely dominated the field of human genetics.

Influence of Eugenics on Human Genetics
It will, I think, be clear to anyone who examines
the records of the period from 1900 to about the

69

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1962, 54, 2.

ER—C
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

middle thirties that the manner in which the
eugenics movement developed cast a long
shadow over the growth of sound knowledge of
human genetics. The ideals of eugenics as
originally proposed by Galton in 1883 and restated in more concrete form in 1901 can hardly
be held responsible for this, for they will appeal
to most people as embodying a noble conception.
But there grew up within the eugenics movement
ambivalent attitudes through which it tended to
become all things to all people, here a science,
there a social movement, and in Germany an
instrument, through the so-called eugenics
laws of 1933, of the ferocious application of
prejudice which seemed to many people to be
the logical extension, the reductio ad absurdum,
of ideas to be found in eugenic programmes
elsewhere. One effect of all this was to deflect
attention from the essential scientific problems
and to discourage persons interested in these
from pursuing them with human material. It
seems as though some perverse kind of Gresham’s
law might have been operating here, bad coin
driving out the better.

A second cause of failure and delay in human
genetics was the all too frequent relaxation of
critical criteria and a lowering of standards
which would not be tolerated in other branches
of genetics. In course of time this, Jike the handicap imposed by eugenics, became less important
in relation to the rising tide of good scientific
work, both practical and theoretical, in human
genetics. Signs of the change may be seen in
Penrose’s paper of 1932 and in Hogben’s book
of 1933. As these changes went on, the name
eugenics disappeared from several institutions
and publications dealing with human genetics.
On the other side some of the eugenical organizations (like the American Eugenics Society) tended
to assume a more responsible attitude toward
the scientific facts underlying social applications
and toward research in human genetics.

1 think it can be shown, however, that neither
of the chief defects seen in the adolescent period
of human genetics has in fact disappeared to-day.
Now, while I suppose that the chief function of
historical analysis is to gain views that are more
satisfying, intellectually and aesthetically, than
those afforded by studying only the present
state of knowledge, still it has its practical side

yo

as well, since we can hardly overlook lessons for
the conduct of our lives in the present and the
future.

In both of these respects the history of connections between eugenics and human genetics
has a special relevance. The connections were
very close, and were especially evident in the
United States, where interest in both fields was
widespread at the turn of the century. Human
genetics was often treated as part of eugenics,
or as it was often called, human betterment or
race improvement. It was that part concerned
with acquisition of knowledge of human heredity.
The association tended to be maintained because
both subjects were frequently pursued and often
taught by the same persons. Those who had been
attracted by the promise inherent in the newly
discovered work of Mendel often added to their
repertoire the results of earlier studies like those
of Dugdale (1874), and others who had dealt
with mental deficiency and criminality as social
problems.

There were however a few whose position was
most clearly stated later by Bateson (1919):

The eugenist and the geneticist will, I am convinced, work most effectively without organic
connection, and though we have much in common,
should not be brigaded together. Genetics are not
concerned with the betterment of the human race
but with a problem in pure physiology, and Iam a
little afraid that the distinctness of our aims may
be obscured.

But in general the position in most countries
was that implied by an index entry in the one
serious attempt to trace, from documents, the
history of some of the important ideas about
heredity. That was the essay of Alfred Barthelmess (1952) in which under the entry Mensch
we find “‘sieh auch Eugenik.”

The nature of the relations between eugenics
and the study of human heredity was strongly
influenced by three facts. The first is that the
formulation of the problems and programme of
eugenics antedated the recognition of the
particulate nature of heredity. Early work in
eugenics was thus guided by a view of heredity
which proved to be without general validity.
The second is that eugenics achieved organized
forms before genetics did. It thus became at the
very least a part of the environment in which
CROSS CURRENTS IN THE HISTORY OF HUMAN GENETICS

genetics grew up. The third is that stated by
Bateson: they had different goals.

Galton and Eugenics

The development of my argument now requires
a brief sketch of the history of eugenics. The best
source book for this is Karl Pearson’s great four
volume biography of Galton (1914-1930).

We may formally date the beginnings of
eugenics in its modern form from Galton’s
Huxley Lecture to the Royal Anthropological
Institute* on “The possible improvement of the
human breed under existing conditions of law and
sentiment.” Galton’s ideas on this subject had
been adumbrated long before this time, first in a
paper of 1865. By 1883 they had been given the
mame of eugenics but had not then attracted
active attention. Nor did the seed sown before
the anthropologists in 1901 appear to have taken
root quickly in England (although it fared better
in the United States) and it took further effort
on Galton’s part to get a fellowship in eugenics
established at University College, London, in
1904. This led first to the organization of a
Eugenics Record Office and then in 1907 to the
Galton Laboratory of National Eugenics (both
endowed by Galton) and in the next year to the
organization of the Eugenics Education Society.
One should note two coincidences of date: 1865
was also the year in which Mendel presented
his results at Briinn; and 1900 was the year of
the famous “‘re-discovery”’ of these. But there
was no more connection between the ideas of
Galton and Mendel in 1900-01 than there had
been in 1865. It was chance of the same kind
which gave both men the same year of birth—
1822.

Galton’s ideas concerning eugenics had been
formed first after reading the Origin of Species.
The substitution of social control for natural
selection in guiding human evolution was for
Galton “the logical application of the doctrine
of evolution to the human race,” but the first
ambivalence appeared when he added that the
result of his study had been “‘to elicit the religious
significance of the doctrine of evolution. It
suggests an alteration in our mental attitudes
and imposes a new moral duty.” He had become

* Nature, November Ist, 1901.
t Life, Vol. IIa, p. 371.

convinced of the heritability of mental qualities
through his studies first of Hereditary Genius
(1869) and then of Inquiries into Human Faculty
(1883), and had devised statistical methods for
the study of inheritance which led him to his Law
of Ancestral Heredity in 1897. His views on
heredity were always based on this “‘law’’ which
turned out to describe certain resemblances in
graded or continuous characters between parents
and offspring but of course provided no explanatory or general principle such as that discovered
by Mendel. This is not to say that his eugenical
proposals would have been invalidated by his
acceptance of Mendel’s principles. Those proposals were based primarily on the supposition
that heredity was an important cause of differences in physical, mental, and moral qualities,
and that was sufficient for his purposes.
Divergences soon appeared in England both
among the supporters of eugenics and between
these and the school which was shortly to call
itself genetics, but was at first referred to as
Mendelians. The internal cleavage in eugenics
was that between the research and the propaganda interests, as represented by the Eugenics
Laboratory and the Eugenics Education Society.
The laboratory resisted and resented interference
with its primary function by the Society. “It
will never do,”’ wrote Galton to Karl Pearson
(the director of the Eugenics Laboratory) on
February 6th, 1909, “to allow the Eugenics
Education Society to anticipate and utilize the
Eugenics Laboratory publications,’+ and he
reminded the Society of the “differences between
the work of the two classes of publication.” The
founder of the movement saw quite clearly the
distinction between research and propaganda,
and in his last public lecture on “Probability,
the Basis of Eugenics” (Oxford 1909) he came
out quite clearly for research as the immediate
need, social application as the distant goal.
But dissension between Society and Laboratory continued and finally Galton was impelled
in a letter to The Times (November 3rd, 1910)
to make his position quite clear vis-a-vis the
Eugenics Laboratory and the Eugenics Education Society. “Permit me,” he wrote, ‘“‘as the
founder of one and the honorary president of the
other, to say that there is no other connection
between them. ...The Laboratory investigates

yi
- THE EUGENICS REVIEW

without bias ...large collections of such data
as may throw light on some of the many problems of eugenics. The business of the society is
to popularize results.”* This cleavage, which
was to reappear time and again as the movement
grew, marked a separation, often not well
defined, between those interested in science and
those interested in social and political questions.
The progress of genetics may not have been
directly affected by such disagreements within
the eugenics movement, but the occasional
excesses of persons with political motivation
revealed the source of danger which eventually
broke into the open in Germany.

The other cleavage which became apparent
at once in England was that between the Mendelians led by Bateson, and the followers of
Galton, led first by Weldon and then by Karl
Pearson, and known as the Biometricians. The
verbal battles between these sharply opposed
schools certainly did delay the development of
both genetics and eugenics in Great Britain.
Karl Pearson, the first director of the Eugenics
Laboratory, and, after Galton, the leading
eugenist, never recognized the importance of
Mendel’s principles upon which genetics was
founded. As late as 1930 he could say “‘during the
last twenty-five years we seem to-day scarcely
nearer the exact knowledge of the laws of heredity; the further we advance the more complex
does the problem show itself.” It was not that he
(or Galton) failed to understand the primary
principle of segregation, although he did not
appreciate the relation of dominance to it.
Indeed in 1904 Pearson foreshadowed an important extension of the principle of segregation
by showing that Mendel’s ratio 1DD : 2DR :
IRR tends to maintain itself indefinitely in
random breeding populations of large size
(cf. Wright 1959). Galton likewise applied the
term ‘atomistic’ to Mendel’s system: But
neither Galton nor Pearson nor their followers
found their interest satisfied by the new principles
of Mendel. The heredity in which they were
interested could not (they thought) be studied
in that way. What they thought important to
understand was quantitative variation in human
intellectual ability, and Mendelism they con
* Ibid, p. 408.
¢ Ibid, p. 309.

72

sidered to be of no help at all. In fact at that
stage it was not helpful. This of course is only
to say that the purposes of the biometricians
and eugenists differed from those of the protogeneticists. Purposes, like tastes, may not be
fair game for scientific dispute, although neither
side admitted that.

Eugenics in the U.S.A.

In general the alienation between the two
schools was a local British affair. One aspect of
it, however, involved the beginnings of the
eugenics movement in the United States. There
the ground had been prepared by studies like
those of Dugdale (1874) on the Jukes family and
of Alexander Graham Bell (1883) on deaf
mutism. However in name and purposes the
eugenics movement in the U.S.A. was clearly
descended from the British one. It differed
sharply from its parent in its attitude toward
Mendelism. The first proponents of eugenics
in the U.S.A., of which C. B. Davenport was
the most active, were thoroughgoing Mendelians, and eugenists because they were. In fact,
Davenport might have been called a superMendelian. One has only to read his conclusions
on the monofactorial inheritance of a violent
temper or a wandering habit to realize this.
The British eugenists correctly surmised that
this attitude could (as in fact it did) bring the
whole movement into disrepute. Dr. David
Heron of the Galton Laboratory vigorously
attacked in 1913 the first papers to come from
Davenport’s newly established Eugenics Record
Office (founded 1910). Heron wrote:

We have selected this rounded group of papers
because they deal with a very pressing subject,
that of mental defect, and in our opinion form a
very apt illustration of the points just referred to,
ie., careless presentation of data, inaccurate
methods of analysis, irresponsible expression of
conclusions and rapid change of opinion....
The Mendelian conclusions drawn have no
justification whatever...The authors have in
our opinion done a disservice to knowledge,
struck a blow at careful Mendelian research, and
committed a serious offence against the infant
science of eugenics.

Heron’s criticism, it must be acknowledged,
was more than merely another skirmish in the
war being waged between the Biometricians and
CROSS CURRENTS IN THE HISTORY OF HUMAN GENETICS

the Mendelians. In this case the point at issue
was fundamental scientific method, and Davenport and his collaborators were at least guilty
of a lack of caution from which the whole
eugenics movement was to suffer. It was at this
time, 1910-1915, that single gene interpretations
began to be applied with great confidence
(amounting in some cases to recklessness) to
differences in mental ability and to mental
diseases. The outstanding example was feeblemindedness, and on the basis of the first pedigrees published by Goddard in 1910 Davenport*
adopted the hypothesis that mental deficiency
in general was inherited as a Mendelian recessive.
In this he was followed by many others, and
eugenical programmes and some legislation were
based on this assumption. Stanley P. Davies,
who reviewed the history of this period in 1923,
called it “the alarmist period.” The first fruits
of new methods of mental testing were garnered
rapidly and widely, and the over-emphasis on
bad heredity as the cause of mental deficiency
and mental disease, and on restrictive or negative
eugenics as the only possible cure of a social
ul brought on its inevitable reaction. H. S.
Jennings in 1925 attempted to restore common
sense by his critical attack on the whole concept
of unit characters and on the unreality of the
either/or distinction between heredity and environment in the determination of human (or any
other) characters. Raymond Pearl in 1927 said:

Orthodox eugenists are going contrary to the
best established facts of genetical science and are
in the long run doing their cause harm.

One of the signs that the public image of eugenics had been affected by this and similar
criticisms was revealed when G. K. Chesterton
published in 1922 Eugenics and Other Evils... .
Although his criticisms were not always cogent,
his suspicion of eugenics, race hygiene, and
“scientific officialism” of the German type
proved to have been well-founded.

Rassenhygiene

In Germany the eugenics movement took the
name Rassenhygiene from a book of that title
published in 1895 by Alfred Ploetz who also

* 1911. Eugenics Record Office Bulletin 1.
t Arch. Rass. Ges. Biol. 27, p. 451.

founded in 1903 the chief German journal in this
field, the Archiv fiir Rassen-und-Gesellschaftsbiologie. In an article in this journal in 1909
Galton agreed with the editor that Rassenhygiene and Eugenik were to be regarded as
synonymous. Any misunderstanding on this
score was removed in 1931 when the chief
German society in this field, the Deutsche
Gesellschaft fiir Rassenhygiene (founded in
1902) added “‘Eugenik’”’ to its title. The direction
in which Rassenhygiene led had become evident
long before Hitler came to power; and the advent
of the new laws for sterilization of the unfit and
unwanted, and for the exclusion of Jews from
the new state were greeted with editorial acclaim
in the Archiv. The speed with which the first
of these laws were prepared and promulgated
within the first few months of 1933 is probably
to be explained by the composition of the
committee of experts which drafted them. This
included Ploetz and his fellow eugenists Riidin
and Lenz and others who had worked in this
field together with Heinrich Himmler. Frick,
Hitler’s Minister of the Interior, whose department was charged with the administration of the
laws, said upon their coming into force: “‘The
fate of race-hygiene, of the Third Reich and the
German people will in the future be indissolubly
bound together.” The situation was made quite
clear by von Verschuer in the introduction to his
book Leitfaden der Rassenhygiene, published in
1941.

Es ist entscheidend fiir die Geschichte eines
Volkes was der politische Fiihrer von den Ergebnissen der Wissenschaft als wesentlich erkennt
and zur Tat werden lasst. Die Geschichte unserer
wissenschaft ist aufs engste verknupft mit der
deutschen Geschichte der jungste Vergangenheit.
Der Fiihrer des deutschen Reiches ist der erste
Staatsmann der die Erkenntnisse der Erbiologie
und Rassenhygiene zu einem leitenden Prinzip
in der Staatsfiihrung gemmacht hat. (p. 11)

Decisive for the history of the people is what the
political leader recognizes as essential in the results
of science and puts into effect. The history of our
science is most intimately connected with German
history of the most recent past. The leader of the
German state is the first statesman who has
wrought the results of genetics and race hygiene
into a directing principle of public policy.

This statement by a leading German human
geneticist was made with some deliberation,

73
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

for it appeared first in identical form in an article
by von Verschuer in Der Erbarzt, 1937, p. 97,
and although it has been omitted in a recent
(1959) edition of the above book, the author has
not to my knowledge publicly altered his position on enforced race hygiene. Although not
all geneticists who remained in Germany thus
accepted the eugenical and racial doctrines and
practices of the Nazis, there is at least evidence
that even the serious scientists among them
underrated the dangers of the movement until
it was too late. From this the melancholy
‘historical lesson can be drawn that the social
and political misuse to which genetics applied to
man is peculiarly subject is influenced not only
by those who support such misuse, but also by
those who fail to point out, as teachers, the
distinctions between true and false science.

In von Verschuer’s book of 1941 Galton is
acknowledged as the modern founder of race
hygiene as eugenics; but to Gobineau is given
the greater credit of having first brought race
into politics, thereby becoming the founder of
political anthropology, a field in which the
leading later exponents in Germany were Eugen
Fischer and H. A. K. Giinther. In contrast to
the situation in Great Britain in which Galton
had been unable to arouse the interest of anthropologists, the German eugenics movement had
close connections with the kind of anthropology
which was pursued by anthropometric methods.
Since this was not guided by a theoretical
rationaJe such as might have been supplied by
population genetics, it fell the more quickly a
victim to the pseudo-science of the promoters
of the Aryan mythology. The chief research
institute was the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for
Anthropology, Human Genetics and Eugenics,
of which Eugen Fischer was the director. Many
members of this institute had become so
politically involved with Nazism that after the
defeat of Hitler’s regime the institute was not
continued by the West German State, thus
fulfilling rather quickly Frick’s prophecy of the
interdependence of race hygiene and the Nazi
state. It must be noted that in the debacle
eugenics carried anthropology and human
genetics down with it. There can be no doubt that
in Germany, formerly a centre of genetical
research, the effect of its association with race

74

hygiene was to delay for a generation the
development of a science of human genetics.

In the United States, as in Britain, anthropologists in general did not respond to eugenical
appeals. The kind of racialism which had become
attached to eugenics was not calculated to
appeal to persons whose profession it was to
study and interpret human differences objectively
and in socio-cultural as well as biological terms.
Human genetics has to-day become a useful
contributor to anthropology, mainly through
gene frequency studies, and by the application
of good objective methods generally untinged
by racialism. However, there are still reminders
of the uncritical use of what look like genetical
methods applied to racial anthropology. What
shall one say, for example, when three authors,
after anthropometric examination of forty-four
Italian war orphans of whom the fathers were
unknown but assumed to be “coloured” draw
Sweeping conclusions concerning heterosis
(“established with certainty’), inheritance of
erythrocyte diameter (“very convincing”) and
other statements not supported by evidence.
Yet these are statements made in 1960 by Luigi
Gedda and his co-workers Serio and Mercuri
in their recent book Meticciato di Guerra. R. R.
Gates, who writes an introduction in English
to this elaborate book refers to it as an important
contribution to what he calls “racial genetics.”
Others will have greater difficulty in detecting
any contribution to genetics, but may see in it,
as I do, a reflection in 1960 of the uncritical
naiveté of that early period of human genetics
which delayed its progress. And the same year—
1960—sees also the appearance of a new journal
Mankind Quarterly devoted in part to racial
anthropology of the above kind (again described
as such by one of its editors . . . and embodying
racist attitudes of the earlier period. Truly the
past is not yet buried, and human genetics, in
spite of its recent evidences of new life, is still
exposed to old dangers.

Eugenics movements grew in many other
countries in the period before and just following
the first world war, but space will permit taking
account of only one such development.

Eugenics in the U.S.S.R.
It may be regarded as an anomaly of history
CROSS CURRENTS IN THE HISTORY OF HUMAN GENETICS

that in Russia eugenics did not appear in an
organized form until after the revolution of 1917,
and this notwithstanding the enunciation of ideas
very similar to those of Galton by W. M.
Florinsky in 1866. In 1919 a eugenics department
was started in the Institute of Experimental
Biology in Moscow under N. K. Koltzoff, and
shortly thereafter a Eugenics Bureau began in
Leningrad under J. A. Philiptschenko. By 1925
thirteen research articles on human genetics,
sensu stricto, had been published from these
institutes. The Russian Eugenics Society was
founded in Moscow in 1920, with local branches
in Leningrad, Saratov, and Odessa, and the
Russian Journal of Eugenics under Koltzoff and
Philiptschenko began in 1923 (cf. Koltzoff, 1925).
The difficulties and later suppression of eugenics
in the Soviet Union were foreshadowed by an
event in connection with the publication in 1924
of Philiptschenko’s book on eugenics. While it
was in production at the government printing
office, according to Weissenberg (1926) there
was inserted in the introduction a statement to
the effect that measures with important eugenical
effects were the destruction of the bourgeoisie and
the victory of the workers. What part the existence of eugenics there played in bringing about
the suppression of genetics in the U.S.S.R. is
not clear to me. The first institute to be suppressed appears to have been that concerned
with human genetics, the Gorky Institute for
Medical Genetics, but this may have been
incidental to the condemnation and execution
of its director, S. G. Levit, as a “traitor.”

Scientific Methods

Although the chief cross-currents operating on
human genetics were generated by persons
pressing for social and political regulation of
human breeding, frequently to the neglect of
sound scientific method, others of less marked
and definite character traced to relations, or
lack of them, between genetics and medical
research. Apart from lack of understanding of
genetics on the part of physicians, there were
frequent expressions of active lack of interest,
since principles discovered in peas and exploited
and extended by experiments with flies were
not thought relevant to human beings. And if,
physicians often said, a disease was inherited,

that meant it couldn’t be treated and knowledge
about it was not likely to be useful. The gap due
to mutual lack of appreciation and of common
experience and training as between medical men
and geneticists has shown some signs of narrowing, but is certainly far from being bridged. This
would require further will and effort on both sides.

Nor can one conclude as yet that the confusion
between the aim of eugenics and the facts of
human heredity which Bateson pointed out has
yet been cleared up. As eminent an acknowledged leader in genetics as Professor H. J.
Muller has recently restated the adherence to
ideas on controlled human breeding which he
outlined in his book of 1935 Out of the Night.
The central idea, eutelegenesis, had been
developed by Herbert Brewer (1935) who
probably was unaware of an earlier similar
proposal by A. S. Serebrovsky (1929). .. . In his
reiteration of this proposal in 1959, Muller has
refined and extended it. He now proposes to
retain the whole genotype of such men (which
the processes of meiosis would tend to break
down) by multiplying samples of their diploid
spermatogonial cells in tissue cultures and subsequently obtaining embryos from these by some
form of ectogenesis. Even though the technical
problems involved might in some future time
be solved, several more important scientific
ones would still remain. Such schemes assume
that there is an ideal genotype for a human
being. Plato could entertain such an ideal but
can we do so after our experience of the variety of
genotypes in successful populations ? Can human
cultures be maintained by an ideal genotype?
Even though the proponents of eutelegenesis
should admit that there might be several good
kinds of human being, are there objective
scientific criteria by which they might be
selected? Even though choice of sperm or
genotype donors were to rest with persons as
benevolent and acute as I believe Professor
Muller to be, selection would still be subject
to changing tastes and ideals and thus to control
by imposed power as in the Nazi state. Muller
illustrates this in his own examples of the
eminent men he might have chosen, for in his
list of 1959 as compared with that of 1935, Lenin,
Marx and Sun Yat Sen have been dropped and
Einstein and Lincoln added.

75
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

To me such schemes seem to express the same
sort of benevolent utopianism as did some of
Galton’s proposals of sixty years ago, but now
they must be viewed in the light of some actual
experience with them. Then as now they were
backed by the prestige of men of deserved
eminence in science, then of Galton, to-day of
Muller, but this did not save the earlier programmes from grave misuse and ultimate
damage to both human society and science.
In fact the high scientific standing of their proponents increases the dangers of uncritical
acceptance of them as bases for social and
political action, with the ever attendant risk of
loss of public confidence in genetics as applied
to man if or when their unsoundness becomes
manifest.

Such considerations remind us of the dilemma
which scientists face in their desire both to
advance sound knowledge and to make it serve
its essential social function. In the case of human
genetics, I do not believe that the problems posed
by the cohabitation of these two purposes are to
be settled by divorce, as Bateson suggested. The
problems posed by the continuing occurrence
of diseases and defects (“Our load of mutations”
Muller 1950) are real and they must be faced,
both as biological and as social problems. Both
sets of interests must be free to develop, and
better together than separately for this is the
condition under which common criteria for
criticism and rigorous judgements, so badly
needed in all fields affected by potential social
applications, may be evolved.

Conclusion

If I have strayed somewhat from the limits of
1900-1930 that I had set for myself for a historical review, I suppose this is a reflection of my
view that some of the cross-currents operating
in the earlier years of this century still play upon
us. It seems to me that their influence in the first
two or three decades was in part due to the lack
of a clear vision of what studies of man have to
contribute to the elucidation of general problems
such as the mechanism of evolution and of gene
action. The rise of population genetics and of
physiological genetics have now turned attention
to the rich source of material for these problems
provided by human populations, and by the

76

accumulated experience of medical and anthropological research. Recent discoveries, such as the
identification of human genes controlling serological, biochemical and developmental processes subject to the action of natural selection
should now give human genetics that orientation
toward important biological problems which was
not generally recognized in its early days. What
seems to me to be most important, especially
in its implications for the future, is the growing
recognition of the logical unity of genetics, for
its essential problems, being concerned with a
system of elements having similar attributes
in all forms of life, can be seen to transcend the
special problems of the different categories of
organisms. Human genetics, freed from the
narrower bounds and conflicting purposes which
hindered its early growth, seems clearly destined
to play an important role in the advancement
of the whole science of genetics of which it is a
part. And that, in the long run, may constitute
its best contribution to the satisfaction of
human needs.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Bateson, B. 1928. William Bateson, F.R.S. Naturalist.
Cambridge University Press.

Bateson, W. 1919. Common Sense in racial problems.
The Galton Lecture. Eugen. Rev. 11.

Bateson, W. and Saunders, E. R., 1902. Royal Society
Evolution Reports 1902-1909. Report 1 (December
17th, 1901) p. 133.

Barthelmess, Alfred. 1952. Vererbungswissenschaft. Freiburg/Miinchen. Orbis Academicus.

Bernstein, F. 1924. Ergebnisse einer biostatistischen
zusammenfassenden Betrachtung tiber die erblichen
Blutstrukturen des Menschen. Klin. Wochenschr. 3,
1495-1497.

Brewer, Herbert. 1935. Eutelegenesis. Eugen. Rev. 27,
121-126.

Chesterton, G. K. 1922. Eugenics and Other Evils.
Cassell.

Davenport, C. B. 1914. Reply to criticism of recent
American work by Dr. Heron of the Galton Laboratory.
Eugenics Record Office, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.
Bulletin 11.

Davies, S. P. 1923. The Social Control of the Feeble

Minded. Ph.D. Dissertation, Faculty of Political Science.
Columbia Un8versity Press.

Dugdale, R. L. 1874. The Jukes; a Study in Crime,
Pauperism, Disease and Insanity. New York.

Florinsky, W. M. 1866. Uber die Vervollkommung und
Entartung der Menschheit. Petersburg.

Garrod, A. 1908. Croonian Lectures to the Royal
Academy of Medicine. Inborn errors of metabolism.
Lancet, 2: 1, 142, 173, 214.
CROSS CURRENTS IN THE HISTORY OF HUMAN GENETICS

Heron, David. 1913. Mendelism and the problem of
mental defect—a criticism of recent American work.
University of London, Publications of the Galton
Laboratory, Questions of the Day and the Fray, Number

Hogben, L. 1931. Genetic Principles in Medicine and
Social Science. Williams and Norgate.

— 1933. Nature and Nurture. Allen & Unwin.

Jennings, H. S. 1925. Prometheus or Biology and the
Advancement of Man. Dutton.

Joravsky, David, 1961. Soviet Marxism and Natural
Science 1917-1923. Columbia University Press.

Koltzoff, N. K. 1925. Die Rassenhygienische Bewegung

Russland. Arch. Rass.-u-Ges-biol. 17, 96-99,

Muller, H. J. 1935. Out of the Night: A Biologist’s View
of the Future. Vanguard.

—— 1959. The guidance of human evolution.’Perspectives
in Biol. and Med. 3, 1-43.

Pearl, R. 1927. The biology of superiority. The American

Mercury.

Pearson, Karl. 1904. On a generalized theory of alternative inheritance, with special. reference to Mendel’s
laws. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London A 203: 53-86.

—— 1914-1930. The Life, Letters and Labours of Francis
Galton. Volumes I, I, Tl, Ila. Cambridge University

Press.

Penrose, L. S. 1932. On the interaction of heredity and
environment in the study of human genetics (with
se) reference to Mongolian imbecility). Jour. Genet.

407.

Serebrovsky, A. S. 1929. Antropogenika Medikobiologcheskii Zhurnal 5: 3-19 (Russian, as cited by
Joravsky 1961).
von Verschuer, O. 1959. Genetik des Menschen. Urban.
Schwarzenberg.

Weissenberg, S. 1926. Theoretische und praktische
Eugenik in Sowjet Russland. Arch. Rass-u-Ges-biol.

18, 81.
Wright, S. 1959. Physiological genetics, ecology of

populations and natural selection. Perspectives in Biol.
and Med. 3, 107-151.

77
