ROMAN CATHOLIC CRITICISM OF
EUGENICS, WITH REPLY FROM THE
PRESIDENT.

UNDER the heading of “ The Fallacies of Eugenics,” the following
appeared in the January issue of The Month :—

“In a pamphlet distributed by the Eugenics Education Society, ‘A
Word on Racial Responsibility,’ there is the usual mixture of what is
sound and what is, unequivocally, rotten. Throughout, the argument is
concentrated on what is physical without any mention of man’s main
purpose in life, the development and perfecting of his spiritual nature.
The standards of fitness and unfitness put forward regard this world only.
The motto of the pamphlet, ‘Our duty to posterity is at least as great
as our duty to our neighbour,’ is one of those loose, ill-defined propositions
which it would need a page of qualification to make tenable. Strictly
speaking, since duty is a relation between existing personalities, we have
no duty to posterity, posterity being a non-entity. We have duties first
of all to God and then to our neighbour; and the latter get their whole
force and significance from the former. The aims of the Society, as set
forth here, are to eliminate from the race all mental and physical disease,
and so far they are very commendable. But good ends are sometimes
pursued by evil methods, and until the Society shows that it reckons
moral ‘ fitness’ as even more desirable than physical, and that it tolerates
no such immoral methods as artificial sterility, its programme must remain
suspect.

“Certain medical men and others, resenting the refusal of the
N.C.C.V.D. to foster the spread of vice whilst aiming at checking disease
by advocating the public provision of prophylactics, have formed a Society
of their own, hampered by no such scruples. Here again there is that
elevation of physical over moral good that we object to in the Eugenics
Society. Freedom from disease, even if probable, would be too dearly
purchased by the permanent debasing of the moral tone of the community,
and nothing would more effectually debase the moral tone than that the
impression that young men were not expected to control their passions
should receive public and formal recognition. As we have frequently
pointed out, there is a deep moral gulf between helping those who have
exposed themselves to infection and providing all and sundry with the
means to make themselves immune. Some of our medical guides need to
be taught the ethics of co-operation in sin.”

To this Major Darwin replied to the following effect :—

“Under the heading of ‘The Fallacies of Eugenics’ in your last
issue, you state that until my Society ‘ shows that it reckons moral “ fitness ”
as even more desirable than physical, and that it tolerates no such immoral methods as artificial sterility, its programme must remain suspect.’
Speaking without a definite mandate, I am sure I may say that eugenists
place moral qualities first, intellectual second, and physical third in
the order of desirability. As to the ‘artificial sterility,’ here two distinct
ROMAN CATHOLIC CRITICISM OF EUGENICS. 49

questions arise. As to the voluntary limitation in the size of families, we
certainly think it desirable. But as to the methods by which this is to
be brought about, whether by abstinence or by other means, this is a
moral question to be decided by each couple and one on which the
Society has expressed no opinion. As to the compulsory sterilisation of
individuals, on this question also no official opinion has been expressed,
opinions being widely divergent. The widespread sanction of such a
practice would, no doubt, add to the risk of immorality, but in certain
cases it would be a more humane proceeding than compulsory detention.

“You also say that ‘since duty is a relation between existing personalities, we have no duty to posterity, posterity being a non-entity.’ This
assertion, I confess, fairly astonishes me, and leads me to think that we
must attach entirely different meanings to the word ‘duty.’ To illustrate
my meaning, may I allude to the National Council for Combating
Venereal Disease, a body the programme of which I am glad you approve,
for it is a Council which my Society helped to initiate, though it deals
with different questions? That Council has always inculcated the idea
that it is a crime to bring a congenitally diseased child into the world;
but if a mother has no duty towards a child before it is born—when it is a
non-entity—how can this be a crime? Or can a duty be said only to arise
when it is too late to perform that duty? We certainly believe that our
moral code should include many duties towards posterity as we understand the word.”
