THAT THE POPULATION OF THE UNITED
KINGDOM SHOULD. BE STABILIZED AT
FORTY MILLION—A DEBATE’

CHAIRMAN: Sir CHARLES DARWIN, K.B.E.,
Sc.D., F.R.S. |
SPEAKERS: C. P. BLACKER,
R. PILKINGTON, M.C., M.P.; Mrs.
PYKE; P. R. COX, F.I.A., F.S.S.

M.A., M.D.;
M. A.

THE CHAIRMAN

O-NIGHT we are to have a debate. The
subject is ‘‘ That the population of the
United Kingdom should be stabilized
at forty million.”’ We are going to have four
speakers: first, Dr. Blacker, for; then Captain
Pilkington, against; then Mrs. Pyke, for;
then Mr. Peter Cox, against. After that, the
subject will be open to debate for anyone
here present. We have to limit the time a
certain amount. The first speakers will be
talking for something like ten minutes each
and I shall hope that, after that, nobody will
force me to call him to order for speaking
for more than, say, five minutes. I won't
waste any more of your time, but will call on
Dr. Blacker.

DR. C. P. BLACKER

I begin by thanking the two opposition
speakers, Captain Pilkington and Mr. Cox,
for their kindness in agreeing to take part in
this debate. The debate was not entirely easy
to arrange, and the fact that these two
consented to take an opposite side to myself
makes me the more grateful to them.

Ends should be separated from means.
There is no difference, I feel, between the
two sides this evening about ends. Both
desire what is best for Britain and the
Commonwealth. The difference is over the

* A Debate held at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on October gth, 1957.

means by which this goal can be attained.

The motion proposes that the United
Kingdom’s population should be stabilized
at forty million. In mid 1955, the population
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (the
United Kingdom) stood at a little over
fifty-one million. What I advocate is a
Forty-three year Commonwealth plan the
object of which would be to enlarge to the
maximum the contribution to the world’s
population made by the Commonwealth as
a whole, while at the same time benefiting
the United Kingdom. This plan, as I see it,
calls for a programme designed at the same
time to raise fertility in, and promote
emigration from, the United Kingdom. The
plan is a long-term plan the effect of which
would be to stabilize the United Kingdom’s
population by the end of the twentieth
century at about the figure attained at the
beginning of that century. (In 1900 the
United Kingdom’s population stood at about
thirty-eight million.) For forty years or so
the loss through emigration should slightly
exceed the gain through natural increases.
But by the end of the century the two
movements should balance one another. The
more vigorous the two movements—the
natural increase and the accompanying
emigration—the better for the Commonwealth as a whole. Three arguments will be
adduced in favour of such a Commonwealth
plan—eugenic, economic and strategic.

The eugenic argument is the simplest but,
from the Soczety’s particular standpoint, the
most important of the three. Its significance
was brought home to me in the course of my
visit to Japan in 1955. If, as in Japan, a
country’s population is felt by its inhabitants
to be so large that further increases would
weaken rather than strengthen it, would

173

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1958. 49, 4
174

aggravate rather than solve difficulties,
conscientious and patriotic people will feel
that they can best help their country by
refraining from having children. But
improvident and morally insensitive people
will suffer no such inhibitions. A differential
fertility of dysgenic character will thus be
encouraged. It is what people feel which is
here important, not what economists pronounce. People’s feelings in these matters
are mercurial, being much influenced by
suggestion. Witness the upsurge of would-be
emigrants since the Suez crisis.

From the economic angle, two arguments
can be advanced. The first is that a country
which, like Britain and Japan, must import
a large fraction of its food is in a highly
vulnerable position. As we have _ been
repeatedly told, Britain, like Japan, must
export or starve. But the capacity to export
and sell depends on numerous events over
which the would-be exporting country has
little control. Tariffs could be erected or
even embargoes imposed; markets could be
lost to foreign competition; and raw materials
(such as tobacco or cotton which are
imported, processed and exported as goods)
may fluctuate in price. This country imports
about a third of its food. By-the end of the
century agricultural techniques will probably
have advanced to the point that the United
Kingdom could, under the spur of necessity,
support a population of forty million on
home-grown food. The dietary may not be
Lucullan, but the dire threat of starvation
will have been lifted. The second economic
argument relates to automation. I believe
that the world may well now be poised on
the brink of a second industrial revolution one
of whose many effects will be to make much
unskilled labour redundant. But this is an
immense subject which could be usefully
debated at one of the Socvety’s evening
meetings. Suffice it that the adoption and
spread of automation could simultaneously
facilitate the numerical reduction of a
population and the raising of that population’s living standards.

Many economists see grave difficulties
arising from a decline in numbers. But not
all are irreconcilably pessimistic. Exactly

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

twenty years ago—in 1937, that is before
automation had begun to make its impact—
Lord Keynes delivered to our Society a
Galton Lecture entitled ‘“‘Some Economic
Consequences of a Declining Population.”’
He ended with these words:

A stationary or a slowly declining population
may, if we exercise the necessary strength and
wisdom, enable us to raise the standard of life
to what it should be whilst retaining those parts
of our traditional scheme of life which we value
the more now that we see what happens to those
who lose them.

The third argument, the strategic, I find
the most difficult. The need for dispersal
was stressed in the most emphatic terms by
military authorities ten years ago. But the
extent of a dispersal which would reduce the
dire effects of the since-developed megaton
bomb (a bomber can now be at least two
million times as effective as it was twelve
years ago) might be held to weaken the
argument. The most recent Government
statement (April 1957: Cmd. 124) boldly
declared that:

It must be frankly recognized that at present
there is no means of providing adequate protection for the people of this country against the
consequences of an attack with nuclear weapons.
But megaton bombs and inter-continental

ballistic missiles apart, the events of the
second great war and of the ensuing smaller
wars have shown that large populations are
not necessarily military boons. With his
tanks, Hitler, in a few hours, rounded up the
big Belgian and Dutch cities on the plains of
north-west Europe; but he was held up bya
scanty but scattered enemy ensconced in
the Norwegian highlands. A small and
dispersed population subsisting in mountainous regions is to-day the most difficult
to subdue. We can recall the difficulties of
the war in the Korean mountains and in the
mountains of Greece’s northern frontiers;
also how, in 1945, Hitler planned a retreat
into the Bavarian and Austrian Alps.

How does the megaton bomb and the
inter-continental rocket with a nuclear warhead affect the need for decentralization?
This at least can be said: the more the
inhabitants of our huge conurbations can be
dispersed throughout a distant and at present
STABILIZING UNITED KINGDOM POPULATION—DEBATE

sparsely populated Commonwealth, the less
unimaginable will be the holocaust brought
about by an all-out nuclear war.

I will now turn to how the proposed forty:
three year plan could be put into effect. I
repeat that I would encourage a natural
increase of the United Kingdom’s population
provided that the increase will, during the
period of the plan, be slightly exceeded by
emigration. Emigration is a two-way process
involving close co-ordination between the
mother country and the receiving country.
The mother country would be seriously
weakened and its age-structure impaired if
efforts are not made to secure a balanced or
(in respect of age) a cross-sectional emigration.
There are obvious difficulties from the standpoint of the receiving countries about taking
in middle-aged and old people; but this
country’s position is now better appreciated
by countries with immigration quotas such as
Australia and Canada (which has imposed
quotas as recently as July 1957) both
of which prefer British to foreign immigrants.
The importance of Commonwealth migration
was attested in January this year by a full
debate in the House of Commons on the
Empire Settlement Bill. The speech by Mr.
C. J. M. Alport, Under-Secretary of State for
Commonwealth Relations, showed a lively
appreciation of the need for cross-sectional
schemes and his views were endorsed by
other speakers.

It will be remembered that the Royal
Commission on Population was concerned
with the Commonwealth’s population problems. They were at pains to point out that
the aggregate population of Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa
amounted, in 1947, to less than half that of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland (the
United Kingdom).

The Commissioners declared (para. 332):

We have no doubt that it is in the long term
interests of Great Britain and the Commonwealth
as a whole to maintain the flow of emigrants
from Great Britain to the other parts of the

Commonwealth at as high a level as possible.
But I hasten to say that the Royal Commission was “definitely on the side of
avoiding a decline in numbers,” though they

175

added what seems to me the important
proviso “‘ except conceivably as an incident
of a large scheme of Empire migration.”’

The rates of natural increase in the
sparsely populated countries of the Commonwealth are higher than in the densely
populated United Kingdom. A _ newly
married couple emigrating to (say) Canada
or Australia will be likely to have more
children there than here. By encouraging
emigration, you therefore raise the Commonwealth’s total contribution to the population
of the world. If, on the other hand, a sense
of pressure and confinement becomes widespread in Britain (of which there are signs
to-day) as it has done in Japan, birth rates
could drop till there is no natural increase.
Instead of the fountain flowing freely, backpressure could develop; the fountain could
choke and the flow cease.

Finally, two points require to be stressed,
No policy aiming at slowly reducing numbers
to an agreed lower level could succeed unless
some restriction were imposed on _ the
counterbalancing movement of immigration.

Our official spokesmen seemingly lack the
courage to declare that an immigration
quota might sometime have to be imposed
by the United Kingdom. Most of the
world’s receiving countries (including the
United States of America) have such quotas.
Many countries further require that immigrants should satisfy certain medical and
hygienic requirements. Why should we not
do the same? |

My second point is the need to define what
is regarded as desirable without being unduly
inhibited by regard for what might at the
moment be deemed possible. What seems
impossible to-day could become possible
to-morrow—as we learned in the last war.
Once you make up your mind on what you
want, you may later come to see that where
there is a will there is a way.

CAPTAIN R. A. PILKINGTON

May I say first of all what a very great
honour I feel it is to be asked to address this
meeting; the thanks are for me to give, and
not for Dr. Blacker to give to me.

We have listened to an extremely powerful
176

presentation of the thesis argued by Dr.
Blacker, and I think that many of the things
that he said will find general agreement
among everybody. He has given us very
good reasons for his argument; but—‘“‘ good
reasons must perforce give place to better ”’ !

He mentioned three main subjects upon
which he rested his argument, and I shall
come to them in a moment, when I get a
little farther on in my speech. I want to
begin, as he did, by taking one or two general
assumptions upon which I think there. will
be general agreement.

First of all, I think there will be general
agreement upon this: that the population of
the whole world is rising at a really alarming
rate and that sooner or later it is bound to
call into being one of three things (or perhaps
a combination of two or all of those three
things), war, starvation or a substantial
extension of birth control.

The second thing on which I think there
will be common agreement is that this
increase in the world’s population is happening mostly among the less civilized
peoples. .

And the third common assumption is
that our Western civilization, our Western
Europe, has pulled into one vast technological civilization the whole of the rest of
the world, with the result that whatever
happens in any part of the world is magnified
in its effects while its repercussions will be
felt round the whole planet, whether the
thing that happens is good or bad. That
means that in this century in which we are
living there are greater dangers than there
have ever been before, but there are also
greater opportunities than there have ever
been before.

My fourth point upon which I think there
is common agreement is that in this sort of
situation the importance of leadership,
whether it is of individuals or whether it is of
nations, is greater than it has ever been
before.

Now, as we survey the world to-day, there
are, of course, the two colossi of the United
States and the Soviet Union, tremendous in
material power and influence; but there is
also this country, which has an immensely

THE EUGENICS REVIEW _

longer and wider experience in the whole
realm of politics, understood in the broadest
sense, whether it be national or international,
whether it be imperial or colonial, or whether
it be now “‘ Commonwealthian ”’ (if one can
use that adjective). We do not seek to rival
in size or wealth or material power those
two great colossi, but we do seek for ourselves power, wealth and influence, both for
domestic reasons and for world reasons, and,
in the pursuit of these things, the optimum
population is a very important factor.

If that, then, is the general framework of
the position, and if the rédle which this
country has got to play is so vital, as I
believe that it is, my argument this evening
is that we can fulfil that rdle better with
fifty million than we can with forty million,
and I have chosen some half-dozen considerations to lay before you to substantiate, as I
see it, that argument, and my colleague,
Mr. Cox, is going to add some of his own.

First, I would like to come straightaway to
the first of the reasons which Dr. Blacker
himself put forward: he referred to the
strategic consideration. I agree that that is
an important one. He sees it as more

important than it was ten years ago. I see

it as less important than it was ten years ago.
What he wants us to do is to transfer some
of our eggs to another basket; but, if the
catastrophe comes, all the baskets, it seems
to me, are going to (if I may mix my metaphors) get it in the neck and what we have
to do is to see that the catastrophe does not
occur, and it is to that end that I think we
should devote our attention. .

Dr. Blacker’s second consideration was the
economic one. It is one I know that is often
argued—that we cannot support ourselves in
this island without exporting a great deal,
and that that is a bad thing. Well now, with
great respect to him, I am exactly opposed
to that argument, because I believe that if
the need to export was removed from this
country our nation would lose a stimulus,
and the loss of that stimulus would not help
to keep this nation the robust and adventuring sort of nation which it has been and is at
the present time.

I turn to another of the considerations
STABILIZING UNITED KINGDOM POPULATION—DEBATE

which I am laying before you during the time
at my disposal—the population density of
this country. It is very great; but ours is
by no means the most densely- populated
country in the world, as we sometimes think
when we see the various conglomerations of
population in this island. Japan, which was
mentioned by Dr. Blacker, is more densely
populated; so is Holland; so is Belgium; and
there are other island examples, sometimes
going up to three and four times the rate of
density which we have in this island. Again,
from the amenity point of view, of course we
do not want to see our countryside progressively despoiled as we have in past years,
but we are now within measurable distance
of having the accommodation which we need
for our population, and I would quote a
gentleman with whom I am not often in
agreement, but perhaps for that reason what
he says has the more weight in this context—
Mr. Bevan. He said, in 1953, four years ago,
“ Taking the country as a whole, we are not
very far removed from having the total
amount of accommodation which the country
requires.’ And since then, of course, a lot
more accommodation has been provided.
These, you may say, are more or less
neutral aspects of the problem. I come to a
more positive consideration, and this meets,
or I hope will meet, the eugenic argument, at
any rate in part, which Dr. Blacker propounded to us. I maintain that a decrease
would be positively undesirable in this
country because it could only be brought
about by one of two ways; either by an
extension of birth control or by an extension
of emigration, both of which Dr. Blacker
mentioned. It seems to me that if you
extend birth control you are bound to extend
it to that more intelligent section of the
community where you do not want it to
apply, and you. will not have it applied to
anything like the same extent to the less
intelligent part of the population in which, if
you were going to have restriction, you would
like to see restriction. So far as emigration
is concerned, Dr. Blacker faced many of the
problems which there are there. However
much people may make speeches in the
House of Commons and elsewhere (as he

3—ER

177

mentioned) and say that it is desirable to
have .a balanced slice of your population
removed, the fact remains that it is going to
be extremely difficult to get a balanced
section of your population emigrating. The
older people among the community will
always tend to want to stay in this country,
and will not, of course, be so welcome in the
countries to which it might be hoped that
they would go.

And that brings me to the next consideration, which I think is a very important one.
It is at the present time of importance to this
country that we do keep a very substantial
proportion of young people, because, thanks
to the decline in the birth-rate from War I
to War II, the number of older people in our
community is already greater than it has
ever been in the past, and it is going to get
progressively greater over the rest of this
century, and we shall need all the young
people coming along if we are going to
maintain our standard of living and support
this much larger older section of the community. That is a problem which is going to
be with all the governments of this country
for the next fifty years or so.

My next consideration is this: that we are
already far behind the other units of the
Anglo-American world, the English-speaking
peoples, in the natural increase which is
taking place in the various countries which
make up that world. I think the figures are
startling. The rate of increase in Canada is
1g per thousand, in New Zealand it is 16,
in South Africa it is 16, in Australia it is 13,
in the United States it is 13, and in this
country it is only 4. Now, if this motion were
to be passed, and if it were to become the
policy of the country, it would mean that
every other English-speaking unit throughout the world would be increasing and we
alone would be dwindling, which I submit
would not be a good thing.

And that brings me to my final consideration, perhaps the most important of all.
Rightly or wrongly, in the world to-day it
is regarded as a sign of weakness and feebleness if the population of a country is
dwindling. We may ‘say that that is not
sensible, but it is a fact, and we have to face
178

facts as they are. Thanks to the effects of
two wars, we are in a sufficiently precarious
position as it is. The dangers that beset us
are obvious and great. I said earlier that
they beset the whole world; they do, but not
least this country. Yet if there are dangers
there are also great opportunities, and not
least for us in the position in which we are,
within the three circles: the European circle,
the Atlantic circle, the Commonwealth circle.
And to seize and make the best of those great
opportunities which our position and the
quality of our people gives to us, we need
not only the wisdom and experience which
we have accumulated, but also strength, all
the strength that we can get; and my
argument is that a dwindling population
would be a sign not of strength but of weakness. We recognize that there are some small
communities which live happy and contented
lives; one may perhaps quote Scandinavia.
But those nations are on the sidelines of the
world at the present time. Once they were
great protagonists, but no longer. We are.
We are on the field of play, or the field of
battle, whichever way it may be, and we
need all the strength that we can get.

Iam sure that this Society, whose aim is the
betterment of the race, should not at the
same time aim at the dwindling of the
nation. I believe that we can best fulfil our
destiny by improving our population of fifty
million, yes, but also by maintaining it.

MRS. MARGARET PYKE

I think that questions like population
pressure and stabilization of population
sound rather academic to some of us, and I
should like to bring them down into terms
of the average human being.

In the first place, he is probably a citizen,
because I think about 86 per cent of our
population lives in towns. In spite of what
Captain Pilkington has just said about
accommodation now nearly meeting the
needs of our population, I should not think
that the average citizen would agree with
him. The average citizen usually wakes up
in a house or flat which he thinks too small,
and his neighbours far too close, because
there are too many people chasing too few

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

houses. To go to work, he probably has to
queue for a bus or train, and, if he spends
ten minutes doing that going out and again
coming home he wastes eighty-three fortyhour weeks during forty years. That is more
than a year and a half of his working life,
wasted standing in bus and train queues.
I read in The Times-the other day that in an
hotel of 100 rooms with 300 days’ occupancy,.
a reduction of ten minutes in the time needed
for the chambermaid to perform her duties
in a room saves {£875 a year. So quite a lot
of money would. be saved by avoiding the
bus queues.

Then he goes to his factory or office,
which is probably also short of space or short
of air, and he has to scramble through his
lunch after again waiting in a queue.

Meanwhile his wife has been struggling in
a shopping queue, and his children going to
schools, where they obtain education—or
more likely evade it—in overcrowded classes.
As for the universities, I don’t know how
many try to get in for each place available,
but I did read the other day that the dean of
one of our medical schools said that he had
eight applicants for every vacancy.

If our citizen’s wife wishes to go into a
maternity home, she has to book her bed
nine months—or, if possible, more !—beforehand. If any of the family are ill, they have
to get into a queue for the doctor or dentist,
or wait in the out-patients’ department;
unless an operation is urgent, they are likely
to die before they get it. When they die,
they are still overcrowded, because there is
not room for enough cemeteries. In fact, I
think that what Mr. Piddington has said in
his really briliant book, The Limits of
Mankind, is true: Britain is the first country
in history to run out of space.

We have fifty million people here on fiftysix million acres; I agree with Captain
Pilkington that we are not actually the most
over-crowded country per acre, but most of
the overcrowding elsewhere is in countries not
so mobile as we are; generally, their populations do not yet go out in motor cars or
play golf, or go to the seaside, or fly. In some
cases their land is more inhabitable and
fertile than ours; in fact, owing to the
STABILIZING UNITED KINGDOM POPULATION—DEBATE

combination of population density and the
stage of our development, we are the first to
feel this spatial pinch.

Years ago, Mr. Piddington published a
calculation to show that if every family in
England possessed a beach hut six feet wide,
there would be a continuous terrace of huts,
stretching four deep, right round the coast
from Berwick to Solway Firth. In fact, there
just is not enough room in this country, and
we see the results in the constant struggles
to find space for schools, hospitals, houses,
roads, reservoirs, airfields and open spaces,
struggles which frequently lead to eviction,
compulsory purchase, and quarrels between
rival authorities and Government departments.

Now this is also an expensive business.
Traffic delays are not only irritating, indeed
infuriating, but they are also enormously
expensive. In London traffic moves at an
average speed of eleven miles per hour, a
shade better than in New York, where the
Traffic Safety Committee has estimated that
the cost of road congestion is 1,080 million
dollars a year. And, of course, overcrowded
roads mean accidents, and accidents are not
only personal tragedies, they are highly
expensive.

Overcrowded houses lead to broken homes
and juvenile delinquency, and then we have
to spend money on probation officers and
magistrates and prisons and police.

But apart from all these material questions, our personal happiness is seriously
affected. Our cities are rapidly spreading
like a blight and running over into all the
little available space left of our lovely
countryside. I suppose all my generation
know what it is to go back to the remote
and peaceful village of our childhood and
find it just a red-brick villa outpost of the
nearest city; all the lovers’ lanes and trees
have gone, and there is nothing but houses
and shops, and a factory or two. And when
we go now to our favourite river pool or
seaside beach we find it raucous with radios,
littered with newspapers and orange peel and
paper bags, and haunted by the sellers
and consumers of choc-ice and _ ice-lollies;
and as for bathing—you have a choice

179

between bathing in a river boiling with
factory effluent or in the sea where our own
human sewage is inexorably returning to us.

As Dr. Blacker said, it is not for us to say
how our population should be reduced, we
want to find out if this is a good thing or
not; but (again to quote Mr. Piddington)
“some carefully reasoned schemes have
envisaged a possible flow of emigration of
one million persons annually for twenty-five
years and it is probable that the highly
developed transport facilities and technical
skill of the British people could just achieve
the task.’”’ The resolution before you would
not require anything nearly as rapid as that,
of course.

As regards birth control, Captain Pilkington said, that would be harmful because the
intelligent would apply it most. But that is
already happening. I doubt if a reduction
in the birth rate will be necessary, but if it
were, I was much taken, myself, with a
suggestion I read in an American article the
other day, that young couples should be
given a cash present of several hundred
dollars for every childless year. That would
be far less expensive than the children
themselves are, and it would be a greater
inducement to those possibly less welldesigned for parenthood to practise birth
control than the exhortations and persuasions
which we try at present.

One point I would mention which Captain
Pilkington made: he said he was not quite
sure if a dwindling population (that word has
an unfortunate connotation, shall we say a
reduced population) was a good thing.
Perhaps it is something on which we can
give the world a lead and show that it 7s a
very good thing. But in any case remedies
can only come after the diagnosis, and what
I am asking you to accept is the diagnosis
that our population pressure is dangerously
high and ought to be reduced and kept stable
at 20 per cent lower than it is at present.

MR. P. R. COX

I should like to start by thanking Dr.
Blacker very much for his kind remarks;
if I may say so, however, he has created
something of an impression that really
180 .

Captain Pilkington and I agree with him
but that we have arranged to support the
contrary view just for the sake of the
debate! That is not so. I do not agree with
the motion. Even if I accepted the principle,
I still would not accept the way in which
it is worded. In one way it gives me great
regret to speak against the arguments of
Dr. Blacker and Mrs. Pyke, as they are both
very much identified with societies that we
all greatly admire; but I think that the aims
we have in common can be achieved by
means other than those we are discussing
to-night.

The motion says that our own total
population ought to be stabilized. In the
technical -language of demography, a
“ stable ’’ population is not one with a fixed
total. It is one with a constant age-distribution, constant mortality and constant fertility. It takes a hundred years of constant
mortality and fertility—and, incidentally, a
net migratory movement of nil—to get such
a population. We have never had one and
are never likely to see one. One with a fixed
total as well is even more unlikely.

Previous speakers have referred to the
desirability of this motion as opposed to the
practicality of it. For myself, I do not see
much use in discussing something that might
be done unless we have a good idea how
to do it; and we have little notion of how to
bring about a reduction by over ten million
persons in order to reach a stable population
of forty million. It is a good thing for a
country to have a population policy; but it
must be a realistic one. Recent history
provides a number of examples of governments that have tried to make changes in
their populations and have not succeeded.
The first example that comes to mind is that
of Hitler, who in the middle nineteenthirties attempted to encourage a growth in
fertility. At the time his success seemed
quite impressive, but subsequent studies
have shown that there was little in his
population policy which contributed to the
observed increase in fertility; such increase
as occurred was almost certainly the effect of
economic recovery from the years of depression that had preceded his rise to power.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Again, in France after 1945, the population
had been depleted by two world wars,
especially among men of working age. In
Italy, however, there was surplus of manpower and plenty of unemployment. What
could apparently be easier than to encourage
large numbers of Italians to emigrate to
France? The French demographic journals
were full of plans for doing so, but in the end
relatively little movement occurred. The
fact is that people’s traditions, beliefs and
habits cannot be changed overnight, but
only over a long period. As Lord Simon said
in his book on Barbados, the inhabitants
know perfectly well that the island is overpopulated, but even so they seem to do very
little about it, presumably because their
habits are fixed in certain channels.

Let us suppose, however, for the sake of
argument, that we knew. how to control
population. Speakers to-night have recognized that this would be a slow process,
extending over many decades. Supposing
we decided that we wanted only forty million
people and decided to reduce to that number
in forty years’ time; who can say that we
shall view things in the same way, and desire
the same goal, in ten years’ time, let alone
twenty, thirty or forty years hence? By
the time the target was nearly reached, we
should in all probability be aiming at-something quite different. It is very difficult to
plan forty years ahead in this age, or to
know what the economic and _ political
situation will be so far off.

I come now to the core of my objection to
this motion. Nobody knows yet how bad
it would be from an economic and political
point of view for us to have a population
that is not increasing. One can only infer
from two of our near neighbours, France
and Eire, which have been nearer than any
others to having a constant population,
what their people feel about such a situation.
In France, strenuous efforts have been made
for over a quarter of a century to stimulate
the birth rate. In Eire a Population Commission a few years ago deplored the fact that
so many people were emigrating; it would
not admit—perhaps for reasons of national
prestige—that the more energetic and
STABILIZING UNITED KINGDOM POPULATION—DEBATE

enthusiastic people were going abroad, and
leaving the less progressive and active
behind; all the same, something of that sort
may well have been going on. The Commission also regretted the fact that Irish
people marry so late, and therefore cannot
have large families. In other words, the Irish
would like to encourage an increase in
population; they do not feel that their
country is being sufficiently developed at
present.

Not only is an unvarying population a
disadvantage, but also strong arguments
have been advanced recently in favour of a
moderate population growth such as we have
in Great Britain at the present time. For
instance, the Overseas Migration Board
recommended in its first report, which was
issued in 1954, that there should be an
increase in population large enough to ensure
a suitable supply of emigrants to the
Commonwealth. It is up to us to provide
economic help as well as manpower to
members of the Commonwealth, and we
should not be in a position to do that from
a position of weakness. <A_ position of
strength, such as only increasing numbers
can provide, is essential.

One of my first reactions on seeing the
motion was that there must be a misprint
in the wording: surely forty million ought at
least to be fifty million? Possibly we could
manage to stabilize at fifty million or more,
but how indeed could we stabilize at more
than ten million fewer than at present? I see
now that forty million was really intended.
It is still a very large number—dquite big
enough to be seriously embarrassing in the
event of a hydrogen bomb being dropped
here; in such a case it would not make much
difference in the general result whether we
had forty million or fifty million. With forty
million probably in the normal course we
should still have to import goods from overseas on a large scale. But the difference of ten
million is also a large number. Presumably
it is not the idea to wait until all those
people have died in the natural course.
How then are we going to dispose of them?
You have read in your papers lately about
voyages to the moon, or to platforms in

181

space. Such possibilities are, however, outside the scope of to-night’s debate. Ordinary
emigration would be the only hope of disposing of a large section of our population, but
would so many people want to go overseas?
That is a question that has not yet been
asked to-night: it seems very doubtful
whether so large a number would be willing
to leave. If they did, would the Commonwealth want to have them? Opportunities in
Australia and Canada are mainly for the
most healthy and active men and women.
The already heavy burden of the aged in the
United Kingdom would be increased if we
exported a higher proportion of our young
people than at present.

The demographic position to-day in this
country is less unfavourable than is often
realized. We are free from the great population pressure that is being experienced in
South-East Asia and elsewhere, and yet we
have not reached the comparative uniformity
of total numbers from year to year that has
been experienced in France and Eire. If we
were to interfere with this fairly happy
situation the consequences might well be
unfavourable.

It has been argued to-night that a gain
from the point of view of eugenics would
follow from the successful pursuance of the
policy expressed in the motion. I would
not dispute that in itself, although.I have
argued that any gains might be more than
offset in other ways. But the aims of
eugenics can be pursued by means other than
creating an artificial decrease in the population.

THE CHAIRMAN

We have had the four speakers introducing
the subject. I would now ask if any member
would like to make a few remarks.

MR. C. G. TOMLINSON

Mr. Peter Cox asked whether the population had been asked what they thought
about emigrating. I submit, Sir, that the
Planners would say: “‘If they don’t like
to go, they must be made to go.” I do submit
that we are suffering from too much planning
in this country, and what we need to do is
182

to find a way of getting rid of some of the
plans, and perhaps some of the- Planners,
and then we should have a happier country.

MR. R. A. PIDDINGTON

_ Asa newcomer here, I do not expect there
is any keen speculation as to which side I
am on. May I stimulate it by quoting a
quatrain:

Tll fares the land, to hastening ills a prey,

Where wealth accumulates and men decay.

To which a twentieth-century hand has
added:

But how much more unfortunate are those

Whose wealth declines and population grows.

I will now confess that the last line
expresses to my mind what has happened to
this country during at least the last fortythree years in particular. Still, I do recognize that in the future our problem with
regard to population may not be so economic
as I may have implied. I can envisage that,
if science makes the progress during the
next ten years which many people expect
and which a few people dread, wé may find
that our standard of living in Britain rises
materially; and yet I submit that, as a result
of that, it will fall culturally.

To explain that paradox, I may perhaps
draw your attention to a picture we have
already had put before us to-night of the
congestion of this country, particularly as
regards road traffic. The average motorist,
inching his way back from a weekend at the
seaside, has certainly achieved what is
called maximum economic welfare; he not
only has his car, he has plenty to eat, he is
well dressed; yet he cannot be said to be
happy, in fact occasionally he feels absolutely
mutinous. What is wrong? I think increased
economic welfare has led to increased
individual frustration. And this. frustration,
I believe, is accumulating in this country
at the present time.

It is a very serious situation because at
any moment it may suddenly spread like
Asian influenza, and people may think of
throwing in their hand. I notice, for instance,
a general reluctance among people even to
‘build a house, or buy a property or to settle
anywhere, because they say: “ In a country

THE. EUGENICS REVIEW

like this, where space is so short, the moment
I select a certain site, somebody else will
come along and oust me from it, or else a
factory will be built alongside the house I
have put up and my position will be rendered
impossible.”’ .

So I suggest that, if we increase our
population instead of reducing it, that
situation would be very much worsened.
May I put it as a kind of parable? If you
have twenty diners round a table which can
accommodate twenty and no more, the
addition of one diner will not create one
skeleton at the feast but twenty-one dissatisfied diners who would gladly forgo the
rest of the meal. If in this country people
feel they are in that position, that life has
become insupportable culturally, we may,
as a community, suddenly find we are no
longer viable, because there is no interest
for anyone in the day’s work.

It has been suggested that we might
remedy this evil by emigration. We British
have a long tradition of emigration; we know
that it can be done, and has been done successfully in the past—in fact I shudder to
think what the situation would now be like
in this country if we had never had the
outlet of emigration. England, I can imagine,
would be one vast Birmingham, or Blackburn. And I fear that still may happen unless
the resolution which is before us to-night is
accepted, not only by us but, in the end, by
public opinion in the United Kingdom.

MR. N. S. PERCIVAL

My sympathies are with Dr. Blacker and
Mrs. Pyke, but the difficulty is, as some
speakers have said, in putting their proposal
into practice. There are two methods:
emigration; birth control. Emigration certainly, if continued in its present form, will
result in the younger people leaving the
country, and birth control in the more
desirable members of the population reducing
their numbers. The same question comes
with immigration; the reason we are willing
to take all these people from the West Indies
is that they are young people and they are
needed to do the jobs in this country.

For those reasons, I think there is very
STABILIZING UNITED KINGDOM POPULATION—DEBATE

great difficulty in this scheme for reducing
the population, although I have great
sympathy with it.

MR. E. AGIUS

There is real difficulty in dealing with this
subject in the time at our disposal. It is so
easy to go wrong in logic and to make false
deductions and to omit things. I cannot
attempt to deal with it in five minutes, so I
will only make one contribution to this
debate—a quotation from a speech by Lord
Samuel in the House of Lords. He said:
“When you stand alarmed at the idea that
a new mouth has been born into this world,
do not forget that there has also been, born
a new life and a new pair of hands.”’

THE CHAIRMAN
At this point, I will put my own views
before you—trather scrappily.

There was a reference to the whole of

England becoming like Blackburn; Mrs.
Pyke, on the other hand, was objecting to
the whole of England becoming like Blackpool. I don’t know which is the worse.
Secondly, Dr. Blacker was the only
person who spoke about restricting immigration into this country. Whatever way the
debate goes to-night, I hope we can reach
some kind of unanimity on that subject. I
feel, when all other countries are restricting
immigration, it is folly for us not to do the
same. That is nothing to do with more or
less population, but sheer protection for this
country, which the United States and most
other countries already have in force.
Another point referred to is this question
of birth control invariably affecting the
superior portions of the population. It seems
natural to us that it should, and I suspect
that it very often does, but there is a very
interesting and important example to the
contrary. As you know, ten years ago there
was a doctrine held by most people who
thought about the population question that
prosperity led to a reduced increase in
population, and the inference was that if
we could make the whole world prosperous,
we should make a nice, jolly family together,
having no children, and enjoying ourselves.

’ tically certain,

183

That has been proved absolutely wrong by
one most important example which has
emerged in the course of the last five or six
years—the United States of America. The’
United States of America at present is
increasing its population at the rate of one
of the four or five fastest countries in the
world, and, in view of its size, that means
making a most important contribution. That
increase is not amongst the downtrodden;
there is a positive correlation between a
man’s income and the number of children he

_has. I won't say that if he is a millionaire he

gets a million children, but at the present
time there is a positive correlation of that
kind. So I don’t think you need take too
seriously what, for most of us, seems instinctively a rather obvious danger.

The main point with which I am impressed
in this argument is the question of spreading
the business over forty years. Mr. Cox made
the point that we might change our minds,
but there is one thing which I think we can
forecast with most certainty in the whole
future of the world—that is that it is pracShort of collision with
another solar system or a good, effective
atom bomb, that the population of the world
will be doubled, or very nearly doubled, by
the year 2,000. Anyway, ten years after that

_it will certainly be double what it is now.

Therefore, if you are stabilizing at forty or
fifty million, you are going to make this
country half as important in the whole world
as it is at present. I happen to share the
view that we cannot control it, that the
possibility of control is “ out ’’; but if it is
“‘in,’’ 1f we do control it, we are writing ourselves down to something like half. the
present importance we have in the world.

Finally, I would like to touch on a point
that I am really rather distressed that everybody seemed to think so important—the
standard of living. I don’t think anyone
has really tried to define what standard of
living is a tolerable standard, but I have the
advantage of knowing: when anyone speaks
of a tolerable standard of living he means
something which is a little better than
what he had this year! There is no other
answer.
184

DR. G. C. L. BERTRAM

I only have a few remarks. I leave aside
things like whether the wording of the
motion is good or not; but it is quite clear
what is aimed at—whether it is desirable,
whether it is possible; and it is clearly a
matter on which there is great divergence of
opinion. It is something weighed in the
balance and it is not quite obvious whether
it is heavy on one side or the other; we all
make our personal integrations.

I cannot agree with Mr. Cox at all. His
argument was really: “If you cannot be
accurately prophetic, do nothing.”’ It seems
to me if you feel that, the best thing is to
take some hashish and settle down and be
happy. If we cannot be accurately prophetic,
still, we have minds, and we can attempt to
be prophetic about the availability of food
in the next forty years. My own view is that
it will become progressively more difficult
for this country to import food over the next
forty years, when the rest of the world is
going to have these immense population
increases. |

Captain Pilkington introduced an argument which has great importance—the
strength of the Commonwealth. Is the
strength of the Commonwealth, which we all
want to see at a maximum, at its greatest

with people spread or with them concen- 
trated? We must make up our minds on that.

But we are not aiming at the strength of
one nation, or of the Commonwealth; what
we are aiming at is, presumably, the health
and happiness and so on of the individual.
So, when we are thinking of strength, we
have, I feel, to look through the present,
which is an unhappy and unsatisfactory stage
in the world’s history, and look forward to a
period when we can get closer to our ultimate
aim, the health and happiness of the individual. And if one takes that into one’s mind,
it does seem to me that somehow, as Mrs.
Pyke has suggested, we have to have a lower
number (though I must remind you that
there are bus queues in Sydney, too!).

It is a difficult integration; one has to make
it; and I would come down on the side of
Dr. Blacker and Mrs. Pyke.

-THE EUGENICS REVIEW

MR. CHARLES S. GREEN

I cannot claim.to be on either side, and I
have been wondering, as I listened, wouldn’t
it be rather a miracle if the first aim enunciated by Dr. Blacker in his thesis were
realized—the clarification of the mind, the
collective mind, of the Council of this Society
on this question? In saying this I am reflecting, not upon any prejudices in the minds of
Council members: but upon the difficulty and
complexity of the present problem.

I have been somewhat irritated by the
constant references to emigration, without
any sort of analysis of what emigration is, or
should be, from the standpoint of this
motion. Mr. Piddington made some enthusiastic remarks about the nature of emigration
in the past and present as an outlet, but has
anybody, since the days of, say, Botany Bay,
even considered the possibility of making
serious representations to any of the
dominions or colonies that they should, in
fact, receive a cross-section of our population?
A true cross-section of our people would
include, would it not, in addition to some of
the strongest and the best physically,
intellectually and morally, a percentage of
the aged, the sick, of the handicapped in
mind or in body, a number of known cases of
tuberculosis and of cancer, a few criminals
and some delinquents, with a sprinkling of
maladjusted scholars and young workers.

And, since we are speaking of emigration,
and not of compulsory transportation, the
complete willingness and desire of each
individual concerned must, of course, be
assumed. In fact, just ask yourselves, what
would actually be a cross-section of our
population, and what sort of inducement
would be necessary to persuade Australia,
or New Zealand, or Canada, or even one of
the colonies, who are, perhaps, a little more
amenable to inducement than the dominions,
to take such a cross-section. But, on the
other hand, fantastic as the idea seems,
should we not seriously suggest to them that
that should be the case? I hazard the guess
that in the long run any dominion or colony.
willing to accept, from time to time, as
immigrants, such a cross-section of our
population, would benefit as greatly by so
STABILIZING UNITED KINGDOM POPULATION—DEBATE

doing as would the mother country in being
relieved of its surplus. Otherwise our
position at home, from the point of view of
improvement through emigration, is just as
fantastically impossible as speakers seem to
agree would be the case if improvement
were attempted by larger measures of birth
control, resulting in what we can only call
the wrong section of the population doing the
controlling.

I do not think some of our speakers have
been quite basic enough in their considerations, and: I adduce this one matter of
emigration as one which should be looked
into further.

DR. J. P. M. TIZARD

May I say a few words about emigration
and about immigration. It is surely not
necessary that we should ask any of the
Dominions or Colonies to take a crosssection of the population. The position is
simply that, if they really want British
‘immigrants, as apparently they do, they
should pay for them—pay for that proportion of the old people and the infirm and the
criminal whom the young emigrants were
supporting in this country. At least this is
a proposition which could be put to the
Dominions, rather than asking them to
take over unwilling sections of our
population.

As regards immigration, if we really are the
last country in the world to have any immigration policy, I think—and here I know I
am against the sentiment of this meeting—
that this is something to be gloried in; that
it is a part of our respect for individual
liberty and is deeply a part of the tradition
of this country. If there is any strength left
in the British Empire, it must lie in the free
interchange of peoples between one part and
another. If it is the fact that this is not the
case in other parts of the Empire that is to
be deplored, rather than the fact that we
still permit free immigration here.

When we speak of immigration to this

country at the moment, nearly everyone
thinks of the Jamaican population. I do not
think we need fear a deterioration in this

4—ER

185

country from mixtures of races. After all,
our strength is supposed to originate from
our mongrel ancestry and in the long run the
population of this country may well be
strengthened by the admission of a different
race.

THE CHAIRMAN
If no one else wants to speak, I will ask
Dr. Blacker to reply.

DR. C. P. BLACKER

Thank you, Mr. President. I really have
nothing more to add, beyond, perhaps, that,
having fully appreciated how incompatible
are my views with those of Mr. Cox, I am
the more grateful to him for having come
here and spoken as he has done, and also
to my old friend Captain Pilkington. We
should all be grateful to them for having
put their case so well.

The essential problem, as I see it, is a
Commonwealth problem of a redistribution
of population, which must be effected voluntarily, through understanding and co-operation between the receiving and sending
countries. Anyone who reads the reports of
the Overseas Migration Board can see how
much thought is being given to such co-operation, and I see no reason why this co-operation should not increase and a greater
measure of agreement be reached in the
future than in the past. Manifestly, one
cannot compel people to migrate if they do
not wish to; but there is evidence that just
now many people wish to emigrate. Such a
movement can be aided by governmental
action—either by credits (much discussed in
the House of Commons), or by part-payment
of their passage; also by making arrangements at the receiving end (which Australia
and New Zealand have done) for their
induction into the new life. Most of the
Commonwealth’s receiving countries are
anxious to increase their quota of British
immigrants. They have expressed themselves with much explicitness on this subject.
There should be no basic difficulty in achieving accommodation if, on both sides, the
necessary goodwill exists.
“1860 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

THE CHAIRMAN also to all the other speakers who have made
It remains for us to give our warmest a number of extremely interesting contributhanks to the four introducing speakers, and__ tions to this debate. Thank you.

POPULATION REVIEW

A biannual Journal of Asian Demography published in Fanuary and July
Eprror: DR. 8S. GHANDRASEKHAR | VoLume 1 No. 2

CONTENTS
Population Growth and Indian Economy
Marx versus Malthus: The Men and the Symbols WILLIAM PETERSEN
Some Principles of Population Economics ELMER PENDELL
The Growth of Village Population and Economic Development in South Asia NatTuHan Keyritz
Cultural Barriers to Family Planning in Under-developed Countries S. CHANDRASEKHAR
Housing in an Indian Village ALLENE MASTERS
Mangadu: Demography of an Indian Village, Part I S. CHANDRASEKHAR
From the Press Cuttings
Institute’s Activities
Reviews of Books
Publications Received

Str PADAMPAT SINGHANIA

ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION: £1. $4.00

Indian Institute for Population Studies
GANDHINAGAR, MADRAS-20 (INDIA)

Society for Constructive Birth Control
‘and RACIAL PROGRESS

The First Birth Control Clinic in the World
THE MOTHERS’ CLINIC
Special Lectures

and _ Instructional

rary may be con- From the beginning dealing with all aspects of birth control and Demonstrations to
sulted by anyone. marriage problems. Members of the
, | Medical Prof
Libeery i ending OPEN DAILY (not Sats.) 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. FREE are regularly given
‘bers of the Society. Address: 106-108, WHITFIELD STREET, LONDON, W.1 Application by tier

 
