POPULATION TRENDS AND POLICIES 13

nations. Polish, Czech, Dutch, Belgian,
French man-power is drafted into Germany
for semi-forced labour. Jewish men in
Poland are apparently herded into reservations away from their stranded womenfolk.
Many thousands of French soldiers are
retained as prisoners. Hitler’s dream of a
Europe repopulated by 100 million “ racially
superior’ Germans is more than ever the

inspiration of Nazi policy. I feel nevertheless
that all this will lead nowhere. One day,
when the nightmare is over and Europe faces
once more the problems of reconstruction,
the Swedish attempt to influence demographic trends by enhancing personal welfare
and freedom will be found to have contained
important hints for a British approach to the
problem.

 

FAMILY ALLOWANCES IN WAR TIME
By EVA M. HUBBACK

Vice-Chairman, Family Endowment Soctety

of the House of Commons drawn from
all parties have put their names to a
resolution asking the Government to formulate a scheme for “a national State-paid

p | ‘HE fact that as many as 150 Members

scheme of allowances for dependent children, |

payable to their mothers or acting guardians,
as a means of safe-guarding the health and
well-being of the rising generation,” is a sure
sign that the support for Family Allowances
is growing every day. Women’s organizations, religious bodies, professional societies
and economists of note are also increasingly
giving their support, not only to the principle
of Family Allowances, but also to a universal
state scheme.

It often happens in war that the national
social conscience is strengthened, and that
reforms which have been asked for im peace
time for many years are adopted and dreams
become facts. It would not be surprising
should this happen in the case of Family
Allowances, for the need is so greatly
strengthened as a result of war conditions.
The main ground on which it is being put
forward is the need for maintaining an
adequate standard of living for the children
of the nation.

Readers of the EUGENICS REVIEW will be
familiar with the peace-time figures—for

instance, Sir John Orr’s estimate that at
least 25 per cent of our children come from
homes in which the income is too low to
allow for adequate nourishment. But they
may not be so familiar with the recent
figures as to child-dependency drawn by
Mr. Seebohm Rowntree from a recent social
survey of 15,577 men in York. In this group:
57°8 per cent. had no children ; 21 per cent.
had one child; 12-3 per cent. had two
children ; 5 per cent. had three children ;
2°3 per cent. had four children ; and 1-6 per
cent. had five or more children. It is significant that the 3-9 per cent. with more
than three children accounted for over 23
per cent. of the total number.

Since the beginning of the war it has been
estimated that the cost of living for workingclass families has risen by at least 30 per
cent. In some industries wages have risen as
much, if not more, and overtime and the
employment of more members of the family
have resulted in higher incomes. But in
other cases it has not been so, and incomes
have risen much less than prices or even not
at all. Often, moreover, when the man has
been called up his wife has to manage ona
greatly reduced weekly sum. The result is
that many families who were previously
above the poverty line are now below, and
14 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that others who had previously been below
are in still more straitened circumstances.
Rationing has been established in order to
spread reduced supplies of food fairly, but
to give every child a ration card is of little
use if there is no money with which to buy
his share.

There is indeed no other way in which the
problem of child nutrition and care can be
satisfactorily dealt with. Food subsidies, it
is true, reduce the cost of living for all
classes ; but they do so in a wasteful manner
for they help not only the poor but many
who could do without help. Increased money
wages all round only defeat their own ends
by leading to inflation. Extended social
services are valuable, but can offer little for
children in their own home; they provide
school meals or milk but leave other needs
untouched.

The population problem is of course one
which must be emphasized in war time. Mr.
Lafitte estimates that during the war of
1914 to 1918 there were half a million fewer
births than there would otherwise have been.

The separations and casualties of this war.

will necessarily lead to a reduction in the
birth rate—though how much only time can
show.

It is generally agreed that any scheme
introduced now must be of a simple nature.
A flat-rate scheme is therefore being advocated, to be financed by the state and to be
universal in scope. The sum usually suggested
is five shillings a week for each dependent
child. Schemes to encourage births in those
economic sections of the community that
spend more than this amount on their
children must needs wait. No doubt once
Family Allowances have become familiar
schemes such as the establishment of mutual
insurance pools for different economic grades

could be superimposed on a flat-rate scheme.
An interesting light should be shed on the
differential birth rate once the minimum of
physical needs have been guaranteed to all
children ; present differences in mental and
physical development between children in
different social classes may well be gradually
reduced.

Cost of a Scheme

The cost of a Government scheme at the
rate of five shillings a week for all children has
been estimated at {132,000,000 a year. The
net cost would probably not be more than
half this, for a large proportion of children
(e.g. orphans, children of men serving in
the Forces, evacuated children, children of
widows, and children of unemployed men)
are already receiving various forms of state
allowances, none of which however are based
on any scientific estimate of the minimum
cost of child nurture. Income tax rebates
are in effect children’s allowances, but their
full benefit is confined to those whose income
is large enough to secure the maximum
concession. An income of £350, for instance,
is required before a rebate of even 6s. 3d. for
each of three children can be paid. If a
universal scheme of Family Allowances were
established these would replace all existing
allowances except to the extent to which
these exceed five shillings. If the resulting
net cost is considered still too high it can be
reduced 50 per cent. by starting the scheme
at the second child only.

It is interesting to note that the Federal
Government of Australia has adopted a
scheme which comes into force this July, in
which an allowance of five shillings a week
will be paid to the mother on behalf of all
children starting from the second in each
family.

 
