T. J. SAMUEL

Population Control in Japan:
Lessons for India’

THB SHARP DECLINE in Japan’s crude birth
rate of 34-4 in 1947 to 17-2 in 1957 is unique
in the demographic history of the world. Why
and how did the Japanese birth rate fall so
steadily in such a short period? What lessons,
if any, has the Japanese experience of population
control to offer to India?

Japan is the only nation in Asia that has
achieved both a demographic transition and a
substantial measure of economic development.
During the last quarter of the nineteenth century
she had birth rates “not much below” 40 per
1,000 population!® as compared with an estimated birth rate above 45 per 1,000 for India
for the same period.! The practice of family
limitation by infanticide in Japan was reported

   
   

wy
So

CRUDE BIRTH RATE
38

Crude birth rate in India

ooom ROBO remem

Crude birth rate in Japan

1929-31

1931-41

1941-1951 1951-1961

FIGURE 1
Crude birth rates in India and Japan, 1921-61

to have been the reason for this disparity between
the two countries. During the period 1921-61
the difference in birth rates between India and
Japan widened, as is shown in Figure 1. The
slight increase in birth rates in Japan in the
period 1941-51 was due to the pro-natalist
policy of the Japanese Government during the
Second World War period.

15

Factors affecting Fertility

The fall in Japanese fertility may be attributed
to the following factors:

First, socio-economic factors such as industrialization, urbanization, employment of women
in non-agricultural occupations, increasing literacy, development of transport and communications systems and the absence of glaring cultural
differences in the Japanese population were all
influential in inducing a decline in Japanese
fertility. Though some of these factors are now
present in India they have not yet helped towards
a fertility decline, as I have pointed out elsewhere. 16

Second, the psychological impact of the defeat
of Japan in the Second World War, the loss of
an empire and the desire to regain the pre-war
standard of living, and even to raise it, provided
further incentives to Japanese couples to limit
their families.

Third, since there was already an established
tradition of family limitation, the Japanese were
not reluctant to make use of any available
technique to help them to limit their families.

Fourth, the Japanese Government, which had
always viewed family limitation with disfavour,
assumed a permissive attitude in such matters
in 1948.

We may discuss these matters in more detail.

Socio-economic Factors

As in most of the western nations, the most
important factor leading to a fertility decline in
Japan was economic development and the
associated industrialization. In other words,
fertility decline did not happen in a static

*T am indebted to Professor S. G. Triantis and Professor M. H. Watkins of the Department of Political
Economy of the University of Toronto for their valuable
comments on this paper.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, March 1966, 58, 1.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

agricultural Japan but in a dynamic nation rapidly becoming industrialized. When Japan was
laying the foundations of industry, the mortality
rates were high. Therefore, a high birth rate was
not an obstacle to economic development.
Between 1875 and 1918—the period when industrialization began—the rate of annual increase of
the Japanese population was 1 per cent!9 as
compared to 2-2 per cent for India during
1951-61. Such a low rate of population growth
meant a lower dependency burden, higher rate of
savings and a smaller amount of capital investment to produce a given level of income.

Industrialization made quick progress in Japan
from the last quarter of the nineteenth century
as may be seen from the following figures:

The total value of manufactured goods, at
constant prices, rose fifteen-fold between 1878
and 1900, eleven-fold between 1900 and 1925
and five-fold between 1925 and 1940. In 1872,
705,000 persons were gainfully employed in
manufacture. Their numbers rose to 2,826,000
in 1900 and 7,160,000 in 1940.7

The trend of industrialization remained unaltered after the war. By 1947, the percentage
of gainfully occupied persons in secondary and
tertiary sectors was 46-6 per cent; it rose to 67-2
per cent by 1960.13 This was also the period
during which fertility registered a sharp decline.
By comparison, in India the percentages of
gainfully occupied persons in secondary and
tertiary sectors were 27-2 in 1951 and 27-7 in
1961.7

Side by side with industrialization, urbanization made rapid strides in Japan. As early as
1934, the urban population of Japan formed
24-5 per cent of the total as compared with
percentages of 29-6 in the USA (1930), 30-1 in
Germany (1933), 39-6 in Great Britain (1931),
17-4 in Italy (1931) and 15-7 in France (1931).8
The percentage of urban population in Japan
rose from 18 to 41 between 1920 and 1944 as
compared to an increase from 11 to 17 per cent
between 1931 and 1961 in India.9

The extent and rapidity of urbanization, the
damage caused to urban houses by bombings
during the Second World War and the occurrence
of frequent earthquakes in Japan created an
acute shortage of housing which acted as a
powerful deterrent to marriage and higher rates

16

of fertility. Complaints about shortage of housing such as, ““Want to get married but have no
place to live in’’; “Sure, there are dwellings but
they cost too much”; ““Want to have children,
but how can we raise them in such surroundings
as these?’’; “Commuting takes all the energy
out of me’’,!2 were very common. Because of
the housing shortage, three million households
(17 per cent of the total) in 1953 lived in normally
non-dwelling buildings, overcrowded quarters or
in superannuated dwellings.!1

The problem of urban housing has been
equally bad in India, but there the urban popvulation forms a smaller percentage of the total
than in Japan. Further, a grave shortage of
urban housing has always existed in India,
whereas in Japan this problem became intense
only after the war. Moreover, the illiterate and
poorly-housed population of India’s urban areas
accepted such inconveniences passively as inevitable, while the literate and inadequately
housed urban Japanese did not consider such a
housing shortage as either inevitable or unalterable.

A particularly important factor in the decline
in Japanese fertility was the employment of
women in factories. The incentives and inducements to postpone marriage, or limit the number
of children within marriage, are stronger among
women in non-agricultural occupations than
among those working in agricultural or in fulltime housewifery. Because of the preponderance
of textile factories, where four-fifths of the
workers were women, 59 per cent of all factory
workers in 1895-1899 were women. In 1940,
43-2 per cent of all gainfully occupied females
were in non-agricultural occupations.1!9 The years
they spent in the factory postponed the age of
marriage. By 1955, over 80 per cent of Japanese
women in the 15-24 age group were unmarried,!9
whereas, in India in 1951, the percentage was
only 17.2

Apart from the postponement of marriage,
the experience of working girls in the factory
and their outside contacts made them receptive
to new ideas and stimulated a powerful dislike
for the drudgery of farm life and of big families,
and a longing for the amenities of modern living.
All these factors motivated a reduction in family
size.
POPULATION CONTROL IN JAPAN

Compared with the percentage of women
employed in non-agricultural occupations in
Japan, the corresponding figures for India are
quite unimpressive. During the period 1950-56,
only 10 to 11 per cent of all factory employees
were women: their number did not exceed 0-3
million.!7 The percentage of females in nonagricultural occupations as compared with all
employed women in India was 20-4 per cent in
1961.3

Another effective force in the control of
fertility in Japan has been the spread of education. The inverse correlation between education
and fertility is a world-wide phenomenon.

Japan has a high rate of literacy. Compulsory
primary education started as early as 1872 when
a royal order said that “if a child, male or
female, does not attend an elementary school,
the guardian shall be held responsible for the
neglect”.!9 This policy continued and by the
second quarter of the twentieth century “the
Japanese were one of the most literate peoples
in the world’’. In 1950, 93-5 per cent of the men
and 84-1 per cent of the women had received
at least four years of schooling.!9 By comparison,
as late as 1961 only 28-8 per cent of the population of India above five years of age was
literate.

The well-developed systems of transport and
means of communication in Japan increased
mobility and the dissemination of ideas. The
following table compares certain means of
transport and communication in Japan and
India.

TABLE 1

The use of various means of transport and communication
in Japan (1953) and India (1960-61)

JAPAN INDIA
1953 1960-61
National and private railway (kilometres travelled per person per year) 1236-0 68:6
Private buses (kilometres travelled per
person per year) 25+3 Nn.a.
Number of postal articles handled (per
person per year) 46-0 9-2
Radio receiving sets (per 1,000 popula— tion) n.a. 4-5
Radio listeners (per 1,000 population) 127-0 n.a.

(Sources: The Oriental Economist, XXII:519, p. 25,
XXIII :539, p. 446; India, Government, India: A Reference Annual, 1962, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, pp. 349, 363, 370, 371; United Nations,
Statistical Year Book, 1962, pp. 649, 856.

ER—B

The extensive use of transport and communication systems in Japan is probably one of the
factors that helped the rapid dissemination of
the knowledge of family limitation.

Finally, Japanese people were not divided
by religion and language, and there was no incentive for one sect to strive for numerical
superiority over another. There was complete
religious toleration between adherents of Shintoism and of Buddhism (57 per cent and 40 per
cent of the population respectively). Religious
toleration in Japan is demonstrated by the fact
that there were 110 million ‘““believers” in 1950,
while the total population was only 83-2 million.19
Linguistically, there was perfect homogeneity in
Japan. These features of Japanese society are
in marked contrast with those of India as has
been shown in the recent developments over
questions of language and religion in India.

These socio-economic factors brought about
changes in ways and levels of living in Japan.
Steady industrialization coupled with rapid
urbanization had a significant impact on Japanese fertility. The new industrial population,
living in cities and possessing a high level of
literacy, became estranged from the agrarian
milieu and was subjected to new stimuli and
pressures. Familial values and attitudes were
recast in new moulds. Marriage and fertility
patterns and the role of women underwent
changes to suit the changed environments.
Marriages were delayed, the rate of marriage
was lowered and the desired number of children
in a family was reduced. Improved transport
and communication, a high standard of literacy
and the absence of any cultural diversities in the
Japanese population helped the dissemination of
these new attitudes, values and practices to a
greater and greater number of couples.

Psychological Factors

Psychological factors also contributed to the
decline of fertility in Japan. In 1945, Japan had
not only lost a war but also had lost an empire
that embraced more than 100 million people.
About one-third of this population lived in the
colonies Japan had acquired—Taiwan, Korea
and Manchuria.

Even outside her colonies Japan had been

17
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

able to find emigration outlets. The future prospects of the Japanese race looked bright indeed.
To satisfy the needs for human resources of
Japanese stock within and outside the empire a
pro-natalist policy was adopted during the
Second World War.

After the war Japan lost both her empire and
her influence outside it. Her rice granaries and
markets for industrial products had gone; her
industrial potential was severely damaged.
Above all, 6-25 million Japanese living outside
the Japanese Islands were repatriated during
the 1945-49 period6 and had to be accommodated
in a dislocated economy. Because of all these
factors there was little optimism among the
Japanese about either the industrial future of
their country or their own future economic
well-being. A crisis appears to have occurred
in the confidence of the Japanese regarding their
ability to feed, clothe and house an increasing
population.

The psychological effects of a changed
political, economic and international situation
had a message that was not lost on the literate
and alert population of Japan. The changed
prospects were promptly assessed and the inevitable conclusion was drawn without delay:
Japan could not afford to add a large number
to her population and, therefore, families had
to be limited at all costs.

The urge to regain the lost level of living was
supplemented by a continuing urge to raise it
further once the old levels were attained. The
American occupation of Japan aided this process. There took place a frequent exchange of
visitors between USA and Japan and the desire
to match the American pattern and level of
consumption became very strong in the average
Japanese. It became customary for Japanese
business men to advertise their wares as “‘Now
popular in America”, “Made in America’,
“Imported directly from America’, “In America
people use this daily” and so on. The frequency
of such advertisements doubled between 1947
and 1955 in some well-known newspapers.5
Many useful and convenient gadgets developed
in the USA were imported into Japan and the
Japanese industrialists lost no time in turning
out similar articles in great bulk and at low
prices. As already noted, the rapid progress of

18

mass communication media aided the spread
of this growing cult of higher levels of consumption. Even at present “measuring himself
against American levels of consumption—as
depicted in Hollywood movies or modelled on
the spot by free-spending GIs and tourists—he
[the average Japanese] is awed by the gap
[between American and Japanese levels of consumption] that remains’’.14

It is suspected that the rise in suicide rates in
Japan during the early 1950s was a direct result
of the failure of many Japanese to achieve the
level of living they aspired to. In 1954, with an
estimated 20,000 deaths, suicides ranked ninth
among the major causes of death for the first
time in Japanese history.10

The determination of the Japanese people to
narrow the gap between aspirational goals and
practical achievements reinforced the desire
further to reduce their fertility. The attitude of
Japanese couples towards the need for, and the
number of, children underwent changes. The
need for children was no longer predominantly
the assurance of security in old age. Parents
who wished ultimately to depend on their
children for support decreased from 55 per cent
of all married couples in 1950 to 32 per cent in
1961.15 Also the ideal family size decreased
during the period 1950-59. When those couples
who had two children were asked in 1950 how
many more they would like to have, 30 per cent
answered “no more”’, while in 1959, 58 per cent
gave the same answer.15

Except for the occasional shortage of food
grains, India had no similar experience to influence her people to limit their families. On the
other hand, the dawn of political freedom in
1947 made educated Indians feel that a period
of unchecked prosperity was ahead. Since the
percentage of educated Indians was very low
this might not have had any observable effect
on total fertility. However, this feeling of undiluted optimism about the country’s economic
future did have an effect on the formulation of
a population policy in India.

The Influence of Tradition

Even in pre-industrial Japan a strong tradition
of family limitation kept fertility lower than in.
POPULATION CONTROL IN JAPAN

most other countries in their pre-industrial
stage. Literature available on the family limitation practices of the Japanese from the seventeenth
to the nineteenth centuries suggests that infanticide (mabiki, originally meaning ‘‘thinning
seedlings”) and abortion were commonly practised.18 So much so, that in the seventeenth
century, the Government of Japan used priests,
preachers and teachers to discourage the people
from committing infanticide. With the same
purpose, devout Buddhist peasants were encouraged to settle down in areas where infanticide was widespread. As to contraceptives,
abortion and infanticide “there was no sharp
differentiation among the three as biological
procedures or ethical concepts”’,!9 and hence it
was immaterial which method was used for
limiting families.

This tradition of family limitation was totally
lacking in India where familistic and other
values put a premium on large families.

The Government and Population Control

There was also in Japan a tradition of governmental interference in matters of population
growth, either to discourage certain techniques
of family limitation or to encourage the growth
of population. This was quite unknown in India
before 1952. The measures adopted in the seventeenth century by the Japanese Government to
prevent infanticide have already been mentioned. In 1927, in view of the increasing population, the Government of Japan created a
Department of Overseas Affairs to promote
emigration from Japan and a Commissioner
was appointed to study the problems of population and food supply. In the early 1940s “all
measures conducive to the limitation of the size
of the family were placed under strict official
denunciation’”’.18

During the American occupation, the problem
of population growth in Japan received widespread publicity because of certain actions of
the Government. For instance, since it was
believed by the occupation authorities that permission given to Mrs. Margaret Sanger to visit
the country might be interpreted by the Japanese
as an attempt to interfere in their population
policy, the Supreme Commander of Allied

Powers (SCAP), General Douglas MacArthur,
refused permission for her to visit Japan in
1949. It was at this time that SCAP’s Natural
Resources Section prepared and published a
report containing an analysis of the natural
resources of Japan. The report stated that “the
population problem was part of the resources
problem, and that the problem created by
reduced death rates could hardly be solved
humanely except through reduced birth rates”’.19
The publication of this statement was protested
against by some Catholic organizations in Tokyo.
As a result MacArthur assured the Japanese
that “decisions thereon [matters of population
control] rest entirely with the Japanese themselves .... Birth control with its social, economic
and theological sides, is in final analysis, for
individual judgement and decision”.!9 After
this assurance, copies of the Report on Natural
Resources were recalled and the “offending”
passages were expunged. These actions made the
issue a lively topic of discussion even in the
remote corners of Japan. Thus the people
became increasingly informed and aware of the
nature of the population problem their country
faced.

Though for several reasons population control
had become a controversial issue in India in
the 1940s and the 1950s, since the literacy rates
were low and facilities for communication
inadequate, the participants in the discussion
were few.

In May 1948, the Eugenic Protection Law
permitted induced abortions in Japan in the
case of ‘“‘a mother whose health may be affected
seriously by delivery, from the physical or
economic viewpoint” ;® a qualitative excuse thus
being given to a decision which dealt with a
primarily quantitative problem. Thus in matters
of birth control the Japanese Government came
to assume a permissive role; and that was
sufficient for the married couples of Japan who
were highly motivated to limit their families.
The lack of sophistication in the method of
birth control known—abortion—provided little
obstacle to the determination of the Japanese to
curtail fertility. The effect on their birth rate
was immediate and drastic.

Hitherto, the illegal nature of surgical abortion
as a method of family limitation was the barrage

19
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that prevented many people from matching the
desired number of children with the actual
number. When all of a sudden this barrage was
swept away, the birth rate came tumbling down
at a rate quite unprecedented in the demographic
history of any nation.

The next step was to set up, in 1949, a Population Problems Council in the Japanese Cabinet
which recommended the dissemination of family
planning information. The recommendation was
not acceptable to the Government of Japan and
the Council was dissolved within the year.
Nevertheless, the birth rate continued to fall
and remained at 25-3 in 1951 as compared to
34-4 in 1947, primarily due to the increased

First, although from an ethical point of view,
Japanese culture does not differentiate between
the use of infanticide, abortion and contraception for preventing births, in the process of
Westernization, certain elements of Western
thought, such as a greater concern for the born
than for the unborn, penetrated into Japanese
culture and, as a result, abortion appeared to
be less immoral than the old practice of infanticide.

Second, since Japanese couples took full
advantage of the extensive system of social
insurance, the cost of an induced abortion was
less in many cases than the cost of using even
the cheapest of contraceptives: for example, the

TABLE 2
Relative popularity of contraception and abortion in Japan, 1950-61

Percentage of couples or wives

ever practised having
with or currently experienced
in favour of contraceptive practising at least one
Year contraception knowledge contraception abortion
1950 60-7 n.a. 29:1 n.a.
1952 65:0 50:6 40:2 15-4
1955 67:4 55-4 §2°5 26:5
1957 72:0 61-7 56°5 29:7
1959 74:2 70:2 62:7 35:1
1961 70-4 74-1 68-7 40:8

(Sources: The Population Problems Research Council, Fifth Public
Opinion Survey on Birth Control in Japan, The Mainichi Newspapers, Tokyo,
1961, pp. 14, 17, 19, 33 and Sixth Opinion Survey on Family Planning and
Birth Control: A Preliminary Report, pp. 17, 23, 31.)

rate of induced abortions. Japan’s Minister of
Welfare became concerned with the situation
because, in his words, ‘‘abortion exerts undesirable effects on maternal health”.6 His view was
that the Government should start disseminating
contraceptive information in an attempt to
decrease the incidence of abortion with its undesirable effects. The Government decided in
favour of this objective in October 1951. During
the period 1952-55, 148 million yen (£146,000)
were appropriated for the dissemination of
contraceptive information.!8

In spite of such efforts made for the spread
of contraception, abortion remained in the 1950s
the modal means of limiting families. Three
main reasons account for the greater use of
abortion than of contraception during this
period.

20

cost of an induced abortion to the wife of a
company employee varied between SO yen (Is.)
and 300 yen (6s.).18 The cost of an induced
abortion may be compared to the cost of
condoms at approximately 100-200 yen per
dozen, 150-200 yen apiece for vaginal diaphragms, approximately 150 yen for 16 foam
tablets and 200 yen per tube of jelly containing
50 gm.!8 A year’s supply of contraceptives
would therefore cost several times the price of
an induced abortion and naturally, the cheaper
method of family limitation was preferred.
Third, with this strong motivation towards
family limitation, abortion was freely resorted
to when pregnancies resulted from contraceptive failure or from the irregular use of
contraception. In 1959, those who terminated
pregnancy artificially following the irregular or
POPULATION CONTROL IN JAPAN

incorrect use of contraceptives formed 58-4 per
cent of the total number of wives who had
abortions. While 42-7 per cent of the wives with
no contraceptive experience had more than one
abortion, the percentage of wives with contraceptive experience who had more than one
abortion was 52-2.15

9

amen Percentage in favour of contraception
soweweceeee Percentage with contraceptive knowledge

—u——n—— Percentage ever practised or currently practising contraception

m—xommmn——= Percentage having experienced at least one abortion

PERCENTAGE OF COUPLES OR WIVES

 

1950 1952 1954 1956 1958 1960 1962

FIGURE 2

Relative popularity of contraception and abortion
in Japan, 1950-61

Because of the aforementioned factors, when
the Eugenic Protection Law of 1948 also
allowed abortion on socio-economic grounds,
abortion was used on a large scale. In 1952,
68-4 per cent of all Japanese wives had not
experienced an abortion; but by 1961 their
percentage fell to 35-6.15

Contraceptives were, however, also used
because information on birth control was readily
available and contraceptives of reliable quality
were easily procurable and were within the
means of average Japanese couples. However,
an increase in artificial termination of pregnancy
was taking place pari passu with increased

popularity of contraception as seen from Table 2
and Figure 2.

The strong motivation of Japanese couples to
limit their families is indicated in two ways by
the table and the figure.

(a) The closeness of the percentages for contraceptive knowledge and practice reveals that
most of the Japanese couples who knew of
contraception did attempt it.

(b) The increasing rate of induced abortions,
along with an increasing percentage of couples
practising family limitation, suggests that in
spite of contraceptive failures—which must have
been common—the Japanese couples did not
give up their decision to limit their families.

During the period 1957-59, for every birth
prevented by contraception, 2-5 births (based
on reported rates of abortion) were prevented
by abortion. It might also be remembered that
by 1957-59, 63 per cent of the couples had
practised, or were practising contraception.®

Lessons for India

Now, it might be asked whether the Japanese
experience of population control has any lessons
for India. The Japanese experience offers at
least two suggestions in the preparation of blueprints for fertility control in India.

First, there is the lesson drawn from the demographic experiences of several Western countries
that once the people develop a strong motivation
for limiting the number of their children, irrespective of, or notwithstanding, the governmental
attitude, and irrespective of the means to be
used, families will be limited. This is reaffirmed
by ‘the Japanese experience, and reminds us
that one of the principal problems facing the
Government of India in their efforts to make
population control successful is the creation of
a strong motivation for Indian couples to limit
their families. Though some of the social,
economic and psychological factors which were
so influential in Japan are making their appearance in India, they are not yet strong enough to
influence the trend ot fertility in the downward
direction. The Government of India must therefore create or strengthen this motivation by
providing economic incentives for those who
limit their families and disincentives for those

21
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

who refuse to do so; such as policy, combined
with a free contraceptive or sterilization service
is, in time, likely to become acceptable to most
peoples in India.

The second lesson concerns the technique of
family limitation. It has been seen from the
experience of Japan that a rapid decline in
fertility is unlikely to come from the widespread
use of contraceptives within a short period. Even
the educated, docile and well-to-do population
of Japan the diffusion of effective contraceptive
practice was not rapid. Since the failure rate
among the users of contraceptives was, and
continues to be, high, the Japanese had to use
the drastic method of abortion to achieve the
desired family size.

The rate of acceptance of contraception in
India is likely to be even slower, in spite of the
activist role assumed by the Government. This
is to be expected in view of the weak motivation
for family limitation, low standards of literacy
and living and the smaller percentage of the
urban population in India. For the same reasons
the failure rate of contraceptives will probably
be higher. The introduction of intra-uterine
devices, which have very low failure rates, is
the only silver lining to an otherwise dark cloud,
but fertility control through contraception is
likely to be a long-drawn-out process.

For speedy results in population control,
India may need “‘drastic’” methods, though not
the same as those of Japan. Since abortion is
likely to be economically unsuitable, medically

22

impracticable and morally unacceptable in
India, voluntary sterilization, particularly of the
male, may provide the answer in the interim
period between the present non-contraceptive
stage and the future contraceptive stage of the
Indian population.

REFERENCES

. Davis, Kingsley. 1951. Population of India and Pakistan. Princeton University Press. 
. India, Census 1951. Paper No. 2 of 1957. Manager of
Publications, Delhi.

. India, Census 1961. India, Part IIA (ii), Manager of
Publication, Delhi.

. India, Census 1961. Final Population Totals. Manager
of Publications, Delhi.

. Kato, Hidetoshi. 1959. Japanese Popular Culture.
Charles E. Tuttle Company, Tokyo.

. Koya, Yoshio. 1963. Pioneering in Family Planning.
Population Council, New York.

. Ohkawa, Kazushi. 1957. The Growth Rate of the
Japanese Economy since 1878. Kinokuniya Bookstore
Co. Ltd., Tokyo.

8. The Oriental Economist, 11:1, p. 15.
9. The Oriental Economist, XV11:388, p. 546.

10. The Oriental Economist, XXIII :534, p. 169.

11. The Oriental Economist, XXI111:536, p. 291.

12. The Oriental Economist, XXV:555, p. 19.

13. The Oriental Economist, XXX:610, p. 87.

14. Plath, David W. 1964. The After Hours: Modern
Japan and the Search for Enjoyment. University of
California Press.

15. The Population Problems Research Council. 1961.
Fifth Opinion Survey on Birth Control in Japan. The
Mainichi Newspapers, Tokyo.

16. Samuel, T. J. 1965. Social Factors Affecting Fertility
in India. Eugen. Rev. 57, 5-15.

17. Sengupta, Padmini. 1960. Women Workers of India.
Asia Publishing House, Bombay.

18. Some Facts about Family Planning in Japan. 1955.
The Mainichi Newspapers, Tokyo.

Taeuber, Irene B. 1958. The Population of Japan.

19. Princeton University Press.

aI A Uv & WwW N =
