VERA HOUGHTON

International Planned Parenthood

Federation (I.P.P.F.)

ITS HISTORY AND INFLUENCE"

RE-APPRAISAL

OWARDS THE END Of the 1930s it became

clear that the provision of a contraceptive

service alone was not enough. The overfertile over-burdened parents of the 1920s still
needed help but so did their sub-fertile neighbours who had failed to achieve the wanted
child, and the newly-married daughters who
came to the voluntary clinics for child-spacing.
Birth control began to have a new and wider
meaning which was expressed in the terms
“family planning’ and “planned parenthood.”
Also reflected in this change was the de-population scare of the mid-1930s brought about by
the dramatic decline in the birth rates of several
European countries and which in France had
already led, in 1920, to legislation aimed at
preventing the practice of birth control and to
Government measures in favour of large
families.

By 1934 the medical facilities for abortion in
the U.S.S.R. provided under the Soviet law of
1920 had become so widely used that in Moscow
for every 100 pregnancies ending in live births,
270 ended in abortion. Counter-measures were
taken in 1936 which restricted the grounds for
abortion and increased family benefits. The
restrictions remained in force until 1955 when
concern about the growing number of illegal
operations and their harmful effects on the
health of women once again prompted the
Soviet Government to legalize abortion.

In Sweden and in Britain fears of de-population resulted in the appointment of Royal Commissions on Population which, while fully
recognizing the need for population replace
* The first part of this article appeared it THE EUGENICS
REviEw, October 1961, 53, 149.

ment, firmly upheld the principle of voluntary
parenthood and, in the case of Britain, recommended that “the giving of advice on contraception to married persons who want it should be
accepted as a duty of the National Health
Service.”

Comprehensive Clinics

The British Royal Commission envisaged the
development of “fa clinic . . . as the needs
emerged, to include pre-marital examinations
and other services of direct relevance to family
welfare.” It went on to suggest that “‘this branch
of the National Health Service might play an
important part in family welfare in future.” In
the absence of any official action the voluntary
agency, the Family Planning Association, has
itself developed the idea of comprehensive clinics
and named them “marriage welfare centres.”

At the Third International Conference on
Planned Parenthood (Bombay, 1952) it was
recommended that such centres be established
in India. The following year, in July 1953, the
Government of India Family Planning Research
and Programmes Committee held its first
meeting. It adopted the five-purposes principle
and defined them as including “‘sex education,
marriage counselling, marriage hygiene, the
spacing of children (which for the immediate
future has priority), and advice on such other
measures (among them infertility) as may be
necessary to promote the welfare of families.”

Abortion in Sweden

The question of abortion figured prominently in
the Report of Sweden’s first Royal Commission
on Population (1935-38) and again in the Report
of the second Royal Commission (1941-46).

201

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1962, 53, 4.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Among the suggested measures to deter women
from seeking abortion were the following: better
sex instruction and improved distribution of
contraceptives; facilities for the early diagnosis of
pregnancy and the simplification of the procedure for obtaining a legal abortion; maternity
grants and the provision of accommodation for
unmarried mothers.

Scandinavian Pioneer

In 1933 Norwegian-born Mrs. Elise OttesenJensen founded in Sweden a voluntary organization to spread sex education, Riksférbundet for
Sexuell Upplysning (National League for Sex
Education), and opened, in Stockholm, the first
consultation centre at which advice on all
sexual matters, including birth control, was
available. Previously the one or two birth
control clinics which had been started earlier
had failed to attract the public but the new
centre quickly became popular.

Through the efforts of the League the recommendations of the Swedish Royal Commissions
on Population were put into effect. For many
years Elise Ottesen-Jensen herself travelled all
over Sweden giving lectures to children and to
adults. As part of the campaign against illegal
abortions the League established its own laboratory for pregnancy diagnosis and opened a
home for unmarried mothers to which the late
King of Sweden contributed 1,000 Swedish
kronor from his private purse. On her sixty-fifth
birthday Mrs. Ottesen-Jensen received from
His Majesty the award “Illis Quorum’, and
more recently Uppsala University has conferred
on her the Honorary Doctorate of Medicine in
recognition of her work in the field of sex
education, which is now an accepted part of
the curriculum of all Swedish schools. In 1959
she succeeded Margaret Sanger as President of
the International Planned Parenthood Federation.

PART II: 1946-1961
Rebuilding in Europe
After the Second World War Mrs. OttesenJensen rallied the scattered forces of Europe
to help rebuild the pre-war movement which the
Nazi regime had destroyed in the “occupied
countries” and in Germany itself, and to lay the

202

foundations for a new international organization.
Under the auspices of the Swedish League the
first of a new series of international conferences
was held in Stockholm in August 1946. It
brought together again representatives from the
United States, headed by Margaret Sanger,
and from\Britain, Denmark, Finland, Holland,
Norway and Sweden. Two important decisions
were taken at Stockholm: the first was to set up
an interim committee to work for the formation of a permanent international organization
and the second was to hold another, more
representative, conference in 1948 in England.
Mrs. Sanger persuaded the Family Planning
Association to undertake the organization of
what came to be known as the Cheltenham
Congress, and promised it financial help.

Cheltenham Congress, 1948

Delegates from twenty-three countries met at
Cheltenham in August 1948, under the presidency of Lord Horder, to discuss the theme
“Population and World Resources in relation to
the Family.” The proceedings of the Cheltenham Congress produced much useful information, which had not been collected before at
one spot, on population trends, the social and
economic aspects of family life, migration and
birth control as factors in the adjustment of
populations to resources, and the psychological,
religious and political implications of family
limitation as well as current and future research
on fertility, infertility, sex and marriage. Subsequent conferences have both added to this pool
of information and increased understanding of
the essential part that family planning can play
in the economic and social development of a
country.

Interim Committee and the London Centre

At Cheltenham the interim committee, known
as the International Committee on Planned
Parenthood (I.C.P.P.), was formed. It consisted
of two representatives each from the national
organizations of Britain, Holland and Sweden,
and three from the United States. The Brush
Foundation for Race Betterment, U.S.A.,
made an initial grant of $5,000 for the establishment of a headquarters office in London and
the Eugenics Society provided it with rent-free
INTERNATIONAL PLANNED PARENTHOOD FEDERATION (I.P.P.F.)

accommodation at 69 Eccleston Square. The
London centre was at first in the charge of a
part-time secretary, Mrs. Helen (now Lady)
Cohen. In November 1949 I was engaged on a
full-time basis and became in August 1953 the
first Executive Secretary of the I.P.P.F. which
post I held until my resignation in May 1959.
The present Executive Secretary is Mrs. Patricia
Gasparro.

During the three years 1949 to 1951 the
I.C.P.P. met annually in London. Contact was
re-established with family planning groups
and supporters in some twenty countries. In
several places, particularly in Eastern Europe,
there was no one left who was in a position to
help and we had to await the emergence of new
forces and new ideas. In others, like Holland,
the pre-war movement was being rebuilt along
somewhat different lines, involving a change in
emphasis from birth control to sex education
and marital harmony. But in Asia the malthusian
spectre stalked again.

Death Control and Counter-measures

Famine, pestilence and disease were fast
disappearing not only from the continent of
Asia but from other areas of the world. In a
single year the death rate of Ceylon dropped six
points, from twenty to fourteen per thousand, as
a result of the use of D.D.T. against the malarial
mosquito. Death rates comparable with the
lowest in Europe are now to be found in Ceylon
(9-8), Taiwan (8-0), Hong Kong (7:5), Japan
(7-4) and Singapore (7-3). In Latin America,
control of malaria, smallpox and yellow fever
has cut the death rate by half in Chile and Costa
Rica and by nearly two-thirds in Puerto Rico.
To-day Latin America has the most rapid population growth (an annual rate of 2-5 per cent)
of any major region in the world.

Economic conditions in Japan after her defeat
were such that the women took matters into
their own hands. In the absence of reliable
contraceptives and trained instructors they
resorted to abortion, a method which, together
with infanticide, had kept the population
stationary for about 250 years during the latter
half of the Tokugawa Shogunate (1603-1867).
With the introduction of the Eugenics Protection Law of 1948 abortion became widespread

until by 1955 there were more than a-million
operations a year and a further million which
were outside the provisions of the law. Although
official sanction was given in 1949 for the production of chemical contraceptives, and the Japanese
Cabinet in 1951 advocated the practice of contraception, it was not until 1954 following Mrs.
Sanger’s visit that the Minister of Welfare’s
Advisory Council on Population issued a statement that “it is necessary for the [Japanese]
Government to adopt policies to curb the population increase” and that the practice of conception control “‘should be conducted not only
from the standpoint of protection of mother’s
health, but also... as a part of overall population
policies.” The measures recommended to the
Japanese Government included the provision of
“means of conception control . . . through the
health insurance or other social insurance
systems” and without charge or at low prices to
indigent people; “the co-operation of welfare
agencies of factories, mining companies, or
other establishments to promote the practice of
family planning,” and the avoidance of benefits
“in relation to wage payments as well as the
taxation system ... which may be interpreted
as encouraging large families.”

By 1951 all Indian States and Unions were
being urged to encourage birth control to check
the rapid growth of population. The Prime
Minister, Pandit Nehru, in his speeches frequently referred to the need for family limitation
and the National Planning Commission, of
which he was chairman, recommended that
“the State should provide facilities for sterilization or giving advice on contraception on
medical grounds,” and that “such help and
advice should not be withheld from others who
seek and need it on social and economic
grounds.” The Registrar-General in his report
on the 1951 Census warned that policies of
economic development and reduction of births
must be simultaneously pursued and defined
‘“‘“improvident maternity” as “a childbirth to a
mother who has already given birth to three or
more children of whom at least one is alive.”
The Indian Government applied to the World
Health Organization for advice and assistance
in carrying out a survey of the rhythm, or safe
period, method and in October 1951 Dr.

203
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Abraham Stone, Director of the Margaret
Sanger Research Bureau, New York, and a
mcmber of the I.C.P.P., visited India as W.H.O.
consultant on family planning. As a result of his
recommendations two study-projects were set
up in May 1952, one in Lodi Colony, New
Delhi, and the other at Ramanagaram in
Mysore, which continued until March 1955.*

When the I.C.P.P. met in London in 1951,
the Bombay Family Planning Association, which
was soon to become the F.P.A. of India, was
making preparations for the first All India
Conference on Family Planning in November
1951. Margaret Sanger immediately cabled the
President, Lady Rama Rau, asking her to
invite the I.C.P.P. to hold the next international
conference in India.

Bombay Conference, 1952
At the invitation of the F.P.A. of India the
Third International Conference on Planned
Parenthood took place in Bombay in November
1952. It was inaugurated by India’s VicePresident, Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan and
was attended by 487 delegates and observers;
fourteen countries participated. In his opening
address Dr. Radhakrishnan discussed Gandhi’s
teaching and pointed out that in matters of
social conduct and policy Gandhi had established, in conformity with ancient texts, an
important moral distinction between what was
ideal and, if the ideal were unattainable, what
was permissible. fT

By a resolution of the Bombay Conference,
the I.C.P.P. became the International Planned
Parenthood Federation and Mrs. Sanger and
Lady Rama Rau were appointed the first Joint
Honorary Presidents. The four original memberorganizations, from Britain, Holland, Sweden
and the United States, were joined by the
family planning associations of India, Hong
Kong, Singapore and Western Germany.

Immediately following the Bombay Conference, the Prime Minister of India, on
December 8th 1952, presented to the Indian
Parliament the National Planning Commission’s
fisrt Five-Year Plan. The recommendations
concerning family planning were adopted in

* THE EUGENICS REviEW 1955, 47, 93 and 163.
+t THE EuGENics Review 1953, 44, 187.

204

full, and a sum of Rs. 65 lakhs (£540,000) was
allocated to the Ministry of Health for a family
planning programme. The provision made
under the second Five-Year Plan was Rs. 497
lakhs (£3? million) and in the third Five-Year
Plan (1961-65) Rs. 25 crores (£18? million).

International Bulletin and Directory

The first issue of the international bulletin
Around the World News of Population and Birth
Control appeared in January 1952. Edited by
Dorothy Brush and generously subsidized by
the Brush Foundation for Race Betterment the
bulletin quickly became an important link
between the older established family planning
organizations and the newly emerging pioneer
groups. The circulation figure of 5,000 doubled
in a year and by September 1953 had reached
a peak of 12,000 copies. Altogether the bulletin
has been published in eight languages. When
Mrs. Brush resigned for health reasons at the
end of 1956 the publication was transferred
from New York to London and Dr. L. N.
Jackson became the editor.

In April 1952 the international directory
previously issued by the British F.P.A. was revived as an annual publication. The 1961 edition
gives information about family planning agencies
in fifty-seven countries.

Stockholm Conference, 1953

The Fourth International Conference on Planned
Parenthood met at Stockholm in August 1953.
Attended by 158 delegates and observers from
twenty countries it was a very different gathering
from that of the first. post-war conference which
the Swedish League invited to Stockholm in
1946. In the intervening years the I.P.P.F. had
grown up and at the 1953 conference a constitution was adopted which put as the first aim “to
advance through education and scientific research the universal acceptance of family
planning and responsible parenthood in the
interests of family welfare, community wellbeing, and international goodwill.’ Membership
was made conditional upon the observance of
the two following principles: that commercial
interests take no part in the control of the body
applying for membership and that its work is
carried on irrespective of race, creed or colour.
INTERNATIONAL PLANNED PARENTHOOD FEDERATION (I.P.P.F.)

At first open only to voluntary organizations
membership was extended in 1957 to government
agencies; the Medical and Health Department
of Bermuda was the first to apply followed by the
Service de la Santé Publique of the Canton de
Vaud, Switzerland. Other associations admitted
in 1952 were from Australia and South Africa.

United Nations World Population Conference
The U.N. World Population Conference which
met in Rome at the end of August 1954 was
attended by 500 specialists from seventy States
and territories. The I.P.P.F. was allowed
observer status and was represented by Elise
Ottesen-Jensen and Dorothy Brush. Eight
members of the Governing Body were amongst
those who contributed papers or participated in
discussion. As described in the first part of this
article, the object of the conference was not to
discuss policies or to make recommendations: it
was to seek information on population trends
and relevant matters. At the I.P.P.F. Governing
Body meeting held immediately after the conference the national associations of Ceylon,
Italy, Japan, Pakistan and Puerto Rico were
admitted as members.

Tokyo Conference, 1955

The Family Planning Federation of Japan was
the host-organization for the Fifth International
Conference on Planned Parenthood held in
November 1955 under the presidency of the
Japanese Minister of Health and Welfare, Mr.
Hideji Kawasaki. Some 500 delegates and
observers from all over Japan and from twenty
other countries participated. The importance of
the Tokyo Conference was the bringing together
for the first time in a meeting of this kind, of
anatomists, biologists, biochemists and other
research workers for the discovery of a biological method of conception control. Ten leading
scientists from Britain, India, Israel, Japan,
Sweden and the United States contributed
papers.

At the end of the conference the Japanese
Minister of Health and Welfare presented the
I.P.P.F.’s President, Mrs. Sanger, with a scroll
of appreciation from the Japanese people.
With the admittance of organizations in Belgium,

Denmark and New Zealand the I.P.P.F.’s
membership numbered eighteen in 1955.

Present Membership

New member-organizations were elected from
Barbados and Jamaica in 1957 as well as the
first two government agencies already referred
to, Bermuda and Canton de Vaud, Switzerland;
from Finland, France, Mauritius and Poland
in 1959; from Nepal and Thailand in 1960, and
in 1961 from Burma, Korea, Malaya and
Trinidad and Tobago, bringing the total
membership up to thirty-two.

Regional Conferences and Seminars

The constitution of the I.P.P.F. provides for a
regional system of organization under which
countries have so far been grouped in four
regions: the Western Hemisphere, based on New
York; Europe, Near East and Africa, on London,
the Indian Ocean, successively on Bombay
and Colombo, and the Far East and
Australasian Region on Singapore. In May
1955 the first of a series of regional conferences
was held in Puerto Rico. Subsequent conferences
have been at West Berlin in October 1957;
Jamaica in April 1958; The Hague in May 1960;
and Barbados in April 1961. The next regional
conference will be held at Dacca, East Pakistan,
in January 1962.

A number of seminars have also been organized in recent years: two, of a scientific nature,
were held at Bombay in November 1955 and
Hyderabad in January 1961, while the theme
selected for a seminar in Lahore in February
1959 was social: ““The Ideal Family.’’ Seminars
on the medical and sociological aspects of
sterilization will take place in Bombay and in
Singapore in January 1962.

Delhi Conference, 1959

The latest, the Sixth International Conference on
Planned Parenthood, held in February 1959,
was noteworthy for the support and co-operation it received from the Government of India:
particularly, for the keen personal interest
shown by the President and Vice-President of
India, by the Prime Minister, Pandit Nehru,
who inaugurated the conference, the Deputy
Chairman of the Planning Commission and

205

ER—D
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

by the Health ‘Minister and officials of his
department, including the Secretary, the DirectorGeneral of Health Services and the Director of
Family Planning. Present were 783 delegates
and observers from twenty-eight countries. The
F.P.A. of India was the host-organization.

During the proceedings the representatives of
the fifteen Asian countries tabled a resolution
directing the attention of their respective governments to the efforts now being made by the
countries of Asia to raise the level of living of
their peoples, and the extreme difficulty of
achieving this aim in view of: the high and
rapidly increasing rates of population growth.
The resolution urged the governments concerned
to take full advantage of the March 1959 session
of the U.N. Economic Commission for Asia
and the Far East (E.C.A.F.E.), which had on
its agenda the item “Population Growth in
relation to Economic Development.”

E.C.A.F.E. Report

In June 1959 E.C.A.F.E. published its report
“Population Trends and Related Problems of
Economic Development in the E.C.A.F.E.
Region.” The region covered by E.C.A.F.E.
stretches from Iran to Japan and now comprises twenty-two countries containing about
half (1,700 million) the world’s population and
only a seventh of the land area, with few
developed resources. The report states a generalization which it considers “valid for all but a few
sparsely populated countries, and unfortunately
applies with special force to those witha relatively
dense population: it is that, other things being
equal, a country with a higher rate of population
growth must make a larger development effort
(which includes investing more and abstaining
more from consumption) in order to obtain a
given rate of increase in per capita income.” It
goes on to warn that “‘there is even a danger that
the development effort will not be large enough
to offset the effect of a rapid population growth
and that per capita income will decrease.”
The report reviews in some detail how the need
for family limitation has gained acceptance in
some of the E.C.A.F.E. countries, notably
Ceylon, Hong Kong, India, Japan, Pakistan,
Singapore and Taiwan, and refers to the activities
of private organizations in the Federation of

206

Malaya and Thailand. Reference is also made to
the family planning programme launched in
China in 1955.

China’s Change of Policy

At the height of the campaign, in June 1956,
Madame Li Teh-chuan, the Chinese Minister of
Health, told the People’s Congress that wider
birth control instruction was “necessary for the
health of mothers and the better upbringing of
children.” Shortly afterwards she exhorted the
people of China to break down the traditional
opposition to birth control for “without planned
child-birth China cannot free itself from poverty
and become prosperous, rich and strong.” The
E.C.A.F.E. report states that “the programme,
first on a modest scale but considerably intensified recently, is making guidance in family
planning an important part of the activities of
hospitals, child and maternity centres.’’ But this
information had already become out of date by
the time the report was published. Although no
restrictions have been put on the practice of
birth control it is no longer publicly encouraged.
But now it is suggested in some quarters that a
further reversal of policy may be imminent
because of the recent disastrous crop failures in
China.

The New Awakening

In the past, governments have more often
pursued expansionist policies than restrictive
policies of population control. Only in the last
decade has there been any real awakening to
the need to reduce the rate of increase in the
interests of the general health and strength of
the nation, for economic advance and for social
stability. Sir Julian Huxley has expressed the
ultimate motivation for family planning as the
desire to secure an improvement in the quality of
life, to realize more possibilities of fulfilment
for more people; while the immediate motivation
is the necessity to secure a reasonable future to
the human species before it is too late.

Without the pioneering work of Margaret
Sanger and of the countless followers whom she
inspired, there would have been no organized
groups ready to exert an influence at the right
moment on the governments of countries such as
India and Japan. As family planning becomes
INTERNATIONAL PLANNED PARENTHOOD FEDERATION (1.P.P.F.)

an accepted part of the health services, the role
of the voluntary society will change but its
function as a pioneer body will remain: its
energies will be directed more towards educational research programmes and to liaison with
governments.

W.H.O. Recognition

In May 1960 after nearly ten years as a Director
of the Technical Assistance Administration of
the United Nations, Mr. George W. Cadbury
joined the J.P.P.F. staff as Field Director, and
the title of Special Representative to the President was created for use as occasion arose
by both Mr. Cadbury and his wife, Barbara.
In November 1960 George and Barbara Cadbury
undertook on behalf of the I.P.P.F. a tour of
Asia which lasted five months and covered
eleven countries. Their overwhelming impression
was the need to get family planning recognized
as a normal part of the maternal and child
health services of the world, which recognition

they considered could best be given by its
acceptance in the World Health Organization.
Several, but so far unsuccessful, attempts have
been made to get W.H.O. to examine the health
aspect of family planning; the latest occasion
was the resolution presented by Ceylon and
Norway at the Fourteenth World Health
Assembly in Delhi in February 1961, discussion
of. which was denied on a procedural point.
Efforts are now being made to get the resolution
re-presented next year at Geneva and for it to
be supported by twenty countries.

Until W.H.O. becomes the proper international body to co-ordinate and stimulate
family planning action the I.P.P.F. will have to

do it. This means that through our member
associations in each country we have to develop
relationships with governments and give them
our services. The influence we must now exert
is greater than at any time in the past fifty years.
If we succeed the early pioneers will have no
greater tribute to their work.

207
