RACE BIOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF
SOME PROBLEMS OF POPULATION.

By HERMAN LUNDBORG.

Everywhere among civilized nations, various problems of population are coming to the fore. Politics will in the near future actively
concern itself with these problems. Governments can in the long
run not pass them by. The enormous industrialization of certain
countries, as well as the throwing open of large new areas of land,
rich in natural resources, have greatly contributed to a considerable
increase of population, and have caused migrationen masse. For many
years, immigration and emigration remained fairly unhampered by
laws and regulatiors, but that time has now almost passed. This
fact occasions much friction and great difficulties. Dr. Helmer Key’s
book, ‘‘The New Colonial Policy,’’ which has appeared in several
languages, is an excellent guide in this question.

Another population problem which deserves the very greatest
attention concerns the fact that the nativity rate is sinking rapidly in
practically all civilized countries, although with varying speed.
France for a long time had the lowest nativity rate that was known
to exist anywhere in the world. The limitation of offspring is at
present, however, so great in Sweden, that our country now has a
nativity rate lower than even that of France. Only 16 children are born
to every 1000 inhabitants yearly. A hundred years ago the figure was
84, at the beginning of the present century, it was 27. The decrease
in nativity begios in the more valuable and responsible strata of
society. This in its turn leads to disastrous changes in the structure
of the nation. If all individuals were essentially alike (in genotype),
as was the earlier view—‘t ts still the. view held by the majority—the
fact that the nativity rate is high in one stratum and low in another,
high in one people and low in another, would not matter so much, as
progress and the favourable development of humanity would then be
entirely a matter of external improvement, moral and mental education, etc. But though recognizing all the beneficent effects of such
factors on the individual and on the living population, we must
strongly emphasize the fact brought out by heredity research, that
individuals and peoples are not alike, and that inheritance (qualities
of family and race) follows laws quite distinct from those which apply
to the individual human being.
RACE BIOLOGICAL ASPECTS. 291

At conventions and meetings of different kinds, in our ccuntry
as well as abroad, questions relating to migration, density of population and nativity are being ardently discussed. These questions are
decidedly very complicated and difficult to solve, in their relations to
the individual and the family as well as the nation. They must be
attacked in conjunction, and with international co-operation. There
may be differences of opinion as to the methods and means, but a golden
rule respected by all should be that the quality of the different peoples
must be maintained, cost what it may. The eugenical view-point must
be given due regard, as we cannot afford to throw away the extremely
valuable asset of good human stock. Many political economists and
statisticians, here and abroad, no doubt judge these matters very superficially. They count human beings as mathematical units, and they
believe, even though they have no sufficient knowledge of biological
laws, that they can judge far in advance, the approximate number of
individuals which a certain country may be able to feed in the future.
Often they give evidence of an amazing degree of pessimism. It is an
unfortunate circumstance that the professors of new and undeveloped
sciences—the biological sciences as well as the humanities—are often
guilty of exaggeration and immaturity of judgment.

Our own small nation, which a thousand years ago constituted
only a small percentage of what the population is at present, has
steadily increased. Great numbers of our people have emigrated to
many different countries in Europe and other parts of the world, everywhere contributing to raise the native culture. The good racial qualities which we have inherited through the generosity of Nature, have
nowhere failed to evidence themselves. The Swede, as well as the
member of the other Scandinavian nations, is everywhere a welcome
stranger. He becomes the pioneer, and as a rule, lays the foundation
of a solid, organized state. There are many peoples with a weaker
heritage who have not been capable of this. Perhaps on the whole
it is always so that genotypically well-equipped peoples spread out and
distribute their culture. Inferior races and peoples die out and leave
place for others. I do not of course advocate that the stronger peoples
shall encroach upon the others and exterminate them by force of arms.
Such imperialism one must disapprove of, but on the other hand,
robust nations should not constantly be complaining to all the world
that they have not enough room and must decrease their number..
Such an attitude indicates faint-heartedness, it encourages pessimism
and inspires no confidence. In this connection the words of a great
Swede may be quoted. The Swedish historian, Erik Gustaf Geijer,
once said that a tendency of the population to expand beyond the
feeding possibilities of its own production is the explanation of and the
incentive for bringing the soil under cultivation, and for progressing
in general culture, for man requires want as a teacher. It is only
stating a half truth when we say that the inventions and technical
improvements of modern times have alone made possible a greatly
increased population on the earth. The other half of the truth is this,
that an increased density of population has forced into being new ideas °
and improvements of all kinds. As the old adage has it: ‘‘necessity is
the mother of invention.’’ Sooner or later, however, the population
292 EUGENICS REVIEW.

of the earth will come to a point where it will remain fairly constant;
after all, trees do not grow up into heaven.

One of the foremost political necessities of the future will then be
to improve human stock by sensible measures and wise laws. This
will not be possible, I am afraid, without a thorough knowledge of
biological laws.

Many a person, now living, will consider that these are empty
speculations and Utopian dreams, but that is not so. The history of
culture shows us many instances of what has been considered impossible
one century being accomplished the next, or even before then.

To make the foregoing still clearer, I shall use an illustration,
Imagine an energetic and prudent gardener who has to live on the
produce of his garden. The foremost requirements for a good economic
result are favourable external circumstances, i.e., good soil, plenty
of water, a protected location with southern exposure, etc. Every
spring he has to work on the soil, so that he may do his sowing. He
must know how to make a careful choice of plants and seeds, as the
prospective proceeds will largely depend on this selection. When
he has everything planted, he must not neglect to water it; in addition he must weed over and over again, as the weeds grow faster and
more abundantly than the cultivated plants. This whole program
must be repeated year after year. If the cultivator becomes lazy and
careless, the garden will run wild.

If we apply this illustration to civilization, which is the human
garden, we find that it is much neglected and has many imperfections.

Those who are in charge of the human garden, and its individuals,
families and peoples, are as a rule not competent. They devote very
much energy to improving the soil, to obtaining sunshine, light, air,
sufficient nourishment, education, enlightenment, etc., but this is
generally the end of their aims. The selection of noble strains for
cultivation, and the weeding out of the less valuable, are practically
entirely neglected. The result is a progressive running wild, which,
if left to itself, will lead to the deterioration, degeneration and even
extermination of the civilized nations. Such happenings are recorded
on many pages in history.

The danger can not be averted by a splendid milieu and high
external culture. These factors may even accelerate the deterioration
or degeneration, if steps are not simultaneously taken for a really
effective, wise upbuilding of the population, and prevention of the
propagation of undesirables (by sterilization, segregation in custodial
institutions, etc.). Human beings are, after all, subject to the laws
of heredity, and we cannot ignore these without being crushed by them.
Eugenically good human stock is an absolute necessity for the attainment of genuine, lasting culture. The best imaginable surroundings
and the most excellent education of the present generation can alone
not produce a first-rate body of people. To attain this end, more profound care is needed, an efficacious support of good homes, raising of
the nativity rates in eugenically favourable strata, independent of the
social stratum to which the individual belongs, and finally, diminishing
the fertility of the unfit, in short, eugenical measures of various kinds.
The aim of race biology is to throw light on all these conditions, and
RACE BIOLOGICAL ASPECTS. 298

to point out the direction in which we must strive. For the nations
themselves and their statesmen remains the work of effectively putting
into practice what will benefit posterity and humanity as a whole.

May we then in all countries work to solve these questions without
much selfishness and without fanaticism. We must try to work out
relations among the various peoples and among the individuals in the
nation in the best possible manner. It is indeed no easy matter,
but we should all learn to realize the vital importance of these questions
and as much as we can, to work for the prevention of bloodshed and
devastating wars, which do not improve the world.
