GALTON’S VIEWS ON RACE”
By C. P. BLACKER, M.A., M.D.

N the course of the French Revolution
| the royal family, the aristocracy and the
tated, massacred or éxiled. Ideals of liberty,
equality and fraternity vibrated throughout
the world, producing important reactions in
North America. Combining with antiauthoritarian sentiments derived from ancient
Greece and from the Reformation, and sustained in the twentieth century by reactions
against British imperialism during the nineteenth, they brought disrepute no less to the
doctrine of a hereditary governing class than
to that of race superiority. Further discredit
has accrued from the egalitarian sentiments
of Socialism, from the persecution of Jews in
Fascist countries, and from the racial
tolerance which is advanced as a cornerstone
of Russian Communism.

The result of these movements of thought
has been to bring into strong disfavour the
idea that certain families are better qualified,
whether by innate endowment or by cultural
tradition, than other families to govern ; also
discredited is the belief that innate differences
exist between races of such a kind that they
can be compared or graded in terms of merit.
An expression of these critical sentiments,
which prevail in the U.S.A. no less than in
the U.K., is the unpopularity to-day of the
word race, which to many has a Fascist
ring. Indeed, some anthropologists wish to
ban the word.

These hostile reactions have been much
intensified by the philosophy and behaviour
of the Nazis and by their conduct in the last
war. As expounded by Nietzsche and practised by Hitler, the doctrine of race became
the negation of Christianity. The superman,
the member of the Herrenvolk, was represented as a blond being, fearless, masterful
and cruel, for whom pity was a weakness. He
was filled with “ noble contempt ”’ for the

a =

 

 

 

’ Extract froma forthcoming book /ugentcs 7 Galton
and After (Duckworth).

previously governing classes were decapi- 
Wy

weak whom he exulted in exterminating. It
is not surprising that the doctrine of race is

.to-day unpopular.

What were Galton’s views on the subject ?
His book Hereditary Genius (1869) contains
a chapter entitled ‘‘ The Gomparative Worth
of Different Races.” The argument there
advanced must be considered in the light of
the general theme of the book and of the
ideas current eighty years ago, when Darwin’s Origin of Species was but ten years old.

In a prefatory chapter written in 1892
(twenty-three years after the rest) Galton
expresses regret for the choice of the book’s
title. He would, if he could, change it to
Hereditary Althty. For the theme of the
book had been that ability, as evinced by
thirteen classes of persons ranging from
judges and statesmen to oarsmen and
wrestlers (whose accomplishments could
hardly be counted an expression of “‘ genius ”’
as commonly understood), was hereditary.
“ T propose,”’ said Galton in the first sentence
of the book, “‘ to show that a man’s natural
abilities are derived by inheritance, under
exactly the same limitations as are the form
and physical features of the whole organic
world.’’ The idea that mental processes were
inherited was then new. Man, like the lower
animals and plants, had come into existence
through an evolutionary process whereby
favourable variants had survived. Human
beings, Galton argued, varied in mental
abilities no less than in physical endowments ; and such abilities were inherited.
Hence we would expect, as a corollary of the
evolution theory, that human families would
differ from one another in hereditary ability.
The same principle of variation as applicd
to human families would hold also of humaii
races. Unmistakable differences were observable between races or breeds of horses or
dogs; analogous differences might be expected between human breeds. Experiences
gained by Galton during his travels in SouthWest Africa, where he had observed
20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

pronounced differences between the native
peoples through whose territories he travelled—the Namaquas, the Damaras and the
Ovampo—undoubtedly shaped his ideas.
Offence is sometimes taken over the use of
such expressions as higher and lower races.
What do we mean by “higher” and

“lower’’? Various standards might be_

applied. If it is a question of living in a
tropical rain forest, the pygmies of the
Belgian Congo would probably be superior to
Europeans ; if it is a matter of subsisting
on an exclusively meat diet, the same could
be said for the Eskimo ; if on a rice diet, for
the Chinese coolie. By the process of natural
selection, we would expect a community of
human beings to become fitted to its habitat
and to the mode of life there imposed. If the
standard of ‘‘ superiority ”’ arbitrarily chosen
is that of sustaining and furthering the
condition described as Western civilization,
we could reasonably expect the best performance from those peoples who had produced Western civilization and throughout
centuries of history had been moulded by it.
This elementary point is made by Galton
at the beginning of his chapter on the comparative worth of different races. ‘‘ Every
long-established race,’’ he writes, ‘‘ has necessarily its peculiar fitness for the conditions
under which it has lived, owing to the sure
operation of Darwin’s law of natural selection. However, I am not much concerned
for the present, with the greater part of those
aptitudes, but only with such as are available
in some form or other of high civilization.”
By what process, then, does Galton assess
the comparative worth of different races ?
The method—and Galton’s description to-day
sounds peculiar—is ‘“‘the very curious
theoretical law of deviation from an average.”’
The law has become familiar enough since
these words were written. According to it,
Galton divides men according to their
abilities into seven classes A to G, each class
marking a rising order of ability and each
class being separated from its neighbours by
equal grades. Men in class A have an order
of ability (or rarity) of 1 in 4, those in class D,
I in 64, those in class F (described by Galton

ce

as ‘eminent ’’), I in 4,000, those in class G

(men of very exceptional endowment), I in
79,000. By natural ability Galton meant a
combination of three attributes—intellectual
capacity, eagerness for work or zeal, and
power of working. Of men endowed in these
ways to the extent of being prodigies of the
rarity of one in a million, he says—*‘ I cannot
comprehend how such a man could be
repressed. The world is always tormented
with difficulties waiting to be solved—
struggling with ideas and feelings, to which it
can give no adequate expression. If, then,
there exists a man capable of solving those
difficulties, or of giving a voice to those pentup feelings, he is sure to be welcomed with
universal acclamation.”

Galton’s standard of judging the comparative worth of different races is the frequency
with which they throw up men of natural
ability equivalent to classes F and G. The
assessment depends on a knowledge of the
size of the population concerned and of the
attainments of its most noteworthy individuals. The Negro race is compared with the
Anglo-Saxon with respect to those qualities
which are capable of producing eminent men
such as judges, statesmen, commanders, men
of literature and science, poets, artists and
divines. “‘ If,’’ writes Galton, ‘“‘ the negro
race in America had been affected by no social
disabilities, a comparison of their achievements with those of the whites in their
several branches of intellectual effort, having
regard to the total numbers of their respective populations, would give the necessary
information. As matters stand, we must be
content with much rougher data.’’ The conclusion is reached “ that the average standard
of the negro race is two grades below our
own’; that the Australian native is at
least one grade below the African; that the
Lowland Scot and the English North-Country
man is “decidedly a fraction of a grade
superior of the ordinary English ” ; and that
the 135,000 or so free-born males who
inhabited Attica between 530 and 430 B.C.
were, on the lowest estimate, “ very nearly
two grades higher than our own, that is about
as much as our race is above the African
negro. ”’;

Galton’s views on race were also shaped by
GALTON’S VIEWS ON RACE 21

an awareness of the rapidity with which the
human inhabitants of the different parts of
the world have changed throughout history.
“‘ The denizens of the world at the present
day form a very different human stock to that
which inhabited it a dozen generations ago,
and to all appearance a no less difference will
be found a dozen generations hence.”
Galton regarded this process of human displacement as inevitable ; and he conceived
it as susceptible to rational human control.
“There are now some 8,000,000 of negroes
in lands where not one of them existed
twelve generations ago, and probably not one
representative of the race which they displaced remains there.”” But what the white
man calls civilization was destined to spread.
“We may reckon upon the advent of a time
when civilization, which is now sparse and
feeble and far more superficial than it is
vaunted to be, shall overspread the globe.”
Two characteristics of the barbarian and of
the savage are regarded by Galton as incompatible with the development of civilization.
They are the nomadic disposition found in
most barbarians and the impulsive and uncontrolled nature of the savage. “‘ In proportion as the world becomes filled with mankind, the relations of society necessarily
increase in complexity, and the nomadic disposition found in most barbarians becomes
unsuitable to the modern conditions.”’
Writers on those hunting and migratory
nations which are brought into contact with
advancing colonization and perish, “‘ tell us
that the labour of such men is neither constant nor steady ; that the love of a wandering, independent life prevents their settling
anywhere to work except for a short time
when urged by want and encouraged by kind
treatment. ... Such a spirit is, on the whole,
an heirloom that brings more impatient
restlessness and beating of the wings against
cage-bars, than persons of more civilized
characters can readily comprehend, and it is
directly at war with the more modern part of
our moral natures... . .As the Bohemianism
in the nature of the race is destined to perish,
the sooner it goes the happier for mankind... . By this riddance... the artisan
Part of our population is slowly becoming

bred to its duties, and the primary qualities
of the modern British workman are already
the very opposite of ‘those of the nomad.”
“Much more alien to the genius of an
enlightened civilization than the nomadic
habit is the impulsive and uncontrolled
nature of the savage. A civilized man must
bear and forbear, he must keep before his
mind the claims of the morrow as clearly as
those of the passing minute ; of the absent
as well as the present. This is the most trying
of the new conditions imposed on man by
civilization, and the one which makes it
hopeless for any but exceptional natures
among savages to live under them.”’
Civilization, the advance of which over the
earth was held to be inevitable and irresistible, was not regarded by Galton as a boon
so much as a scourge to primitive peoples
adapted to simple lives of hunting or agriculture. “ The number of races of mankind that
have been entirely destroyed under the
pressure of the requirements of an oncoming
civilization, reads us a’ terrible lesson.
Probably in no former period of the world
has the destruction of the races of any animal
whatever been effected over such wide areas
and with such startling rapidity as has been
the case of savage man. In the North
American continent, in the West Indian
islands, in the Cape of Good Hope, in Australia, New Zealand, and Van Diemen’s land,
the human denizens of vast regions have
been entirely swept away in the short space
of three centuries, less by the pressure of a
stronger race than through the influence of a
civilization they were incapable of supporting.’’ The process, Galton felt, would
continue ; it would result in further human
displacements and replacements which would
answer the question of which race was
“superior ”’ or “inferior ’’ by the biological
criterion of which survived. In this inevitable
process, man could exercise prudence and
foresight ; he could perhaps play on a wider
but more difficult stage the same constructive and kindly role as he could perform for
the individual by the application of eugenics.
How does this aftitude compare with that
of the believers in the superman and the
Herrenvolk ? It is possible that a casual
22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

reader of Galton, who was steeped in the
literature of racism, might detect similarities.
But the essential ideas underlying the two
systems are far apart. Galton saw the spread
of civilization as a painful though inevitable
process the tribulations of which civilized
man, by the studious exercise of enlightened
foresight, could do something to alleviate.
Nietzsche’s superman, on the other hand,
transmuted into their opposites the values in
the light of which Galton hoped that the
harshness of a natural process might be
mitigated. The superman was glorified
because of his fearlessness, his masterfulness
and his cruelty. He was full of contempt for
the weak for whom no pity should be felt.
The elimination of the weak should cause the
same sort of pleasure as the extermination of
vermin,

Galton’s assessment of the comparative
worth of different races was based on the
frequency with which they threw up men of
high natural ability—exceptionally gifted
individuals whose works enriched civilization. But a high degree of ‘“‘ worth ’”’ thus
judged might be combined with defects
which impair the perpetuation of worth.
Thus Galton remarked of the Athenians :
“We know, and may guess something more,
of the reason why this marvellously gifted
race declined. Social morality grew exceedingly lax ; marriage became unfashionable, and was avoided ; many of the more
ambitious and accomplished women were
avowed courtesans, and consequently infertile, and the mothers of the incoming population were of a heterogeneous @lass.”’

The “high Athenian breed” decayed
and disappeared because it lacked certain
moral qualities which, by securing its perpetuation, would have added greatly to its
“ worth.” The recognition of the importance
of moral qualities in a hierarchy of eugenic
values seems to have come to Galton in later
life: he was forty-seven when //ereditary
Genius was published, and he lived to eight v
nine. The views about race set forth in
Hereditary Genius were the expression of
thoughts provoked by the publication of the
Origin of Species ten years before, of efforts
to think out the bearings of the evolution
theory on man’s future. From the inability
of many native races to withstand the impact

-of the white man’s inevitably spreading civili
zation, a simple question emerged. Which
races could best sustain and promote that
civilization ? The spread of the white man’s
culture had destroyed many primitive races
whose instincts were ill-adapted to its requirements ; and others were imminently doomed
to a similar fate. Some races, on the other
hand, possessing resources of intelligence and
adaptability, might survive the ordeal.
Could anything be done by foreseeing man to

~ expedite this biological adjustment and to

make it painless and humane ? The question
was asked and (as far as was then possible)
answered without animus. It is the absence
of animus which distinguishes Galton’s attitude from that of the exponents of racism.
The theories and practices of racism have
opened a veritable Pandora’s box of national .
recriminations and political hatreds. From
this turmoil has cmerged the doctrine of
racial egalitarianism which is orthodox today. The reaction is understandable, but
Galton might have thought that, if. construed to mean that all human races have an
equal power of sustaining and promoting the
process known as Westeria civilization, it
belied some of the plainest facts of human
evolution. ‘ The frequency in‘history ’’ he
wrote, “ with which one race lias supplanted
another over wide geographical areas is one
of the inost striking facts in the evolution of
mankind.”

Galton’s views on race as expressed in
Hereditary Geiius are the first. tentative
efforts of a kindly man to apply to humanity
the harsh lessons of biology as then understood. His motive was to prevent, not. te
inflict, suffering.

Eugeuics Review, Vol. XLII, No 1
