REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 323

Roman pontiffs exhorted the sibyl most eloquently to lower her price
and enlarged upon the danger to the State involved in her exorbitant
demands. Although our governing classes receive a classical education
they have still not assimilated the teaching of that instructive fable, they
still believe that catchwords are legal tender. M. GREENWOOD, JNR.

Mott, F. W., M.D., F.R.S. Nature and Nurture in Mental Development.

London: John Murray; 1914; pp. 151.; price 3s. 6d.
THIS small volume is an amplification of three Chadwick Trust lectures
delivered by Dr. Mott, than whom no better man to treat this subject in
a popular way could have been found. The author’s chief life-work has
been neuro-pathology on its mental and brain side, his experience in that
department being corrected and enlarged by his position as a physician to
a general hospital.

To write effectively on Nature and Nurture, social, educational,
psychological and eugenic knowledge and interests are needed, as well
as the purely medical qualifications, which Dr. Mott so eminently
possesses. He modestly claims to throw “only a little ray of light” on
his vast theme, but hopes that his book “may stimulate the reader to
further enquiries regarding the respective parts played by environment
and heredity in mental hygiene ”—an end which will certainly be attained.
Strictly speaking, there is not much new or original work in the book.
Dr. Mott himself and others have trodden the same ground before. It
is through the way things are put by the author that the public will
be interested and impressed and a certain rousing of the public mind
and conscience in regard to those questions will result.

Dr. Mott brings together and correlates the latest facts in regard to
his subject, but he has found, as so many of us who have tried to get
at the public in regard to scientific matters, that it is difficult to avoid
the use of technical expressions that are unintelligible to even educated
people. What could an ordinary reader of these lectures be expected to
gather from these two sentences? “ The neurone is a complex cell behaving like a living organism; it nourishes itself and is not nourished. Now
the neurones forming the grey matter of the cortex are the most complex
and latest developed ontogenetically and phylogenetically, consequently
the germinal determinants of those cells are less fixed and stable, therefore more likely to undergo pathological mutations than other cells of the
body under the influence of chronic poisoned conditions of the blood of
the parents.” These sentences express scientific facts, but what
do they convey to the lay understanding? We do not say this to
discourage Dr. Mott or other scientific educators, but to show lay readers
the difficulties of their task. Dr. Mott first treats of mental hygiene from a
physiological standpoint and the causes of mental deficiency. He goes
on to speak of the “raw material of character” in relation to heredity
and the inheritance of pathological and individual characters. The old
question of the respective parts played by inheritance, nutrition, education
and environment on the work and life of man and woman are discussed.
Then come interesting psychological studies of Laura Bridgeman, Helen
Keller and Marie Heurton, and what they teach in regard to mental
development. What the author says about sleep, feeding, the association
of eye and hand and the senses in education are all most practical. The
fourteen pedigrees given by him, and the beautiful diagrams, will greatly
instruct the ordinary reader; without them the book would not be of
half as much value. The last subject treated by Dr. Mott is self-control,
that king of all the mental faculties and prince of all the virtues, the
general practice of which would revolutionise human society. A short
account of the medical inspection of school children by Miss Agnes Mott
forms an appendix to the book. The volume really endeavours to put in
I5I pages what it would require many treatises to exhaust.

T. CLousTON.
