PROMISING FAMILIES: ELITE AND
MOIETY EUGENICS
By C. P. BLACKER

HIS article originated in a discussion

which took place in the course of a

committee meeting, of how far happiness, particularly of children who come from
well-adjusted families, should be treated as
an index of eugenic merit.

Two approaches to positive eugenics are
described; the first is concerned with a small
élite, the second with a large fraction of the
population rising to a half, here called a
moiety (French moztié). Happiness, it is
suggested, is an irrelevant standard if applied
to the small élite, but not to the larger
moiety. :

Three methods of ascertaining eugenically
meritorious families are discussed in the light
of certain desiderata which are applicable to
the ‘‘ moiety ’’ approach.

Lastly some possible functions of local
associations for furthering eugenics are
described. These should be centred on a
durable organization performing a socially
useful function and not merely on a discussion group. The merits of a five-purposes
parenthood centre as such a nucleus are
outlined.

Some of the points here raised were
brought forward at a Members Meeting of
the Society on November 18th, 1953, when
the Soczety’s future policy was discussed.

Problem and Promising Families

In its earliest days, the Eugenics Soctety
gave moral and financial support to the
monumental genealogical investigations
undertaken over a long period of years by
Mr. E. J. Lidbetter into Problem families.*
This interest was sustained in the inter-war
years when we produced further studies.?
And between 1947 and 1950 we subsidized
and sponsored five geographically distinct
inquiries dealing with problem families by
Medical Officers of Health.2 These activities were all concerned with negative
eugenics.

21

Converse activities in the sphere of positive
eugenics had long been felt to be desirable. .
The third and last of the three inquiries
above-mentioned had as its main object the
standardizing of a procedure for “ ascertaining ’’ problem families. Herein, the predicaments of children prominently figured. Was
it possible, some of us asked ourselves, to
ascertain families which, instead of being
liabilities, were assets to the community?
And, if yes, would the children of these
families likewise serve as pointers? A term
was needed to denote the converse of a
problem family ; the expression “‘ promising
family’ was first suggested by our past
President, Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders.

The promising family is mentioned in the
Soctety’s last (1950) Statement of Objects in
the following terms :

The problem family has an opposite, the
promising family. Here are comprised children
who are conspicuously healthy, happy and well- |
adjusted. Every schoolmaster is aware of such
children among his pupils. They are noteworthy for their cheerfulness and trustworthiness, for their good influence in the school, and
usually for their scholastic ability. He says of
them that they are a pleasure to teach and to
handle and that he would like to have more like
‘them in his school. They come from united and
happy families.

Such children and their parents are, according to the Soctety’s standard, eugenically desirable types.

Promising families need further investigation. As of prohlem families, efficient means of
ascertainment are needed. Measures should then
be found of encouraging and if necessary aiding
the parents, if they are still of reproductive age,
to attain the maximum fertility they desire.

Within the Soczety, there has, in the last
year, been some discussion of the issues
raised in the above passage. How far, it has.
been asked, are the internal cohesion and
happiness of a family a valid index of its
“promising ’’ character? Happiness, it~
could be argued, is in this context an irrelevant standard. Many creative men and
22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

women who have made outstanding contributions to literature, art and science have, on
balance, been unhappy. There comes to
mind here Sir Russell Brain’s Galton Lecture
given in 1948—‘‘Some Reflections on
Genius.’ Outstanding gifts, he showed, were
sometimes associated with traits which
brought unhappiness.

Genealogical and individual approaches : elite
and moiety eugenics

These doubts suggested that there were
two possible meanings of the term “‘ promising family,’’ depending on which of two
approaches was adopted. One approach is
genealogical, the other individual. The first
leads to the idea of an élite ; the second to
that of a moiety.

The idea of an élite is evoked by Galton’s
book Noteworthy Families, written jointly
with Edgar Schuster (Murray, 1906). Galton’s line of thought was here similar to that
followed in his Hereditary Genius (1869)
which (it will be recalled) he later said he
would like to re-christen ‘‘ Hereditary Ability.”’ In these books are assembled genealogies of families many of whose members had
achieved eminence. The same criterion—
eminence—determines posthumous inclusion
in the Dictionary of National Biography and,
to a far lesser degree, in such compilations
as Who’s Who. The late Mr. Gun, for many
years an active member of our Society, was
an authority on such families; and so was
Mr. Stanley Bramwell, the author of an
appendix (never published) to our projected
reprint of Hereditary Genius which brought
up to date the genealogies set out in that
volume. Mr. Paul Bloomfield, now a member
of our Council, is likewise interested in what
might be called the Galtonian view of
genealogy. His broadcasts and published
papers are well known. To some, the term
promising family most readily evokes the
idea of a connection whose members, instead
of presenting the community with multiple
social problems, confronts it with an efflorescence of outstanding and gifted personalities.
No organized ‘ascertainment’ of such
families is necessary. They are brought to
our notice by a sort of social reflex—the

automatic and public recognition of the
distinction of their members.

The genealogical approach calls for no
testing procedures, examinations or interviewing. Being largely concerned with
public recognition and achievement, it is
based on a study of records and documents.
The genealogist traces his distinguished
quarry through diverse ramifications of kinship; and it is possible for him to assemble his
impressive pedigrees without himself ever
making contact with the people who are the
objects of his research.

The genealogical approach, as followed by
Galton, Havelock Ellis, Gun, Bramwell and
Bloomfield, covers but a minute fraction of
the population. It deals with people of
exceptional ability, energy, and creativeness.
Of these, it might well be contended that
their personal happiness is irrelevant. All
that matters is that they should be given the
freest possible scope for the deployment of
their gifts. ©

The individual approach, which we may
contrast with the genealogical, presupposes
the existence of a standard of eugenic merit
in the light of which people can be placed in
two “‘ moieties,’ one above, the other below
the average. The term “ moiety ’”’ (French
mottié, Latin medius) is perhaps ambiguous.
It is here used to denote a substantial fraction, rising to half, of the population. This
meaning is implicit in the following passage,
written by Galton in 1909, which we print
on the inside of the cover of our Statement of
Objects : |

Let us for a moment suppose that the practice
of eugenics should hereafter raise the average
quality of our nation to that of its better
moiety at the present day and consider the gain.

The general tone of domestic, social and political

life would be higher. The race as a whole would

be less foolish, less frivolous, less excitable, and
politically more provident than now. Its
demagogues who ‘ played to the gallery ’ would
play to a more sensible gallery than at present.

By what standard should we assign an
individual to the nation’s better or worse
moiety in the sense of the above quotation ?
We may put the question in another way by
asking what is meant by the syllable ex in
eugenics? A considerable list of qualities,
PROMISING FAMILIES: ELITE AND MOIETY EUGENICS __ 23

said Galton, could be compiled which most
people would take into account. It would,
he suggested, include health, energy, ability,
manliness and a courteous disposition. But
not all of these qualities are measurable; and
in different people they present themselves
im varying combinations. The standard
adopted by the Soczety, and declared in our
Statement of Objects, is a performance test
centred on the family. The eugenically
meritorious couple, we say, is the one which
produces by design (i.e. by planned parenthood) a healthy and a happy family. To
plan the births of a well-spaced family
demands intelligence, foresight and restraint;
to produce families large enough for replacement implies a love of children and a sense
of duty to a community which needs children;
to provide them with a good home requires
the power to make a success of marriage and
of life outside the home.

According to this standard, the welladjusted and happy family is preferable to
its opposite ; and from the eugenic point of
view, the family which produces happy and
well-adjusted children is a better bet than
the one which produces neurotic and
emotionally disturbed problem children who
are nowadays so familiar to Child Guidance
Clinics. In the context of moiety eugenics
though perhaps not of élite eugenics, happiness and good social adjustment are not
irrelevant.

But the formulation of standards of
eugenic merit is a part only of the problem.
A positive eugenic policy further requires
that we should be able to identify the
individuals and the families who, according
to whatever standard we agree to adopt, are
favourably endowed—the process of ascertainmernt; and, having found them, we are
yet further required to devise means of
persuading them to have enough children for
full replacement.

Five desiderata

There are several possible methods of
ascertaining eugenically meritorious families.
Three are considered below. In assessing
their respective usefulness certain desiderata

are applicable, among them the following
five :

1. Relevance to eugenics. The test of
assessment should be concerned with attributes which have eugenic significance. Thus
intelligence has such significance while eyecolour or the type of finger-print have little
or none. Attributes which are tested or
assessed will have varying levels of eugenic
significance, as seen below.

2. Discrimination. The test or assessment
should reliably discriminate; it should effectively separate those who possess the attribute
in question from those who do not.

3. Ready Applicability. The test or
assessment should be easily and widely
applicable without requiring elaborate organization and without incurring unduly large
expense, inconvenience and dislocation of
normal routines. Alternatively, it should be
easily grafted on to routine procedures in use
for other purposes.

4. Acceptability. The test or assessment
should be applicable on a voluntary basis
which should commend itself to the persons
tested or assessed ; it should not antagonize,
annoy, offend or outrage the people to whom
it is applied.

5. Early Applicability. The test or assessment should be applicable as early as possible
in the life of the individual or couple, so that
a maximal influence can be exerted on subsequent fertility.

Three Methods of Ascertainment

Let us, in the light of these requirements,
consider three methods of ascertainment,
namely that made possible by a premarital
health examination ; that involved in the
term ‘‘ reproductive efficiency’ as defined
in a recent paper read to the Soczety by Professor Dugald Baird and Miss Eileen Scott* ;
and that which seeks to discover the “‘ promising family’? through the “ promising
child.”

Premarital examinations are commended
in our Statement of Objects. There is no
moment in life, we say, when a medical

* EUGENICS REVIEW, 1953. 49. p. 139.
24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

examination is more appropriate than before
marriage. Not only may diseases (venereal,
early tuberculosis, etc.) be detected ; but an
opportunity is given for discussing intimate
problems which may cause anxiety. Guidance, both eugenically appropriate and personally helpful, can be offered. A couple with
superior endowments in their late twenties
might usefully be advised to start a family at
once and not to space their children too far
apart. An immature couple in their late
teens, subnormal in intelligence or unstable
in character, with bad occupational records
and marrying to escape crowded or troubled
homes, might be advised to postpone having
children until they had adjusted themselves
to marriage and to one another. Some
desertions and quickly broken homes might
thus be averted.

Advice of this kind would, if acted upon,
be as beneficial to the individual as to the
community. It should be a function of
marriage guidance to encourage such examinations, and of the health services to provide
the necessary facilities. Premarital health
examinations would, at the start, be sought
by a conscientious and perhaps over-anxious
minority ; but with public support, not least
from the clergy, they might in time cover a
majority of marrying couples. |

From the standpoint of the first three of
the five desiderata mentioned in the preceding section (namely relevance to eugenics,
discrimination and ready applicability) premarital examinations would at present fall
short. Until they are organized on a generous
scale with accessory services for hzematological, physical and psychological investiga
tions and until the examining doctors acquire |

the necessary experience to deal with the
complex and delicate issues on which guidance is most helpful, their assessments are
likely to be somewhat rough and ready. The
impression received by a doctor in the course
of a short interview, when most of his time
is taken up by a physical examination,
necessarily runs the risk of being superficial.
But these defects would disappear if the premarital examination assumed its deserved
place in a national scheme of preventive
medicine. From the standpoint of the fourth

desideratum (acceptability) there is little to
criticize provided that the examinations
were sought in good faith and in expectation
of benefits. From the standpoint of the fifth
desideratum, namely potential influence on
subsequent fertility, their value is maximal,
for reproductive life has not yet begun.

Let us next consider, as a possible method
of ascertainment, that implied in the term
“reproductive efficiency ’’ as defined by
Professor Dugald Baird and Miss Eileen
Scott in their joint paper ‘‘ Intelligence and
Childbearing’’ published in the October 1953
number of the EuGENIcs REviEw. Their
observations and tests (including an
intelligence test) were made on primiparous
women (those having their first babies) in a
maternity hospital in Aberdeen. To epitomize the contents of this valuable paper, the
“maternal efficiency ’’ of these women was
rated in terms of “ four aspects of maternal
behaviour,’ namely the use they had made
of birth control, their use of sources of
information about pregnancy and labour,
their diet during pregnancy, and their intention to breast-feed their babies.

Conspicuous differences between women
in the sample, revealed in respect of their
maternal efficiency, would largely extend to
the home conditions later provided for their
children. The standard here involved, namely
maternal efficiency, clearly has important
eugenic implications, though perhaps at a
somewhat basic level in the scale of eugenic
values. This method of ascertainment we
might therefore assess as good from the
standpoint of our first and second desiderata
(the standard employed has definite eugenic
significance and it discriminates well between
good and bad performers) ; from the standpoint of the third desideratum (ready
applicability), it is perhaps open to criticism
on the ground that tests and examinations
of this complexity, while indispensable to a
research project, are scarcely applicable as a
routine in maternity hospitals. The fourth
desideratum—acceptability to the women
concerned—was apparently satisfied for no
complaints were reported ; and so was the
fifth, for the women, being primiparous,
were embarking on their reproductive lives.
PROMISING FAMILIES: ELITE AND MOIETY EUGENICS 25

_ The third form of ascertainment we are
here considering, namely that through the
promising child, wa the schoolmaster, is at
present somewhat difficult to assess. It
probably scores marks on the first two
-counts—of being of definite eugenic signifinance, and of having discriminatory value.
On the third count (ready applicability),
there are uncertainties. While it could
fairly easily be put into wide operation
without raising large organizational problems or incurring expense, it would be
necessary to find interested groups to
sponsor the inquiries. This might not be
easy. On the fourth count—acceptability—
no opinion can yet be given. Much tact
would be needed. On the fifth—its possible
influence on later fertility—it is open to
serious criticism. By the time that a married

couple have produced a child who can

attract the favourable notice of. his schoolmaster, they have usually reached a point in
their reproductive lives when they are no
longer easily influenced. Indeed, this shortcoming illustrates an important difficulty in
devising workable programmes of positive
eugenics, namely a conflict between the first
and the fifth of the above-mentioned desiderata. A reasonably valid assessment, based on
performance, of the eugenic merit of a
married couple can only be made when their
children have had an opportunity to show
their paces. But by this time the parents’
fertility is complete ; their reproductive lives
are over. On the other hand policies which
are expected to yield dividends in the shape
of increased fertility must be applied early
in reproductive life, or (better) before it has
begun. But at this early stage, eugenic
merits are more easy to guess than to assess.

This difficulty makes it clearly understandable why Galton laid such stress on the
study of ancestry. In his imaginary Utopia,
ancestral records were kept with Confucian

piety.

Functions of Local Associations

In the foregoing, a distinction has been
drawn between two possible methods ‘in
positive eugenics.

The first makes use of a genealogical

approach and is concerned with but a small
fraction of the general population—a
genealogical élite. The method was largely
applied by Galton in his Hereditary Genius to
connections which flourished in the past and
with whose members or descendants Galton
had no personal acquaintance.

The second method uses assessments and
tests. These are applied to the population
round about us with the purpose of ascertaining those who are above and those who are
below the average in respect of whatever
standard is made the basis of the assessment
or test. The first method is concerned with
a very small élite ; the second with a much
larger moiety.

Galton’s name is better associated with the
search for a small élite than for a large
moiety. But he was far from indifferent to
the importance of the moiety approach. His
views are most clearly set out in a short
address which, on October 14th, 1908 (two
years before his death), he gave to the
Eugenics Education Society, as our Soczety
was then called. The address was entitled
“Local Associations for the Advancement

of Eugenics”’ Galton then said :

The successful establishment of any system
of constructive eugenics will, in my view (which
I put forward with diffidence), depend largely
upon the efforts of local associations acting in
close harmony with a central association like our
own. ... Such a central society would tend to
bring about a general uniformity of administration the value of which is so obvious that I do
not stop to insist upon it.

During the inter-war years efforts were
made to organize local branches of our
Society. For a few years there was an active
Society in Oxford ; there also existed a group
in Cambridge and similar groups had short
lives in some midland towns. They failed to
survive partly because undergraduates form
an unstable population which is in residence
for less than half the year, and partly because
the local societies were not linked to any
organization serving a continuous and
socially useful function which could provide
a persisting nucleus. Of such continuing
organizations, the birth control clinic staffed
by a keen band of voluntary workers provides a good example.
26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Are the prospects for Local Associations
any brighter today? Possibly.

In our Statement of Objects we advocate the
establishment of Five-Purposes Parenthood
Centres. These, we suggest, should be concerned with five activities bearing closely on
parenthood, namely marriage guidance, premarital health examinations, advice on birth
control, treatment of infecundity, and
eugenic prognosis. A beginning has recently
been made in the establishment of such a
five-purposes centre by the active North
Kensington Women’s Welfare Centre (now
called the North Kensington Marriage Welfare Centre) which*has long benefited from
the enterprising farsightedness of its chairman Mrs. Margery Spring-Rice. Our Soczety
has made a grant of £750 a year, renewable
for two years, to assist with this project.

Ideas are like migrant birds. They recognize no man-made frontiers. An idea which
falls on stones in one country may find a
fertile soil in another. When I was attending
the Third International Conference on
Planned Parenthood in Bombay in November 1952, I found myself appointed chairman
of a study group which was asked to make
recommendations on public health programmes. In this study group, I benefited
from the wisdom and experience of Colonel
R. N. Khosla, the Rapporteur of the group,
who has recently been appointed one of the
Vice-presidents for the Central Asian region
of the International Planned Parenthood
Federation. I discussed with Colonel Khosla,
before the group met, the appropriateness to
India of the project of a five-purposes parenthood centre. The upshot was the inclusion,
as the third of five recommendations, of the
following? :

3. Provincial Organizations

(By ‘‘Provinces”’ is here meant the geographical subdivisions of a country into large administrative areas such as the forty-eight States of the
U.S.A., the fourteen Health Regions of England
and Wales, and the twenty-eight States of
India.)

In each province there should be established,
in association either with a Public Health
Department or with the Departments of Maternity and Child Welfare of the Province’s Univer
sity (if such exists) a Central Five-Purposes
Parenthood Clinic with the following functions :

(a) Family planning (limitation and spacing).
It is considered that this item should have
first priority.

Infertility (diagnosis and treatment).

Marriage guidance.

Premarital health examinations.

e) Eugenic prognosis (guidance as to parenthood for people anxious about hereditary
infirmities in themselves or their families).

(These five activities need not take place.
under the same roof, but they should be centrally ;
co-ordinated.) This Central Clinic should be the
centre of research, training, and organizational
activities in each province and should take
account of the needs of men no less than of
women.

It should undertake responsibility for the
following activities within its province :

(a) Design and co-ordination of research

projects.

(b) Design and co-ordination of clinic case
sheets, records and statistics.

(c) Training of doctors, social workers, mid
wives, nurses and health visitors.

(2) Establishment throughout the province of

affiliated clinics, distributed geographically and organized in such a manner as to
meet the needs of the largest possible
number of families. In some areas, there
may be a need for mobile services; in
others, affiliated clinics will work on a
sessional basis and have a simple organization.

The Planned Parenthood Association of
India announces in its recent monthly
bulletin that India’s Planning Commission of
Programmes and Research met in January
to consider what recommendations to make
about the allocation of the sum of Rs. 65
lakhs (over £500,000) already earmarked for
family planning services. The Commission is
reported as having recommended that these
services should be established in association
with hospitals and maternity centres and
that they should be comprehensively based
so as to promote the general welfare of
families.

A start has thus been made in England
and may soon be made in India. A Centre
such as is envisaged which includes in its
functions the provision of guidance on
eugenic problems, would provide an ideal
nucleus round which a Local Association, as
suggested by Galton, could be formed and
sustained. It is part of the Soczety’s policy to
promote the establishment of such Parenthood Centres in the university towns of the

o
—

eao Oo
BLD
MB

fourteen health regions of England and
Wales.

Let us now return to the policies of positive
eugenics which are the main theme of this
article. Could the three types of ascertainment earlier described be connected with the

activities of these Centres? An ascertainment based on premarital examinations
could obviously be so connected. But much
doctor-time would be needed. Both partners
need to be separately examined, and, as in
marriage guidance, interviewed together. If
their. interest and goodwill are engaged,
contact could be maintained during their
later lives, and records of some interest
accumulated.
_ Ascertainments such as those reported by
Professor Baird and Miss Scott if imitated on
any appreciable scale in the future, would be
based on maternity hospitals. But the
liaison between a maternity hospital and a
Five-Purposes Centre in the same city would
be close, and the two places might have
certain members of their part-time staffs in
common.

Ascertainments of promising families vza
promising children would require to be
sponsored mainly by persons interested in
education. But a medical representative on
the sponsoring committee would be appropriate, and if it were the policy of the com
pe PROMISING FAMILIES: ELITE AND MOIETY EUGENICS 27

mittee and staff of a parenthood centre to
take an interest in inquiries of eugenic interest, the co-operation of such a centre might
be welcomed. Local Associations to further
the aims of what Galton called “‘ constructive
eugenics,” if centred on an active organization performing socially useful functions,
could pursue what studies they liked. They
might, if they wished, encourage the preparing and the keeping of genealogical.
records not with the view of discovering an
élite but as a simple duty towards one’s
posterity. - If such a sensible habit became
universally adopted, so that every family
came to possess a genealogical record of
Galtonian character, genealogical considerations could be made to play a much larger
part than is possible at present in what has
here been called ‘‘ moiety eugenics.”

REFERENCES

1. Lidbetter, E. J. Heredity and the Social Problem
Group. 1933. Edward Arnold.

2. Blacker, C. P. (Ed.). A Social Problem Group ?
1937. Oxford University Press.

3. Blacker, C. P. (Ed.). Problem Families :
Inquiries. 1952. The Eugenics Society.

4. The full text of the recommendations are printed on pages 200 and 2o1 of the well-edited and wellproduced Report of the Proceedings published by the
Family Planning Association of India. Obtainable,
price 10s. 6d. from the Secretary, I.P.P.F., 69
Eccleston Square, London, S.W.1.

Five

Eugenics Review. Vol. XLVI, No. 1
