ROSAMUND SHUTER
West Ham College of Technology

Hereditary and Environmental
Factors in Musical Ability

THE AIM OF the investigation to be described
was to study how far musical ability depends
on heredity or environment by comparing
parents with children, and monozygotic with
fraternal twins.

In most earlier studies musical talent had been
assessed on the basis of reputation or of
questionnaire data on musical activities. Though
satisfactory tests of musical ability had existed
since the 1930s, little attempt had been made to
apply them in genetic studies. A detailed account
of the literature can be found in the writer’s
thesis (Shuter, 1964).

Pedigree and Questionnaire Studies

Galton (1869) studied the genealogy of 120
eminent and original musicians. But only
twenty-six of these had had eminent kinsmen,
not all of whom were musicians. He included
nine members of the Bach family—surely the
most remarkable of all the musical families in
history. According to Shull (1948), of fifty-five
male Bachs in six generations, forty-eight were
musicians and only seven had no known musical
gifts.

Biographical material tends to be incomplete,
however, as Feis (1910) found. He attempted to
study the ancestors and descendants of 285
famous musicians, but information on maternal
lines was especially difficult to obtain. Moreover,
many of the musicians failed to produce children.

An investigation of contemporary musicians
and students at the Juilliard Graduate School of
Music was carried out by Scheinfeld for the
first edition of You and Heredity. His virtuosi
group in the following table included such
oustanding performers as Yehudi Menuhin and
Artur Rubinstein.

ER—L

 

TABLE 1
Approximate percentage of poumnibes with some degree of
talent
Percentage for
No. in — ny
Group Group Fathers Mothers Siblings
Virtuosi 37 75 50 50
———~—,-—_-~
Opera singers 36 67 40
Cc nae Y
Students of music 50 58 74 70

An analysis of the incidence of talent in the
three groups showed that where both parents
had musical talent, more than 70 per cent of the
brothers and sisters (in addition to the individual
reporting) also had talent. Where only one
parent was talented, there was talent in 60 per
cent of the siblings. Where neither parent was
talented, only 15 per cent of the brothers and
sisters had talent.

Scheinfeld concluded that a multiple-gene
mechanism would be needed to account for
these ratios, and the simplest one which might
fit the requirements would be, at the very least,
two different dominant genes. Such a theory
would help to explain the sudden appearance of
a highly talented individual in an apparently
unmusical family—Scheinfeld quotes the example
of Toscanini. Whether great musicians differ
from those of lesser talent in possessing special
“talent” genes is, however, open to question.

Hurst (1912) seems to have been the first
person to apply Mendel’s laws to an unselected
population. From his observations of parents
and children in a Leicestershire industrial village
he concluded that musical ability was a recessive
trait. Lack of musical aptitude might be due, he
thought, to an inhibitory factor preventing the
expression of the musical capacity which is
hypostatically present in everyone. Do the tone

149

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, September 1966, 58, 3.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

deaf, he wondered, suffer from a double dose of
the inhibitory factor?

Inthe 1920s several Continental workers sought
to study the inheritance of musical ability, as
assessed from questionnaire data. Mjoen (1926)
graded his subjects’ musical ability on a scale
from 0 to 10. In the following table those
described as P (Poor) were rated between 0 and 2;
at most, their ability was limited to being able
to recognize a tune. The M (Musical) group
ranged from those who knew when they sang
out of tune (3) to being able to improvize a
second part (7). The S (Superior) subjects were
graded 8 to 10 and were, at the least, able to
play by ear, while the most talented of all could
compose, and play several instruments.

TABLE 2

Percentages of children in grades of talent born to parents
of various combinations of talent

Number of Number of & of children
Parents parents children S M P
SxS 7 23 72 28 0
SxM 40 175 60 34 6
SxP 9 34 26 37 = 37
MxM 30 113 39 49 12
MxP 21 75 7 40 53
PxP 7 22 0 10 90

Thus, the higher the average talent of the
parents, the higher the average talent of the
children is likely to be. The environmentalist
might object that the musical environment
provided by parents is liable to vary roughly
with their own talent or lack of talent. Mjoen,
however, also presents evidence that where
both parents are musical (grade 5 or above),
the proportion of musical children corresponds
to the number of gifted grandparents, and
concludes that it is the quality of the stock rather
than that of the parents which is decisive.

Haecker and Ziehen found that the chance
that a child will be very musical is 86 per cent
where both parents are talented, about 60 per
cent when one parent is musical, and about
25 per cent when both parents are unmusical.
Remarkably similar percentages were obtained
by Heymans and Wiersma (see Revesz, 1953).

Such questionnaire surveys depend, of course,
on the accuracy of the replies. Where instrumental playing is taken into account, they do

150

less than justice to individuals who have lacked
the opportunity to learn to play.

Studies based on Testing

With the development of musical ability
tests more accurate means of assessing aptitude
became available. The first standardized tests
to be published were the Seashore Measures of
Musical Talent (1919). These were intended to
measure capacity to perceive fine differences in
pitch, time, intensity etc. and to judge which
tone in a sequence had been altered on a second
playing. Their relevance to functional musical
ability, such as required for success in learning
to play an instrument, has been repeatedly
questioned. The pitch and tonal memory tests
are probably the best from this point of view.

Since 1930 tests based on musical material
have been developed, some of which do provide
satisfactory estimates of musical potentiality.
Perhaps the best established and most comprehensive battery is the Wing Tests of Musical
Intelligence. Three of the seven tests are concerned with ear acuity: how many notes in a
chord? Have two chords been repeated exactly,
or has one note moved up or down? Which note
of a melody has been changed on a second
playing? Four are tests of appreciation, of
rhythm, harmony, intensity and phrasing. In
each test a tune is repeated in identical or
altered style. The subject has to decide whether
the second version is the same or not, and, if
different, which is the better rendition.

Such tests do not, of course, provide information as regards the muscular side of performance.

A pioneer genetic study in which the Seashore
Measures were used was undertaken by Stanton
(1922). She tested eighty-five members of the
families of six well-known American musicians
and drew up talent profiles for each family.
Her results seem to confirm that the child from
musical stock has a better chance of being
musical, but her tables are difficult to interpret,
since no statistical analysis is applied.

Seashore’s pitch, loudness and rhythm tests
and Wing’s pitch and memory tests were included
in the Hereditary Abilities Study (Vandenberg,
1962). Some thirty-three pairs of MZ and
HEREDITARY AND ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS IN MUSICAL ABILITY

forty-three pairs of DZ twins were studied.
Significant differences between the two types
of twin were found only in the case of the
rhythm and of the memory tests. The heritability
indices, calculated with Clark’s formula, were
as follows:

Seashore Pitch 0-00
Loudness 0:44
Rhythm 0-52
Wing Pitch 0:12
Memory 0-42

The Seashore rhythm test is of doubtful
reliability, but other evidence suggests that
rhythmic capacities are especially resistant to
environmental influences. It is surprising that
the two pitch tests should apparently be so little
subject to hereditary control. Vandenberg
himself suggests that it may be that only the
exceptional talent of the great composers and
musicians has an hereditary factor. He adds that
possibly defects rather than proficiencies are
more properly the concern of hereditary studies.

An interesting investigation of tone deafness
was carried out at University College, London
by Kalmus and Fry. They developed a distorted
tune test consisting of a few phrases of twenty-five
well-known tunes. In one version the tune was
played correctly and in the other the melody
was distorted by the insertion of several blatantly
wrong notes, the rhythm remaining unchanged.
The subjects were asked to decide whether the
tunes were played rightly or wrongly. The
test discriminated efficiently between 95 per cent
of some 1200 adult and adolescent subjects
considered normal and 5 per cent regarded as
tone deaf (Fry, 1948). Performance of Seashore’s
memory test was invariably poor among the tone
deaf, who were also weak on a pitch discrimination test. The tone deafness appeared frequently
to segregate in families and siblings in ratios
indicating that it might be caused by a single
gene, possibly a dominant. But Kalmus (1952)
is cautious in his conclusions and believes that
there may be several types of tone deafness and
that it is by no means independent of upbringing.

Wyatt (1945) provided ample evidence that
really efficient individual coaching could significantly improve pitch discrimination. Practice at
singing back notes and phrases can lead to a

lasting improvement among children aged three
to five (Updegraff, Heileger and Learned,
1938). How far-reaching would be the effects of
a long-term programme of such training is
not known. Evidence is, however, available on
the influence on test results of a normal amount
of exposure to music. Most test authors have
tried to produce tests that would be as little
affected by previous experience as possible.
Wide differences of ability certainly exist among
individuals brought up in musically similar
environments. In one case a marked difference
between two sisters was found even at the early
age of eighteen months; their subsequent careers
confirmed the difference. Allowing for maturation, scores remain reasonably constant and
unaffected by whether the child has commenced
studying an instrument or given up music
lessons. Again, little real differences in scores
are found with groups varying e.g. in sex, race,
or cultural background (Wing, 1948; Drake,
1957; Bentley, 1966).

It has been pointed out that many of these
results refer to children who may have already
passed the stage where training could affect
performance of the tests. Holmstrom (1963)
obtained evidence that children of eight who
come from musically good homes make significantly better scores than those from musically
poor homes. This does not, of course, disprove
that heredity is a factor.

The Parent-Child Study

Fifty-four pupils of a mixed grammar school
and thirteen from a grammar school for girls,
both in the Home Counties, and seventy-eight
of their parents were tested with the Wing
battery. Data on instrumental playing, music
lessons, concert-going and home listening were
collected by questionnaires.

It would have been desirable to include
parents and children at all ability levels. But a
volunteer group tends to become a self-selected
one, since adults are more likely to attend if
they themselves are musical, or have some
interest in music, or feel that their children may
show talent. The scores showed that the parents
were in fact rather above average in musical
ability. Many of the children were highly

151
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

talented and had enjoyed superior opportunities
to have music lessons and to listen to good
music. But even with this select group, the
midparental-child* and the sibling correlations
(Table 3) were very similar to the 0-5 “‘typically”’
reported in studies of intelligence (see Vernon,
1960). The low correlation of 0-290 for the full
sample rose to 0-364 when the results from the
girls’ school where the self-selection effects were
particularly strong were omitted. With a more
representative sample, a still higher correlation
might have been obtained.

TABLE 3

Correlations on the Wing Test
Correlation

Number _ coefficient
Midparent-child 25 0:475
Each parent-each child 100 0-290
Father-child 25 0-627
Mother-child 25 0-258
Higher scoring parent-child 25 0-394
Father-mother 25 0-331
Siblings 14 0-496

Considering that an interest in amateur
music-making might lead to meeting a marriage
partner of similar tastes, one might have expected
a fair degree of assortative mating among this
sample of parents. The figure obtained, 0-331,
is quite low, compared with the correlations
ranging from 0-3 to 0-7 reported with married
and engaged couples on height, intelligence and
a wide variety of other traits (see Cattell, 1950).

Again, any effect of dominance, as shown by
musical ability being transmitted by the more
talented parent, did not appear prominently in
the results.

The striking difference between the fatherchild and mother-child correlation was difficult
to explain. Boys make roughly the same scores
as girls on musical aptitude tests. It is therefore
hard to see how a sex-linked mechanism could
be involved in the transmission of musical
capacity. The data from the parents’ questionnaires on the amount of playing, the music
lessons they had received, and their listening
habits, were carefully examined for an environmental explanation. However, even with these
older children, it seemed to be the mother,

* The parents’ scores were averaged; in the eight cases
of siblings, the average of both children was used.

152

rather than the father, who set the musical
environment. Perhaps some subtle selection
mechanism was at work—conceivably, men may
be more likely to volunteer to be tested if they
suspect that their offspring resemble themselves!
In any case, the number of cases where both
parents could be tested was only twenty-five, so
the results can be considered no more than
suggestive.

The data from the parents’ questionnaires
were also compared with a total index of the
children’s musical level. This was obtained by
adding, to their Wing scores, a mark for musical
knowledge, a listening score and a combined
score for playing and music lessons. Parental
playing and music lessons were the only variables
which showed a highly significant (p less than
0:01) association with the children’s musical
level. This may be regarded as an example of
the interaction of hereditary and environmental
factors, but could be interpreted as supporting
either side. Thus, it could be argued that those
parents who had received music lessons and
kept up their playing were themselves musically
talented and that the children had inherited
their gifts. The adults’ Wing scores did seem to
show, broadly speaking, a positive association
with the amount of training they had received.
On the other hand, the environmentalist would
say that the parents’ playing had contributed to
raising the children’s musical level and that
parents who have themselves learned an
instrument are more likely to encourage their
children to learn to play. The correlation between
the children’s Wing scores and their score for
lessons and playing combined was quite high,
0-654. This might well have been partly due to
the weaker children making slow progress and
giving up their lessons. If the subjects had been
drawn from a population where few had enjoyed
opportunities to learn music, more decisive
results might have been obtained.

The Twin Study

1. Twins Brought up Together. Fifty pairs of
twins, with ages ranging from nine to sixteen,
from some twenty schools were tested with
the Wing tests. They were classified as identical
or fraternal by general impression and by
HEREDITARY AND ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS IN MUSICAL ABILITY

careful inspection. Questioning the twins
proved helpful in clearing up some cases of
doubt; some superficially alike pairs indignantly
denied that they were ever mistaken for one
another by relatives or teachers. The proportion
of MZ to DZ twins (40:60) was higher than the
proportion in the general population (28:72
according to the General Register Office
statistics). This is partly because the writer tried
to obtain fairly equal numbers of each type.

 

 

The smaller differences are somewhat more
frequent among the MZ twins and the larger
among the DZ groups. The extent of intrapair
differences was compared with the _ twins’
attitudes to music, amount of training and of
listening, age and musical level. No consistently
significant relationships emerged. Differences
were slightly greater among the younger, as
opposed to the older, pairs. With both types of
twin there seemed to be a certain tendency for the

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE 4
Distribution of Musical Quotient Intra-pair Differences
IDENTICAL FRATERNAL
cc * ene slam oeermineasaaaaaam
MQ Children Adults Children Adults
Points aemen re | a ——* ca * cena _ —_—* —‘\
Difference Boys’ Girls Men Women Boys Girls Mixed Men Women

0-4 4 2 2 1 3 1 1

5-9 1 2 1 2 1
10-14 2 2 2 3 2 2
15-19 ] 1 1 2 1 4 1
20-24 3 2 1 1
25-29 2 2 1 1
30-34 1 1
35-39
40-44
Over 45 1
Totals 10 10 5 3 9 12 9 2 1

Also, many boy-girl pairs would be at different
schools and likely to be missed. It is usually
considered better to exclude opposite-sexed
pairs, but, as will be seen, those in the present
sample were not unduly dissimilar in their
musical ability.

In addition to the child twins, Wing scores of
eleven pairs of young adults who were being
studied by the M.R.C. Psychiatric Genetics
Research Unit for another purpose were
obtained.

If the sample of parents and children was
unrepresentative in being more talented than
average, most of the twins were atypical in being
well below average in musical aptitude. In
particular, the appreciation tests may have been
unduly affected in some cases by guessing. The
results reported below therefore are based only
on the three ear acuity tests. The Wing
scores were converted into Musical Quotients
(MQs) by Wing’s formula (Wing, 1960). The
distribution of intra-pair differences for each
class of twin is shown in Table 4.

smaller differences to be found among the lower
scorers. This might mean that the weaker the
ear for music, the less responsive will the
individual be to any environmental stimulation,
or perhaps the more marked the degree of
inherited defect, the harder it is to modify. The
majority of the twins had never had music
lessons (apart from class lessons at school) and
only very few ever attended concerts or listened
to classical music at home. Among the identical
twins, if one had received music lessons, so had
the other. A difference of 23 MQ points was
found among a highly talented pair of blind
boy twins, judged to be identical. Both had been
studying the piano for four to five years and did
a good deal of practice. On the other hand, the
two pairs of identical girl twins with the most
discordant scores (differences of 23 and 33) had
never had music lessons. Among the fraternal
twins, the larger differences were found among
those who were having lessons and who played
for about equal periods, as opposed to those who
were similar in not playing at all. But the number

153
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

was too small to be conclusive as to whether
or not the training might have increased the
differences.

With one DZ pair, the MQ of one twin was
88 points lower than that of her co-twin. Both
had failed to record their answers to the first
test in the right place. As their MQs were based
only on their performance of tests 2 and 3, it
seemed better to omit such an extreme result
from the correlation calculations, in the absence

some connection with the higher proportion of
boys classified by their teachers as tone deaf.
A survey of over 16,500 schoolchildren by
Bentley (1954, 1957) found that, at the age of
twelve, 7 per cent of boys, but only 1 per cent
of girls, are considered ““monotones”. Bentley
himself was inclined to believe that this 4 per
cent of individuals may be the same 5 per cent
of the adult population who are tone deaf
according to the findings of Kalmus and Fry.

TABLE 5
Intra-pair Correlations of Musical Quotients
MZ
(n. in pairs) r (n. in pairs) r h2
20 child 0-838 20 child (like sexed) 0-719 0-423
20 child+8 adult 0-794 29 child+3 adult 0-721 0-262
10 boy 0-899 9 boy 0-734 0-617

of verification by retesting. 42 was calculated
using Holzinger’s formula.*

The extent of the MZ/DZ contrast (Table 5)
was much less than has been reported on
intelligence (see Vernon, 1960). It would be
unwise to conclude, however, that hereditary
factors are less important in musical ability.
The numbers were rather too small for correlations to be really stable; the level of difficulty
of the tests may affect correlations (cf. Vandenberg, 1962); and with such unmusical children
the Wing tests may well give less reliable results
than the best intelligence tests.

Environmental factors, as far as they could
be assessed from the questionnaires, did not
seem to account for the high h2 among the boy
twins considered separately. There might be

* h2 is a statistic devised by Holzinger as a measure of
the proportion of the variance of a trait in a given
population that is due to heredity as opposed to environment (Newman, Freeman and Holzinger, 1937). It is
useful as an expression of the estimated importance of
genetic control, but has been criticized because it assumes
that the environments of MZ and DZ twins can be
regarded as equivalent and does not take into account
any interaction between heredity and environment.
Holzinger’s formula is

rMZ—rDZ

fda
1 —rDZ

where r is the intra-class correlation for MZ or DZ twins.
Vandenberg (1962) preferred to use Clark’s formula,
which divides the variance of the DZ twins minus the
variance of the MZ twins by the variance of the DZ twins.

154

However, why some monotones outgrow or
overcome their deficiency before the age of
twelve, while others do not, would require
investigation.

The scores for the 30-itemed pitch and

memory tests were not intended by Wing to be
used separately from the other tests. However,
it seemed worth while trying to see whether
Vandenberg’s results could be verified or
disproved. The intrapair correlation on pitch
for the twenty pairs of DZ child twins was
higher, 0-767, than that for the twenty pairs of
MZ twins, 0-558. On memory, however, with
age partialled out, the intrapair correlation was
0-766 with the MZ group and 0-500 with the
DZ group. h2 as calculated with Holzinger’s
formula was 0-532. If Clark’s formula was used,
as in Vandenberg’s study, the h2 rose to 0-642.
The evidence in the literature on the heritability
of pitch discrimination is somewhat contradictory (see Shuter, 1964, pp. 193-5). One might
have expected that, if any difference existed at
all, pitch would have been more highly heritable
than musical memory.
2. Twins Brought up Apart. Thanks to the kindness of Mr. James Shields of the M.R.C.
Genetics Research Unit, five pairs of identical
twins brought up apart, who had earlier been
studied by him, were tested. The pseudonyms
used by Shields in his book (1962) have been
adopted here.
HEREDITARY AND ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS IN MUSICAL ABILITY

The intrapair differences in Wing raw scores*
were as follows: 2, 2, 12, 15 and 20.

One of the pairs whose scores differed by only
2 points had rather similar musical backgrounds:
both claimed to be interested in music; both had
one or two years of piano lessons during childhood. Both of the other pair of twins with a
difference of only 2 points had grown up in
families where other members of the family
played in brass bands. But while Francis had
actually played the cornet in a band for twentyfour years, Foster had not had the opportunity
of learning to play till only two months before
he was tested (at the age of thirty-eight). Their
scores were very Close to the average on Wing’s
norms. The pattern of subtest results was very
similar.

The twins with the difference of 12 marks were
aged fifty-seven when tested. The lower score
was made by Jim, the twin who was more
interested in music than his co-twin and who had
the more sophisticated tastes. He liked ballet
music and Tchaikovsky: his brother preferred
Strauss.

Jacqueline, whose Wing score was just above
average while her sister’s was 15 points less, had
enjoyed a much superior musical background as
a child. There was constant music-making at
home; she had piano lessons for seven years and
later conducted a Townswomen’s Guild choir.
No one in Beryl’s home played and she had
never had music lessons.

The largest difference was found with a pair
of female twins, tested when aged forty-three.
Their father played the piano and had gained
diplomas for music. Olive, brought up by her
own parents, had two years of piano lessons.
From the age of fourteen, she listened to light
classical music every evening. Madge was
brought up by an uncle and aunt who encouraged
her to become a piano teacher. She held an
A.T.C.L. diploma, but at the time of testing,
had given up music teaching. Both twins scored
well above the average and some of Olive’s
subtest scores were very similar to Madge’s.
They had similar tastes in music.

* Difference between raw scores=roughly half the
difference between MQ points.

Conclusions

The genetic factors that emerged from the
present investigation are less strong than those
found in studies of intelligence, probably
because of the musical level of the subjects that
could be tested.

The general conclusion to be drawn from this
and other studies reported in the literature is
that genetic components do impose an upper
limit to achievement and speed of learning in
music. How much less than maximum attainment
is reached in an unstimulating environment is
difficult to determine. The possibility of improving musical ability, as measured by the Wing
tests, is suggested by the difference of 20 marks
between a pair of MZ twins brought up apart.
But this difference occurred where one twin had
enjoyed the opportunity of training up to piano
teaching diploma standard. It might, moreover,
be only among persons with high initial endowment that differences of training could produce
such a difference in test performance. Also, the
more experienced twin may have felt more
confident about tackling the tests. Sensibly used,
tests such as the Wing have considerable
prognostic value in estimating future success
with music.

REFERENCES

Bentley, A. 1954. Children who sing out of tune, Music
in Education, March/April, 13-14.

Bentley, A. 1957. Children who sing out of tune, Music
in Education, July/Aug. 82-3; Sept./Oct. 114.

Bentley, A. 1966. Musical Ability in Children and its
Measurement, London, Harrap.

Cattell, R. B. 1950. Personality. New York, McGrawHill.

Drake, R. M. 1957. Manual for the Drake Musical Aptitude Tests. Chicago, Science Research Associates.

Feis, O. 1910. Studien iiber die Genealogie und Psychologie
der Musikers. Wiesbaden, Bergmann.

Fry, D. 1948. An Experimental Study of tone deafness.
Speech, 12, 4-11.

Galton, F. 1869. Hereditary Genius. London, Macmillan.

Holmstrom, L. 1963. Musicality and Prognosis. Uppsala,
Almgavist and Wiksells.

Hurst, C. C. 1912. Mendelian heredity in man. Eugen.
Rev. 4, 20-21.

Kalmus, H. 1949. Tune deafness and its inheritance.
Proc. Int. Cong. Genet. Stockholm, 605.

Kalmus, H. 1952. Inherited sense defects. Scientific
American, 186, 64-70.

Mjoen, J. 1926. Genius as a biological problem. Eugen.
Rev., 17, 242-257. ;

Newman, H. H., Freeman, F. N., and Holzinger, K. J.
1937. Twins: A Study of Heredity and Environment.
Chicago, Univ. Chicago Press.

155
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Revesz, G. 1953. Introduction to the Psychology of Music.
London, Longmans, Green.

Scheinfeld, A. 1939. You and Heredity. New York,
Stokes.

Shields, J. 1962. Monozygotic Twins Brought up Apart
and Brought up Together. London, OUP.

Shull, F. 1948. Heredity. New York, McGraw-Hill.

Shuter, R. P. G. 1964. Heredity and environmental
factors in musical ability, Ph.D. thesis, London University.

Stanton, H. 1922. Inheritance of specific musical
capacities, Psychol. Monog. 31, Whole No. 140,
157-204. .

Updegraff, R., Heileger, L., and Learned, J. 1938.

156

The effect of training upon the singing ability and
musical interest of three-, four-, and five-year-old
children, Univ. Iowa Stud. Child Welfare, 14, 83-121.

Vandenberg, S. G. 1962. The hereditary abilities study:
Hereditary components in a psychological test battery,
Amer. J. hum, Genet. 14, 220-37.

Vernon, P. E. 1960. Intelligence and Attainment Tests.
London, ULP.

Wing, H. D. 1948. Tests of musical ability and appreciation, Brit. J. Psychol. Monogr. Suppl. No. 27, Pp. 88.

Wing, H. D. 1960. Manual for Standardised Tests of
Musical Intelligence. N.F. Ed. Res.

Wyatt, R. F. 1945. The improvability of pitch discrimination, Psychol. Monog. 58, 267, 1-58.
