JSABELLA LEITCH

O.B.E., M.A., D.Sc., Commonwealth Bureau of Animal Nutrition, Rowett Research
Institute, Bucksburn, Aberdeen

Growth, Heredity and Nutrition’

Animal Breeding

T IS NOT at all clear to me whether
[Eesue: like animal breeding, should be

regarded more as a science or as an art; nor
do I know whether its aims include selective
breeding to ‘‘improve’”’ the human population
as the stock breeder has improved farm
animals. But, whether science or art, if there
is to be practical application of rules or ideals,
the first need is for criteria of merit. In animal
breeding the desideratum is a product or performance: speed in the racehorse, milk in the
cow. And what makes selection for any such
performance possible is that it should be
known, by experience, to be associated with
some bodily character, or group of characters.
In the cow for instance the girth of the “barrel”
and shape of the udder are important “‘points’’.
But conformation is not always a good guide. It
is true that within recent years we appear to be
becoming a little less dependent on morphological characters. A search is being made for
biochemical characters which can be measured
and used instead. In the human population
many biochemical peculiarities, which are gene
transmitted, have been recognised, but most of
them are criteria of abnormalities, of disorders,
not of merit, and so are of negative value only.

Again, within recent years, the animal
breeder has sought to make good some of the
shortcomings of conformation as a guide to
potential performance by invoking the aid of
the statistician. But the statistician’s measurements of heritability, say of milk yield, have
not added much to the practical outcome of
rule of thumb selection in the traditional
manner.

Not only so, but there is always the unknown
and incalculable danger from association of

 

* Part 1 of a paper read at a Members’ Meeting of
the Eugenics Society on May 20th, 1959.

genes, which may make hay of the best planned
breeding programme. One of the main problems of dairy husbandry just now is the short
herd life of the dairy cow. In many herds
sterility is the rule after only three, or at most
five, calves have been produced, instead of anything from ten to fifteen in the original stock.
No satisfactory explanation in terms of faulty
diet or hygiene has been found and it seems at
least possible that breeding for high milk yield
on the basis of parental performance and filial
conformation has meant also breeding for a
short productive life. We should perhaps be
cautious about the use of physical criteria to
predict what are complicated physiological
processes.

The Influence of Environment

That is not all. Even if a given set of physical
characters is a reliable indication of the
presence of a desired set of “performance”
genes, the expression of genetic potential
is greatly influenced by environment, and
in particular nutrition, both in plants and
animals. The alpine dandelion, which was
described as a separate species until someone
thought of transplanting it to the valley, the
rachitic child, the foetal malformations that
result from dietary deficiency or excess, or
from infection with rubella during certain sensitive stages of foetal development, these and
many other illustrations show how the gene
itself depends on correct nutrition for its proper
expression.

Human Diet and Health

For more than twenty years Dr. Thomson and
I, first as disciples of Lord Boyd Orr and later
with the collaboration of several colleagues
whose names appear in the list of references
below, have been much occupied with questions
of human diet and health. Whether the picture

15s

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1959, 51, 3.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

is of the broad differences between rich productive countries and the under-developed

regions, or between social classes in this or any |

other country, there is always a gradient with
wealth in quantity and quality of diet associated
with parallel gradients in rate of growth and
adult stature, physical performance (when comparable performances can be measured), mental
ability and resistance to disease. When we
began our studies there was a sufficiently large
gradient in quantity and quality of diet in this
country to be responsible, on our standards for
nutrient requirements, for considerable differences in growth and health, and our standards
were, I think, abundantly confirmed by the
remedial effect of war-time rationing which, if
it did not eliminate, at least greatly reduced the
differences of diet with social class. Our study
of the secular change in rate of growth of
school children (Boyne, Aitken and Leitch,
1957) shows the change that has accompanied
improved diet over the last thirty years.

That picture, which recurs within all populations and when populations are compared,
poses two questions. To what extent, if at all,
is the correlation of good diet with good
growth, good health and high intelligence due
to some linkage of genes for height, health and
high mental attainment, or to the independent
effects of better diet, better hygiene and better
education, which are associated in our social
inheritance, on independent genes for height,
health and brain? That is to say, is the inheritance social, in three linked parts, or genetic
in three linked systems?

Physical Development

Contemplating that array of correlated virtues
in the human population, and putting alongside
it such exceedingly mundane facts as that the
pig which is well-grown at weaning will be a
superior pig all its life and on into bacon and
ham, we arrived at a concept of a growth
potential which, if fufilled, connotes fulfilment
of the development of other characters. In
terms of that concept it is not necessarily height,
per se that is of merit but the completion of

156

- growth to the final correct adult proportions of

the body. You will remember the text-book
drawing of the proportions of the human body
from the two-month-old foetus to the adult.
Arrest of growth at any stage must mean relatively long torso and short legs; conversely,
completed growth means long legs and there
can be no doubt that the long-legged form is
that idealised in art and romantic writings. It
is also that which, in general, in the statistical
and population sense, connotes both health and
ability. Curiously enough we hear more often
of “arrested development’’ in the psychological
field than in the anthopometric.

The concept, then, is of a sort of developmental and physiological élan vital, not at all
in the sense in which Bergson used that term in
his Creative Evolution, but in a strictly ontogenetic sense. There is a developmental tide in
the affairs of man. . . . But such a concept has
no place among the accepted criteria of “‘fitness’’. In the strictly Darwinian sense, as I see
it and as it has been recently described by
Lerner, “Natural selection is a term serving to
say that some genotypes leave more offspring
than others,”’ or “The individuals who have
more offspring are fitter in the Darwinian
sense.”” In the human population we are faced
with the complication of differential birth rates,
those who possess merit in growth and development on the whole leaving fewer offspring than
others. But then number may be a poor
criterion of desirable properties in any population.

Lerner has described the biological phenomena of primary interest to geneticists as
arranged on three planes: the physico-chemical
or intracellular; the phenotypic or individual,
and finally “‘the properties of groups, including
means and variances of different metric traits
and attributes which bind individuals in time
and space... the population level.’’ It is there
and in respect of the Darwinian criterion of fitness, of capacity to leave offspring, that the
Baird school has, all unwitting, entered the
genetic field. Dr. Thomson has some peculiar
findings to show you.
