OUR CROWDED ISLAND
By Sir CHARLES ARDEN-CLOSE, K.B.E., C.B, C.M.G., ERS.

Present-Day Difficulties

ANY of us, uncomfortably aware of
M the irritations of food queues, overfull buses, shortages of supplies, and
restrictions in every direction, are inclined,
perhaps, to attribute the troubles and inconveniences of life in Britain, at the present
time, to the after-effects of the second world
war. And toa large extent this is, of course,
a correct explanation. But it is possible to
maintain the theory that in a rightly planned
society, with a properly balanced population,
the more serious of our troubles would have
been avoided. And, in particular, our food
troubles would have been less insistent than
they are now if there had been fewer to feed
and if we had more food available at home.
To be sure, the question of food is only one
of those which press upon us now with no
satisfactory answer available ; but food is
the most urgent and elementary of our requirements, for we can, at a pinch, make
shift with less clothing, with fewer houses, or
with less warmth in our houses, and, in fact,
we have all of us learnt to limit our calls
upon such requirements, and no great harm
results. But food is the first need of man,
and limitation of this primitive necessity is
not good for his body or his mind and adversely affects his energies and capacities.

Population Density of Britain

Let us first of all discuss the question of
our numbers, bringing the facts up to date.
There has been no census of population in
Great Britain since 1931. In that year, on
April 26th, the population of England and
Wales was 39°947 millions, and we may put
it at about 39-980 millions in the mid-year.
In mid-year 1947 it has been calculated that
the population of England and Wales was
43°026 millions ; in fact, in spite of the war,
our numbers increased in sixteen years by
somewhat more than 3 millions. The previous intercensal increase (1921-31) was 2-061
millions, so that the rate of increase was

23

substantially the same in spite of the second
world war. During the twentieth century our
numbers in England and Wales have increased from 32-527 millions in April 1901 to
43°026 millions in mid 1947, an increase of
104 millions.

The area of England and Wales is 58,324
square miles, or 37,327,479 acres. This gives
the extraordinary density of 737 persons per
square mile, a good deal less than an acre
per person. Actually, if the land were
divided up, each person could have a square
of about 65 yards a side; and if we make
allowance for towns, moorland, and the
other categories of country unsuited for food
production, we shall find that we are of
much the same opinion as Sir John Russell,
who, a short time ago, stated that “‘ we have
in this country little more than half an acre
of cultivated land a head of population.”’
Each person would have a plot about 49
yards square.

So far, nothing has been said about the
population of Scotland. That country keeps
its numbers down, by emigration, to about
5 millions, with slight variations. It is
curious to note that a considerable proportion of emigrants from Southern Ireland
settled in Scotland up to the outbreak of the
second world war, so that Scotland was exporting Scotchmen and importing Irishmen.
Taking 5 millions as the existing number of
the inhabitants of Scotland, and adding this
to the 43 millions in England and Wales, we
have the total population of Great Britain,
in mid 1947, as about 48 millions. The area
of Scotland is 29,796 square miles, that is,
almost exactly half the area of England and
Wales. The area of Great Britain is 88,120
square miles, and the density of its population is now 545 to the square mile.

It is sometimes said that though Britain is
densely crowded with people it is not so
crowded as Belgium, and it is desirable to put
this comparison fairly. Belgium has an area
of 11,755 square miles and an authoritative
24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

estimate of the density of its population,
per square mile, in 1939, was 713. The density of population of England and Wales
was about 737 in 1947, and of Great Britain
545. Although we have not available an upto-date figure for Belgium we may say that
it is probably not far off the figure for
England and Wales. It must be observed
that Britain has some eight times the area
of Belgium ; and England and Wales five
times, almost exactly. One might, perhaps,
expect that a relatively small country could
cope with a great pressure of people more
comfortably than could a large one. In any
case, so much depends upon the foodproducing capacity of the countries concerned that a mere comparison of densities
only affords a rough, preliminary measure of
the well-being of their populations.

Another country which is sometimes mentioned, in connection with this question of
density, is Java. According to CarrSaunders, writing in 1936, the density of
population per square mile, in Java, was 817.
The area, including Madura, is under 51,000
square miles, practically the same as that of
England without Wales. The above-quoted
authority remarked that ‘‘ the position cannot be regarded as otherwise than menacing ;
and this is now the view of the Dutch
authorities.”"* He goes on to indicate that it
would in future be difficult to provide food
for an increased population. We may say
that, in any case, there is no parallel to be
drawn between a mainly industrial people
in the temperate zone and a densely packed
agricultural Asiatic population in the
tropics.

There is more to be said for a comparison
of the population density of this country
with that of Italy. The area of Italy, including Sicily and Sardinia, is 120,956 square
miles, or, excluding those islands, 101,575
square miles. Italy was described by CarrSaunders in 1936 as an _ over-populated
country, and its numbers were then increasing. According to Landry the population in 1936 was 42 millions and the annual
excess of births over deaths was 375,000.
According to official statistics the population,

* World Population. Clarendon Press, 1936, p. 280.

at the end of 1946, was 45,645,000. With this
figure and the above-mentioned area for the
whole of Italy, including the islands, the
density works out at 377 to the square
mile (see Table 1).

TABLE 1
DENSITY OF POPULATION PER SQUARE MILE

Great Britain wee 545
England and Wales ... 737
England ___.... _ 783
Belgium (1939) 713*
Italy ... wax 377

We shall not go far wrong if we say that the
population density of England and Wales is
rather greater than that of Belgium and
nearly double that of Italy.

Of course, the numerical density of population is only a rough and ready indication of a
condition of pressure. But it is, nevertheless,
an indication which deserves to be taken
account of, because, in some cases, it sets a
limit to population growth. In an entirely
self-sufficient country it would determine the
number of people who could be fed from the
soil. And even in the cases of Western
peoples who have expanded their numbers
mainly by industrial development and the
import of food in exchange for goods produced in the country, even in these cases the
amount of food which can be produced at
home is a vital constituent of the problem of
trade and exchange. And this matter of the
possible amount of home-produced food is
decided ultimately by the area of land which
is available for the purpose. There is, therefore, no need to shirk discussion of area and
density, though any such discussion must not
ignore the factors of trade and finance. We
have at the present time ample evidence of
the extremely artificial condition of our
national economy. We are rightly told by
our public men of all parties that our pre-war
existence was made possible by our exports
and by our investments abroad. Now that
the latter have largely disappeared we have
to rely chiefly upon our exports as a means of
purchasing the balance of food beyond that
which we can produce at home, and the

*In Europe's Population in the Interwar Years,
League of Nations Publication, 1946, the density of
Belgium is given as 275°3 per square kilometre, in
1939, ie. 713 per square mile.
OUR CROWDED ISLAND 25

prospect is not entirely encouraging. We are
thrown back to a very inconvenient extent
on the problem of producing as much food as
we can in our island. And that must be the
next subject of our inquiry.

Home-Grown Food

We may begin by considering how much
agricultural land is required for the production of food sufficient to support one human
being on a Western European standard. This
problem is necessarily vague, but is not
entirely indeterminate; and as evidence
that it is worth consideration we have the
pronouncements of several eminent authorities on agricultural methods and _ policy.
Estimates by three experts, now, alas ! no
longer with us, Sir Henry Rew, Sir Daniel
Hall and Sir Thomas Middleton, all connected with the Ministry of Agriculture and
Fisheries, were not entirely in agreement.
The first-named stated that to maintain a
unit of our population, on a pre-war standard
of food, would require 2} acres of foodproducing land. Hall’s estimate was 2 to
24 acres. And Middleton said that pasture
could supply food, for one year, at the rate
of 2 to 50 acres per person, whereas arable
land could feed I to I-I persons per acre.
These estimates are clearly rough and ready ;
probably Middleton’s is the most valuable.

But, of course, the actual food-producing
capacity of the total area will depend upon
the extent of the various categories of land
and the fertility of each category. And as to
these various areas we have some excellent
information. In 1941 Dr. Dudley Stamp, the
Director of the Land Utilisation Survey of
Britain, published an important report,
entitled Fertihty, Productivity and Classification of Land in Britain. In his introduction
Dr. Stamp remarks, ‘“‘ the importance of a
classification of land according to inherent
fertility and productivity was suddenly
emphasised by the outbreak of war.... It
took the war to bring home to the leaders and
people of Britain the tragedy of the longcontinued loss to industry and housing of
much of the best agricultural land of the
country, thereby lowering enormously both
the actual and potential production of food.”

The report specially stresses the matter of
the inherent fertility of the land. Dr. Stamp
remarks that investigations tend to show
that there is a considerable stability of land
use on the best land and on the poorest land,
and that the greatest fluctuations are to be
found on land of intermediate quality. He
adds the interesting historical note that,
“The problem of increasing the home food
supply is nothing new. It was a paramount
problem at the time of the Napoleonic wars,
when much unsuitable land was ploughed, to
be abandoned soon after.’’ It may be noted
that the population of England and Wales, in
1821, was about 12 millions.

As subsequently revised, Dr. Stamp divides
the land into ten major types, beginning with
first-class land capable of intensive cultivation, and going on through good general
purpose farm land, medium quality general
purpose land, first-quality grassland, good
but heavy land, medium quality light land,
to the poorest land, rough marsh pasture, and
ending with areas occupied by towns, etc.

He remarks that, of the first-class arable
land, huge tracts have been taken for aerodromes and by public bodies, and that such
land needs protection from the inroads of
housing and industry, and, he might have
added, from the demands of the Services.

In consultation with the Ministries of
Agriculture and Town and Country Planning, Dr. Stamp has revised his earlier
estimates, and now gives the following
acreages :

England &

Wales Scotland
Total good agricultural land 17,825,900 3,963,300

Total medium agricultural

land. 2 ms wee 11,933,800 2,877,400
Moorland, heaths, etc. 6,351,000 12,113,800
Chief towns, etc. ... 1,142,700 114,200
37,273,400 19,068,700

It will be noticed that whereas in England
and Wales about 80 per cent of the whole area
of the country can be classed as good or
medium agricultural land, in Scotland the
percentage is only about 36. Or we may put
the comparison like this, England and Wales
have 4°35 times as much good and medium
agricultural land as Scotland, and, if the
26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

size of a population depended entirely upon
the productivity of the soil, England and
Wales would have 4°35 times the population
of Scotland.

Dr. Stamp has information in greater
detail than is given in the above table, and
from this information the agricultural expert
could arrive at a plausible figure for the size
of the population which the land of Britain
could feed. Using Middleton’s factors and
the above table, however, it is possible to
get an idea of a maximum home-fed population. But actual records are more valuable,
though they only imperfectly serve as a
guide to the future.

A consideration of the area of land which
can be made use of for the supply of homeproduced food has its importance as providing an estimate of the limiting amount of
food which can be so produced, and thus
gives us a limit to the number of people who
can be fed from home sources. But we can,
perhaps more profitably, discuss what was
actually done, during the war years, and
since that time, in the way of feeding the
teeming population of Britain with food
produced in our island.

Food in War-Time

The study of this part of the food problem
is rendered easy by the information provided
by an admirable pamphlet, published by the
Ministry of Food in 1946 and entitled, How
Britain Was Fed in War-Time. It is therein
mentioned that “‘ The chief reason why the
war-time shortage of food was so acute was
the dependence of the United Kingdom on
imports for more than half its food supplies ;
up to 1939 over half the meat, nearly all the
fats, four-fifths of the sugar, and some ninetenths of the cereals and flour were imported.”
To make up for a large part of these imports
it was necessary, as we all know, to stimulate
the home production, with the result that
““ by 1944 there was, by comparison with the
pre-war production, a go per cent increase in
the production of wheat, an 87 per cent increase in potatoes, and a 45 per cent increase
in vegetables. The production of sugar-beet
increased by Ig per cent....’’ Before the
last war we imported, each year, some 22

million tons of food; ‘‘ every day ten or
fifteen food ships reached our ports,” and
“‘imported food provided more than twothirds of the calories and more than half of
the total protein supply.’’ Our dependence
upon imported food was colossal, and far more
than that of any other country in the world,
Britain was obliged to buy the bulk of her
food from abroad. In studying the figures
given in the pamphlet it is rather curious to
note that the United States did not send us
any very noteworthy quantity of food, as
compared, that is, with Canada and Argentina.

There is much of interest in the pamphlet
not very directly affecting our particular
enquiry, but a perusal of the whole of it is
well worth while and will show the reader
how efficient a public department can be
when provided with a far-seeing and capable
direction and a skilled technical staff. Before
we leave this instructive pamphlet it may be
noted that it is therein stated that whereas
the annual average weight of imported food
and animal feeding stuffs, during the years
1934-8, was 22 million tons, these imports
were reduced to an average annual weight of
about 1r million tons during the war years
1942-4. Of course, weight is not in itself a
satisfactory measure of food value, but it
gives an indication of the amount of shipping
that was required—and saved.

Present-Day Food in Britain

And now we come to a matter which is of
direct importance for the study of our
present dependence upon outside sources of
food supply. The Ministry of Agriculture
and Fisheries has very civilly sent the present
writer the following information in a letter
dated November rgth, 1947:

““ The most recent calculations made by
the Ministry of Food, of the proportion of
food consumed in the United Kingdom
which is home-produced, refer to the year
July 1946-June 1947. The figures are as
follows :

Percentage of calories home-produced ... ov 39
Percentage of all protein home-produced wae 51
Percentage of animal protein home-produced . 59
Percentage of vegetable protein home-produced 43
Percentage of fat home-produced ams 31
OUR CROWDED ISLAND 27

These figures are exactly comparable with
those quoted for other years in the pamphlet
How Britain was Fed in War-time.”

And if we refer to the pamphlet in question
we shall find that in the years 1934-8 the
home-produced calories averaged 30 per cent
of the total consumption, and for the years
1943 and 1944 the figures were 41 and 40 per
cent respectively. It therefore appears that
we increased our home-grown production
from 30 to about 40 per cent, an increase of
one-third, no mean result, but still leaving
60 per cent to be imported. We will now deal
with the use of calories as a measure of food
production.

Food Units

Dr. K. G. Fenelon, Director of the Statistics Division of the Ministry of Food, has
kindly furnished a copy of some notes,
dated December 19th, 1947, on the problems
involved in the calculation of the proportion
which home-produced food forms of the total
supply in Great Britain. In these notes it is
pointed out that there are three possible
units for use in the measurement of food,
namely, weight, value and nutritional significance. As to weight, it is clear that the
use of this as a unit would give very unreliable results, though, of course, the discussion of weights is necessary in a consideration
of transport and storage problems. As to
value, there is a long discussion on this point,
including the consideration of such items as
the cost of imports at the port of arrival, the
number of non-food items included in the
food items, and other details which need not
concern us here, except to note that cost
cannot generally be accepted as a means of

comparison. Finally, it is decided that :
If food as a source of energy and a means of
life is the criterion, the calorie method, in spite
of its defects, is superior to the cost method, and
since protein, fat and carbohydrates are the
calorie providers (in the proportion of 4-9 and 4)
they are in effect subsumed in the calorie figures.
. The use of protein only would under-emphasize
foods of low protein content. Where, however,
the criterion is economic or financial the calorie

method is not suitable.

“The calorie is the quantity of heat
energy required to raise the temperature of

one kilogram of water by 1 degree Centigrade.’’ The calorie values of the various
foods are determined by actually burning
these foods in oxygen and measuring the
resulting amount of heat. Thus the article on
“ Diet ” in the Encyclopedia Britannica, in
which it is stated, later on, that, during the
years 1909-13, the daily ration of the
“ average man ”’ in the United Kingdom was
3,410 calories.

It is clear that we are entitled to use, as a
single figure to indicate our dependence upon
imported food, the estimate that 39 per cent
of our total consumption is home-produced.
That means that 61 per cent of our food is
imported. The population of Great Britain
is now (1947) 48 millions, and it follows that
the equivalent of some 29 millions of our
people are fed on imported food, and 19 millions on home-grown food.

But even this is not the whole story. The
average amount of food now consumed in
this country is below the pre-war average.
The Minister of Food stated in November
1947 that there is an “‘ average daily calorie
intake of just below 2,700 per head for the
whole population.”” This should be compared with the average daily quantity consumed, during the years 1909-13, of over
3,400. So that not only do we import 61 per
cent of the food that we eat, but, even with
this large addition to our resources, an
addition paid for with the utmost difficulty,
even with this huge purchase of food from
other countries, we are under-fed to the
extent of 20 per cent.

The matter may be put in this way: the
39 per cent that we produce in this country
is 39 per cent of a standard which is twentyseven/thirty-fourths of the pre-war standard,
so that in terms of the latter we only produce at home 31 per cent, that is, 31 per cent
of the total amount of food required to feed
Britain on a pre-war scale.

The facts cannot be disputed, and the
reasons for them are not far to seek. This isa
very densely populated country, and we lived,
until the outbreak of the second world war,
somewhat precariously by means of our
world-wide trade and on our oversea investments. Our condition was tolerable, if
28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

artificial. But it was admitted on all hands
that, whereas the home country was crowded
with people, the Dominions were, and are,
under-populated. It only required the
calamity of a second world war to undermine
our home stability. Our present condition is
largely due to the continued increase of our
numbers ; the population is now 104 millions
larger than in the beginning of the century ;
it has grown from 37°5 millions in 1901 to
48 millions in 1947. At our present rate of
food production at home, and on our present
standards, we could feed half the r1gor1
population.

Important Opinions

In his valuable article, entitled “ Stages in
Population Growth,’’ which appeared in the
EUGENICS REVIEW for October 1947, Dr.
Blacker remarks, “‘ The United Kingdom is
far from being self-sufficient in foodstuffs.
We depend, and are likely to continue
depending for some time to come, on imports.”” This may, perhaps, read a little too
optimistically. Can anyone foresee a time,
within the next generation, when we shall
not have to depend mainly on imports of
food ? Here are some additional opinions :

Mr. Ernest Brown, then Minister of Health in
the House of Commons, in July 1943: It was an
entire misreading of the situation to regard the
reproduction rates of the nineteenth century as
normal. In Great Britain the population was
more than trebled during the hundred years, and
had still substantially increased to its present
size... with an area density which was among
the highest on contemporary record.... A
check was inevitable sooner or later.

Mr. Ernest Benn* : We are 684 to the square
mile as compared with twenty-three Russians or
forty-three Americans ; and we have lost those
claims upon the rest of the world, secured to us
by the work of previous generations, and on
which our high standard of living was built.

Lord Moran, in September 1945: This dreadfully over-populated island. ...

Professor C. E. M. Joadft: And so it (the
population) will begin to decline. For goodness’
sake, don’t let us be frightened of that. I think
an England with far fewer people in it will be a
happier and more comfortable England.

Lord Trent}: I would appeal, in particular,

* Sunday Times, September 3rd, 1944.
¢ Sunday Dispatch, October 7th, 1945.
¢ The Times, March 12th, 1947.

to industrialists to recognize that the food
problem is their problem and not only the
farmers’. Food is as vital to the human worker
as fuel is to the machine. The more we produce
from our own soil, the less we need to scramble
for abroad .. . from every point of view industrialists should support and reinforce the demand
for positive action to reduce our precarious
dependence on external food supplies.

And Dr. Arthur Bryant*: We are a creditor
country no longer. ... But we still have to feed
a far bigger population than we can grow food
for. That necessity places us at the mercy, in the
open markets of the world, of those who raise
the food we so urgently require . . . within the
next two years, possibly the next year, a food
crisis of the most grievous kind may face us... .
None of the dangers confronting us, domestic or
foreign, compares in urgency with this.

In a discourse at the Royal Institution on
October 31st, 1947, Lord De La Warrf put
the case like this:

The word “ crisis ’’ is misleading, and its use
has prevented us from realizing that the start we
gained in the industrial revolution has run out
and that cheap food and raw materials, with the
consequent high standard of living to which we
had become Eee can no longer be taken
for granted. . During the last five years
before the war . . . we had already begun to live
beyond our means. wee

If the land of Britain is to yield of its best, it
will demand a greater share of every section of
our national wealth, its energies, capital, income,
raw material, and, above all, its brains. It will
take time to solve the problem of feeding the
millions who inhabit Britain. Neither agriculture
nor any other single industry can provide a
panacea; though agriculture could furnish a
greater contribution to the future well-being of
our country than any other industry.

And Dr. Ingef :

My own opinion is that since we cannot hope
to recover our foreign trade, we shall gradually
return to pre-industrial England with a much
smaller population living mainly on the land.
We may be happier when that change has been
brought about. But the reduction of the population by birth-control would be a very slow
process, and those who wish to emigrate may be
those whom we do not wish to lose.

Other Difficulties
Difficulties caused by the crowded state of
our island do not entirely end with the
shortage of food. There are, for instance, the
* Illustrated London News, March 22nd, 1947.

¢ Nature, December 27th, 1947.
t The Hibbert Journal, January 1948.
OUR CROWDED ISLAND 29

inconveniences of present-day travel, the
deterioration of the countryside, the exhaustion of our mineral resources, and the
destruction of our forests, resulting in our
having to import nearly all the timber that
we need. The shortage of houses and clothing
should fairly be put down chiefly to the
second world war. But the war also should
be credited with having caused an improvement in the supply of food from home
sources. This is the crucial matter. We can,
in time, repair our houses, rebuild those
destroyed by enemy bombs, and build new
and better dwellings in place of our slums,
and all this we can do mainly from our own
resources. But there is a severe limitation to
the amount of food that can be grown in
Britain, and the shortage of food imposes
burdensome reactions on our economic
situation.

The Future
How does this picture of a densely crowded

Britain square with the demand, which we

sometimes hear, for an increase in the birthrate ? Well, those who make this demand are
moved, not by our present difficulties, but
by the fear of a possible future of a continuously dwindling population. This fear
is chiefly due to the publication of various
forecasts of the size of our population, based
on certain assumptions as to future fertility.
So far, the forecasts have not been justified,
and we should do well to take the advice of
the late Dr. R. R. Kuczynski who, in the
words of an obituary notice in The Times,
studiously refrained from predicting the
total future population of any country, “a
risk which no serious statistician should be
willing to shoulder.’’ But, whilst it is correct
to say that forecasts of future figures of total
population should be looked upon with suspicion, this remark does not apply to forecasts, based on a life-table, of certain
elements of future population. Thus, Professor A. V. Hill, in The Times of September
23rd, 1943, gave a diagram, based upon the
calculations of Mr. D. V. Glass, which showed
for successive years up to 1963 the number of
women in England and Wales who would be
alive between the ages of 20 and 40. These

had actually been born and a life-table
would show how many would be likely to
survive to a given year. The di
showed a rise up to about 1935 and then a
decrease to 1963, after which date the
numbers would be speculative.

Or we may quote Sir Ernest Rock Carling,
who spoke at a conference in June 1947 :

In 1946 there were 6,587,000 people of 60 and
over in Great Britain, compared with only
2,408,426 in 1901. It is estimated that in 1971
there will be between 9 and 10 millions.

And Sir Godfrey Ince :

In 1939 we had 417,000 young men reaching
the age of 18; in 1950 295,000 would do so.
We may, in fact, take it as true that the

population of Britain is an ageing one. At
the same time we must realize that our
numbers have not yet begun to diminish. In
spite of the second world war there has been
a steady increase, and we have reached the
present massive total of over 48 millions. We
do not know when the population will be at
its maximum, and we cannot say what that
maximum will be, though we might hazard
a guess, and put it at somewhere in the
neighbourhood of 50 millions. It is legitimate
to put the question: If we find the utmost
difficulty in feeding 48 millions, how shall
we be able to feed a still larger number ?

Emigration

It will be generally agreed that, if our
numbers are not for ever to go on increasing,
we must face the difficulties resulting from
an ageing population. And, as a consequence, oldish people must learn to take a
larger share in the nation’s work. Ifa certain
number of the young and fit emigrate to the
Dominions, the average age at home must
still further increase, and we must face this
difficulty also. For on general grounds it is
highly desirable that the other units of the
British Commonwealth should increase their
relatively sparse populations by immigration
from this country. Take the case of Australia,
for instance, with a population, on June 3oth,
1947, of 7,580,800. The British newspaper
proprietors’ delegation, which visited Australia in 1943, returned with the knowledge
30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that, in that country, the population problem
was of prime interest to everybody. Sir
Walter Layton* said that ‘“‘ economists
would like to see Australia with at least
20 million people. Where was she to get
them? Everywhere the members of the
delegation went they were questioned about
immigration.”” In May 1944 Mr. Forde, the
acting Prime Minister, said that if Australia
did not build up her population, the country
“might not be given another chance.”

There can be no doubt that Australia is
anxious for a steady stream of immigrants
from this country. Mr. Arthur Calwell,
Australian Minister of Immigration, stated,
in August 1947, that Australia House had
received inquiries from 400,000 people in
Britain about settlement in Australia. He
re-stated the view that 70,000 immigrants
could be absorbed each year without interfering with the country’s economic standards.
He did not agree with those who advised
people in Britain to stay at home, where
they were “‘ only helping to starve and suffocate each other.” f

As to Canada, the population was estimated by the Dominion Bureau of Statistics
to be 12,582,000 in June 1947. This represents an increase of more than 9g per cent.
since the census of 1941.

The white population of New Zealand was
reported, in January 1946, to be 1,746,319,
and the Maori population to be 172,509,
almost exactly one-tenth of the whites. The
white population had increased 11 per cent.
in about ten years. {The total, in January
1946, was 1-918 millions, and now it may be
1:96 millions, in a country which has an area
of more than 100,000 square miles. But it
should be remembered that at the beginning
of the century there were only 773,000. It
was calculated, more than twenty years ago,
that the numbers would reach about 2 mil
* The Times, January 25th, 1944.
+ The Times, August. 29th, 1947.

lions in 1946, and this prediction happens to
be not far from the truth.

In January 1948 the total white population
of the British Commonwealth overseas could
be put at 25 millions (see Table 2). In January
1927 the total white population of the above
countries was just over 19 millions, so that,
in 21 years, there has been an increase of
some 6 millions.

TABLE 2
WHITE POPULATION OF THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH

Canada (June 1947) 12,582,000
Australia (June 1947) ms 7,580,800
New Zealand (Jan. 1946) . 1,746,319
Union, of South Africa (1946) 2,372,690
Newfoundland, about 300,000
S. Rhodesia, etc. 150,000

24,731,809

Taking the whole British Commonwealth,
Britain and Northern Ireland have some
49°4 million people, and Canada, Australia,
New Zealand, South Africa, Newfoundland,
Southern Rhodesia, etc., have approximately 25 million white people, that is,
rather more than half the number at home.
A redistribution, during the course of the
next generation or so, would seem to be
eminently desirable. In November 1947,
Lord Addison, speaking for the Government,
said: ‘‘ The Government did not take a
short-sighted view of the needs [of the
Dominions] and considered it right that
Britain should afford the loss of the proportion of the population which migrated to the
Empire. Britain’s loss would add not only to
the strength of this country, but to that of
the Commonwealth in a practical way.”
Speaking to the Oxford University Labour
Club on February 27th, 1948, Mr. Hugh
Dalton expressed the view that in the long
run this country would not be able to carry
such a large population as at present. There
ought to be a substantial movement of
population from this island to other places,
especially to Australia.*

* The Times, February 28th, 1948.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XL, Na 1
