THE

EUGENICS REVIEW

THE COST OF DEGENERACY.

BEING PART OF THE ANNUAL PRESIDENTIAL
ADDRESS.

By Major LEonarpD Darwin, D.Sc.

The building of Utopias is generally an unprofitable
pastime, because the differences between the perfect state and
our existing very imperfect conditions are so great that all such
dreams remain far outside the range of practical proposals.
With the object of indicating the possible benefits to be derived
from eugenic reform, we may, however, usefully consider what
would occur if our Government were not only really to grapple
with these racial problems, but that the result thus actually
obtained was a slow and gradual betterment of the nation as
regards its inborn qualities. It is not necessary to assume the
establishment of human stud farms for the breeding of giants
and geniuses; for such a system has never been part of the
eugenic programme. But we may be permitted to look into
an imaginary future, and to attempt to picture a country where
there had for long existed a far deeper sense of responsibility concerning all questions connected with marriage than that now obtaining in any civilised community ; a condition of things which
had led without any compulsion to an increased fertility amongst
the fit, together with some diminution of fertility amongst those
suffering from certain types of hereditary defect. We may also
not unreasonably imagine that in this ideal country both the
feeble in mind and many other unquestionably degenerate
classes had long been actually prohibited from becoming parents,
and that this had led to a considerable diminution in their
numbers. And, having drawn this not impossible picture, may
94 EUGENICS REVIEW.

we not legitimately enquire whether we can form any estimate
of the effect which such eugenic successes would have on the
internal condition and the external relations of this happy land ?
The monetary effects of social changes, though probably not
the most important of all the possible consequences, are often
those which are most easily foretold ; and for this reason we may
begin by considering the results on the finances of our nation
which are likely to arise from a reduction in the number of our
degenerate citizens. Definite statements on such subjects are
quite out of the question, and we must be content with noting any
facts which give even a vague indication of the answer sought ; as,
for example, the items in our existing national expenditure which
certainly would be reduced more or less considerably as the result
of successful eugenic reform. The expenditure in the United
Kingdom on Law, Justice, police, the relief of the poor, and lunatic
asylums—all services closely connected with degeneracy—now
amounts to about 448,000,000 a year. Then, again, there is the
expenditure on special schools, a burden on the country still more
closely correlated with hereditary defects. As to our national
system of insurance, the necessary taxation, if it may so be
described, is made to fall on the employer, the employed, and the
tax payer ; and obviously this impost, which now amounts to some
£25,000,000 a year, would be reduced, or the benefits now obtainable would be increased, if there were fewer of the unfit amongst the
ranks of the insured. Lastly, we have to consider not only taxes
in money, but also imposts of other kinds, which in some
countries form a heavy item; for example, all forms of compulsory service, whether civil or military, fall harder on the
capable in proportion to numbers of the incapable excused
or rejected. In short, it is obvious that a large decrease in
degeneracy would lead to a material decrease in taxation.
But any such lightening of the burden of taxation, in consequence of a diminution in the numbers of the unfit, would probably
form but a small part of the easement of the financial strain which
would be experienced by the ordinary citizen from such a cause.
Wages are closely correlated with the average value of the work
done by the workman; and the presence of either the shirker or
THE COST OF DEGENERACY. 95

the weakling in the ranks of labour must, therefore, inevitably and
automatically reduce the daily rate of wages. Even in the case of
piece work, according to Professor Pigou, harm is felt by all as the
result of the inferior work of the inferior workman. Another
illustration of the many ways in which the fit suffer financially
through the failings of the unfit is to be found in the fact that
when a man fails to pay his rent, or a bill of any kind, the loss
does not in the long run fal] mainly on the individual landlord or
shopkeeper concerned ; for such burdens are unconsciously transferred by them on to the backs of the general public by a rise in rents
or prices. In fact, the honest man without knowing it is always
paying the debts of the wastrel. The expenditure for charitable
purposes must also be held in view; for this in a large measure
represents funds supplied by the fit for the maintenance of the unfit.
The endowed charities of the United Kingdom have an estimated income of some 43,500,000, a figure which might perhaps be increased
to 410,000,000 if all the unendowed charities were added ; and a
more useful disposal of all this vast store of national wealth would
obviously be possible under a more eugenic vegzme. Lastly, as to
the cost yearly defrayed out of their own pockets by private
individuals in maintaining their sick, defective, and degenerate relatives, it can only be said that the total sum must be enormous.
Thus we see that there are many ways not connected with
taxation in which our countrymen would find their financial lot
improved in an ideal eugenic future.

Another method of bringing home to our minds the harm
done to us all by the presence of the good-for-nothings is to
attempt to visualize what economists call the national dividend ;
an attempt which can best be made by regarding it as a great
stream composed of all the goods issuing from our manufactories
and all the services rendered for payment by our citizens, a stream
which, when re-distributed over the whole surface of the nation,
serves to supply all our material needs and comforts. Now this
stream—the national dividend—must be considered both with
reference to its quality and its quantity ; for the better its quality and
the greater its quantity, the more prosperous will be the land it
waters. As to its quality, when we remember that our national
96 EUGENICS REVIEW.

drink bill is said to amount to £160,000,000 a year, we see how
great even as regards this one item are the possibilities of substituting a useful for a useless or harmful output of commodities ;
a substitution which any increase in the innate strength of character of our citizens would in many ways inevitably tend to
produce. As regards the quantity of this stream of goods and
services, we could only deal effectively with the problems
involved if we knew the numbers not only of what may be described as the good-for-nothing class, but also of those whose
time is, economically speaking, wasted in ministering to their
wants; whereas of these numbers we can now only form the
crudest guess. We know that there are in round numbers about
a million paupers in receipt of Poor Law relief every day in the
United Kingdom, and that the employment of a whole army of
able-bodied officials and attendants is thus rendered necessary.
We can also form some notion of the number of persons living
a criminal and worse than useless life from the fact that about
14,000 persons are convicted annually, and that 68,000 police are
needed mainly for our protection against this class, whilst there
is no return available indicating the number of prison officials
and warders, whose employment is obviously entirely dependent
on crime. We know that there are over 22,000 scholars on the
register of the schools for defectives, in which are employed
1,400 full and part-time teachers. Lastly, as to those who are
deformed, diseased, epileptic, insane, idiotic, feeble-minded,
hereditary drunkards, etc., whether found in hospitals, asylums,
institutions, or in private dwellings, together with those whose
employment is dependent on them or diminished by their presence, their name is legion. Having formed a rough mental
estimate of the numbers of persons involved, we must next try
to conceive the total volume of the additional goods which would
be produced, and of the additional services which would be
rendered, if those belonging to these defective classes were even
partially replaced by normal productive citizens, and if, moreover, the employees thus set free from their economically
useless occupations were employed instead on economically productive services. In fact eugenic progress would, we _ believe,
THE COST OF DEGENERACY. 97

mean the production of much: additional wealth, and all wealth
better spent when made.

Thus far the presence in our ranks of those suffering from
obvious heritable defects has been mainly held in view, though
in this way we get a very incomplete idea of the possible effects
of eugenic reform. What we hope to attain is, not merely a
reduction in the numbers of all the truly degenerate types, but
also a general raising of the standard of the whole nation in regard
to its inborn qualities ; a result which a general increase in the
sense of racial responsibility would certainly tend automatically
to produce. Such widespread beneficial effects would also in all
probability be produced by any compulsory method of preventing
the unquestionably degenerate from breeding; for if such types
were prohibited from intermarrying with the fit, their defects
would cease to be spread abroad through the agency of heredity,
and all the classes of the nation would thus be benefited. In
fact we believe that eugenic reform would diminish all the less
desirable types, and increase all the more desirable, to the great
advantage of the community as a whole. As regards national
finance, the expenditure thrown on the state by each individual
must in vast numbers of cases be less than the sum received in
taxation directly or indirectly from him; and the elimination of
all such persons, many or most of whom could not be described
as being degenerate, would obviously be a fiscal advantage to the community ; an advantage which would be increased
if they were replaced by citizens who were actually paying assets
to the nation. Again, if the average level of the race were raised,
the percentage of those who may now be ranked as exceptionally
able would also be increased, and the nation would thus
benefit in ways not yet mentioned. For example, the presence
of a larger percentage of those who may be described as the
lieutenants and serjeants of industry would promote commercial
progress to a degree hardly realizable by those who have had no
connection with manufactories. The extent to which the commerce
of our country can be developed is, in my opinion, definitely and
strictly limited by the supply of the superior employees of the
various types required ; and a material increase in the proportion
98 EUGENICS REVIEW.

of the nation who could be entrusted with responsibility of any
kind would help us greatly in our commercial competition with
other countries. We have, moreover, to consider not only the
benefits conferred on others by the fit, and the injuries inflicted
on others by the unfit, but also what every citizen might gain
were he to become more fit himself. As wages are largely
dependent on the value of the work done, it follows that the
raising of the average level of any section of the community in
regard to their innate capacity for productive work would be
accompanied by an increase either in the wages or in the leisure
enjoyed by that section, whilst the total amount of bodily and
mental effort necessary to produce a given volume of goods and
services would also be lessened. In connection with this subject
it may be worth noting in passing that recent psychological
investigations indicate that the capacity for work varies greatly
even amongst healthy and normal persons ; in one case for
example, 35 selected girls were able to perform with increased
accuracy the work formerly done by 120, the cost being less
though the wages were doubled.! The possible benefits to mankind to be derived from an increase in the innate industrial
capacity of all workers are, therefore, very great indeed.

We may conclude then that every man would gain both by
a diminution in the number of the unfit in the nation and by an
increase in the number of the more fit, as well as by an increase
in his own innate fitness, were that possible ; and in all these ways
the advantages of eugenic reform are clearly foreshadowed.

In connection with the harm due to impaired racial characteristics, there is one last point which must not be overlooked,
although I have no wish to lay undue stress upon it. As long
as the enlistment for our naval and military services is accompanied by a fairly rigid system of selection, physical deterioration in our fighting forces is not much to be feared. But woe
betide the nation that does become so degenerate as to be unable
to defend itself with due vigour when the pinch comes. Then
the debt which would have to be paid for the neglect of the preceding generation to regulate their conduct in accordance with
the duties they owed to posterity would indeed be grievous.

1Psychology and Industrial Efficiency. Miinsterburg. p. 55.
THE COST OF DEGENERACY. 99

The result of this long discussion has been to show that the
effect of eugenic reform, if successful, would be to lower taxation,
to raise real wages, to facilitate commercial competition, and to
increase the security of the country in time of war. In things
wholly immaterial, great benefits would moreover be felt ; fora
diminution in the number of the insane, the criminal, the feebleminded, the diseased, and the wastrels annually brought into the
world would mean the removal of a terrible burden of unmerited
misery ; whilst an increase in the output of men and women of
character and ability would not only add to the reputation of our
country, but would also add to the happiness of its inhabitants in
many ways. These are the benefits we hold to be in the power of
this generation to bestow on our country in the future by now
resolutely grappling with the problem of human heredity.

But this is all but a mere idle dream, we shall no doubt be
told. Certainly it is if we do not now bestir ourselves ; for recent
investigations point with no uncertain hand to degeneracy rather
than racial progress as the probable result of our existing social
system. How then is this danger to be averted? The social
reformer has long been busy in his attempts to improve the
environment of the people; and his efforts merit our warmest
approval. Progress in the evolutionary sense is, however, not
thus certainly promoted, and may not be promoted at all. What
we also need is an intellectual campaign, which will make the path
of eugenic reform stand out more clearly in front of us by
increasing our knowledge of the laws of heredity ; and a moral
campaign to make our fellow countrymen now ready to accept the
sacrifices necessary to insure the racial progress of their country in
the future. And for these campaigns we want funds, we want
recruits, we want the enthusiastic few to give courage to the
lagging many. With our fighting forces well organized, may we
not confidently hope to arouse a widespread sentiment of racial
responsibility, out of which the necessary reforms would, as it were,
spring of themselves? Thus armed we should be able to look
forward to the future of our nation with confidence; for progress
in inborn characters leads to progress in all directions, the
actions of a people being but the outcome of their innate im100 EUGENICS REVIEW.

pulses. Even the zeal of the reformer, wholly intent on the improvement of the environment of mankind, is but a symptom
of the forces implanted in him at birth. On the other hand,
if we fail to organize our forces, deterioration and disintegration
seem to be the lot in store for our nation; in which case the
records of British achievements in the past will, at no very
distant date, become a page in history never again to be read
with that stimulating sense of Imperial pride only to be felt as
long as the chain of Imperial or national continuity remains unbroken. Is it not wortha mighty struggle to avoid even the mere
risk of such a national calamity? Our countrymen have willingly died by scores to secure the welfare of the land of their
birth. Once make them see that help is urgently needed to safeguard the future fame and prosperity of the land they love and
of the Empire of which they are so proud, and then we shall
merely have to appeal in the name of patriotism to ensure an
ample response.
