“DARWINIAN INTERPRETATIONS’”’

PRroFEssor E.. W. MacBRIDE, F.R5S.

In the July number of the Review there appears a short article
by my friend, Professor Goodrich, criticising an article in the same issue
by Mr. Hinton, one of our foremost experts on mammals, termed
‘*Habit and Environment as makers of species.’’ Professor Goodrich in
criticising Mr. Hinton’s article makes the following extraordinary
statement: ‘‘He (Mr. Hinton) seems to be unaware that the whole
theory of the permanent alteration of organisms by the inheritance of
so-called acquired characters has been discredited and has been shown
to be inconsistent with well established facts brought to light since
the time of Darwin by the study of heredity.’’ I wish to make some
comments on this statement. The evidence that evolution has really
occurred rests on three main classes of evidence, viz., (1) palaeontology,
(2) the minute study of systematic differences among nearly related
species; and (8) embryology. Passing over my own conversion to
Neo-Lamarckism which was the result of a comprehensive study of the
facts of embryology and which took place in spite of a close acquaintance with post -darwinian studies in heredity and of several years spent
in Mendelian research, we may take note of the following leading
zoologists who like Mr. Hinton ‘‘are unaware’’ that Lamarckism has
been discredited. These are Professor Elliot Smith, who has openly
stated his belief that change of habit precedes change of structure,
and is the cause of it ; Dr. Tate Regan, Director of the British Museum,
one of the foremost systematists of Europe, who has likewise stated his
belief that habitudinal changes are the causes of the formation of
species; and Sir Arthur Smith Woodward, the emeritus head of the
palaeontological department of the British Museum, who holds the
same opinion, as does Dr. Foster-Cooper, superintendent of the Museum
in Cambridge. Dr. Schuchert, one of the leading palaeontologists of
America, has written ‘‘All the palaeontologists of America are
Lamarckians.’’ This list could be added to indefinitely, but enough
has been said to show how baseless is Prof. Goodrich’s statement.
One is involuntarily reminded of Macaulay’s dictum, ‘‘The merit of
being at least one century behind the rest of England was a distinction
early acquired by that august institution the University of Oxford
and never subsequently lost.’’

But Professor Goodrich goes on to state that the causes and mode of
inheritance of variations cannot be inferred from systematic and
palaeontological data, but must be determined by experiment. Now
this statement sounds plausible and convincing until it isexamined in
detail. Final proof of a mode of inheritance could be only furnished
** DARWINIAN INTERPRETATIONS.” 215

by experiment, but strong, indirect and circumstantial evidence can be
obtained from a survey of the differential characters of living and
extinct species. After all, we all believe in evolution and yet no
experimental proof of evolution ever has or ever can be brought.
Belief in it is the cumulative effect of the massing together of an
enormous number of indications from systematic facts. If we find,
as Mr. Hinton has shown, that the features separating nearly allied
species are just such as arise within the same species as a response to
altered conditions, then the inference is irresistible that these features
arose as environmental responses, and became fixed in the hereditary
constitution of the species by long repetition. Evolutionary change as
palaeontology abundantly testifies is exceedingly slow; to produce a
noticeable alteration of structure as the result of environmental change,
may and probably does require a period far exceeding the term cf a
human life, and hence direct proof may be difficult if not impossible.
Nevertheless as I have repeatedly pointed out in this journal such
direct proof has been brought. Certain superficial characters such as
pigmentation are much more labile than other more deepseated characters, and in these the beginnings of hereditary change can just be
detected. In a recent article in ‘‘Nature,’’ I have given a synopsis
of the last and most brilliant work of Dr. Kammerer. In this work
he gives an account of the sub-species of lizards in the islands of the
Adriatic. He shows that on the smaller islets the formation of melanic
races is in progress, but that if these melanic specimens are exposed
for two generations to cool and moist conditions they revert to the
ancestral green type. Again the Lamarckian idea is that at first
habit changes and becomes hereditary and only after the newly acquired
habit has lasted for a long time does a change in structure make its
appearance. Now the heredity of acquired habit has been proved by
Pavlov in mice, by Professor McDougall in rats, and by Professor J .
Heslop Harrison in saw flies, and an exhaustive and wel] documented
proof of the inheritability of acquired immunity has been obtained
in the Pasteur Institute in Paris and was given by me in a recent
number of this journal.

When such proofs however are presented to Professor Goodrich
he either says that he does not believe them or that he will wait until
somebody else does the experiment again, so that it is evident that it
is not want of evidence which is the difficulty, but the undue
scepticism of Professor Goodrich.

It would be interesting to know with what facts of heredity,
ascertained since Darwin’s time, Professor Goodrich considers Lamarckism to be inconsistent. We presume that he refers to ‘‘mutations,’’ the sudden and apparently miraculous appearance of these
and their strong inheritability. It may be conceded at once, that in
the appearance of mutations we have a hereditary phenomenon of a
different kind from the inheritance of habit. Professor Goodrich does not
agree with Mr. Hinton in holding that these mutations have played no
part in evolution. It is interesting therefore to remind readers of this
review that Dr. Bateson, our greatest authority on mutations, came
into my laboratory about one-and-a-half years before his death and
stated his belief that mutations had nothing to do with evolution
216 EUGENICS REVIEW.

whatever. Further, to my intense amazement, at a recent meeting of
the Genetics Society, at which we were addressed by Professor Mohr,
described to me by Dr. Bateson, as the greatest ‘‘Drosophila expert
in Kurope,’’ the following view of mutations were put forward. ‘‘Mutations,’’ Professor Mohr said, ‘‘are likethe spectrum.’’ Towards the red
end we have the modifying factors which produce no effect at all except
when they occur in connection with another factor, and which do not impair the insect’s constitution or vitality. As we pass towards the middle
of the spectrum we encounter ordinary mutations which make noticeable
changes in the outward appearance of the insect, and which interfere
with tts viability, their interference being in proportion tothe change in
structure which they effect—towards the blue end we encounter
mutations. which produce changes so violent that the majority of
insects affected thereby die; these are sub-lethal mutations. Finally
in the violet we have lethal mutations which entail the death of all the
insects affected by them.

Thus on the most unimpeachable authority we learn that
mutations are constitutional weaknesses. It was the perception
of this fact long ago, that led me to the same conclusion as
Mr. Hinton, viz., that mutations had played no part in evolution. Believing as I do in the real existence of natural
selection. JI am convinced that the surviving race has always been the
more forceful and constitutionally vigorous, though natural selection
taken by itself can never account for evolution, the real cause for
which, as Dr. Bateson said long ago, must be sought for in variation.
I should like to conelude by another pregnant statement of Dr. Bateson,
made in course of a discussion in the Linnean Society in 1923. ‘‘In
the last resort,’’ he said, ‘‘there are only two possible causes for
variations, chance and the reaction of the animal to the environment .’’
I feel convinced that in the long run the majority of thinking
men will accept the second alternative.
