CONTRIBUTION TO THE FUNDAMENTALS OF A POLICY OF
POPULATION.*

By G. DE LAPOUGE.

What is needed for the right conception of a policy of the population problem is a bird’s eye view of all the various issues which bear
on the study of population. The economist looks at nothing but the
question of hands, and at most the relationship between labour and
the means of subsistence. The military expert sees nothing but the
possible number of recruits. The demographer is preoccupied with
the number of births, deaths and marriages and their relationship
according to the city, the country and the period; or the sub-division
of individuals according to professions and localities, or as poor, as
criminals, as suicides, and under the various categories of the cultured
or the illiterate. The anthropologist studies the divisions into races
within a population, and the differences of their respective adaptabilities, the internal effect of social selection and the external effect of
colonisation. And each one proposes practical measures according to
the objective of his inquiries. From these narrow conceptions, not
always inspired by a truly scientific spirit, arise formidable errors on
practical issues. In the matter of population, however, nearly every
question, and particularly questions of a practical order ,are conditioned
by biological laws. If population policy for an instant loses sight of
genetics, its conclusions must necessarily be false and the effect of the
application of these conclusions irreparable, for the laws of heredity
are inexorable. One cannot act on them except through these same
laws.

The law of Malthus has up to now hardly come into play, for there
was a superfluity of empty spaces on the globe and the manufactures of
over-populated countries made it possible to buy the means of subsist ence in countries rich in agriculture and poor in industry. Now these
empty spaces are becoming rare even in America, and the time is near
when there will be more men than bread in Europe. To-morrow every
country will need all its own food supply. In the near future emigration, which is already difficult, will be nothing but a memory. Every
nation will reserve all its potential resources for its own nationals.
Tell me, I beg, for you must have thought of this, what will happen in
Germany for example, on the day when for lack of food for all, two or

*Paper prepared for the World Population Conference, Geneva, 1927 (Original)
in French).
FUNDAMENTALS OF A POLICY OF POPULATION. 198

three tens of millions of inhabitants will be faced with death? Or in
England, or in Italy, countries which have long since overstepped the
margin of their self-sufficiency? From this moment we must take the
necessary measures, so that in every country the population will in
time be reduced to that which its own agriculture can support. There
is no population question of greater urgency.

The re-establishment of the equilibrium in over-populated countries is the only practicable means for preventing crises of famine and
war such as have been re-enacted on this earth since the time of barbarian
invasions. After the conquest of the ocean, escape from over-population was colonisation over-seas, and this was efficacious. Colonisation called into being the new world and made civilisation world wide.
It brought an increase of riches to Europe. The verdict of history,
however, on the permanent benefit of this course, is not yet definitive,
and in regard to these occurrences the final balance has not yet been
struck. There are still some accounts to pay. Apart from injustice
and cruelty, economic greed has caused nations to make terrible mistakes, and Statesmen in realising these aims may have sacrificed by
their policy for an immediate gain the future of their nations. Spain
has hardly recovered from the consequences of her colonisation policy.
England has expended much through generations in order to furnish
America with ready-made workmen and has impoverished herself of
valuable stocks only with the obvious result of creating a rival more
powerful than herself. America in its turn, in order to secure labour
as quickly as possible has made the mistake of introducing elements of
every colour, and of highly incompatible mentality, in the mad hope
of assimilating all and bringing them by education to an American
type of intelligence, which has not happened. To-day she regrets her
mistake. Now this avenue of emigration is practically closed. Territories habitable by Europeans, that is to say with temperate climate,
which like Australia are empty, or nearly so, like North and South
America, are now occupied by nations firmly organised, and which
understand the necessity of reserving to their descendants land which
is yet free. That colonisation which formerly exterminated the
vanquished, is no longer possible and it would be a shattering thought
that the great civilised races of Europe might possibly fall a prey to the
lot of the aboriginal Australians, or the Red Skins. We should,
however, be wrong not to envisage it. This danger does not only exist
for Europe. The colossal mistake of equipping with the power which
has been forged from Western material culture the millards of men
inhabiting India and the far East, is beginning to weigh heavily on
England and also on France and those nations who were imprudent
enough to follow their lead. A mad racial vanity has made them
forget that if coloured people appeared to have less adaptability or
power to furnish leaders and men of genius with first-rate mentality,
they could nevertheless supply a sufficient number (and this is
equally true also of Africa) for a supply of officers, administrators,
leaders, agriculturalists, bankers, bishops and professors, and every
grade which contributes to form the economic and military ranks of a
nation :—politicians as able as their own, ambitious to equal them and
moreover firmly determined not to bear their rule. Thus colonial
expansion has resulted in giving the nations who had no hostile feeling
194 | EUGENICS REVIEW.

against the white races, a hatred of Europeans and the power to eliminate them by sheer force of numbers. This mistake has cost us dear and
may in the long run be of far greater importance than political economy
to the generations which come after. And like Europe, Asia is
over-populated and is on the eve of a crisis in food supply. It would
be imprudent to think, now that distance is always lessening, that
Europe arouses no envy or that she is immune from danger. It becomes
clear that the number of men on earth (whites as well as yellow) has
very nearly arrived at the possible maximum, that the density is badly
distributed and that the redistribution of space can only be rectified
by displacements, and finally that limitation of births in over-populated countries is the only means whereby the balance may be peaceably
restored. But in population, number is not the only thing to consider.
Men are no mere statistical units. Their personal value is of infinitely
greater importance for the State. Inthe population as a whole some live
as parasites, discontented and often dangerous to civilisation, in idleness or rapine, and civilisation alone curbs their instincts. The mass
in docile fashion shares up this burden without understanding it too
clearly, and a small number alone carry on the work of progress. All
future progress depends on this little élite. It must never be forgotten
that on the development of the number and the quality of this little
élite civilisation itself actually depends, that if it should come to an
end at the point at which we have now arrived, progress itself would
stop; and if this small group disappeared, the masses whom they
lead, being no longer supported and directed, the fall would follow
quickly, under the overwhelming pressure the mass of that uncivilisable
residuum.

If we are to judge by actions, it seems as if no-one really envisages
clearly the gravity of the present situation. The problems to be
solved by Statesmen and leaders of industry, and commerce, and of
banking, grow to a complexity which passes the limits of our present
intellectual capacity. To-morrow you will scarcely find a man who is
up to the greatness of the new tasks, and I venture to say that the very
best of our own time have not discharged themselves any too well of
the difficulties they have encountered.

The mass of knowledge which is now required exceeds our capacity
for understanding. The time is no longer when everything was
explained by the immobile and indivisible atom, by the cell and
karyokinesis, transformism, gravity and Euclidian geometry. Science
now is bordering on the infinite and the most powerful brain feels
feeble in front of the tasks which are glimpsed. Vaster memories
must be forged, sharper insight must be gained; now is the moment
when man has to choose whether he will become a demi-god or fall
back into barbarism. And this is no figure of rhetoric but simply
expresses the possibilities of the day after to-morrow. The science
of population, if it remains true to its real function, must not be regarded
merely from the point of view of to-day, but that of the future. Till
to-day, we have counted too much on chance for the production of
superior men, and indeed it was quite impossible to use consciously
the tremendous forces of heredity before its laws were discovered.
At best man relied somewhat vaguely on the transmission of the
effects of education. But education has no effect except to utilise as
FUNDAMENTALS OF A POLICY OF POPULATION. 195

perfectly. as possible the present generation. Instruction is not
inherited ; not even language in its most ancient form is transmitted by
inheritance. A child does not speak until it has been taught, and
does not speak the language of its parents, but that of those who have
taught it any other. Nor does it prefer its own if this also has been
taught it.

Society owes to each individual the maximum of culture which
it can give, and each individual owes to Society the maximum of
service which his faculties permit. But no education allows an
individual to give more than the patrimony of his natural inheritance,
and only a double-edged selection, negative and positive, will eliminate
undesirable individuals and produce a greater number of superior
beings, and create stocks possessing faculties which are now particularly
rare. It is amongst these that variation or rather mutation may, in the
long run and very rarely, give individuals and stocks from which we
may obtain a humanity as superior to the man of to-day as the mass is
to the remote ancestor of men and apes.

It is quite vain to count on individual variations or mutations
in an unselected group for the production, without undue delay, of
the necessary types of men. I wish to emphasise this point because
even those who are well acquainted with biology often tend to forget
how the way was forged from the ancestral primate to primitive man
and not to give due weight to the role of the time factor.

As a rule evolution does not arise suddenly or through one pair,
but starting from the complex of distinct and neighbouring species,
proceeds by a series of mutations concerned with a particular group of
characters, and these not always the same or in the same order, each
line of descent showing its own particular advance in the common
direction. And the advance was not in the mass, but on the contrary
in little bunches. Phylogenetic evolution cannot be compared to a
mould, transforming without exception all the larvae of one. species
into a butterfly of the same species. Mutation is a phenomenon of
exceptions and of the order of probability of a millionth and a billionth,
and even then gives no practical result unless a male and female vary
in the same direction at the same time and both meet and reproduce.
And as man instead of furnishing one generation a year or every three
or four years, only achieves three in a century, thirty in a thousand
years, it is easy to judge what time we should have to wait for the
chance arrival of the super-man. Duration in evolutionary concerns
is of the geological order, and even if we substitute the wisest possible
selection for chance, it will only be in centuries that we may await the
first of the results promised by the Serpent, ‘‘Ye shall be as Gods.’’

In the brain of man the universe moves slowly to self-consciousness.
Possibly the reason for man’s existence (the raison d’ étre of human life)
is the development of this self-consciousness, fragmentary and often
betrayed by senses which perceive partially and as best they may the
manifestations of nature; controlled and increased by instruments
continuously more numerous and more powerful and more subtle, a
body of knowledge is created by man, synthetised by science, conditioned by the elements of possibility, but still self-consciousness.

Population legislation, taking genetics as its basis, can and must
from the present moment begin this essential task. It may so work
196 EUGENICS REVIEW.

as to deliver society from a part of its burdens and from the dangerous
elements which now exist, by eliminating cacogenic stocks.

This legislation may facilitate the multiplication of Eugenic
stocks and it is competent of giving immediate results and increasing
results, so as to forward the adaptation of populations to the needs of
civilisation in the future. These needs will not long be the same as
those of to-day, and will generation by generation progressively differ
from these.

Philanthropy is a beautiful thing but must be exercised with
judgment. As now practised it frequently works clean against its
own end and perpetuates suffering at high cost. It is right to alleviate
the ills of the incurable, of the insane and of the degenerate, unfit for
work. It is even right to pity criminals, prostitutes and professional
beggars, but it is not right to go so far as to augment the number of
these by permitting them by their personal liberty to poison with their
descendance the future community. Laws which prevent undesirable
categories from transmitting their taints must be perfected in those
countries which have them and adopted in those which are not yet so
supplied. These measures of negative selection are of the greatest
immediate urgency.

The protection of Eugenic stocks and those which nearly approach
them, must be undertaken. It must be done in a great variety of ways
which may put a check on the effects of the social selection which exists
to-day. More than forty years ago I showed that all forms of social
selection tends downwards. It is through this action that nations are
beheaded, degenerate and perish. And above all we must carefully
avoid that measures like that of the system of Marsalism in France
cause a paralysis of reproduction of human intellect:

And lastly it is necessary that in the whole nation, and this is a
most difficult point, reproduction must be directed with a sense of
adaptation towards future conditions of existence by raising the mean
level of brain power. The importance of numbers and of muscular
force in the state belongs rather to the past than to the future. The
type of mind which corresponds to that of the working class and
particularly to the manual worker has reached the limit of its usefulness. Inthe near future, counting by the clock of history, the progress
of chemistry physics, biology, the possession of unlimited sources of
heat and force at a minimum of expenditure (inexhaustible for the
duration of actual cosmic conditions), will greatly reduce the need of
manual labour. For the full utilisation of the machines of the future,
for the perfection of delicate processes, we shall on the contrary need
brains highly resistant to work and capable of a degree of instruction
which surpasses that of the mean of the labouring class of to-day.
The élite of the working class and of our middle class of to-day could
furnish this human material. For the higher functions of social life
we shall need brains of a type at least equal to that of the most powerful
which exist to-day. Multiplication of eugenic elements will produce
these little by little. From this moment onwards it is worse than
useless to encourage reproduction of stocks of inferior capacity or of
mediocre groups. Their descendants would only be a burden to the
society of the future, as the retarded are to our own.

When we take the point of view of the future, reproduction
FUNDAMENTALS OF A POLICY OF POPULATION. 197

policy must have nothing but the aim of the constant increase in the
value of individuals. The value of an individual is calculated as a
function of his social usefulness, both while he lives but above all
after his death. Humanity to its last hour will always be in the debt
of the unknown inventors of fire and of writing. How many inventions
have served vast multitudes during centuries, and inversely what
human masses have produced barely the equivalent of that which they
have consumed, and how many drones have consumed without producing? The transition to the state of society only commenced when
man found himself reaching out from his individual interest to collectiveends. It developed when it became possible to constrain the mass
to ordered life. But it is not yet complete, and society will only be
truly created in that day when each individual will live only for the
whole, a degree which has been reached by the more ancient, if less
well endowed biological societies as those of the ants, the termites and
the bees. The crystallization of instincts will never doubtless be as
complete amongst men, and that is probably to be desired, as a much
higher grade of perfection would be thereby excluded, but each step
made in this direction separates man more widely from the ancestral
primates who lived each for himself.

Man will not have escaped wholly from the animal level till that
moment when the selfish instinct will have been destroyed by a long
course of selectionist population policy.
