74 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Miss Ashley regrets our restriction of the invalidity pension to those
earning nothing instead of, as in Germany, to those earning less than
one-third of their average wages, as likely to encourage malingering;
and would prefer no maternity benefit for wives of insured men unless
themselves insured. It is still too early to test the effect of Bismarck’s
legislation upon national health; but the compulsory system provides
valuable information as to the course and causes of disease. The contributory principle is much commended, but Miss Ashley thinks the
pauperisation argument is sometimes overdone. “Too much danger of
misfortune in life is weakening rather than strengthening ”—surely a
sound reflection for the sterner type of eugenic politician.
A. W. COCKBURN.
Engel, Dr. The Elements of Child-Protection. Translated by Dr.
_ Eden Faul. London. Geo. Allen and Co.; 1912; price 15s. ;
Pp. 270.
A VERY disappointing book. The first part consists of a sketchy
enumeration of the various conditions that militate against the physical
and moral well-being of the child. This is followed by a vague
account of the various agencies which are at work for the benefit of the
child. But Dr. Engel does not give us a single illuminating idea on
the problems involved, and we have looked in vain for the data which,
in his preface, he claims to have supplied us in order to enable us to form
our own conclusions. He gives us simply page after page of statements without either the facts on which he bases them, or the reasons
which have guided him in making them. These statements, he seems
to think, are incontrovertible, and the great majority of them doubtless
are, being mere platitudes, such as “ Artificial feeding (of infants) frequently leads to illness, life-long debility, premature death, etc.,” or
“Alcoholism is a cause, both direct and indirect, of the maltreatment
of children.” But what will Eugenists say to “the parental constitution
must be regarded as largely dependent upon the social environment in
which the parents themselves have grown to maturity,” or followers
of Karl Pearson to the blind placing, as usual, of women’s “ work for
wages” as one of the chief causes of infant mortality? Or what can
anyone say to such statements, absolutely unsupported by either example
or argument, as “Capitalism gives rise to numerous diseases in the
social organism, and then endeavours to cure them, for the most part, by
the methods of child-pfrotection,” and “ Child-protection to-day is in
essence nothing more than a number of repressive measures, which are
necessary only because capitalism will not permit the desired ends to be
obtained by the use of preventive methods, owing to the fact that prevention would involve the destruction of capitalism” (the italics are
ours).
te is difficult to understand why this book was thought worthy of
translation. It would be a very unsafe guide for those ignorant of the
subject, and quite useless for anyone with any knowledge of it.
M. B. ANDREWS.
Saleeby, C. W., M.D., F.R.S.E. Woman and Womanhood: A Search
for Principles. London. Heinemann; 1912; 10s. net; pp. 398.
WE disagree with Dr. Saleeby concerning many of the details of his
book, but recognise that in it the true eugenic aspect of the woman’s
movement is clearly portrayed, and therefore recommend it for the
consideration of all women who are taking part in the movement,
and, above all, those who are responsible for its policy. There is very
little to be said either for or against the woman’s movement that has
not been reiterated ad nauseam, but while nothing new is said, the facts
are so grouped into their racial, social and economic settings as to
throw fresh light on many points, and to conduce to clear thinking on
some of the fundamental principles.
