TEACHING IN SCHOOLS, TRAINING
COLLEGES AND COLLEGES

From the point of view of the Eugenist.

1MEMORANDUM APPROVED BY THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL OF THE
EUGENICS EDUCATION SOCIETY.”

In this memorandum both eugenics and sex hygiene will be
considered, though they are essentially different. Eugenics is
defined as ‘‘ the study of agencies under social control that may
improve or impair the racial qualities of future generations
either physically or mentally.’’ In other words, it deals with
all endeavours to utilise all those forces of nature which have
in the past resulted in progress in the inborn qualities of living
beings, in order to secure a continuation of that progress in the
inborn qualities of mankind in the future.

Sex hygiene is the ‘‘ science which deals with the preservation of health,’’ in so far as that study is affected directly, or
indirectly, by questions of sex. The teaching of sex hygiene is,
therefore, mainly intended to safeguard the individual taught
against dangers resulting from sex, or to assist teachers in safeguarding others against such dangers.

Eugenics look to the future, and sex hygiene looks mainly
to the present. But in spite of this essential difference between
these two studies, they become in a large measure tied together
for the following reasons :— \

In the first place, the mechanism of sex is the link which
connects one generation with another, thus making possible
the continuity of the stream of life; and sex is, therefore, an
essential feature of the most powerful medium for improving
or impairing the qualities of future generations. An understanding of the mechanism of sex and of sex hygiene is, consequently, an inherent part of the study of eugenics in its higher
branches.

Then, again, if and when sex hygiene is taught the intro
duction of the eugenic ideal will unquestionably tend to elevate

1 Memorandum formulated in support of verbal evidence given before the Education Reform Committee.
2 Drawn up at the request of.
TEACHING IN SCHOOLS, TRAINING COLLEGES AND COLLEGES. 129

the subject and divert the mind from some of its unpleasant
aspects. To study questions of sex in order to safeguard the
future of mankind is more ennobling than to study such questions merely in order to avoid personal trouble.

It had, however, better now be stated definitely, once for
all, that we do not advocate the teaching of sex hygiene in
class at schools as a separate subject. We are convinced, moreover, that without touching on definite sexual questions at all
it is possible at an age so early that these questions cannot
be understood and should not be alluded to, to commence the
laying of a useful foundation on which eugenic thought can
ultimately be built.

We do advocate, however, that in elementary schools a
general idea of the ceaselessly flowing stream of life, following
immutable laws, should be imparted by means of nature
studies. Moreover, the facts of life are generally known at a
very early age amongst the poor, especially in industrial districts, and something may be done, we believe, to purify this
knowledge by the indirect effects of training in elementary
biology, zoology, botany, nature study, etc. Such instruction
at schools will also greatly facilitate the task of privately imparting knowledge concerning questions of sex, which, unquestionably, should be undertaken at a later date. It is,
however, only when the teacher has been thoroughly grounded
in biology, sex hygiene, and eugenics that the improvement in
the moral atmosphere at school, and the implanting of the
eugenic ideal, is at any time likely to be successfully accomplished with the avoidance of undesirable references. And this
knowledge on the teacher’s part is certainly necessary to enable
them to give simple and truthful answers to the simple questions as to the facts of life which young children often ask.

Though sex hygiene, in so far as it deals with immediate
dangers, does not come within the province of eugenics, yet,
in view of the foregoing considerations, eugenists as a body,
we believe, regard it as an essential part of human knowledge,
and, therefore, always to be imparted ; but if it is only imparted
after great danger has already been run, it will be, in a large
measure, useless. We hope, therefore; that both eugenics and
130 EUGENICS REVIEW.

sex hygiene will be considered in the reform of our educational
system.

As to the nature of the reforms which are desirable on
eugenic grounds, we hold that far the most important aim is to
endeavour to elevate the moral natures of all citizens, so that
they will be ready to make the personal sacrifices which may
be demanded of them in order to promote racial progress. In
the past the morality taught has dealt mainly with our duties
to our neighbours, whilst in the future it must be taught that
our duties towards posterity are even more important.

As to the scientific aspect of education, it will, no doubt,
be held by many that we are at present far too ignorant of the
action of the forces of nature in the past to make any attempt
to utilise those forces in the future at all safely, in so far as they
relate to inborn qualities. In this we do not agree. But
granted the truth of this contention, will anyone dare to assert,
in view of the enormous strides now being made by science,
that it is probable, say, fifty years hence, we shall still be
unable to deal with problems relating to the future progress of
man, not only as regards his environment, but also in regard
to his constitutional nature, on which his environment will have
to act? The students now being taught at our schools and
colleges are certain to have to face these questions, and the only
way now to endeavour to insure that their action will then be as
wise as possible is to give them the best possible foundation
in all those sciences on which their ultimate action must be
based.

We are, however, convinced even now that all who are
responsible, either for the spreading of social virtues or the
making of laws—and all of us are responsible in a measure—
ought to understand the value to the race of inherent or inborn
qualities. The inborn qualities of the nation of the future will
assuredly be affected by all existing social reforms which influence the marriage, birth, and death-rates of the different sections
of the community. Then, again, whilst social reform is, in the
main, an endeavour to produce immediately beneficial changes
of environment, the ultimate selective effects of environment
in encouraging or discouraging parenthood amongst those enTEACHING IN SCHOOLS, TRAINING COLLEGES AND COLLEGES. 131

dowed with good inborn qualities, or in lessening or increasing
the reproductive capacities of the unfit, must never be overlooked. The citizen must, in fact, understand something of
the interdependence of heredity and environment, in order to
properly perform his civic duties.

Let it then also be perfectly clear that we want no scientific
principles inculcated which do not carry the practically universal consent of the scientific world. It is true that we believe
that the efforts to promote racial progress will have to be based
mainly on the science of heredity, and that a widespread knowledge of the facts, as they are gradually brought to light by
this study, will be essential for success. But even if we are
wrong in our present opinions, the refutation of our errors can
only be made by those possessing knowledge superior to that
which we possess; and to render such superior knowledge a possibility for the rising generation, a foundation must now be laid,
a foundation which can only consist of the truth as we now
believe it to be. Progress is certain to be made in the future,
and our educational systems must be designed to facilitate that
progress. This will best be done by laying a solid foundation
of truth, and not by dwelling on the particular reforms now
held to be desirable. The urging of such reforms, though
essential to progress, had better be left out of educational
curricula. |

Passing on to consider the actual changes in _ existing
methods of teaching which seem to us to be desirable, the subject may be divided under five heads, namely :—

I. Children under ten or twelve.

II. Boys and girls over ten or twelve.
III. Training colleges.
IV. Instruction out of class.

V. Colleges other than training colleges.

I. Children under Ten or Twelve.

In this period the eugenic foundation is mainly laid in
moral teaching. It should be given in the course of the
ordinary lessons in an indirect manner, the object being to
132 EUGENICS REVIEW.

inculcate a sense of responsibility for the ultimate effects in the
future of our actions. This can be enforced in many ways, as,
for instance, by showing that the bad effects of bad words do
not die out quickly. It should, moreover, be definitely recognised that it is useful to familiarise the mind of the child with
the ideas of marriage, parenthood, and the care of children
through reading story books, and, in the case of girls, by encouraging them to play with dolls. Children may also be very
early familiarised with the idea that children are apt to resemble
their parents.

II. Boys and Girls over Ten or Twelve.

With older children all these ideas can be widened and
deepened. Boys and girls very early realise that they belong
to a nation, and the idea of responsibility for, and pride in
their nation, not only of to-day, but of the distant future, should
be strongly enforced. In history lessons the conception of a
continuity in the growth of the nation should be introduced
when possible. Nature study, showing the reign of law in
nature, and how living beings are divided into orders, genera,
species, and varieties can now be introduced. The idea of life
as a ceaselessly flowing stream will aid in inculcating the idea
of responsibility in parenthood at a later date; and at the end
of school life this idea can be definitely enforced by reference
to the laws of natural inheritance. Lastly, in order to facilitate sex instruction at a later date, the fertilisation’of plants and
the lower animals should be somewhat fully described in a
strictly scientific manner.

III. Training Colleges.

It is essential in order to safeguard their pupils from grave
dangers, that teachers should have a thorough knowledge of
questions of sex. Sexual troubles not infrequently occur at
school, and the ignorant teacher cannot possibly deal with them
on right lines. Moreover, questions will be asked of the best
teachers, that is, of those who make friends with their pupils
and their pupils’ parents, and if ignorant they will, to say the
least, lose an invaluable opportunity of doing good. Lastly,
on leaving school, or at a certain age at school, teachers should
TEACHING IN SCHOOLS, TRAINING COLLEGES AND COLLEGES. 133

deal with questions of sex in private conversations with their
pupils, for many boys and girls every year have their prospects
ruined merely from the want of such instruction.

The importance of a vivid sense of individual racial
responsibility can be emphasised, together with the social advantage of good inherent quality in offspring. The dangers
of alcoholism, sexual vice, and other agencies detrimental to
the next generation can be indicated.

If sexual dangers are dealt with in this way, not being
isolated from other subjects, they would more readily take their
proper place in the minds of young people, neither being
exaggerated nor ignored.

The training in questions of sex at training colleges should
begin with a biological and anatomical instruction in regard to
reproduction in man, this being dealt with purely scientifically.
This training in class should be supplemented by private conversations, where questions would be asked which would not be
asked in public, and where questions of sex should be dealt with
without reserve. Teachers should be warned never themselves
to give medical advice.

The foregoing suggestions have been made, no doubt,
without reference to the needs of eugenics, but merely to indicate on educational grounds the absolute necessity of sex instruction at training colleges. This instruction can, however,
be made of great value to the race if it be widened in certain
directions. Such views as are widely accepted at the time concerning evolution in the past should be taught, and elementary
ideas concerning the laws of natural inheritance should be inculcated. Moreover, the enforcement of the idea of parental
responsibility—the eugenic ideal, in fact—in private conversations on sex, will tend to elevate the tone of these private conferences dealing with questions of sex.

IV. Instruction Out of Class.

Private instruction should, it is suggested, be given on
matters of sex to pupils both at school or on leaving school,
and at training colleges. |

Those giving this instruction should be warned that it is
inadvisable to touch on the questions of sex abuse, unless in
134 EUGENICS REVIEW.

reference to any individual and particular need. When the
matter has to be dealt with it should be carefully handled, and
no opportunity given for the teaching to encourage wrongdoing through curiosity.

Since this instruction concerns sex hygiene rather than
eugenics, and since the methods adopted must be left almost
entirely in the hands of well-taught teachers, they will not here
be discussed.

V. Colleges other than Training Colleges.

The student at college who intends to take a degree involving natural science is certain to have the opportunity of
acquiring all he need know in order to take an intelligent interest in eugenic questions. Specialisation is, however, now
carried so far in many universities that the highest degree in
many subjects may be associated with nearly blank ignorance
of all those sciences on which our action concerning the future
of our race must depend. Specialisation is essential in all
higher education; but is it necessary to abandon instruction in
all other lines when specialisation begins in any one direction ?
The mind of the student in science should, it is submitted, be
kept alive as regards its zsthetic needs. In a like manner, if
lectures indicating the accepted views on evolution and heredity
were included in the curricula of all colleges, not only would
the interest of art students in scientific matters be stimulated,
but the possibility of racial progress would be promoted.
