DISCUSSION.

“THE EXPLOITATION OF THE FIT.”

DEAR SIR,

Now that there is a prospect of some practical legislation to prevent a continuance of the hitherto disproportionate
increase in the number of the unfit, as compared with the fit,
may I be permitted to plead earnestly for the betterment of the
race by the exploitation of the existing fit, a point which as yet
has received but scant notice, as a potent counteracting force to
the declining birth rate and further continuance of the unfit.

The great departments of State do not appear to realise
that, before they are concerned with their own specialities in
Naval, Military, Colonial, and Home affairs, they are primarily
departments of State; departments officered and manned by
Englishmen picked for their superlative mental and physical
efficiency, and yet, so far from any attempt being made by the
departments which govern them to facilitate such men—the
pick of the race—procreating their kind, matrimony is officially
only half-heartedly recognised and inwardly regarded as a
nuisance, with a consequence that the families in this class are
notoriously small.

Without interfering in the least with their efficiency as
fighting units, without militating in the slightest against discipline, more consideration could be shown by the Admiralty
and War Office to married officers and men in times of peace,
whereby more shore leave could be granted, and whereby they
would not be so liable as at present to be arbitrarily moved from
station to station without any adequate compensation and on all
too short notice. Had such departments the good of the State
primarily at heart there would be less grumbling in the services,
less shortage of officers, and the birth rate would have at least
a better chance than at present of being augmented by the fit;
while putting the matter on its lowest footing, an increased
expenditure in grants to married officers and men to assist them
in meeting the expenses of their families would pay the country
in the long run.

The renting of houses where quarters are not provided
being a serious drain on private resources, one would expect
some sympathetic departmental solicitude instead of the studied
306 EUGENICS REVIEW

official indifference meted out to those who are anxious to obtain
some idea upon which to base length of tenancies, etc.

Among soldiers a proportion of only five per cent. obtain
leave to marry ‘‘on the strength,’’ and the frequency with
which, under the Local Government Board, Boards of Guardians, Town Councils, etc., notices of vacancies for joint
married appointments openly state that preference will be given
to those ‘‘ without children ’’? not only shows how utterly such
departments fail to recognise their greatest responsibilties as
being primarily in the interests of the community and for the
amelioration of the State in the future, but also reveals the immorality of an attitude which places, as it inevitably must, a
premium upon practices deserving the highest condemnation.

Mrs. Watherstone, in a letter published in the EUGENICS
REVIEW (January, 1912), instances my contention as regards the
Colonial Office, and to my own knowledge the case of a Local
Government Board official (a man of splendid physique and
moral character and eminently desirable as a racial asset, who
was informed when his third child was born that he would be
dismissed if a fourth arrived, the threat being eventually carried
out solely for that reason) points to a policy which, alas! is
all too general, and which cannot be too forcibly condemned,
no words being too strong for so criminal an attitude—criminal,
because practically operating towards racial death.

Yours truly,
F. M. Row ann, M.D., B.A., Cantab.

Lichfield,
August 23, 1912.
