EPILEPSY: A REVIEW OF “FIELD WORK.”

By SIR ROBERT ARMSTRONG-JONES, C.B.E., M.D., F.R.C.P.

THE State Board of Charities for the County of New York consists of
Commissioners representing the nine divisions of the county, who sit as a
Board, having among their duties the highly responsible one of going into
the root of things, viz., of investigating the origin and social condition of
the poor seeking public aid. Their report states, as a result of enquiry, that
the causes of dependence and poverty are many, but that none affect the
public welfare more disastrously than the inheritance of feeble-mindedness,
insanity or disease which definitely injures the nervous system. Like our
own Board of Control (Lunacy Commissioners) and Prison Commissioners,
the New York State Board of Charities visits and inspects; but it also has
in addition the power of scientific investigation placed under its own
contro]—a duty which we hope “ Reconstruction ” may place upon the two
bodies named. The State Board assert from their observations and knowledge that many of the inmates in almshouses, in the State institutions, in
hospitals, prisons and custodial asylums are so placed in consequence of
neuropathic conditions, due to some form of inherited mental deficiency or
some acquired mental disease. Hence the publication of this most
mecessary investigation? into the causes and source of poverty and dependence. There have been seven important treatises from this bureau; but
the one under review is the summary of what may be described as “ fieldwork,” carried out by one of the investigators of the Bureau of Analysis
and Investigation which is attached to the Board of Charities, and this
brochure relates to epilepsy only. It was carried out by Miss F. G. Smith
at the New York Craig Colony for 1,500 epileptics, and is the result of
careful enquiry and research into the history of nine families, some members of which were under treatment in this institution. Miss Smith worked
in collaboration with the Resident Medical Superintendent, Dr. W. T.
Shanahan, who placed all the case-book entries at her disposal and
facilitated her enquiries in every way.

Not long since the President, Major Leonard Darwin, and some members of the Executive Committee of our Eugenics Education Society were
received as a deputation by the English Board of Control (Lunacy Commissioners), who themselves expressed a sympathetic desire to initiate
similar “ field-work” as an experiment im a rural district under their
supervision in this country; and it is earnestly hoped that this may be
commenced in the near future.

The report under consideration is divided into two chapters, which are
most informing and instructive. Chapter I. deals with epilepsy in a full

1 Eugenics and Social Welfare Bulletin, No. VII., being an investigation of
the histories of nine families of epileptics in one rural county, published by the
New York State Board of Charities (Department of State and Alien Poor) from
their Bureau of Analysis and Investigation and printed at the Capitol, Albany,
New York, in 1916.
EPILEPSY: A REVIEW OF “FIELD WORK.” 71

and careful digest of all the published opinions of authorities and workers
in all countries respecting its origin—predisposing and exciting as well as
its pathology—so far as this is known, as also its prognosis and treatment.
In regard to the inheritance of epilepsy there is, as may be expected, a
great diversity of opinion as to the exact numerical proportion. of those
whose families show a record of epilepsy and related diseases. Gowers is
quoted as giving 40 per cent. of such inheritance, whilst Kraepelin gives
75 per cent.; and this disparity coincides with our own experience, for
many observers include mental and nervous conditions (as factors ot
inheritance) which were not regarded by others as sufficiently important to
complicate the conception of a hereditary transmission. The most common
traits found in the families of epileptics, both in this country and in America,
ate epilepsy itself, insanity in its various forms, alcoholism, migraine and
mervous and convulsive diseases. According to the enquiries by Miss
Smith in the New York State, alcoholism in the parent or grandparent
figures in about one-third of all the cases, epilepsy itself in over one-fifth,
and insanity 1n over one-tenth of all the recorded cases. The occurrence
of convergent heredity through consanguinity has been noted by many
authorities, the weak traits of a poor stock tending to become emphasised,
and two neuropathic strains tending to favour epilepsy. It has been asserted
that traumatic epilepsy has been transmitted in families. At any rate, it
would be correct to state that a hereditary taint favours the manifestation
or tendency to the convulsive neurosis.

Epilepsy is generally described as a paroxysmal] neurosis affecting both
consciousness and motor co-ordination. It is a manifestation of many
derangements of the nervous system and is a syndrome of symptoms rather
than a single disease. Its various stages are enumerated by Miss Smith,
but the so-called status epilepticus is the great climax, the patient passing
from one seizure to another in this condition without recovering consciousness. The kinds of fits are those generally accepted as the grand mal, petit
mal, Jacksonian and psychic. As to its frequency about one in every 200
of the population, or in some places one in every 500, is affected; and it
has been estimated that there may be 175,000 epileptics in the United
States, although an attempt at a census in New York City resulted in a
registration of only 6,860. The age of onset is generally before the 2oth year
and in 74 to 85 per cent. of the cases; and of these one-half occur before
the age of five years, the other half from 10 to 14 years. The classification
is a three-fold one, into early or inherited epilepsy, adolescent or developmental, and late, which is associated with alcohol, syphilis or arteriosclerosis. The disease is regarded as a syndrome of two variables, viz.,
heredity and some exciting factor, the former being the most potent and
being referred to as the “constitutional neuropathic predisposition,” or an
inherited instability—a defective equilibrium resulting from ancestral
weakness, connected, it may be, with alcoho] and other toxins such as
syphilis, cancer, tuberculosis, rheumatism or gout, anemia and goitre.
Stress is laid upon these factors as ante-natal causes, and the view is
properly taken that ante-natal conditions have a peculiar bearing upon the
first six or eight weeks of intra-uterine life, whilst the results of birth
traumata are also included, one-fourth of the cases presenting some record
of danger at birth. Although psychic influences such as emotional disturb72 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ances may precipitate convulsive attacks in the young, it is fully realised
that reflex causes also act, among these being eye, ear and nose troubles,
dentition, intestinal disorders and parasites. Much is made in this report
of parental alcoholism, for dipsomania greatly resembles epilepsy in that
it is periodical and paroxysmal, there being a definite connection believed
by some to exist between epilepsy and delirium tremens. Tuberculosis is
frequently observed in the post-mortem findings of epileptics, and apart
from a lowered vitality in the latter disease it has been regarded as having
a causative relation to the fits. Neither menstruation nor pregnancy has
been proved to be in any way definitely associated with epilepsy, although
the development of an endogenous toxin in puerperal eclampsia may bring
on convulsive attacks resembling epilepsy; but the type is regarded as
functional. Much has been written about psychic seizures, and these are referred to in detail in relation to migraine, vertigo and hysteria, the latter
being regarded as not excluding epilepsy, although no mental deterioration
follows hysteria. It is stated that the “epileptic furor” seen in cases of
epilepsy with insanity is not associated with any definite type of fit, but
the fact is noted that epilepsy is associated with one-third of all cases of
defective mental development in children. Eye-strain in children has been
regarded by some as a possible cause of epilepsy, and although some eye
anomalies are seen in a fifth of all cases and the visual aura is twice as
common as any other, there does not appear to be sufficient ground to
regard disturbances of the visual apparatus as a cause of epilepsy. Sleep
rather than sleeplessness has been attributed as a favouring condition of
epilepsy. Both have common signs in the loss of muscular power and of
consciousness, anzmia of the brain being regarded as a common factor.
Fits have been noted by many observers to be more common in some cases
at night, an hour or two after falling asleep and the same before awaking,
when the physiological resistance of the bodily state may be considered at
a low ebb.

There are certain stigmata which have long been classified as those
characteristic of the epileptic; and these are mainly associated with an
incomplete evolution, for they are seen in persons who are regarded as
suffering from the formation and the retention of toxic substances from
some congenital deficiency. There are not infrequently in epileptics
anomalies both of bodily conformation and of mental and moral development and of habits. It has been suggested that epileptic fits are more
common in winter than in summer, and that the sun’s rays rather than the
sun’s heat are important controlling factors.

As to its pathology, the paroxysmal nature suggests an irritative
lesion ; but osseous thickenings, sclerosis or hardening, and vascular dilatation may all be present without convulsions; so that some other exciting
factor is necessary; and this is to be sought for in heredity. Whenever a
series of different factors are brought forward to explain a phenomenon, it
may be taken for granted that the exact cause is still unascertained, and
this is the case with epilepsy. A toxic theory has been advanced, and this
either in the blood sweat, urine or the gastric contents. It was believed by
some that these secretions became hypertoxic during, immediately before
and after the seizures, but hypotoxic in the intervening periods. Uric acid,
chlorine, phosphorus, ammonium carbamate, cholin, cyto-toxin, and purinEPILEPSY : A REVIEW OF “FIELD WORK.” 73

bodies have each been suggested as the exciting toxin. The ductless
glands have been considered to be responsible, and as epilepsy occurs
mainly during the period of activity of the thymus, this. gland was associated as a causative factor; but so also has the thyroid, through the lack of
thyroglobulin, because the thyroid takes poisonous iodine compounds from
the blood, combining them with albumen which assists in normal metabolism. The pituitary, adrenal, parathyroid and even the pineal gland
have been regarded as causative factors. Some authorities have suggested
a thrombosis of the cortica] capillaries as a cause, and that the real cause
of epilepsy lies in some circulatory disturbances. Anzemia and hyperzmia
each has in turn been regarded by some as a cause, whilst others have
looked upon epilepsy as due to an irritable zone, the “ epileptic zone,” the
result of some former trauma, this being excited into activity by a toxin
and so initiating the convulsive seizure. Needless to say, the Freudians
have regarded epilepsy as of sexual origin and of psycho-genetic etiology.

The treatment of epilepsy is fully considered in this little treatise, and
under four separate headings—(1) means to diminish the excitability of
the nerve centres, (2) to eliminate reflex irritation, (3) to exclude toxins,
and (4) to increase the resistance of the nerve-cells to them. Treatment,
general, surgical and’ remedial, is also considered. The latter is dealt
with under drug treatment, organo-therapy, serum-therapy and hydrotherapy, adequate reasons being given in each instance. Even psychoanalysis finds a place in treatment as a means of preventing fits by maintaining a healthy moral and mental] standard. Interesting comments are
made in the section devoted to prognosis. For instance, the grand mal
type is said to be more influenced by the bromide treatment than the petit
mal, a “cure” resulting when the fits have been kept under control for
two years, or in the opinion of less optimistic healers for ten years.
Infantile epilepsy is the least easy to control, whilst the fits that come on
during puberty or adolescence—if not too frequent or severe—more readily
yield to treatment. It is asserted that adult epilepsy coming on between
21 and 35 proved recalcitrant to remedial treatment. Those cases with a
family history of mental or nervous diseases most often became confirmed.
The incurable cases were most frequently of the petit mal type. The
duration of the disease was about 20 years, and epilepsy is stated to shorten
life by about ten years on the average. Of cases in institutions only 2 per
cent. were described as cured, but in young persons, according to a very
Sanguine expectation, the rate of recovery may be even 20 per cent. There
is no doubt that epilepsy impairs mental integrity, for the epileptic is
characterised by mental inertia, and he is a person of ill humour; uncertainty and taciturnity alternating with excitement. There is a marked
tendency to egotism and to religious fervour in his “ mental make-up,” but
his religion is superficial only, and as a class epileptics are untruthful,
illogical and characteristically impulsive and impetuous.

A very full bibliography, which comprehends 61 references, concludes
the first part of the work, viz., the first of the two chapters. This portion
is introductory to the real work, which is described in the second chapter.

It is pointed out that this piece of “ field-work ” was undertaken for
the purpose of studying the inheritance of epilepsy, with particular reference to its bearing upon social conditions and upon poverty. The work
74 EUGENICS REVIEW.

was undertaken in a rural county so as to obtain with greater facility full
family histories, these being undisturbed by the inevitable intermixing of
people such as would be the case in an industrial community. Further,
the family histories in this district need only be traced at furthest to one
hundred years back, when the first ancestor arrived. In the cases investigated the families were unrelated, thus yielding exclusive, definite and
reliable records.

The histories of the nine families are clearly denoted in separate
charts. The ascendants and the collaterals, normal and abnormal, are all
marked in symbolic form—the males in squares and the females in circles.
Various alphabetical distinctions suggest departures from the normal, and
colours are used to discriminate shades of mental] failure, so that at a
glance the full family history, even to the great-great-grandfather, is
plainly and at once pictorially and graphically represented. A table
summarises the results obtained; and to any one wishing to carry out
social work of this kind, the investigations presented in this enquiry serve
as a most helpful example of how to record pathological family histories.
These investigations must serve as a basis for work to students engaged
in mental hospitals, prisons and asylums for the insane. It is striking
how often green, which represents insanity, figures in these charts; and
the same applies to the red for epilepsy. The charts serve to prove that
a morbid heredity is the most common predisposing cause of epilepsy,
which is closely connected with many forms of mental and nervous
instability. In these enquiries over 200 individuals are recorded and
there occur no fewer than 63 cases of feeble-mindedness, evidenced by a
failure of adaptability or by definite anti-social reactions shown in the
large number of cases of divorce, of desertion and non-support. Criminality, alcoholism, suicide and insanity appear repeatedly; and the minor
forms of instability are also present. Hysteria, migraine, chorea and
paralysis were common, and further the general want of self-control and
self-direction, which more than any other factors account for defective
citizenship. Analagous investigations in this country would be most
illuminating and helpful as to the causes of poverty, crime, insanity and
failure of adaptation.

The conclusions drawn from this enquiry carried out by the New York
State Board of Charities and published by their Bureau of Investigation
are, that if good citizenship and ready adaptability are to be encouraged
it is essential that the stock from which honest and capable men and women
are to be bred must be uncontaminated, vigorous and strong, and free from
any neuropathic taint. We earnestly hope that our Board of Control
(Lunacy Commissioners) may see their way to making a small experiment
on similar lines in this country, and we commend this record of enquiry to
the notice of all students of social conditions. It is a most convincing
piece of evidence of the value of a good heredity. |
