OUR CRITIC CRITICIZED.

I.
By Mayor LEONARD DARWIN.

IN reading the very interesting ‘‘ Criticism of Eugenics’ by
Mr. Carr-Saunders in the last number of the REVIEW, one cannot but feel that it was written with the very object of provoking
replies, and moreover that the author himself would be glad if
some of his doubts could be set at rest. His paper is indeed
an excellent example of the way in which controversy should be
conducted in order to bring forth the truth; and, if we in our
replies should be equally successful in adopting a suitable tone,
we may perhaps legitimately hope for some sympathy even from
Mr. Carr-Saunders himself as regards many of our comments.

The main underlying thought in this criticism seems to be
that we are as yet very ignorant of the way in which racial progress has been produced in the world of nature, and consequently that our present scanty knowledge forms but a poor
foundation on which to build an enduring eugenic policy. In
discussing this contention it is necessary to endeavour to avoid
those differences of opinion which in reality spring from unperceived differences in the meanings attached to words; for, if
the word ‘‘ eugenics ’’ is not used by both parties with generally the same signification, confusion is certain to arise. Without departing from the views held by Sir Francis Galton, it
may be said that the science to which he gave this name comprises the study of all the evolutionary agencies which in the
past have made for racial progress, together with the attempt
to utilize the knowledge thus acquired in promoting human
advancement. If this be accepted as the scope of the science
to be studied by the eugenist, it obviously follows that he must
accept the principle of evolution; for, if it were a fact that
all species had been separately created, then there would have
been no evolutionary agencies which had made for racial progress in the past and on which this science could now be
founded. If, on the other hand, the principle of evolution be
OUR CRITIC CRITICIZED. 317

accepted as an axiomatic foundation, it follows that it must be
possible to build on it some form of eugenics as thus defined ;
though it still may be an open question whether we are now
ready to make any definite advance in practice, or whether we
are attempting to advance in the right direction.

Mr. Carr-Saunders may, in fact, provisionally accept the
meaning thus attached to the word eugenics, as well as its
axiomatic foundations, and yet urge that, though our existing
knowledge of the facts of heredity is ‘‘ of the highest importance, we can make but little use of it’’ in the absence of more
complete information ; and it is the amount of knowledge which
ought to be held to be sufficient to justify an active eugenic
policy which is the true point at issue. All will agree that for
a very long time to come it will be impossible to remove all
doubts concerning the nature of the various facts of evolution ;
and we can indeed hardly imagine or even wish to imagine
a time when the then approved theory of evolution would
be free from all criticism. It is therefore obvious that we cannot
wait until all doubts are removed, as that would probably mean
postponing all reform for ever. The reformer must both own
to some doubts and accept some risks. But how is he to know
when his doubts are of sufficient gravity to make it wise for him
to halt in his advance? This is the problem, and it is one
which probably admits of no one simple solution, it being only
possible to suggest certain wide generalisations which should
be held in view as each case comes up for consideration.

Every reformer must be permitted to hold himself to be
justified in placing some reliance on his own estimate of the
probable effects of his proposals; for anyone who is not prepared to deny that what he believes to be right and true is as
likely as not to be false and wrong has no logical ground on
which to advance in any direction whatever. If this be so,
does it not follow as a logical consequence that we cannot be
wrong in trying to persuade others to voluntarily pursue the
course of action which we hold to be right; at all events, provided we do not hide our doubts or conceal our methods of
arriving at our conclusions? Does not experience prove that
liberty in advocacy is always the best means of ensuring pro
99
318 EUGENICS REVIEW.

gress? And, if these premises be granted, is not a wide field
thus at once laid open for the eugenist ?

In discussing reforms involving compulsion it must, however, be remembered that the person subject to compulsion is in
the abstract equally justified with the reformer in being guided
by his views as to what is right and wrong; and, as he will
frequently think the action taken in regard to him is unjustifiable, a sense of injustice will thus be created, together with a
weakening of the respect in which the compelling authority is
held. When compulsion is advocated, reform must, therefore,
always be regarded as resulting in a balance of good and evil
consequences; and in eugenic reform, as in all other reforms,
it can only be justifiable when it is confidently held to be right
by a large majority of the citizens concerned. _But, this condition being fulfilled, can even a considerable amount of doubt
on the part of this majority be shown to be a logical bar to all
action? I see no reason why it should be.

Some light may perhaps be thrown on this difficult problem by an endeavour to estimate what would have been the
result in the past of the adoption of an attitude of extreme
caution such as that hinted at rather than definitely advocated by
Mr. Carr-Saunders. Now, in regard to the past, it is useless to
urge the ‘necessity for more knowledge than that which we
now possess; for we have no right to imagine any knowledge
to have been in existence when it was as a fact not existent.
Assuming our existing state of ignorance, I am much tempted
to imagine a conversation between Mr. Carr-Saunders and
Nature—I will not pause to define that word—at that epoch in
the evolution of the animal world when, let us say, reptiles of
a low type were the highest form of being in existence. Our
critics would probably have begun by demanding what possible
justification Nature could find for creating vast numbers of
beings merely to be slaughtered in a cruel and almost fortuitous
fashion. We do not know, Nature would have been told,
‘“‘how far all the various potentialities are inherited with the
same intensity, we are ignorant as to the degree to which they
are correlated or are inherited independently one of another,”’
and consequently even if a small fraction of the unfit were being
OUR CRITIC CRITICIZED. 319

killed off in each successive generation, there would be no
justification for assuming that living beings were thus being
slowly fitted to their environments. Perhaps Nature might
also have been informed that she had no right to make the
““ sweeping generalisation ’’ that the mere fitting of beings to
their environments was as a rule a progressive movement; or
that progress could not best be made by fitting the environment
to the individual. But if Nature had been persuaded by the
cogency of the logic of our imaginary critic to abandon all her
methods of selection, what would have been the result ? Should
we not now be still crawling about on all fours, laying innumerable eggs, and utterly careless of the welfare of our progeny ?
No doubt Mr. Carr-Saunders might reply that I was not justified in thus personifying Nature, a retort the force of which I
should have to acknowledge. But does not this fanciful conversation at all events indicate that by no amount of caution can
we avoid the risks attached to a policy of standing still with its
possibly disastrous consequences ?

It may no doubt be urged that, where doubts exist, the
policy of inaction is generally speaking the course involving
at all events the least amount of risk. But even if this conclusion were admitted as a guiding principle for our future policy,
it would nevertheless be impossible to point to any reform
which could not be opposed on the ground of insufficient knowledge. As time goes on we shall get to know much more about
the factors of evolution ; but will the millennium of perfect knowledge ever arrive? Even if natural selection be in the future
completely discredited, and whatever may be the new lights
thrown by science on biological problems, until this happy era
does arrive it will continue to be possible to oppose every attempt to introduce new methods of insuring racial progress on
grounds similar to those urged by: Mr. Carr-Saunders. Or,
turning again to the past, and looking for example to the case
of the breeder of animals, it must, it is true, be admitted that he
has been dealing with risks of a different order of magnitude to
those which the eugenic reformer has now to face, and that
consequently cattle breeding is but a very uncertain guide as
regards human affairs. But the breeder does encounter certain
320 EUGENICS REVIEW.

risks, both in regard to his own pocket and as to the effect of
his experiments on his stock; and it is hard to find a logical
defence for his action if all the efforts of the eugenist are to
stand condemned on account of insufficient knowledge, both
parties being equally ignorant of the laws of heredity. Again,
our critic has urged that our ignorance ‘‘ concerning the influence of the environment upon the characteristics of the individual in its lifetime is so profound that ’’ certain generalisations made by eugenists cannot be sustained. But, if this be
sO, must not many of the generalisations of other reformers concerning the effects of environment fall to the ground also? The
late Lord Farrer remarked, I believe, that the one thing that
could be predicted with certainty concerning the effect of an
Act of Parliament was that it would be different from that
anticipated by its advocates. Yet, in spite of all this doubt and
ignorance, social reformers have as a fact pushed forward and
have done much to benefit man by improving his surroundings;
and Mr. Carr-Saunders is the last person to wish that they
had held their hands from the plough. Moreover, it 1s important to note that if the wisest amongst the reformers had let
their ignorance bar their road, the consequences might have
been even more disastrous than a mere check to progress. It
is the wise who, seeing all round the subject, perceive possible
dangers to which the less wise are blind; and, if the more capable hold back in consequence of their wider vision, the steering
of the ship will pass into the hands of the less capable who may
be uninfluenced by any reasonable fears. The acceptance in
the past of arguments similar to those suggested by Mr. CarrSaunders might therefore have turned many a progressive
advance into a retrograde movement; and the dread of such a
result as regards eugenics in the future is a legitimate argument against excessive caution on the part of the leaders of
scientific thought. |

But, even if it be granted that doubts ought not to completely bar the road to action, we still have to enquire whether
we are attempting to move in the right direction. Mr. CarrSaunders’s misgivings on this point appear to me to be in one
respect due to a misapprehension of the views held by the
OUR CRITIC CRITICIZED. 321

majority of those striving for eugenic reform. Our critic considers that eugenists in asserting that ‘‘ inheritance is of far
greater strength than environment’ are generalising without
sufficient evidence; and I must admit that we have not infrequently been to blame in using such words without explaining in the clearest manner the meaning which we intended to
convey by them. As to the social effects of environment, or
those effects which are produced on individuals by changes in
their own surroundings, they may be broadly divided into
physical and mental effects. Now, every eugenist admits, or
acts as if he admitted, the immense importance of mental and
traditional environment; for when considering the effects produced by these factors, problems connected with heredity are
often consciously or unconsciously pushed into the background. For example, if we completely ignored everything
but heredity, we should now be advocating child murder instead
of utterly repudiating it, as we most certainly do. The agony of
the mother of a murdered child is rightly held to be the predominant consideration in studying the ethics of infanticide,
and this agony is wholly due to a change in her environment.
Moreover, no fears or apprehensions would be aroused in the
minds of the cats of the next generation by the drowning of any
number of kittens to-day; and, if all the environmental conditions were the same in the case of man as in the case of the
lower animals, I see no reason why babies and kittens should
be treated differently. The higher mental powers of man, and
the fact that knowledge may be transmitted from generation
to generation for an indefinite period, however, make any
analogy with domestic animals a dangerous guide in human
affairs and justify the more or less complete neglect of heredity
in considering certain social questions. But with regard to physical environment the eugenist is unquestionably right in demanding that the hereditary factor shall always be given a prominent
place in discussing the problems involved, a demand which
might have been made even before all our recent statistical
knowledge had been acquired, knowledge which I myself hold
to be of the greatest value. To establish the importance of
considering heredity in connection with social problems in322 EUGENICS REVIEW.

volving questions of changes in physical environment, is it not
sufficient to point out how ignorant we are as to the ultimate
social effects of nearly all such environmental changes, and how
impossible it is to judge the length of time for which any given
material improvement will last; whilst at the same time showing
how mankind may be benefited for countless generations by
successful eugenic reform, and this without throwing any of
those additional strains on the citizens of the future which
environmental reforms nearly always throw on the citizens of
to-day ?

But even if it were proved that environment was more important than heredity, whatever meaning might be attached to
these words, would it not be well to consider to what extent
such a conclusion would tend to modify the eugenic programme ?
Would it be wise on this supposition alone to neglect any
eugenic reform? Assuredly not. If we heard two farmers
disputing as to which was more important for their crops,
manuring or ploughing, we should not, I think, find it easy to
Clearly state what was the issue between them. They might
no doubt be wrangling as which would have the greater bene,
ficial effect, a change from manure A to manure B, or a change
from plough C to plough D. But would the unanimous verdict
of all the disputants that the proposed change in manures would
increase the crops more than the proposed change of ploughs
be any argument whatever against using the best plough?
Obviously it would not; and obviously if any given change of
environment would benefit mankind more than a_ possible
change in the parenthood of coming generations, this fact would
form no argument whatever against the eugenic reform in question if it could be carried out simultaneously with the more
beneficial social reform. If Mr. Carr-Saunders had confined
his criticisms to those cases where eugenic and environmental
reforms come in conflict with each other he would have been
on firmer ground; for it is only in such cases that we can have
any doubt as to the wisdom of pressing forward both methods
of benefiting mankind at the same time. Where there is such
a conflict of ideals, more light is often urgently needed ; though
OUR CRITIC CRITICIZED. 323

even then we should not let our doubts altogether overmaster
our desire to advance.

Another fundamental point dealt with by our critic is with
reference to the possibility of distinguishing the fit from the
unfit, a sorting out process which we must attempt if we wish
to influence the relative rate of multiplication of those two
great classes. Have we any solid foundation, we are in effect
asked, for the alarm we often express concerning the high birthrate of the poorer classes? Can we prove that there is any correlation between wealth and innate civic worth? As to the
doubt expressed in this criticism whether the element of chance
does not so dominate the race of life that there is in fact no effective weeding out of the inherently incapable from the ranks of the
rich or any regular promotion of the inherently capable from
the poorer strata of society, we can only say that this is a conclusion which is contrary to our own personal experience as
well as to our reading of the lesson taught to us by the best
literature. Economists no doubt hold, as we are reminded, that
society is divided into a number of non-competing classes;
though in using this term they have had in their minds, we
believe, only the more immediate effects of competition. The
changes in the economic conditions of one group may have very
little immediate effect on the neighbouring groups; and yet a
slow transfer may be taking place between them as the generations succeed each other, a transfer which may have but slight
economic consequences if the numbers transferred in opposite
directions are about equal. It may perhaps be, as Mr. CarrSaunders tells us, that the most desirable members of the poorer
classes ‘‘ show, if anything, an aversion to attempting to improve their position in the social sense,’’ artizans themselves
seldom becoming clerks; yet it is certainly true, as Mr. Charles
Booth has told us, that ‘‘ it is common for the children to aim
at a higher position than their parents held’! and to move into
*“a house in a better district.”” Will not the children of capable, sober, foreseeing, and thrifty parents be more likely to be
able to do this than the children brought up in the squalor of
the wastrel’s house? There is, in fact, as it seems to me, little

1 Life and Labour. Final Vol., p. 204.
324 EUGENICS REVIEW.

in this economic argument to lessen the a priori probability of
the existence for many years in the past of a slow sorting out
process by which some fractions of the more able stocks have
been transferred from the poorer to the richer strata of society, a
process which has been much hindered but not quite stopped
by economic friction of various kinds.

Assuming merely for the sake of argument that. such a
change has been taking place, Mr. Carr-Saunders proceeds to
question whether it is in truth the men whom we ought to
regard as being the best who have been promoted into the richer
ranks. To consider only one of the points he raises, and that
perhaps not the most important, he suggests that the ‘‘ faculty
for getting himself trusted ’’ is one of the obvious characteristics
of the successful business man, a quality the loss of which
would not be a matter of serious concern to society. But does
he deny that there is a fairly close correlation between the power
of inspiring confidence and the quality of actual trustworthiness? If these two characteristics are closely connected,
then by selecting those who inspire confidence we shall in large
measure be sorting out those who possess a very valuable
quality, the quality on which all delegation of authority, and
nearly all our confidence in the actions of our fellow citizens
depends. My own personal experience in manufacturing circles
teaches me that, if we look merely to the captains of industry,
by far the most important quality for ensuring commercial success is the power of picking out the men
who can be trusted and of deciding on the amount of
confidence which can be safely placed in each individual
selected. If this be so, and if consequently our large and
flourishing manufactories are as a rule run by men exceptionally
gifted in the judgment of character, it follows that the subordinate posts will generally be filled by the promotion of men
who not only inspire trust, but are trustworthy. If this be so,
surely success in business is not a bad test of civic worth. No
doubt we want far more reliable information concerning the
average innate qualities of those composing the different strata
of society. But if there are a priori reasons for believing that
men exceptionally well endowed by nature are being slowly
OUR CRITIC CRITICIZED. 325

drafted into the classes with the lowest birth-rate, does not this
probability form not only a legitimate ground for alarm, but
also a serious warning with regard to the many possible dangers
attached to the policy of standing still ?

Want of space makes it impossible todiscuss the many other
interesting questions raised by Mr. Carr-Saunders; and I must
conclude by saying that this article seems to me to be admirable
as a plea for further scientific enquiry, whilst if it was intended
—which I do not believe—as an argument in favour of calling a
halt all along the line of practical reform, I submit that it fails
entirely.

II.
By F. C. S. ScuiLier, D.Sc.

THE advocatus diaboli is an official who should be permanently
employed, not only by the makers of saints, but by every human
institution which is liable to get, as humanity will, too good
an opinion of itself, and by every organisation which tries to
precipitate the millennium. I had hardly realised that the
Eugenics Education Society had progressed so rapidly as to
need the services of this official, but I do not doubt that every
reasonable eugenist will have welcomed Mr. Carr-Saunders’s
paper in the last number of the EUGENICS REviEW. For he
has put together and stated with great ability and clearness
objections which are widely felt, and urged his case with much
moderation and in courteous and temperate language. Mr.
Carr-Saunders has given us the best sort of criticism to which
eugenics are at present exposed, and even where we feel that
his objections are based on misconceptions and misrepresentations and suspect that he can hardly himself have been taken in
by them, he has given us a convenient occasion to reply and to
remove misapprehensions which are none the less dangerous
for being unjust. It is always profitable and pleasant to reply
to relevant and fair-minded criticism, and the pleasure is not
diminished by a conviction that an effective reply is possible.
I hope, however, that mv remarks will be construed as strictly
a reply to the devil’s advocate’s case, and not to Mr. Carr326 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Saunders personally, whose courtesy and candour are as grateful to eugenists as the defects of his arguments are reassuring.

The first peculiarity which struck me in Mr. CarrSaunders’s case was the completeness with which it had fallen
into the tone, and adopted the language, of obstructive conservatism always and everywhere. No one who has had experience
of the conduct of business can have failed to note that often
the most efficacious way of baffling an unwelcome proposal is
not to oppose it directly or to denounce it violently, but to
deprecate haste, to urge the need for further inquiry, and finally
to get it referred to a committee. A plausible case for more
knowledge before action is attempted can always be made out.
Moreover, committees must deliberate, and by the time they can
report circumstances may have changed, and the danger of
innovation may be over. But most committees have to report
sooner or later, and then action must ensue. Would it not be,
however, a master-stroke of obstructiveness to find a committee
which by its very nature and constitution is bound to deliberate
for ever and can never issue a final report? To refer a question
to such a committee would really be to shelve it for ever. Yet
is not this the true inwardness of the demand for a complete
consensus of scientific experts delivered with absolute finality ?
In no science can the experts ever agree absolutely, in no
science are the conclusions absolutely final; and if either of
these portents had occurred, it would mean, not that final truth
had been reached, but that the science had ceased to progress.
It ought therefore to be clearly understood, both by eugenists
and by their critics, that to demand absolute and complete knowledge before anything is done is really to refuse to let anything
be tried.

But the practical eugenist is not really bound to wait for a
quixotic agreement and an illusory finality about the knowledge
he needs. He only needs knowledge enough to warrant his
first tentative experiments to cope with crying and admitted
evils, and can trust his very experiments to yield him the
instruction needed to carry him on to the next step. He can
well reply therefore to those who counsel caution to the pitch
of inaction, ‘‘ True, I know little enough, but I know enough
OUR CRITIC CRITICIZED. 327

to start on; moreover, it is only by experimenting and taking
certain risks that I can ever hope to learn what as yet I do not
know.”’

To traverse this contention it would have to be shown that
we have not, as a matter of fact, enough knowledge to venture
on any experiment. But will any of the critics of eugenics
contend that the whole of our present knowledge of genetics and
biology is practically irrelevant, and leaves us just as helpless
as the most ignorant savages? It may be that we have not
knowledge enough to try a particular experiment; but in each
case specific reasons should be given for thinking so. Merely
general insistence on the defectiveness of human knowledge
should no more suffice as a deterrent than general enthusiasm
for eugenics should suffice to exculpate the authors of some
foolish experiment that claims to be eugenical.

Now it seems to me that Mr. Carr-Saunders’s strictures are
far too general. He hardly ever condescends to focus his eye on
particular proposals, or to attempt a quantitative estimate of the
difficulties he enumerates. Yet it is upon its capacity to meet
particular difficulties in particular cases that the future of
eugenics will depend.

This excessive generality lends itself to exaggeration of the
differences of opinion both among eugenists and among the
scientists whose researches are relevant to eugenics; it is too
easily assumed that these differences are so extensive as to preclude agreement about what should be done and what should
be done no longer.

But as a matter of fact these differences are mostly irrelevant. It is quite unnecessary for a eugenist dogmatically to
deny the possibility of improving a stock by improving its
conditions of life; it is unnecessary also that he should have
arrived at final conclusions as to the exact proportions in which
‘nature’ and “‘ nurture ’’ may be held to contribute to a man’s
total character. It is enough that the existence of hereditary
defects should be admitted, and that it is possible to get rid of
them, just as the case for reforming the environment is made
out so soon as it is shown that evil conditions exist which it is
possible to remedy. And it is just as obvious that improve328 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ments in the conditions may be rendered nugatory by deterioration of the stock, as that improvement in the stock may be
neutralised by badness of the conditions. The antithesis
between nature and nurture is more a question of partisan
dialectics than a real practical difficulty, and it would be
deplorable if it were allowed to frustrate a constructive policy.

In like manner the biological disputes between the
Lamarckians, Darwinians, Mendelians, and biometricians, and
the unsolved problems round which they rage, are, for practical
purposes, largely irrevelant. Whether or not acquired characteristics are in extreme cases to some slight extent inherited,
there is no doubt about the importance of heredity, and no
biologist who denies the enormous difference between a good
and a bad inheritance. It does not therefore seem legitimate to
argue that ‘‘if acquired characteristics are to any extent’
inherited, then to that extent we are thrown back on the environment ’’ (p. 217). If the extent is small, as it admittedly must
be, the environment will make little difference ; if it is negligible,
it will make practically none. But even if it were considerable,
it would not follow that it should not be backed up and
accelerated by selection.2, Again whether or not we succeed in
dissecting our nature wholly into unit characters inherited
according to Mendelian rules, there is no doubt that a number
of our characteristics behave in a manner conveniently described
by the Mendelian theory. Whether or not we hold that natural
selection is all powerful, there is no denying that it occurs, and
that human selection also exists, and that if it were guided
by an intelligent purpose its effects would very rapidly make
themselves felt. Whether such intelligent selection would
chiefly utilise small variations, or large, is quite a secondary
question; for there is nothing to prevent our trying both.
Still less does it matter practically whether the coefficient of
correlation of the inheritance of mental qualities is °3 or °5, so
long as it is not denied that it is relatively high and should not
be neglected.

1 Ttalics mine.

2 In the end, in his first footnote on p. 232, Mr. Carr-Saunders has himself toacknowledge that ‘‘the Eugenic case rests rather upon the fact that heredity has some influence
upon all characteristics than upon its dominating importance.”
OUR CRITIC CRITICIZED. 329

The reason why Mr. Carr-Saunders so exaggerates the
practical importance of the differences of biological opinion
which exist at present is apparently that he is labouring under
a logical delusion, which, though sanctioned by the textbooks,
is utterly paralysing and repugnant to common sense. He
repeatedly implies (pp. 216, 218, 220, 221, 230, 232) that in
order to justify action our evidence must be ‘‘ conclusive,’’ our
premisses ‘‘ certain,’’ our knowledge “‘ precise.’’ I venture to
reply that if this doctrine were true, no action would ever be
justifiable anywhere. For every act presupposes at least one
alternative, even if it be only that of doing nothing, and letting
events take their course. Hence every act implies a chotce
between alternatives, and a possibility of error, if the alternative
adopted is not the best. Clearly, therefore, no act can be
absolutely assured of a successful issue in advance. It may
always be that an alternative better than any the agent thought
of was possible. The risk that the act chosen was not the best
possible must always be taken. As a rule it is necessary to
take far greater risks as well, and to act upon slight probabilities
and avowedly defective knowledge, because the pressure of
existing evils renders the dangers of inaction such that men
clutch at straws to keep their heads above water. Hence an
absolutely conclusive case for any action can never be made
out; if it could be, there would not normally be a conservative
party which views all changes with alarm. All must run risks,
whatever they do, the opponents of eugenics as well as its
advocates. Whoever, therefore, seeks to deter eugenists from
running the risks incidental to what they believe to be their
beneficial proposals should endeavour to show, not that they
have no certainties to go upon, but that their policy would
probably entail greater evils than those they seek to remove.
Merely to argue that success is not assured, nor likely to be
unalloyed, is not a sound objection. For are there not, we
may ask, grave evils bound up with the present ordering of
things? Do they not menace perpetually the human race with
deterioration and destruction? Surely the conditions of life
are not in general so ideal that society should frown upon
intelligent attempts to improve upon them.

cé

ce
330 EUGENICS REVIEW.

The eugenist, therefore, must claim what is conceded
without a murmur to every politician, to every man of business,
and to every political theorizer however cranky, viz., the right
to have the courage of his opinions and to act upon them, if
he will count the cost and forecast the risks, and abide by the
verdict of experience. But this does not mean that he is at
once to rush into rash experiments on a vast scale that may
irrevocably compromise the human race. In the first place the
eugenists (of the Eugenics Education Society at any rate) have
learnt from the wisdom of Sir Francis Galton that their teachings must respect and build on the existing conditions of
human society and sentiment. They are not utopian Platonists,
whose first step to betterment is an impossible leap into the
air (or rather into a supercelestial void), and who dream of
establishing the ideal state by a tour de force. Secondly, to one
who knows the world and has observed how enslaved the
human mind is to the sway of habit and how inhospitable
it is to the reception of new ideas, it will seem ludicrous to
suppose that any considerable impression is going to be made
upon it by eugenics in the immediate future. The Eugenics
Education Society has a long and arduous campaign before it,
if it hopes even to interest the majority of the human race in the
problems it studies, and for eugenics to exercise any appreciable
influence over the fortunes of humanity will most probably take
centuries. If circumstances are propitious and efforts strenuous
we may hope that by the time the oracle of science is open to
consultations, and biologists like Professor Karl Pearson are
ready to commit themselves to a practical policy, there may be
a body of eugenists trained and intelligent enough to receive
their utterances with respect, and large enough to popularise
them and to bring them in touch with the masses. At present
if a biologist should happen upon a discovery that would save
society, it would fall upon indifferent or hostile ears. A little
distortion in our Daily Mails, a little derision from our
Chestertons, and its effect would be erased by the fresher sensations of a new indecency or a new murder. Surely the present
generation of men has little to hope, and less to fear, from
practical eugenics !
OUR CRITIC CRITICIZED, 331

It seems to me, therefore, that Mr. Carr-Saunders has committed himself to a logical position which renders action unjustifiable, and condemns eugenists, because like all reformers, they
see that such a position is untenable. But in several other
respects also he does not seem to me to meet the case of
eugenics squarely. For example, he does not seem to have
understood why eugenists believe in (and deplore) the concentration of ability in the upper ranks of society. He treats this
merely as a snobbish belief in the superiority of the upper
classes, and declines to believe that they are really superior.
But this is to miss the force of the argument. The argument
is that the upper classes tend to be superior because ability
tends to rise, society being so organised that, even when ample
deductions are made for luck (p. 224) and favouritism, there is
a considerable degree of correlation between merit and success.
A large proportion, therefore, of the ability in existence forces
its way into the higher ranks. That this ability may be of
various kinds, and rise in various non-competing classes, does
not alter the fact that there are prizes for ability to rise to in
most walks of life. The able examinee may rise to be a bishop,
or a headmaster, or a professor, or an under secretary in the
civil service; the good speaker may rise to be a judge or a
cabinet minister; the good organiser and speculator may become
a millionaire; the good doctor, or artist, or musician, or singer,
may grow rich, and any one who is rich may nowadays achieve
a title—the result in every case is that ability from every class
is attracted towards the prizes that are offered. Now there may
be some differences of opinion about the completeness with
which the lower classes are thus drained of their native ability,
but that the opportunities to rise are far greater than formerly
can hardly be disputed. It follows that the ability in the lower
classes always tends to be drafted off into the higher.

What becomes of it when it has risen? That is a separate
question. It is to be feared that the social machinery now proceeds to churn a great deal of the cream into scum. If so, it
may be that on the average the level of ability in the upper
classes is no higher than in the lower. But, if so, the deterioration of the national stock will only proceed the faster. Again,
332 EUGENICS REVIEW.

it is possible that there is much latent ability in the upper
classes, which is never manifested because it has no motive for
strenuous exertion. If so, national efficiency can be enhanced by
contriving new incentives to the strenuous life. But what is
indisputable is that, as things are, the ability which rises to the
top very rapidly dies out, and this is a crying evil, whether that
part of it which survives is corrupted or not. Surely then Mr.
Carr-Saunders has not disposed of the eugenists’ indictment of
the present social order.

He does not shrink from trotting out again the old bugbear
(from Jowett’s criticism of the Platonic Republic) about the
possible losses to mankind from the elimination of feeble-bodied
men of genius. We are once more asked to remember how
much we owe to St. Paul, Newton, Kant, and other weaklings.
But no attempt is made to show that our indebtedness would
not have been incomparably greater if these great men had
enjoyed a robuster physique, or that their physical infirmities
promoted rather than impeded their spiritual activities. It 1s conveniently forgotten that with just a little more physical debility
these geniuses would not have been able to achieve anything at
all, and that for lack of a little more adequate physical equipment
much ability has always been lost to the world. What of the
waste of men like the ‘‘bridled’’ Theages, whom Plato
esteemed as the only true philosopher in Athens (except himself)? They have left no memorial, and remained pathetically
ineffective, as though they had never been. Nor again is
any tear bestowed upon the geniuses whose physique was so
defective that they never lived to manifest their superiority
even to their friends. Least of all is it shown to be impossible
that as much genius (or more) might not be engendered by a
eugenical society from its sane and healthy stocks as antieugenical societies now produce from their tainted and uncertain
sources. It is so little genius that we get at present and we
make such miserable use of it that the very conjectural loss
which eugenics might occasion need scarcely enter into a
statesman’s calculations. At any rate the chances of obtaining
genius might be enormously improved by diminishing the
enormous waste and elimination of ability which is now proOUR CRITIC CRITICIZED. 333

moted by our social order in the very families which seem most
fitted and likely to engender genius.

To conclude then, there is only one of Mr. Carr-Saunders’s
criticisms of the sane and moderate eugenics which the Eugenics.
Education Society appears to me to stand for, to which I can
attribute a modicum of truth. I think a eugenically organised
society would hardly be able to start with fully formed and
perfectly definite ideals of ‘‘ goodness’’ and ‘‘ badness.’’ It
might have difficulty, therefore, in determining in certain cases
what were the ‘‘ good ’”’ qualities it wanted to encourage and
what were the ‘‘ bad’’ it wanted to extinguish. Nay, I will
admit even that, not improbably, it would make mistakes.
There would be nothing surprising in this, for the human race
has usually stumbled upon the truths it has achieved only after
long wanderings in the mazes of error. It has reached the
promised land only after many trials in the wilderness, and these
have not always been wholly bad for it. But I would ask Mr.
Carr-Saunders whether it is so certain that the present valuations
of society are absolutely right? Is it certain that at present we
make no mistakes as to the characters we admire and reward,
or again depreciate and punish, and commit no errors of judgment in our ways of doing this? Why then should an inerrancy
be demanded of the eugenists which cannot be claimed for any
actual society? At any rate it can hardly be denied that we
have not arrived at anything like universal agreement in these
matters, and that our actual social order pays scant regard
to the estimates of ‘‘ goodness’’ and ‘‘ badness’’ which find
most favour with our best men. To contend therefore that all
things are so well and wisely ordered that we need not trouble
to think of changing them seems an enormous paradox.

Ii.
By C.J. Bonp, F.R.C.S.

In taking advantage of the invitation to readers of the
EucEnics ReEvIEw to discuss some of the points raised by Mr.
Carr-Saunders may I, as an original member of the Eugenics
334 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Education Society, express my appreciation of the insight and
fairness of criticism which characterises his article ?

While agreeing with Mr. Carr-Saunders as to the difficulty
of determining the kinds of natural endowments which are
necessary to insure success under present conditions of life,
and while concurring in his suggestion that there is a tendency
on the part of some eugenists to magnify the hereditary at the
expense of the environmental factor, and while fully conceding
that under present conditions achievement cannot be regarded
as a satisfactory test of endowment, I still think, after careful
perusal of his judicial statement of the position, that even on
his own showing one safe and practicable line of eugenic
action still lies open to us.

If with Mr. Carr-Saunders we regard the struggle of life
not as a single race but as a number of races of different
lengths, with different obstacles, going on at the same time,
among different groups of competitors, then the difficulty of
dealing with the case of the tubercular citizen assumes its
proper aspect. Although the consumptive person may not
possess the endowments necessary to enable him to ‘compete
in a five mile race, he still may be able to acquit himself
creditably in the hundred yards, and in view of our present
inability to determine the extent to which capacity of resistance
to tubercular infection may be linked up with capacity to
achieve success in other fields;—and in view of the further fact
that the advance of preventive medicine may eventually banish
the tubercle bacillus from the environment of the near future,
it certainly seems reasonable to abstain from restricting the
liberty of tubercular persons in the matter of parenthood,
unless we also know that in addition to this special disability
they also possess other hereditary disabilities (especially those
of a nervous kind) which will render their chances hopeless of
competing successfully in any of the tests which civilisation
imposes on mankind. This with our present knowledge is
certainly impossible. But having granted so much in the case
of the tubercular citizen, the case of the feeble-minded citizen
stands on quite a different level when judged by this standard.
Here at any rate we may, with some chance of obtaining a
OUR CRITIC CRITICIZED. 335

truthful answer, ask ourselves the question—Is the feebleminded individual so deficient in all innate capacity as to render
his chances hopeless in all the various tests which civilisation
demands, and further still is he or she deficient in all those
capacities which past records and present experience lead us to
regard as likely to be of increasing value to the citizen and the
State in the environment of the future ?

If we can say he is so deficient, and if we can also say that
in addition to this general deficiency he possesses innate tendencies, the exercise of which will infallibly handicap or injure
his fellow competitors in the struggle, then I think we may
reasonably assume that the verdict of society will eventually confirm the verdict of the eugenist, namely, that it is the duty of
the State to prevent such persons from becoming the parents
of offspring which, accumulating evidence goes to show, will
inherit like disabilities.

Apparently the only character which can be adduced as
worthy of consideration in such a judgment would be the
natural fertility which seems to be part of the endowment of the
feeble-minded mother. But apart from the difficulty of separating out the desirable character of fertility from the other
undesirable qualities with which it is associated, such evidence
as exists goes to show that it is not lack of fertility but a
misapplication of the power of voluntary control over the output
of human life that constitutes our present difficulty.

Capacity to achieve success under conditions in which
achievement is a fair measure of endowment, in an environment
which may be an expanding one in space and time—this would
seem to be the true basis of eugenic theory, and the safeguarding of the supply of this capacity would seem to be the main
object of eugenic practice.

Some practical difficulty may arise in the application of this
rule because it is not only necessary to know that these innate
disabilities which preclude success are transmissible in heredity,
but it is also necessary to recognise that certain individuals may
transmit these disabilities to the offspring without exhibiting
them themselves. The only satisfactory solution of this
difficulty is fuller knowledge of the genetic constitution of such
336 EUGENICS REVIEW.

persons. The difficulty, however, does not arise in the case of
the feeble-minded themselves.

In view of the increasing claims that the environment of
the future will, undoubtedly, make on the mental equipment of
the race it would seem wise for eugenists to concern themselves
especially with the problems of the inheritance of neuro-psychic
qualities.

No doubt, the scope of eugenic action so restricted seems at
present very limited, but we must remember that the field is a
gradually expanding one, and one which some new and
unsuspected acquisition of genetic knowledge may rapidly
extend.

Meanwhile, what we require is, that students of genetics
should also classify the various competitive tests which society,
as at present organised, imposes on its citizens, and that they
should ascertain the exact handicap which each particular social
and industrial environment places on each individual competitor. In other words, it is necessary to ascertain whether the
conditions of the competition are such that the achievement of
success can be used as a fair measure of natural endowment
before we can say what the innate qualities are which are
necessary to ensure success in each race. Then having
acquired some knowledge of the innate capacities requisite under
different environmental conditions we can proceed to enquire
whether these different competitions are all necessary, or useful,
and whether it might not be possible to do away with some
and to improve others, whether, for instance, some race which
is now run by an ill-assorted, unfairly handicapped, unequally
equipped crowd of runners could not be more usefully run in
separate heats by smaller groups of competitors under fairer
rules. By some such analysis not only would achievement
become a truer measure of endowment, but the kind of
individual endowment necessary to ensure success under such
controlled conditions would begin to become apparent.

Until we are more fully equipped with this sociological
information it would seem best to copy the example of nature
and confine our eugenic interference within negative lines of
action, and by a modified form of artificial combined with
OUR CRITIC CRITICIZED. 337

natural selection in which some consideration is shown for the
individual, deny the privilege of parenthood to one clearly
defined class of citizens to whom we have applied certain
recognised tests, in the same way that nature denies the privilege
of continued existence to her inefficient children after submitting
them to the test of the struggle of life.

We may now look at the problem of national decay from
the same eugenic standpoint. |

It may, or it may not, be necessary to inquire whether the
decay of any civilisation necessarily means the decay of the
race which has evolved it, or whether it is possible for a race to
exhibit declining vigour in one department of national life
and yet to show, either at the same time or subsequently,
undiminished activity in some other field of human enterprise.
In other words we may need a stricter definition of what we
mean by “‘ fall of civilisation ’’ and ‘‘ national decay.”’

Assuming, however, for the present that in general terms
‘“decay of civilisation’? does mean a decline in all valuable
racial qualities, then the important question arises as to the
relative share exercised by hereditary and environmental
influences respectively in bringing this result about.

Are we eugenists right in assuming that ‘‘ differential
fertility ’’ is causally linked up with national decay? Is it not
open to argument that ‘‘ differential fertility’? and national
decay may both be only symptoms of some deeper underlying
cause.

We shall, at any rate, probably be on firm ground in maintaining the fundamental proposition that decadence in any
department of life, individual and national, is the outward
expression of a want of adaptation between the organism,
individual or social, and its environment.

This failure in adjustment of inner to outer relations may
come about in a stable environment through degeneration in
the organism, or it may come about in a changing environment,
that is, in an environment which is moving in the upward
338 EUGENICS REVIEW.

direction, from failure on the part of the organism to develop in
proportion.

Further, the change in the environment may be so sudden
or so rapid that the organism is unable to go through the
biological or genetic changes necessary to bring it into harmony
with its altered environment. In other words there may not be
time for ‘‘ adaptation ’’ to come into play.

Let us translate this into sociological terms. As Mr.
Carr-Saunders, following Pigou and others, has shown, the
environment of civilised man, unlike the environment of animals
or of savage man, is largely a ‘“‘ traditional environment,’’
which continuously and cumulatively modifies the environment
of the next and succeeding generations. One, perhaps the
chief, way in which this modifying influence operates is by
increasing the facilities for the satisfaction of human desires.

The history of the decline of every civilisation is largely the
record of the acquisition of facilities for the satisfaction of
desires in excess of the capacity of the citizens to use those
increased facilities for right ends, that is, in ways which are
calculated to promote the welfare of the society. Looking a
little deeper we find that the reason why these increased facilities are not used to right ends is not wholly, or always chiefly,
because, innate capacity to do so is absent, but because it is not
used in the right direction. The change may have affected one
side, the material side only of the traditional environment.
Facilities for the satisfaction of selfish desires, in other words
opportunities for luxurious living may increase, while opportunities for the exercise of opposite tendencies through moral,
intellectual, and physical education do not increase in like
proportion. In such a case the result on national conduct will
be the resultant of these two tendencies, and as much, or
perhaps more, will depend on the way in which the innate
capacity is exercised than on the nature of the capacity itself.

Let us translate this sociological statement into biological
terms. Some initial change, possibly introduced from outside,
affects the environment of some social organism in which no
deterioration has hitherto arisen in innate equipment. As the
result of this change innate capacity begins to be exercised in
OUR CRITIC CRITICIZED. 339

directions which do not lead to the welfare of the organism,
with the result that deterioration sets in from disuse, or misuse,
and this deterioration is accelerated by a further depreciation of
innate capacity of genetic origin.

Moreover, since advancing civilisation depends on the interaction between innate capacity and the acquirements which it
makes, or in other words, since progress depends on successful
reaction between hereditary tendencies and environmental
influences, it is quite reasonable to suppose that decay is also
dependent on like factors. What do we find? We find that
decay does come about not only from failure of innate capacity
of genetic origin, but also from misuse of capacity itself, the
result of environmental influence, for the wider the establishment of environmental relations the greater the opportunity for
the misuse of capacity. In other words a nation may take the
first step on the downward road from failure to exercise, as well
as from failure to possess the qualities necessary to success.

It would, indeed, be strange if biological laws which control evolution and decay in the individual, and the family,
should cease to operate in the nation or the empire. Just as
in the individual, a sudden environmental change of an
injurious kind may bring about illness and death before there
is time for reaction and the establishment of immunity; and
just as in the industrial world demoralising social conditions
may prevent the attainment of healthy or decent living by
otherwise normal citizens in the short span of a generation, so
too in the history of nations the introduction of luxury (which
is more deadly to the development of capacity than moderate
hardship or lack of opportunity) may lead to misuse and
atrophy of capacity, for the genetic repair of which environmental stress may not allow sufficient time.

What happens is this: During a period of national growth
the acquirements of civilisation increase out of proportion to
the much more slowly evolving innate capacity. A natural
endowment which may be equal to the calls of a simple environment, if it loses the stimulus to effort under the new conditions,
becomes smothered by its own civilisation. The growth of a
community like that of an individual organism can be arrested
340 EUGENICS REVIEW.

by the products of its own activity. In support of this view
of the important share taken by the ‘“‘ traditional ’? environment
in bringing about the fall of a civilisation we find that the
Jewish race, in which, as the result of persecution and hardship,
acquirements have not increased out of proportion to capacity
to use them properly, does not exhibit signs of national
decay. The Jews have, in fact, been able to maintain a moving
equilibrium in a changing environment, and while their material
civilisation has been small their racial vigour has been very
great.

The cure of national decay like the cause, may be twofold
also. It may be brought about genetically by the introduction
of a new supply of innate capacity by inter-marriage with more
vigorous races, or it may be brought about by a return to a
simpler environment, by the removal of demoralising influences,
and by the reduction of facilities for the misuse of capacity, and
by the substitution of opportunities for exercise along better
lines.

Thus it is only by recognising the influence of environmental change, interacting with natural endowment, that we can
hope to explain those cyclical periods of waxing and waning
activity in the history of the nations, of which, in some cases,
the terminal stage is national decay.

Variation in natural endowment of a genetic kind alone
seems an inadequate explanation when we recall the comparatively short intervals of time that sometimes intervene between
these two opposite phases of national existence.

But not only may the environmental change be limited to
one side of the ‘‘ traditional ’’ environment, it may affect one
section only of the population. We know from experience that
opportunities for self-indulgence and luxury when unbalanced
by inducements to action in worthier directions do tend to affect
the upper strata in every society, and we also know that societies
like other organisms die from above downwards.

Two important questions thus arise :—

(1) Whether there is any association between the depth to

which the change affects society and the degree of
national decay.
OUR CRITIC CRITICIZED. 341

(2) Whether that part of the readjusting reaction which is
biological, and depends on a renewal of innate capacity,
as opposed to that part which is sociological and
depends on education and the exercise of capacity along
better lines; whether this biological as opposed to the
sociological readjustment takes place from below upwards, or from above downwards, or in the middle
social levels. It is of course at this point that the
question of ‘‘ differential fertility ’? comes into play.

Although it is held by some that achievement ts a sufficient
measure of endowment, and that loss of innate capacity in the
upper social strata is not made good, genetically speaking, by the
rest of society, yet there are reasons for thinking that the social,
like the individual, organism may repair the effects of waste and
injury, and renew itself from the less specialised, and the less
highly evolved units in its composition. The highly specialised
nerve cells in the individual organism have lost even the power
of cell division.

If this be true of society, then as long as the middle classes
retain a moderate reserve of innate capacity and exercise this in
right directions, national decay is prevented even although the
birth-rate in the upper classes has fallen to a low level.

The history of France would seem to provide an example
of the renewal of national vigour (along lines of quality rather
than quantity) from below upwards.

One other question still remains. We are ignorant as
to the influences which control the growth and sustained vigour
of any given genetic strain. There are reasons for thinking
that even under normal conditions and in a healthy environment some genetic strains do exhibit a gradual loss of vitality
apart from any admixture with inferior strains, as though an
equilibrium of homogeneity had been reached which required
the stimulating disturbance of cross fertilization even though
the introduced elements may not be of superior quality. This
question is, of course, closely linked up with the problem of
‘‘ inbreeding ’’ and the continued selection of certain desired
qualities which are contained in homozygous parents.’

* See also Raymond Pearl, Amer. Nat., 1913.
342 EUGENICS REVIEW.

If this be true of the human family, if the vigour of the
germ-plasm waxes and wanes as the vigour of the somatic
tissues certainly does, then further complications are introduced into the already complicated problem of race culture.

It would seem as though ‘“‘ genetic’’ like other kinds of
equilibrium leads to stagnation, as though change of some kind
is necessary for germinal progress. This may be supplied
insidiously and slowly by environmental influence, or with immediate and dramatic effect by cross fertilization.

The distinctive feature of the modern world is the contemporaneous existence of a number of equally vigorous civilisations and equally powerful empires, while in the medizval and
ancient world there was only room for one empire in any one
age, the consequence is that the area of competition is widening
and the lives of the nations by becoming more strenuous may
also be shortened. Although dread of decadence seems to be as
natural to the nation as dread of death to the individual, yet the
extinction of the nation which, under stress of competition, has
reached its climax of development may bé as necessary to the
progress of the human race as the death of the individual, after
middle age, seems to be to the welfare of the community. In
order to make this otherwise it would be necessary to remould
the whole constitution of things.

From this point of view the problem of the removal or the
renewal of the decadent nation is as important to the human
race as the problem of the removal or the renewal of the
decadent citizen is to the nation.
