EUGENICS: GALTON AND AFTER >
By SIR CHARLES GALTON DARWIN, K.B.E., Se.D., E.R.S.

E warmly welcome this volume,*
from the pen of Dr. Blacker, whichis
appearing very appropriately at the
conclusion of his long period as secretary of
the Society. It is thus a culminating service
rendered by the man who has, perhaps more
than any other of our time, devoted himself
to the cause of eugenics. As the title explains,
and as the author himself confesses, the book

has really two rather different purposes..

Nearly half of it is an account of Galton’s
life and work, covering the enormous variety
of his activities, though, of course, with a
special emphasis on eugenics ; while the rest
of the book describes the developments since
those days of the various subjects which have
bearings on eugenics.

One of the troubles that most of us suffer
from is the impossibility of reading all the
books that we ought to and that we should
like to. Thus Galton’s memory is perpetuated
in the four volumes of Pearson, but there
must be few, unless they are actively concerned in the history of any of the subjects
at which Galton worked, who will have
found the time really to study those volumes
in detail. The first part of this book, then,
admirably fulfils a need by giving at just the
right length an account of Galton and his
work. To anyone who has the wish—and
there should be many—to know about the
extraordinary versatility of his genius it
may be commended as giving just what is
needed, though perhaps such a reader might
also be urged to read Galton’s own Memories
of My Life.

In studying the scientific thought of the
past, one of the most difficult things to assess
is the mental climate of the period in which
new ideas are put forward. They may appear
to arise full-fledged out of nothing from the
mind of one individual, whereas actually
they were really sometimes in the minds
simultaneously of many people, and it is

* Blacker, C. P. Eugenics: Galton and After. London,
1952. Duckworth. Pp. 349. Price 25s.

152

chance which of them happens to get the
credit. Thus attributions of priority are
always difficult, and justice is not always
done. But when all credit is given to rivals,
still Galton has strong claims to have been
the real initiator of a great many different
branches of science. It is perhaps his

versatility that is the most remarkable

quality, but unlike some other versatile
geniuses it was associated with a persistence
through which, after proposing a subject,
he did a great deal of the spade-work in
getting it established. This characteristic
comes out in all his activities. Thus when
he was a traveller he spent a full two years
on his travel, and when he saw the need for
measuring human qualities he set up an
anthropometric laboratory, where no less
than nine thousand people were tested. One
of his pioneer experiments was on the way
the human mind works. It was roughly on
the line that later has become the current
practice of word-association, but it was
invented by him and done entirely on
himself, and though he records the fact that
he found it quite repellently disagreeable
still he had the persistence to see it through.
Nearly all his other activities have come into
extended use ; mention may be made of his
discovery of the anticyclone, of his use
of blood transfusion as a test of the
pangenesis theory, of the Galton ultra-sonic
whistle, and of finger-prints. To be just,.
mention should also be made of one subject
in which he made extensive studies, which
seems to have come to nothing; this is the
subject of ‘number forms.” In more
important fields there is his work on the
co-relation (sic) coefficient, which practically
created the modern science of statistics, and
there is the study of twins, which provides
the best means yet devised for distinguishing
the effects of nature and nurture. And then
there is his work on eugenics, embodied in
Hereditary Genius and the Inquiries tnto
Human Faculty, and in many of his other
EUGENICS: GALTON AND AFTER

writings. All these things are described in
the present book, and no one could help
being impressed by the wide range of the
fields he covered. Here and there, there is,
of course, a breath of what seems now the
rather naive simplicity of the nineteenth
century with its easy explanations of everything to do with evolution, but although
throughout his life his views remained
remarkably constant, yet apart from a few
of these minor things they were quite
outstandingly modern.

The rest of the book—rather more than
half—describes what has happened to
eugenics since Galton’s days. There are
chapters which describe the developments
in each’ relevant subject. The first introductory chapter describes the great changes
in mental climate that have occurred, largely
on account of the two wars. There is a
description of the prejudices induced
against eugenics through the subject getting
confused in some people’s minds with the
various schools of militant nationalism. Then
there is an account of how the rather easy
optimism of the nineteenth century has been
replaced by a clearer appreciation of the
difficulties that eugenics has to face. There
is also in this chapter an account of the
change in climate which has removed the
absolute prohibition of the nineteenth
century on the discussion of sexual matters
and birth control.

There is then a chapter on demography,
describing the conditions of different parts
of the world in the matter of population and
population increase. It brings out the very
important fact that during the past century
in nearly all parts of the world the population
has doubled itself. There is a classification
of the countries into five demographic
classes, and the fact emerges that a great
many parts of the world are still fast
increasing in population, and thus surely
laying up future troubles for themselves.
An interesting map shows at a glance the
condition of the world in all these respects.

Then there is a chapter on the entirely
different subject of testing procedures, a
subject entirely transformed since Galton
started it. There is a large mass of technical

153

literature on all this, and Dr. Blacker has
done a great service in summarizing it for
those who could not, or would not, study the
originals. There are accounts of the wellestablished tests of intelligence, and of the
much less well-established tests of character.
Much of this work has been done in America
—for much of.it the author draws on Osborn’s
Preface to Eugenics—and no one could
withhold admiration from the work done in
this difficult field. It perhaps leaves the
impression that it may not even yet be
running on the right lines, but we can be
grateful for the laborious work so patiently
undertaken by so many workers, for even if
new approaches should be discovered which
prove more profitable, still this kind of
exploration is the only possible way in which
a new science can be established.

The chapter following deals with genetics,
describing the general principles of the
subject on the usual Mendelian lines. It
then branches out into questions of immediate interest to eugenists, by discussing such
things as identical twins. There is a short
account of the ‘“‘ wolf children,’’ whose actual
behaviour was so very different from anything described by Kipling ; this case seems
to swing the balance between nature and
nurture very much in the direction of
nurture. The chapter ends with an account
of the present genetic doctrines enforced in
Russia. This seems a rather unnecessary
excursus, but perhaps the excuse for it is
that these doctrines may at present be
dictating policy about eugenics in a great
portion of the world.

Using these foundations Dr. Blacker then
describes the condition of existing opinion
and policy on eugenics in various countries.
He refers to the report of the French Committee on Population, which raises in an
acute form what is really the cardinal point
in eugenics. It bears on the question of the
‘“‘ planned family.’’ In this country there is
a tendency to insist that children ought only
to be born if they are wanted by the parents.
It sounds an admirable principle, but the
French Committee comes down squarely
with the opinion that a population recruited
in this way will not maintain its numbers—
154

in fact, that in human nature there is an
inadequate wish for children. The matter is
disputed by some authorities, but it is
obviously of quite principal importance for
the future of the race. Connected with this
there is then a discussion on marriage
guidance and other familial questions.
Finally, there is the subject which should
certainly be the, main interest of eugenists,
the question of positive eugenic policy, that is
the encouragement of the increase of good
types as contrasted with the elimination of
bad types. There are a number of interesting
suggestions of what might be done in this
way, including one which should be explored
further; this might be described as the
award of scholarships to parents instead of
to children. But in this part of the subject
it is hard to avoid the conclusion that,
frankly speaking, the more closely the

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

practice of eugenics is examined the more
difficult it is all seen to be.

As a general view of the book, it provides
an admirable conspectus of a whole range of
knowledge which the ordinary reader could
not, or anyhow would not, gather from its
original sources. This in itself would be
enough justification, but the book does much
more. Opinions have changed and are
changing, so that no finality in them is
attained. Eugenics cannot be a pure science
like any of the -ologies, because it deals
with man himself, and so in a changing world
it will always be changing too. It is inevitable
that there will be changes of policy, but there
need be much less uncertainty than there
now is about the knowledge on which these
policies must be based, and it is only through
the existence of books like this that the
knowledge will develop on which sound
practical policies may be chosen.

~—

AND

INTERNATIONAL LAW

Founded in 1894

President: The Rt. Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.C.V.O.
Chairman of the Executive Commitie: The Rt. Hon. Lord Justice DENNING

Editors:

Professor F. H. LAWSON, D.C.L.

J. E. S. FAWCETT, D.S.C.

Honorary Secretary: E. H. WALL.

Annual Subscription :

INTERNATIONAL AND COMPARATIVE LAW QUARTERLY.
Address: 18 NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE,

 

THIRTY SHILLINGS for U.K. subscribers

Articles, Notes, Notices of Books, etc.
LONDON, W.C.2

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLIV, No. 3
