A. E. MOURANT
M.A., D.Phil., D.M., M.R.C.P.

Blood Groups in the Study of

Human Populations

Introduction

HEN A EUGENIST turns to the study
\ V/ of genetics I suppose that he thinks
in terms mainly of those characters
which can be described as advantageous or
disadvantageous to the individual or to the
human race. Unfortunately for the geneticists,
but perhaps fortunately for the race, goodness,
cleverness, good health and beauty are not
simple genetical characters. In so far as they are
genetically determined at all, each of them is the
resultant effect of a very large number of different
genes acting together. The same is true of all
those characters of shape, size and colour by
which we recognize and classify human beings.
Almost the only characters of direct and obvious
interest to the eugenist which are genetically
simple are the congenital diseases, or at any
rate the majority of them, and these fortunately
are relatively rare.

The blood groups are genetically very simple,
in this resembling congenital diseases, and the
rules by which they are inherited have in nearly
all cases been very fully worked out; they possess,
moreover, the advantage that, the genotype
having been determined once for all at the
moment of conception, the adult phenotype
develops almost completely by the time of birth
and quite fully by the age of about one year,
and thereafter remains fixed for life. A year or
two ago one could have made this statement
quite categorically, but it is now known that, in
a few individuals in every hundred thousand or
every million, the ABO blood-group phenotype,
though not, of course, the genotype, is modified
by disease. This is, of course, quite unimportant

* A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on November 18th, 1959.

in population studies, however important it
may be from a medical point of view; the change
moreover, is not one which would deceive a
competent serologist who was aware of the
possibility.

Nevertheless, the blood groups cannot be
regarded simply as neutral markers like labels
attached to individuals or populations from the
outside. As we shall see later, the blood groups
of individuals do, though to a minor degree,
affect their health and fitness, and so these
characters are involved in the processes of
natural selection and of evolution. However,
as a first approximation, we can regard the
frequencies of the blood groups in a population
as remaining unchanged from one generation to
the next; so that they are, in fact, the most useful
of all markers in studies involving ancestral
relationships between populations, and calculations of the proportions in which the original
components have entered into a hybrid race.

Blood Group Testing

When I wrote the notes for this lecture I intended to describe very briefly how blood groups
were determined. Having seen how many of my
blood-grouping colleagues have come to support
me by their presence, I feel somewhat embarrassed at this. Nevertheless, I feel sure that there
are some of you who have not done any blood
grouping, so I shall describe very briefly how
the tests are done, in order to give some idea of
what I am talking about when I refer to someone as being, for instance, group MN, or
Rh-positive.

As you know, the blood consists of a great
many components, of which the most abundant
are the red corpuscles or red cells, which are
microscopic reddish-coloured discs, and the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1960, 52, 1.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

almost clear fluid in which they are suspended,
the plasma. Although the red cells are so minute,
being only 1/3,500 in. in diameter, each nevertheless contains many millions of chemical
molecules, and this gives considerable scope for
the development of a variety of those particular
molecules which determine the blood groups.
These chemically very complex substances,
known as antigens, are situated on the outer
skin of the cell, and something like sixty different
blood group antigens are known, of which any
one individual has perhaps a dozen or twenty.

Corresponding to each of the known antigens
is a particular reactive substance (an antibody)
which is contained in suitable testing fluids.
These fluids usually consist of serum obtained
from human beings or animals, or in certain
cases of extracts of plants, but we shall for the
moment treat them as empirical testing reagents
without worrying about their origin. If a
particular sample of red cells contains the antigen
which corresponds to a given testing fluid, then,
when the fluid is added to the cells, the latter,
instead of remaining separate, alter their
surface properties and stick to one another to
form clumps. The essential blood-grouping test
thus consists in adding separate portions of each
blood sample to a variety of these testing fluids,
and seeing whether the red cells go together in
clumps.

The Genetics of the Blood Groups

By carrying out such studies on the red cells of
enormous numbers of human _ beings—for
instance, there are in the literature the published
results of over 6,000,000 ABO blood-grouping
tests—and by carrying out such tests on members
of known families, it has been possible to determine the way in which each of these antigens, or
rather, the ability to make it, is inherited. It has
thus been found, by testing many thousands of
families, some for one or two antigens and some
for large numbers of them, that these substances
are the product of genes; in general one may say
that each antigen is determined by a single gene.
- The same family studies have shown that these
genes fall into eleven major independent genetical systems which we refer to as the blood-group
systems. Within each system you may have

anything from two to perhaps a dozen distinct
genes.

It would take me far too long to describe the
genetics of each of the blood-group systems, but
I must say a little more about the three systems
with which we are mainly concerned in population and anthropological studies. First of all,
the ABO system: as many of you know, there
are four main blood groups, O, A, B and AB.
These are the products of three different kinds
of allelomorphic genes, O, A and B; each
individual will, of course, have two such genes,
alike or different, one received from each parent.
This gives a possibility of six different genotypes,
OO, AA, AO, BB, BO and AB. The reason why
there are only four blood groups, or distinguishable phenotypes, is that AA and AO are indistinguishable, corresponding to group A, as are BB
and BO, corresponding to group B. The other
two genotypes, OO and AB, correspond, of
course, to blood groups O and AB respectively.

Thus, when we have determined the: blood
group of an individual, there may still be some
doubt as to the genotype. However, if we test a
sufficiently large number of persons we can
calculate the frequency of the three genes in the
population as a whole. We do, in fact, frequently
find it convenient to express the composition of
a population not in terms of the blood groups,
or phenotypes, but in terms of the genes.

One reason for doing this is that it reduces
the number of mathematical variables. In the
case of the ABO system the frequencies of four
blood groups are reduced to those of three genes;
moreover, the total frequencies of the latter add
up to 100 per cent so that if you know the
frequencies of A and B you can tell that of O,
and there are thus really only two independent
variables; if you plot on a graph the percentages
of gene A in one direction, and those of gene B
in the direction at right angles to it, the composition of any population can be expressed completely by means of a single point. As you will
see later, we frequently represent and compare
series of populations by means of graphs of this
sort.

The Rh or Rhesus system is much more
complex. I will not, however, weary you with
its full, and indeed unfathomed, complexities,
nor with the interminable controversies that have
BLOOD GROUPS IN THE STUDY OF HUMAN POPULATIONS

been waged over them. I shall merely try to set
out a relatively simple scheme which is widely
accepted as being a fair approximation to the true
state of affairs. Whereas the ABO groups are the
expression simply of one pair of genes at corresponding loci on one pair of chromosomes, the
Rh groups may be regarded as being due to a
pair of sets of genes, each set occupying three
closely adjacent loci on a chromosome, the loci
being occupied respectively by gene D or d, by
C or c, and by E or e. The linked sets of genes
are represented by sets of symbols such as CDe
cDe, cde, but for some purposes it is useful to
express them in a sort of shorthand (which
actually has priority to the three-gene system);
the short symbols for the three examples just
given are: R,, Rg and r, respectively. Persons
who have at least one D gene are known as
Rh-positive; those with two d genes as Rhnegative.

It is now known that the scheme just described
is an over-simplification: there are certainly
more than two possible allelomorphic genes for
each locus (though each individual can have only
two); there appear to be more loci than three;
and each of the supposed simple genes may itself be complex; however, for most purposes
the simple hypothesis of three adjacent loci is
adequate. Because the genes on a single chromosome are so close together they are inherited
en bloc. It is thought that if you were able to
study many thousands of individuals from
selected matings, as you can with mice, then,
once in several thousand families, you would
probably find that the process of crossing over
had taken place, and that a block of genes
present in a parent had not been passed on intact to a child. However, with the limited
numbers of human families available for testing,
no convincing exceptions have been found to
the rule that each block is passed on intact.
With the exception of little d, which is rather
mysterious, each of the genes corresponds to an
antigen, and each of the latter to an antibody
present in a testing fluid, so that instead of a
single reaction of a single chemical substance
being passed on from generation to generation
as with the ABO system, in the Rh system it is a
set of chemical compounds, or a set of reactions,
which is passed on.

The MN system is genetically similar in plan
to the Rh; here there are two main closely
linked loci, one occupied by gene M or N, the
other by S or s. Again as with Rh, the complexity
is certainly greater than is expressed by this
simplified scheme. There are other allelomorphic
genes that can be present at each of these two
loci; there are certainly more than two loci—
possibly five or more—and again the supposed
genes may themselves be complex. For to-night,
however, we shall keep to the simplified scheme.

There are eleven major blood-group systems;
we have so far considered three. In most of the
remaining cases the genetics are considerably
simpler than in the ones I have described, but as
each system is studied more and more closely,
unsuspected complexities tend to appear.

Blood Groups and Anthropology

I want to turn now to the application of these
genes, considered as markers, to a variety of
populations. When we study the distribution of
the genes of the ABO, Rh and MN systems
throughout the world, we find that the latter
can be divided into seven or eight fairly distinct
regions corresponding reasonably closely to the
regions into which most physical anthropologists would divide it; within each of these areas
there are relatively small variations in the
frequencies of the genes of most of the bloodgroup systems, whereas between the areas there
are frequently very much bigger differences.
This is true, in particular, of the Rh and MN
systems; but in the case of the ABO system,
although the average frequencies are quite
characteristic for each major area, there are
very wide variations in frequency within each of
the areas, even down to quite significant differences between adjacent counties in this country.

I have suggested, and I shall revert to this
suggestion later, that the reason for this is that
the ABO blood groups are subject to a much
more rapid variation than the others by means
of natural selection in relation to features of
the environment. It is probable that the Rh and
MN blood groups also are subject to natural
selection, but, if so, at a much slower rate, so
that the inter-marriage which takes place between
people from different parts of Western Europe,
for example, is sufficient to keep Rh and MN

9
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

AY ,
BT Tt
iil
ef, ie yar Lee y [ye
BHAA AA
RAAT
EEE Te

PERCENTAGE
FREQUENCIES

XXSYSRANSANSANRAN RY
NN NYARSARASARARY
IN RANDY NARNIA NSEND
SN; SNLANIAN S NAN LANSO
SAN ARARARSSARY
STARA
NEARS

AM Uf Uf ep LE ile

CZ LLL

 

FIGURE l
DISTRIBUTION OF BLOOD GROUP GENE O IN EUROPE

blood-group frequencies uniform over the
whole area, whereas there are wide variations
in Western Europe in the frequencies of the
ABO blood groups.

NowIwanttoturnto a map of Europe (Figure
1). This shows the frequencies of the O bloodgroup gene throughout the region. Most of the
data were obtained from records of the blood
transfusion services in the various countries.
The point to which I want to draw your attention
is the high frequency of the blood-group gene O
in North-Western Europe, and particularly in
the so-called Celtic countries of Scotland and
Ireland. Incidentally also in North Wales, as
shown by Dr. Morgan Watkin, the Welshspeaking people taken by themselves have a
high frequency of group O, but this scarcely

Io

shows on the map, where data for the total
population have been used.

The surprising thing is that the Icelanders have
similar blood group frequencies to the Scots
and Irish, and different ones from those found
in most of modern Scandinavia, although the
sagas tell us that the Vikings who colonized
Iceland went from Scandinavia. There are
various suggested reasons for this difference
between Iceland and Scandinavia. From what
we know of the rate of natural selection, it is
extremely unlikely that a population like the
present one of Southern Scandinavia would
have altered in 800 or 900 years to what we now
find in Iceland. One suggestion is that the
original Icelanders came mainly from _ the
British Isles, and only a ruling class, who wrote
BLOOD GROUPS IN THE STUDY OF HUMAN POPULATIONS

34

30

25

A GENE PERCENTAGES

N
oO

6 10
B GENE PERCENTAGES

FIGURE 2
THE A AND B GENE PERCENTAGES OF JEWS AND NON-JEWS IN EUROPE

 

15 20 2?

A _ Austria H Hungary P_ Poland
B Byelorussia J Jugoslavia Ro Romania
C Czechoslovakia K Karaites Ru Russia
GEO Georgia L Lithuania U_ Ukraine
GER Germany N Netherlands

the sagas, came from Scandinavia. The most
likely explanation, however, is that the Icelanders did indeed travel mainly from Scandinavia, but that the race which then lived on the
coasts of Scandinavia was very similar to that
found in Scotland and Ireland, and that the
majority of present-day Scandinavians are
descendants of more recent immigrants into the
peninsula. We have some interesting evidence
in support of this. We have known for a fairly
long time that there was a rather high frequency
of Group O on the west coast of Norway, and
very recently it has been found that there are
enclaves in Sweden with blood-group frequencies
quite as extreme as those found in Iceland.

We shall next consider some people of a rather
special kind, namely, the Jews. In the diagram
(Figure 2) there have been plotted for a number
of different populations, in the manner already
described, the percentages of the A and B genes.
Each of the lines on the diagram refers to a
particular country of Europe: the end marked
by a heavy black dot represents the Jewish
population, and the other end of the line the
non-Jews. We have very little information about
the Jewish communities in Western Europe,
so that most of the lines refer to Eastern Europe.

The points on this diagram represent mainly
pre-war observations. Although the pre-war
Jewish population of each of these countries

It
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

A GENE PERCENTAGES

6 10

 

TUNISIA

ALGERIA

15 20 22

B GENE PERCENTAGES

FIGURE 3
THE A AND B GENE PERCENTAGES OF JEWS AND NON-JEWS IN NORTH AFRICA

differed appreciably in average composition
from the non-Jews, the average over the whole
of Eastern Europe was about the same for Jews
as for non-Jews, so it might be thought that
there was no essential difference in blood-group
frequencies and racial composition between the
Jews of Eastern Europe and non-Jews. However,
when the Rh groups of European Jews are
studied (and unfortunately the only adequate
data we have are from Jews who migrated to
Canada), it is found that, while the Jews from
Eastern Europe have much the same ABO
blood-group frequencies as Eastern Europeans
in general, their Rh groups differ quite considerably from those of the non-Jews. The
Jews have a much lower frequency of Rh
negatives and a higher frequency of CDe (R;,),
which would fit in with a population derived from
the Eastern Mediterranean area.

12

While the diagram for Europe looks rather
confused, that for North Africa (Figure 3) is
much simpler and easier to understand. Here
we see that the Jews in those North African
countries for which we have adequate data
represent a fairly homogeneous population.
Similarly the non-Jews (Arabs in this case) are
also relatively homogeneous but differ quite
systematically from the Jews.

Turning to quite another part of the world,
namely the Pacific area, I am sure most of you
have read the book by Thor Heyerdahl in which
he claimed that the Polynesians came from
South America. He has subsequently written
another book in which he goes into more
detail, and now claims that they came in part
from South America and in part from what
is now Western Canada. A great many anthropologists have strongly criticized his views, but
BLOOD GROUPS IN THE STUDY OF HUMAN POPULATIONS

   

  
   

s to «625
. . ‘

Roe ew i Ch
‘ ie (uy, . Ww ay i
ss WV MOY \ x

Vy “
‘ 3 : °
J BA e ‘
See, ss Miftf{ts “~y Ds ° :
41/1 ffi fi Tn0o” .
;
- .

 
 

WS

‘ —
Yy es S
7) x
§ Ge
Sys i
g fe
co é
‘
A

  
 
   

.
NA
N

N
Ss.
WAR:

tee

. eee
ere
a*s
eteths
.
a as

.
<6 a 8%

.
Seka ®

C4 0 6 %6

    

  
    
  
 
  
    

\ \ AN y \\ ; + . '
IY \\ a ; tt \\ F LD .

. J - . re
ise <2 BASS» : x
:
» *
* ty Og mae S$ Ss
f Be ee ; 3
Ve Vee. =—=(\ fp ANS
> Aa —————— JANN NMANS
, ity ee eeeneeermemnns x Nw x
'* B ea ———, AAS, NY
vy ev SSS, SSS
2 — SAAN
oO; eh? —— UY SS ;
oP: ——— rd YY N
\ - ~.
——————
Q A ==
ae SPAS vt ry] §

 
  

 
   
  
  
  
    
 
 
  

  

   
   

 

 

 

 

.)
XS aif
° eae « oe
AAXS) i Soe
y . . ; M4 ai * Pd
\\y yp : ~~. o? #6
yore SSS SES: / ve
a = RD’ os
SSS A J XY I re
Sa ——— PEN y one" e
A == Le iS , AS -*
\
\\

 

 

epee eemeeeeery

OU

 

 

 

 

 

OMIT en
Le, Op Pe.

7 Le ae
VELs , 2 32 E: - _ se ig: ee

 

 

    
 
  
  
 

 

   

>

+t.
*.

: 
oH ?

  

PERCENTAGE FREQUENCIES: Fg 50 - 55 fg 40 - 45 BRS 35 - 40 EEEY 30-35 25-30 3 20-25
V/A \5 - 20 SY 10-15 Ej] 5-10 [10-5
FIGURE 4

DISTRIBUTION OF BLOOD-GROUP

it is interesting to see what light the blood
groups throw on his theories. First of all, as
regards ABO blood groups (Figure 4), the
Polynesians in general are very high in blood
group A and, unlike the Micronesians and
Melanesians, they are almost completely lacking
in group B: in both these respects they resemble
the Indians of Western Canada. But the ABO
blood groups in general show such wide variations within small areas that one cannot lay too
much stress on deductions from them.
However, when we come to study the Rh
groups and the distribution of the Rh gene E
(Figure 5) I think we are on somewhat firmer
ground. Here you will see that the highest
frequencies of the E gene in the world are those
found in American Indians generally, particularly in Western Canada, and also, incidentally,
in the Eskimos. The only other peoples who have
similar E frequencies anywhere in the world are
Polynesians, particularly the Maoris. One, of
course, classifies the Polynesians with the
American Indians in the broad group of Mongolians or Mongoloids, but this also includes

GENE A IN THE ABORIGINAL POPULATIONS OF THE WORLD

the Chinese, the Japanese, and a great many
other peoples in Eastern Asia who mostly have
quite low frequencies of the E gene. Actually the
Japanese have rather high frequencies of E, but
they also have a high incidence of B, which is
lacking in American Indians and Polynesians.

Though I am far from being convinced that
the Polynesians came from America (in fact, I
think it is rather unlikely) I do feel that the
Polynesians, from the blood group evidence,
are more closely related to the American Indians
than is either race to any other race’in the
Pacific area which has been adequately studied
from the blood group point of view. We may
still find, when work is done in Eastern Siberia,
some evidence of a people from which they both
arose, but that is speculation. I am happy to say
that anthropological blood group work is now
starting up in Russia again, and a certain amount
of work has been done in Eastern Siberia, so
that we may hope for important information on
these points in the next few years.

I now want to turn to some of the differences
between major races, and especially between

13
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

2) Ml i

yi ? 2
yp” .°

PERCENTAGE FREQUENCIES: BB over 50 Ea 40-50

E83 30-40

 

[Ml] 20-30 15 -20 10-15 f-] under 10

FIGURE 5

APPROXIMATE DISTRIBUTION OF THE RH BLOOD-GROUP GENE E IN THE ABORIGINAL POPULATIONS
OF THE WORLD

Europeans and Africans, or rather, between
Caucasoids and Negroids. Most of the basic
investigations leading to our present knowledge
of the blood groups have been carried out in
Europe and North America using blood samples
from persons of European origin. In such work
blood groups cannot be recognized as such
unless there are differences between individuals
within the population supplying the specimens.
It follows that most of the recognized bloodgroup systems involve differences within European populations, and that the antigens and
genes discovered in this work mostly have
substantial frequencies in such populations.
More recently investigations have been extended
to people of other races. The Japanese have for
many years been active blood group workers
and have, of course, investigated mainly persons
of their own race, but in Europe and America
a great deal of work has now been done on the
blood of persons of African origin, and it has
been found that there are a great many blood
group antigens which are peculiar to Africans,
or which have a much higher frequency in
Africans than in Europeans or Mongoloids.

14,

There are several variants in the Rh system that
behave in this way, and several in the MN system. There is a third allele in the so-called Duffy
blood-group system: there are only two alleles
known in Europeans, but what appears to be a
third allele is quite common in Africans. There
is also a separate blood-group system, the Js
system, where the only recognizable antigen is
found almost exclusively in Africans. In contrast
to this, there is only one blood group antigen,
the Diego antigen, known to be a peculiar to
Mongoloid peoples.

I think that one reason for the apparent
divergence of the Africans is that such a lot of
work has recently been done on American
Negroes in America and on African Negroes in
this country, but this can be only a small part
of the complete explanation. It does appear as
though the African races generally must have
been rather long separated, genetically speaking,
from the peoples of the rest of the world, and
undergone their own evolution with respect to
blood-group antigens.

It may be asked why you do not find the same
sort of thing in Australia, since Australia is also
BLOOD GROUPS IN THE STUDY OF HUMAN POPULATIONS

supposed to have been genetically and physically
separated from the rest of the world for a very
long time. One explanation of this may be that
the aboriginal population of Australia is, and
always has been, very much smaller than that of
Africa. This will have two effects: firstly, that
it is harder to get blood samples of Australians
than of Africans, so that considerably less
research has been done on them. Secondly,
because of the small population there will have
been much less scope for mutation. Moreover,
while Africans are fairly sharply cut off from the
rest of mankind, or were until comparatively
recently, by the Sahara Desert, it seems that
Africans within Africa have always been pretty
mobile; therefore, not only will one have had
relatively large numbers of mutations because
of the big population; but, because of the
mobility of the Africans, any of these mutations
which was favoured by natural selection in the
African environment will have had a chance to
spread to the whole population of Africa south
of the Sahara, and that is what we rather find:
those genes which are almost completely confined to Africans are, in fact, found pretty well
in every part of Africa, other than the extreme
north. Incidentally, several of these genes are, in
fact, found to a very limited extent in this
country, even in perfectly blond, blue-eyed
people, and it may well be that such people, as
well as all the rest of us, carry genes which came
out of Africa in the last 2,000 years. Ultimately,
of course, all our ancestors probably came from
Africa.

The other suggestion is one made recently
by Professor Ruggles Gates in a talk which he
gave at the Royal Anthropological Institute.
He suggests the Australian aborigines are closely
related to Europeans, and his evidence is that
whereas in hybrid populations of European
and African origin there is little or no visible
segregation of the genes for skin colour, that is
to say you very rarely get families consisting of
some almost pure white and some almost black
children from one pair of parents, you do get
something approaching this in Australians; he
therefore suggests that the number of colour
genes by which Australian aborigines differ
from Europeans is very much smaller than the
number involved in the difference between

Africans and Europeans. I think a great deal
more critical genetical work ought to be done
on this subject. The circumstances under which
Professor Gates’s work had to be done in
Australia were by no means as conducive to
critical work as those under which Dr. Ainsworth Harrison has been able to carry out investigations on Negro-European crosses in
Liverpool, from which he made the very
interesting deductions which he described to
this Society about three years ago.* In view of
the importance of the subject it is to be hoped
that similar work will be done in Australia.

One could go on describing all sorts of fascinating variations in blood-group frequencies, and
the deductions to be made from them, but
I want to turn now to rather more general topics
and see what we can deduce of a more general
biological nature from the distribution of the
blood groups. I want to remind you of what I
said about the ABO blood groups and the Rh
and MN groups, namely that you get much more
rapid variation of ABO frequencies within a
major region than of Rh and MN, and I suggested this was because the ABO blood groups
are subject to a higher degree of natural selection. It might be suggested that the reason is
really that many more people have been tested
for ABO, and therefore that the variations are
more apparent than real. Such a false appearance
of uniformity might apply to the Duffy or Kidd
groups, where relatively few tests have been
done, but I think that we now have sufficient
data for Rh and MN to be sure that there really
is a high degree of uniformity in Western
Europe, a much greater uniformity than in the
case of the ABO groups.

Blood Groups and Diseases

Sir Ronald Fisher and Dr. E. B. Ford have for
many years been suggesting that the bloodgroup genes are subject, like all other genes, to
natural selection, and that the present distribution which we find is a product of that process.
Dr. Ford in particular, for about twenty years,
has been urging those in a position to do so to
investigate the frequencies of the various blood
groups not only in the normal healthy population, but also in people suffering from a variety

* THE EUGENICS REVIEW, 1957, 49, 73.

15
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of diseases, and for the whole of this time (at
least twenty years) some people have been trying
to do that. Unfortunately they have mostly
been people working in single hospitals who
have taken fifty or 100 cases of a particular
disease and shown that the frequencies did not
differ significantly from those found in the
population as a whole.

There was one notable exception to this
failure to test adequate numbers, that of the
relationship between the Rh or Rhesus blood
groups and haemolytic disease of the newborn,
but to consider this to-night would take too
long and take me too far from my main theme.
So, rather reluctantly, I must leave it and
continue the consideration of the relationship
of other diseases to the blood groups. In the years
between 1920 and 1953 there were a few rather
promising individual discoveries, but the first
real break through was made in the latter year
by Professor Aird, Mr. Bentall and Dr. Fraser
Roberts when they showed, on the basis of very
large numbers, that there was a highly significant
excess of blood group A in sufferers from carcinoma of the stomach. Since then, at frequent
intervals, other diseases have been shown to be
characterized by similar abnormal distributions
of the blood groups. We find in duodenal ulcer
the most striking case of all: people of group O
are 1:6 times more likely to get ulcers than
people of other groups; in the case of gastric
ulcer, again group O is in excess, and if you are
in group O you are 1.2 times more likely to have
a gastric ulcer than if you are not. In the case of
duodenal ulceration, and probably also for
gastric ulceration, sufferers also show a higher
incidence than the normal population of failure
to secrete the individual’s ABO blood group
antigens in the saliva and other fluids. The
secretion or non-secretion of these substances
is determined by a pair of allelomorphic genes
independent of those determining the blood
groups themselves.

The diseases already mentioned are those for
which a connection with blood groups is most
firmly established. For certain other diseases
the statistical connection appears highly significant but, because the work has been done all
at one centre, or for other reasons, caution is
necessary in assessing the results, and additional

16

evidence is desirable. The need for such caution
is illustrated by a number of cases where very
promising results for a particular disease at one
centre or for one period have failed to be confirmed at a different centre, or for a subsequent
period. It is, however, highly probable that there
is an excess of group A among sufferers from
diabetes mellitus, pernicious anaemia and
cancer of the uterine cervix, and that there is a
deficiency of O and an excess of non-secretors
among cases of rheumatic carditis.

You will note that most of the conditions
which I have mentioned are diseases of the
gastro-intestinal tract, and that in some of them
not only blood group but also secretion is
involved. It looks, therefore, as though there is
some connection between the nature of the
gastro-intestinal or other mucous secretion and
the liability to these various diseases, but it is a
little difficult in most cases to explain how this
connection arises.

I think it will be easier to give a plausible,
though not necessarily a correct, explanation in
the case of rheumatic carditis. This condition is
a late effect of rheumatic fever, which is itself
one effect of infection with haemolytic streptococci. One of the things for which investigators
have been looking, in studying blood-group
frequencies in different diseases, is significant
disturbances of these frequencies in infectious
diseases, since it has long been known that the
blood-group antigens are closely related to
antigens carried by certain bacteria. It might be
expected that if you had a particular bloodgroup antigen on your red cells you might have
difficulty in producing an antibody which would
kill off bacteria which carried a similar antigen.
It would then be a good thing to have as few
blood-group antigens as possible, and be of
group O. Therefore, one might expect a deficiency of group O in sufferers from infectious
diseases, as is found in rheumatic carditis. This
is, in fact, an over-simplification, since even
group O people have the blood group antigen
H, and since one type of haemolytic streptococcus (Type 14) carries an antigen which is
related to H as well as to A and B.

Blood Groups and Natural Selection
I want now to venture beyond the bounds of
BLOOD GROUPS IN THE STUDY OF HUMAN POPULATIONS

established knowledge into speculation regarding
the origin of the blood groups. We must conclude
from our study of the relation between blood
groups and disease that, whatever may be the
precise mechanism, the blood groups are
subject to natural selection in relation to the
environment. In the case of duodenal ulceration
an important factor is the nature of the available
food, so that, if they have to eat a very rough or
irritating diet, this may put the people of group
O at a disadvantage to those of group A by
tending more strongly to give them ulcers. In
the case of other diseases the relative advantage
or disadvantage of a particular blood-group
may result from the bacterial environment.

So far we have considered selection only as it
might affect fully evolved man. The human
blood groups, however, are likely to have been
inherited, in part at least, from our pre-human
ancestors. We do not know what blood-group
antigens were carried by those ancestors, but
we may gain some clues by looking for blood
groups in the lower primates, in mammals
generally, and in other classes of vertebrates.
Even fishes are known to have blood groups,
and nearly every mammalian species that has
been adequately investigated has been found to
have them.

Among the anthropoid apes one finds antigens which are closely related to those of man;
in the MN system in particular, an M-like
antigen is present in many if not most species of
primates; but as one climbs down the family
tree from man through higher apes to lower
monkeys, one gets more and more remote from
the well-defined human pattern in the reactions
of this antigen.

Another point about human beings is the
enormous variety of blood-group antigens they
have been shown to possess. This is certainly
due in part to the fact that human beings have
been very much more fully investigated than any
other species of mammal, but there seems to be
little doubt that a good many species of mammals have a much smaller absolute number of
blood-group antigens than has man. One
species of mammal which, like man, has an
enormous variety of blood-group antigens is the
common ox or cow, and it may be significant
that cattle resemble human beings not only in

having had their blood groups very fully investigated, but also in having had great evolutionary
success during the latter part of geological
history. One wonders whether the ability to
develop blood groups is one of the features
leading to evolutionary success, or whether
evolutionary success stimulates the production of
blood-group antigens.

Finally, I want to mention some specific
suggestions which I have previously made in an
attempt to explain the origin of the blood
groups; but in view of some recent discoveries
in human palaeontology, I do so with even
greater diffidence than hitherto. It is generally
agreed that man first developed in Africa or
perhaps Southern Asia. Until recently it
appeared that the critical stage of evolution
occurred in a relatively short space of time,
geologically speaking, so that we might imagine
that the earliest men, although having relatively
large brains and hence the ability to make and
use tools and to construct clothing and dwellings,
lived at first in a similar microbiological and
biochemical environment to their ape-like
ancestors. However, with their ability to protect
themselves from the cold and to get supplies of
food, they were able to spread to other environments, and could, by means of their intelligence
and use of their hands, meet the grosser harmful
features of the new environments. But they
came up against dangerous micro-organisms
and perhaps various noxious biochemical features
of the environment from which they could not
protect themselves by the use of their brains
and their hands, so that it was only as they
evolved biochemically, developing among other
things new blood groups, that they could spread
effectively to all the new areas which, physically
speaking, were open to them.

I have, however, been a little disturbed by some
recent discoveries, for instance, that the Australopithecines, with their small brains, and living
quite a long time ago, were already making and
using simple tools: there is even a possibility that
Oreopithecus, living in Italy at the beginning of
the Pliocene, had already passed the point at
which the direct line of ancestry of man had
become differentiated from that of the anthropoid apes. I am not sure yet how far the ideas
I have just put forward are compatible with or

17
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

adaptable to the longer time-scale of human
evolution, and the less sharp change from ape
to man, that these discoveries seem to imply.

If I have not given you any firm conclusions on
the more fundamental issues, I hope I have shown
you how interesting the study of blood groups
can be, as applied to human populations, and
what valuable help they can give in tracing the
history of such populations.

REFERENCES

The facts mentioned in this talk have been drawn from
many hundreds of published papers. The few works
which have been cited specifically are listed below: the
only way to guide the reader to the remainder is to cite a
few publications, mainly of my own, which contain full
bibliographies. For the basic facts of blood group
distribution the following may be consulted:

Mourant, A. E. 1954. The Distribution of the Human
Blood Groups. Oxford, Blackwell Scientific Publications.
Mourant, A. E., Kopeé, Ada C. and DomaniewskaSobczak, Kazimiera. 1958. The ABO Blood Groups:
Comprehensive Tables and Maps of World Distribution.
Oxford, Blackwell Scientific Publications.

18

More recent facts are set out and discussed in three
papers published in the British Medical Bulletin, May
1959: 15, Pt. 2.

Roberts, J. A. F. Blood Groups and Disease. 129-133.
Sheppard, P. M., Blood Groups and Natural Selection.

Mourant, A. E. Blood Groups & Anthropology.
140-144.

In addition to some of the above publications, the
following are individually cited in the tex
Aird, I., Bentall, H. H. and Roberts, r A. F. 1953.
Relation between cancer of stomach and the ABO

blood groups. Brit. med. J. i, 799-801.

Heyerdahl, T. 1950. The Kon-Tiki Expedition. London,
Allen & Unwin.

Heyerdahl, T. 1952. American Indians in the Pacific:
thie Leone ¢ of the Kon-Tiki expedition. London, Allen
and Unw

Mourant, A. E. 1959. The blood groups of the Jews.
Jewish J. Sociol. 1, 155-176.

Watkin, I. M. 1956. ABO blood groups and racial
characteristics in rural Wales. Hered. 10, 161-193.

I am indebted to Messrs. Blackwell Scientific Publications Ltd., for permission to reprint Figures 1, 4 and 5,
also to the Council of the Royal Anthropological Institute
in the case of Figures 1 and 4; and to the Editors and
Publishers of the Jewish Journal of Sociology for allowing
me to reprint Figures 2 and 3.
