G. AINSWORTH HARRISON
M.A., D.Phil.
Anthropology Laboratory, Department of Anatomy, University of Liverpool

Genetics and Race’

tions which differ from one another in the

incidences of some genes or chromosome
structures in their gene pools.”! The most
important aspects of this concept of race are
that it concerns populations, not individuals,
and genetic variation, not the variation which
is produced directly by differences of environment. In the genetic sense, a population
is a group of individuals which, to some extent,
is reproductively isolated from other populations. The largest Mendelian population
is the species, since all the individuals of a
species actually or potentially share in a common
gene pool, but different species, because they are
permanently reproductively isolated from one
another, have different gene pools. It is generally
agreed that all present day forms of man belong
to the single species Homo sapiens; they mate
with one another and produce viable and fertile
offspring. Characteristically within a species,
there is a heirarchy of sub-ordinate Mendelian
populations, which to a varying degree are,
and for a varying length of time have been,
reproductively isolated from one another. This
isolation is, of course, a prerequisite for the
genetic differentiation of populations, in other
words, for race formation.

As ever more data has been collected about
the geographical pattern of human variation
it has become increasingly apparent that there
are marked differences from one population
to another. In fact it would be true to say that
every character which shows variation within
one population also shows variation between
populations. :

In discussing the nature of this variation it is
convenient to recognize two types of character

* The substance of a lecture given at an extra-mural

course in Cambridge on ‘““The Genetic Side of Medicine,”’
March, 1963.

Ree: HAVE BEEN defined as “popula
difference. Firstly there are those differences
whose mode of inheritance is simple and more
or less completely understood; they are usually,
but not invariably, qualitative in nature. In
contrast, there are those which involve many
genes, tend to be quantitative, and have not been
fully analysed genetically. The distinction is not
clear cut but is worth making because of the
special difficulties involved in anthropological
studies when the genetic basis of some difference
is not known. So far as normal, i.e. non-pathological, variation is concerned it can rather
broadly be said that biochemical and serological
characters fall into the first category, whilst
physiological and morphological characters,
depending as they usually do on many interacting biochemical and organizational factors
for their development, are of the second type.
It is, therefore, not surprising that almost all
the characters studied by early anthropologists,
fall into this latter category, since the features
which first attracted anthropological attention
were, naturally, the visually obvious morphological and metrical ones.

Continuous Variation

This category includes such characters as skin
and eye colour, hair shape and colour, fingerprints, and parameters of body size and shape as
for instance stature, weight, ponderal index,
head length and breadth and the cephalic index.
To it, can now be added a number of physiological variables such as basal metabolic rate,
vascular responses in the hand to cold, vital
capacity and age of menarche. It also includes
many of the marked differential sensitivities to
disease such as the geographical variations in
liability to hypertensive disease, and the lower
incidence of mouth, lip and skin cancers, and
higher incidence of cancers of the cervix uteri
in Negroes as compared with Europeans.

139

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1963, 55, 3.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The most difficult problem involved in considering the geographical distribution in these
characters is to determine the extent to which
the environment is directly responsible for the
variation. In some cases it would seem that
environmental factors are the sole cause and that
the variation, therefore, has no racial significance
at all. It is common knowledge that the dietary
and infectious diseases have ramifying effects on
body habitus, and even such an obviously
adaptive trait as the variation in red blood cell
count with altitude is, in large part at least,
attributable to direct environmental effects.
In this case, it is the capacity to respond to
atmospheric oxygen tension which is genetically
determined, and this does not appear to show
inter-population variation. In other cases the
effects of the environment are less clear and this
is particularly so for parameters of growth and
development where some temporary environmental factor can have a permanent effect.
Cradling habits, for instance, may affect adult
head shape. Indeed, the extent to which such a
frequently studied feature as the cephalic index is
environmentally labile is still unknown. If a
character has any lability at all, it is apparent
that the magnitude of some difference will
depend upon the precise nature of the environments which produced it. It is evident then, that
the usual methods of gauging environmental
effects, such as the study of monozygotic twins
reared together and apart, will be of little use,
since it is obviously unlikely that the various
effects of the world’s many environments can
be sampled in this way! Some insight has been
gained by the study of migrant populations, but
the problem is beset by pitfalls, since it has been
shown that, in many features, migrants are not
random samples of their sedentary kinsfolk.

The other major difficulty with characters
that are determined by many genes also concerns
the relationship between the phenotype and the
genotype. Even in the absence of environmental
modification, it is evident that there is no
necessary relationship between the comparative
magnitude of phenotypic and genotypic differences. Thus, for instance, two indistinguishable
phenotypes can have totally different genetic
bases. There is no reason to suppose that the
genes which are involved in determining the

140

pigmented skin of Melanesians are the same as
those producing much the same colour in
African Negroes. (In some respects the situation
is similar to that facing the clinical geneticists
attempting to establish whether more than one
locus is involved in determining some rare
abnormality, but the difficulties both practical
and theoretical are considerably greater.) Further, a small phenotypic difference may involve
many gene substitutions, whilst a large one
might arise from a few changes; it is known that
the effects of the different genes can be unequal.
The question of scale is also important, since
gene effects may not be additive on the scale of
measurement being used. Perhaps this can be
most clearly seen in the case of skin colour
variation, where it is possible with the reflectance
spectrophotometer to measure the variation
directly on different scales, i.e. at different wavelengths. When this is done for instance at 425
mu and at 685 mu it is found that the comparative differences between a series of populations
which vary in shade from African “black” to
European “white” are different at the two wavelengths. Thus, South African Cape Coloureds
are more like Europeans at 685 mu than they
are like West Africans but on the 425 scale the
position is reversed. It has been shown from
studies of African x European hybrid families
that the genes responsible for the parental
differences are additive on some reciprocal and
logarithmic functions of reflectance,? and if one
uses the reciprocal of the reflectance for plotting
the differences between the various populations,
then the results at different wavelengths agree
with one another. When characters such as
stature are studied, where only one scale of
direct measurement is available, it is easy to
forget that this scale may show no linear relationship with the underlying genetic determinants.

Discrete Variation

Over the last fifty years an ever increasing
number of anthropological characters have been
discovered which have a comparatively simple
genetic basis and which are more or less free of
direct environmental determination. Examples
are the blood groups, the abnormal haemoglobins, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deGENETICS AND RACE

ficiency, serum proteins like the haptoglobins
and transferrins, taste and colour blindness
and the excretion of f-amino-isobutyric acid.
These characters have tended to supplant
continuously varying ones in many anthropological studies, particularly those concerned
with population dynamics, because populations
can be described and compared for them in
terms of varying gene frequencies. So far as the
geographical pattern of their distribution is
concerned a number of rather general statements
can be made. Firstly, most of the variations are
quantitative variations in gene frequency rather
than presences or absences. Usually, in fact,
populations display a balanced polymorphism
for the various alternative states of the character,
and what varies between populations is the level
at which the balance is set. Secondly, each
system tends to show a gradual change over
wide geographical areas so that gradients of gene
frequency, or clines, occur. Occasionally, however, there are quite abrupt changes, and many,
but by no means all, of these changes tend to
differentiate populations on a continental basis.
Finally, the distribution patterns of the various
characters are frequently very different, and the
distribution of one system may in no way
coincide with that of another. This is becoming
ever more increasingly apparent as the geographical distributions are more precisely
mapped. Nevertheless, in a rather general way,
some overall continental patterns have emerged,
and it is of importance that the broad classification of human populations by blood groups
is in fairly close agreement with the ones that
were made using the classical type of anthropological character. Thus for instance, the
populations of Africa south of the Sahara are
not only characterized by having dark skin,
spiral hair and broad noses, but also have
uniquely high frequencies of the rhesus combination Dce, and of the S", Js* and Fy genes. They
are also characterized by the V rhesus antigen
and the Hunter and Henshaw antigens in the
MNS system.‘

This has been of some comfort to those who
are concerned with determining the relationships
between populations, but when one comes to
consider this central problem of racial anthropology, knowledge of the genetic basis of the

variation is not a very great help. Admittedly in
dealing with characters whose mode of inheritance is understood, one avoids the danger of
convergent phenotypes with different genetic
bases, but the problem remains of the recognizing
genes which are alike in state but not identical
by descent. Thus if two populations possess the
same gene, it does not follow that they acquired
it from a common ancestral population and are
related; it may well have arisen quite independently as two separate mutational events. This
possibility becomes very real when we come to
consider the causes for inter-population variation.

The Causes of Racial Variation

It took a surprisingly long time for the full
implications of Darwinism to perculate through
the minds of anthropologists, and at least up to
the time of the last war, many authorities thought
of the pattern of geographical variation solely
in terms of varying degrees of hybridization
between a few distinct primary races of man. Just
how these primary races came into being was
usually either attributed to chance or, more
commonly, conveniently ignored completely.
It is true that throughout human evolution and
particularly during the more recent phases there
has been widespread hybridization and gene
flow. Further, it is now recognized that if alternative genes are more or less of equivalent
adaptive value their frequencies will drift in
small populations, and until quite recently, most
populations were in fact small. However, it
has become increasingly evident that genes are
rarely, if ever, of equivalent adaptive value—at
least over a span of time—and that what has
primarily caused the variation between different
populations is the differential effect of natural
selection in the vastly differing environments
inhabited by man. In other words, whatever
the causes for within population variability,
the between population variability is primarily
due to the selective action of the three broad
ecological variables, climate, nutrition and
disease. Of course, recent hybridization, or
changing ways of life complicate the relation
between ecology and genetic variation, but it is
to be expected that the pattern of variation between human populations will show some

141
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

correlation with the geographical distribution
of ecological variables. This expected relationship has formed the basis for one approach to
discovering the causes of the variation. It has
been shown, for instance, that the distribution
of skin colour tends to coincide with the intensity
of incident ultra-violet radiation, that the distribution of nasal index is positively correlated
with atmospheric vapour pressure,®> that body
weight variation is inversely correlated with the
mean annual temperature® and that other body
parameters are also related to climatic factors.’
It is also known that the abnormal haemoglobins
and G.6.P.P.D. only occur in high frequency in
regions of malignant tertian malaria® and it
has been noted that the frequency of the ABO
blood group genes throughout the world fit the
distribution to be expected if people of type O
were particularly susceptible to bubonic plague
and those of type A to smallpox.® Such associations, of course, only provide a clue to the
possible selecting agents; usually there are some
complications, and the relationships may be in
fact misleading. Thus, as already mentioned, it
is not clear to what extent variation in body size
and shape, is due to direct environmental action
and is without a genetic basis. Further, although
the abnormal haemoglobins and G.6.P.D.D.,
only occur in malarious areas (excepting, of
course, recent emigrants from such areas) it is
not certainly known why there are different
types of abnormal haemoglobin, and there are
malarious regions where neither the known
abnormal haemoglobins or G.6.P.P.D. are to be
found. The relationship between the distribution
of the ABO blood groups and smallpox seems
to be entirely coincidental, since although an
antigenic overlap between A-substance and
vaccinia was originally claimed, the present
evidence strongly points to it being artefactual.1!
It is evident that any possible association between some ecological factor and a genetic
trait needs to be tested experimentally. The
finding that in malarious regions young children
with the sickle cell trait have a lower parasite
count than those with only normal haemoglobin
confirms the view that the possession of the
abnormal haemoglobin protects against the
severe effects of malarial infection. The facts
that ultra-violet radiation causes sunburn and

142

basal cell skin carcinomas, and that on poor
diets, negro children are more susceptible to
rickets than are white, along with the demonstration that pigmented skin transmits less ultraviolet radiation than unpigmented skin, strongly
support the view that such radiation has been
influential in determining the world distribution
of skin colour. This, of course, does not mean
that it is the only factor concerned. Skin colour
is also important in determining the solar heat
load received and possibly also affects radiant
heat loss from the body.

Even when there is no indication of what
environmental factor is acting, it is sometimes
still possible to demonstrate that selection is
operating by comparing the frequency of the
character in different age groups. It has been
found that the frequency of G.6.P.P.D. in
Nigeria changes with age,!? and it is possible that
at least part of this represents selectional effects.
The trouble with this approach is that, unless
selection is extremely strong, very large samples
are required to detect significant changes. Yet
an advantage of one gene over another of as
little as 1 per cent, which would be extremely
hard to detect by any method, will be important
in evolutionary terms.

The realization that natural selection is the
cause for race differentiation obviously complicates the problem of determining racial relationships. In particular, it is evident that similarity
of environment—and therefore of selective
forces—is as likely to produce similarity of
genetic structure as is close relationship. This
is just as likely—and in some ways more likely—
for single gene characters as for multifactorial
ones. Certainly there is no justification for
assuming that all sickle cell genes in existence
had the same unique origin. It may be so, but
since mutation is a recurrent phenomenon, one
would have expected the gene to arise in every
population, and where it was an advantage, i.e.
in malarious regions, to spread.

Further, in evolutionary terms changes in
gene frequency can be quite rapid. In the case
of the gene for sickle haemoglobin it has been
calculated that with the estimated fitness of the
three genotypes in East Africa, it would take
only about forty generations for the gene to
reach its equilibrium level of about 20 per cent
GENETICS AND RACE

this level is determined by the relative fitness
of the two homozygotes). Further, if migration
to the non-malarious environment occurs, there
will at first be quite a marked drop in the frequency of the sickle gene, because individuals
with the sickel cell trait are now at no advantage
over those with only normal haemoglobin, and
there is still a heavy loss of sickle cell genes
through the very low viability of the homozygote
sickle cell genotype. This is rather clearly seen
amongst slaves shipped from West Africa to
Surinam or Curacao. There is no reason to
suppose that the slaves to the two areas differed
in the frequency of the gene or that subsequent
hybridization has been an influential factor,
but in Curagao, a non-malarious region, the gene
is at a very significantly lower level than in
malarious Surinam.!* However, the rate at which
the gene is eliminated once it has become rare
is infinitely slow because it will then mainly
occur in heterozygous state, and its very presence
can be used as a population marker over quite a
long period of time. Nevertheless, except in the
more extensive surveys it is quite likely to go
undetected (this would be especially so if all the
known phenotypic expressions were completely
recessive), and when it reaches a very low
frequency, the position could not easily be
distinguished from an abnormal gene which is
solely present in a population as a result of
recurrent mutation.

The realisation that it is the environment, rather
than relationship, which ultimately determines
the genetic structure of populations has invalidated much of the work that was done in
anthropology before the last war. It is clearly
evident that before any reliable analysis of
evolutionary affinities can be made from the
degree of genetic similarity between populations
it is necessary to know the nature and magnitude
of the selective forces which have operated on
the genes over the time period concerned;
knowledge we are never likely to have.

When one comes to think of the pattern of
human heritable variation as being a function
of environmental selection, it is much easier to
explain the fact that the distribution of many
characters show quite different geographical
patterns than it is on hybridization hypotheses.
Further, it is now recognized that clines can

result not only from gene flow between popula tious, but also from the presence of geographical
gradients in the relative strengths of opposing
selective forces. This, of course, is not to say that
the effects of hybridization are relatively unimportant; indeed many of the unique features
of human evolution can be directly attributable
to widespread gene flow between populations;
but it does mean that attempting to determine
relationships between populations is an extremely hazardous activity.

The independent geographical distribution of
characters and the ubiquity of clines also, means
that any formal classification of man into
distinct races must, to some extent, be artificial,
even if such a classification is attempted solely
on a phenetic basis (i.e. on the degree of overall
similarity irrespective of phyletic affinity). In
animal taxonomy it is common practice to
employ the so-called 75 per cent rule! by which
a population is regarded as a distinct subspecies
only if 75 per cent of the individuals comprising
it are recognizably distinct from other populations. Now, whilst it is possible to distinguish
a number of populations of man from one
another on this basis, they are typically interconnected by a whole range of populations
showing practically every degree of intermediacy.
Any classification must obviously therefore be
arbitrary. However, it does happen that, for
one reason or another, clines have varying
gradients and are steeper in some places than
others. Further, as has already been mentioned,
some characters do tend to show the same
general pattern of variation. Even to-day, with
our vastly greater knowledge of human variation, it would still seem true to say that, until
quite recently, human populations were fairly
clearly differentiated on a continental basis and
it is for this reason that most anthropologists
continue to recognize the existence of, at least,
major races of man.

REFERENCES

1. Dobzhansky, T. 1955. Evolution, Genetics, and Man.
Wiley, New York.

Harrison, G. A. and Owen, J. J. T. 1956. Acta. Genet.
6, 481.

Weiner, J. S., Harrison, G. A., Jopp, W., Singer, R.
and Harris, R. (in preparation).

Mourant, A. E. 1961. In Genetical Variation in
Human Populations. Pergamon. Oxford.

=» & be

143
THE EUGENICS

Weiner, J. S. 1954. Amer. J. phys. Anthrop. 12, 1.
Roberts, D. F. 1953. Amer. J. phys. Anthrop. 11, 533.
Coon, C. S., Garn, S. M. and Birdsell, J. B. 1950.
Races. Thomas, Illinois.

Allison, A. C. 1961. In Genetical Variation in Human
Populations. Pergamon. Oxford.

Vogel, F., Pettenkofer, H. J. and Helmbold, W.
1960. Acta Genet. 10, 267.

jo PF NAY

144

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

REVIEW

Pettenkofer, H. J. and Bickerich, R. 1960. 261. Bakt.

1. Orig., 179, 433.

Harris, R., Harrison, G. A. and Rondle, C. J. M., (in

press) Acta Genet.

Bone R. and Gillies, H. M. 1961. Ann. hum. Genet.
9 e

Jonxis, J. W. P. 1959. In Abnormal Haemoglobins.

Blackwell. Oxford.

Amadon, D. 1949. Condor, 51, 250.
