Contents

 

Notes of the Quarter page
THE GALTON LECTURE 1967—CONTROL OF WORLD
POPULATION—WHO WERE THE FIRST HOMINIDS ?—
LECTURES ON GENETICS IN NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE—
OBITUARY: G. AIRD WHYTE

Sociology, Biology and Population Control A. H. Halsey

The Role of Genetic Factors in the Human Face, Jaws and

Teeth: A Review . . . Wilton Marion Krogman

Notes and Memoranda . . 4 ; 3 i ‘
Reviews of Books . . . . . . . .
Other Notices . . . . . . . . .
Periodicals . . . i Z

Urban and Rural Fertility: Some Facts. . . :
From the Press Cuttings . . . . . . .
Correspondence . . “ ‘ x . ; “

149

THE EUGENICS SOCIETY is not responsible for statements made or

opinions expressed by authors of articles, reviews and letters.

PUBLISHED Quarterly, Oliver and Boyd Ltd., Tweeddale Court, High

Street, Edinburgh.

PRICE: 17s. 6d. (U.S.A. $3.00) per copy and 60s. (U.S.A. $10.00) per
annum, post free. Issued free to Fellows and Members of The.Eugenics

Society.

EDITORIAL OFFICES: THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

69 ECCLESTON SQUARE * LONDON ° SWI ° 01.834.2091

Editor for the Society: Mrs. K. Hodson
PERIODICALS

THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF HUMAN GENETICS
September 1966, Vol. 18, No. 5

Methemoglobin Reduction and the Inactive X Hypothesis by G. STAMATOYANNOPOULOS, TH.
PAPAYANNOPOULOJU, C. BAKOPOULOS and A. G. MOTULSKY

According to the Lyon hypothesis of X-inactivation, women who are heterozygous for
G6PD deficiency are mosaics of cells, some having the normal enzyme and some with the defective
enzyme. This mixture is reflected in each organ and has been shown to be present in skin and
leiomyoma cells but there is no histo-chemical method yet for demonstrating the deficiency in
individual red blood cells. For these cells an indirect method was to measure the rate of reduction
of methemoglobin, since this depends on G6PD activity but then it was found that males hemizygous for the deficiency gene showed a “‘pseudomosaicism’’ due to decline of G6PD activity in
ageing red cells. The present paper describes a neat experiment in which the red cells from heterozygous women were separated into two layers by centrifugation—a “younger’’ upper layer and
an “older” lower layer. Tests then revealed that although the younger cells had lower methemo,
globin levels than the older ones, mosaicism was found in both layers after methemoglobin elutionindicating two genetically different cell types.

It was also found that, for similar G6PD levels, males hemizygous for mild enzyme deficiency
reduced methemoglobin normally while females heterozygous for the Mediterranean type of
enzyme defect showed abnormal levels of methemoglobin. This less efficient methemoglobin
reduction in heterozygotes compared with hemizygotes is best explained by assuming two red
cell populations in the females, again indicating genetic mosaicism.

Properties of X-linked Alleles during Selection by HENRY N. KIRKMAN.

Equations for predicting the final gene frequency of two sex-linked alleles under selection
have been reported by previous authors. The present one shows how the number of generations
required to achieve any intermediate gene frequency may be estimated.

Gm(20), a new Hereditary Gamma Globulin Factor by MARTIN R. KLEMPERER, EUGENIA R.
HOLBROOK and H. HUGH FUDENBERG.

Serum from an individual with rheumatoid arthritis was found to possess agglutinator
activity against several gamma-globulin antigens, including a new one, Gm(20). This factor is
dominantly inherited, the locus being closely linked to Gm(1).

C5 Types of Serum Cholinesterase in a Brazilian Population by G. Cc. ASHTON and N. E. SIMPSON.

Segregation of progeny from the four possible matings between C5 phenotypes in more than
1,000 families differed significantly from expectation, more C5-children being found than expected.
Other unexpected findings concerned the age distribution of the children’s phenotypes.

Two rare haptoglobin Phenotypes, 1-B and 2-B, containing a previously undescribed «-Polypeptide
Chain by E. R. GIBLETT, I. UCHIDA and L. E. BROOKS.

A Chemical Difference between Human Transferrins B, and C by AN-CHUAN WANG, E. ELDON
SUTTON and AUSTEN RIGGS.

Peptide mapping showed a single peptide difference in the trypsin digests of Tf C and Tf B2:
a glycine residue in Tf C is replaced by glutamic acid in Tf Bz.

Gm and Inv Studies of a Hokkaido Population: Evidence for a Gm? Allele in the Ainu by ARTHUR
G. STEINBERG.

Data from a population of presumed mixed Ainu-Japanese ancestry are given.
206
PERIODICALS

Aneusomie de Recombinaison: Three Further Examples by JEAN DE GROUCHY, MARCEL
AUSSANNAIRE, HENRI E. BRISSAUD and MAURICE LAMY.

Family studies including chromosome analyses are reported for three children with psychomotor retardation. In each case the authors suggest possible chromosome arrangements which
could account for the family findings, illustrating their discussion rather nicely with string-models
of differing hues.

Models for Clonal Evolutions: A Study of Chronic Myelogenous Leukaemia by JEAN DE GROUCHY,
CRISTINA DE NAVA, JOSE-MARIA CANTU, GEORGES BILSKI-PASQUIER and JACQUES
BOUSSER.

Eight examples of karyotype evolution were found in a study of forty cases of Ph! positive
leukaemia. They are used to illustrate three possible models of clonal evolutions occurring in cell
populations already known to carry the Ph! anomaly. HELEN BLYTH

ANNALS OF HUMAN GENETICS
July 1966, Vol. 30, Part 1

Two Cases with a C-group Ring Autosome by L. ATKINS, S. S. PANT, G. W. HAZARD and E. M.
OUELLETTE.
Clinical and cytological studies on two cases with a ring chromosome are reported.

The Effect of Partial Exclusion of Certain Matings and Restriction of their Average Family Size
on the Genetic Composition of a Population by J. s. F. BARKER.

The eugenic consequences are examined when heterozygotes for a recessive lethal are persuaded (a) not to intermarry, (6) to limit the number of children when they do intermarry.

The Birth Weight and Survival of Ghanaian Twins by M. J. HOLLINGSWORTH and C. DUNCAN.

Data on birth weight, mortality and the age and parity of the mother in a sample of twins
from Ghana are presented and discussed.

On Genetic Aspects of Angiokeratoma Corporis Diffusum by A. W. JOHNSTON, B. J. WARLAND
and 8. D. V. WELLER.

Two pedigrees of angiokeratoma, one of them very extensive, are reported. Both of them
support a sex-linked mode of inheritance. It is suggested that the locus lies between the Xg locus
and the locus for deuteranopia.

ABO Frequencies in Mongolism by H. 0. GOODMAN and J. 3. THOMAS.

No significant difference was found between the ABO frequencies of mongols in institutions
and a comparable control population. The theoretical effects of trisomy on ABO frequencies
are discussed.

Blood-group Gene Localization through a Study of Mongolism by D. A. PRICE EVANS, W. T. A.
DONOHOE, R. M. BANNERMAN, J. F. MOHN and R. M. LAMBERT.

Phenotype frequencies were the same in mongols as in their sibs in all blood group systems
except Kell in which there was an increase in Kell positives among mongols. It is suggested that
the Kell locus may be on chromosome 21.

Familial Spastic Paraplegia with Amyotrophy of the Hands by J. R. SILVER.
Pedigrees of two families with this disease are described.

Inheritance of Marker Chromosomes from a Cytogenetic Survey of Congenital Heart Disease by
E. C. MOORES, J. M. ANDERS and R. EMANUEL.

The inheritance of morphological chromosome variations in six families is described.

207
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

November 1966, Vol. 30, Part 2

A Theoretical Approach to the Study of Genetic Parameters of Histocompatibility in Man by a.
SERRA and D. O°’MATHUNA.

The theoretical consequences of a general model of histocompatibility are examined, and an
attempt is made to estimate the number of loci and of alleles concerned in the rejection of kidney
transplant in man.

The XY Bivalent in Human Male Meiosis by MAJ HULTEN, J. LINDSTEN, PEN-MING L. MING
and M. FRACCARO.

The XY bivalent could easily be recognised in diakinesis and first metaphase in chromosome
preparations from human testicular material. The X and Y chromosomes were separated in varying
proportions of cases. Conclusive evidence of chiasma formation was not obtained.

Familial Down’s Syndrome. A cytological and genealogical study of twenty-two families by
MARGARETA MIKKELSEN.

The pedigrees and cytology of twenty-two families with Down’s syndrome in more than one
member were investigated. An inherited translocation was found in only four families.

Transmission of a 13-15/21 Translocation in Six Families by MARGARETA MIKKELSEN.

Genealogical, cytogenetical and blood-group data of six families with an inherited translocation between a chromosome of the 13-15 group and chromosome 21 are reported and discussed.

Human Meiosis: the occurrence of interlocked bivalents in a normal male by A. MCDERMOTT.

The mitotic and meiotic chromosomes from the testes of a sixty-five-year old man were investigated. A pair of interlocked bivalents was observed in nine out of the fifty-four diakinesis/early
first metaphase cells examined.

Rare Phosphoglucomutase Phenotypes by D. A. HOPKINSON and HARRY HARRIS.

Eleven rare phosphoglucomutase phenotypes are reported, in addition to the three common
phenotypes due to a pair of alleles. It is suggested that nine of the new phenotypes are due to
heterozygous combinations of a rare allele at the same locus with one of the two common alleles,
whereas two of the new phenotypes represent heterozygotes for alleles at a different locus.

On Some Models for Segregation Analysis by ERIC PERITZ.
The effect of compensation for foetal deaths on the analysis of segregation ratios is discussed.

Nail-patella Syndrome in an Indian Family: clinical and linkage data by J. c. SHARMA.

A pedigree of the nail-patella syndrome in a Hindu Bengali family is reported and discussed.
Of eleven persons with the syndrome, two show malformation of the teeth. Close linkage with
the ABO locus is confirmed. M. G. BULMER

EUGENICS QUARTERLY
December 1966, Vol. 13, No. 4

A Multiple Variable Approach to the Assortative Mating Phenomenon by BRUCE L. WARREN.

The author asks whether assortative mating occurs because people seek spouses with characteristics similar to their own or whether people are sorted spatially by some characteristic and
then marry someone who is at hand, and discusses both hypotheses.

Inbreeding in India by L. D. SANGHVI.

Marriage rules and customs in Indian caste society are extremely resistant to change and
several of its pecularities are described and formulae are given for calculating the decline in the
frequency of deleterious genes under inbreeding over a period of generations.

208
PERIODICALS

Behaviour Measurement and Population Change by JOHN C. LOEHLIN.

These two subjects are amplified and emphasis given to “‘the very great diversity in the measurable aspects of human behaviour’’.

Relation of Fertility to Educational Attainment in a Kalamazoo Public School Population by CARL
JAY BAIEMA.

This is a follow-up study of 957 native and white individuals born in 1916 or 1917 and who
took the Terman Group Intelligence Test in the sixth Grade in the Kalamazoo Public School
System.

Pakistan’s New National Family Planning Experiment by WARREN C. ROBINSON.
A good survey of the family planning programme about to be launched, and described as

‘“‘one of the largest and most ambitious schemes ever undertaken by any country’’. The outcome
will provide valuable data for other countries.

Race: A Population Concept by WILLIAM S. LAUGHLIN.

The author of this article regards the vexed question of Race from the standpoint of “‘breeding
groups”? and observes that ‘“‘variation in the human species is clustered rather than randomly
distributed”,—and proceeds to develop the theme with interest and marked ability.

Pilot Study: Population Differences in the Frequency of Spina Bifida Occulta by RICHARD H.
POST.

This investigation was prompted by the previously ascertained fact that there are higher
frequencies reported of abnormal nasal septa among long-civilized populations than among
“hunters and gatherers”. The question arose as to whether there might be other skeletal abnormalities associated with populations with relatively longer histories of civilization.

Brief Reports:

Key to the Secrets of Heredity. K. TOLKACHEV. Describes the exhibits at The Biology Pavilion
of the USSR Exhibition of Economic Achievement.

Schizophrenia and Evolution. ROBERT E. KUTTNER and ALBERT B. LORINCZ. A discussion of
possible survival advantages possessed by schizophrenics.

Notes on the Third International Congress of Human Genetics (The University of Chicago,
September 1966).

Book Reviews:

Regional Model Life Tables and Stable Populations. Ansley J. Coale and Paul Demeny. Princeton
University, Press New Jersey, 1966.

Described as a ‘“‘monumental volume” making available extensive tables for analysis and
estimation.

Genetics and Social Behaviour of the Dog. John Paul Scott and John L. Fuller. University of Chicago
Press, 1965.

This book is the outome of thirteen years research and is presented in four parts—the
methodology of the project and the history of the social behaviour of the dog from the phylogenetic and the developmental points of view; the second part with breed differences in trainability and emotional reactivity; the third assesses the effects of heredity on behaviour, and the
final section applies the “principles and concepts developed in the earlier chapters to the general
problems of dog eugenics’.

Birth Rates in Latin America: New Estimates of Historical Trends and Fluctuations. O. Andrew
Collver. University of California, 1965.

Described as “Ambitious and much more reliable than those published so far’’.
209
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

World Population: Past Growth and Present Trends. A. M. Carr-Saunders. Frank Cass & Co.
London, 1964.

A new impression of the original first published in 1936 and reviewed as a classic in the field
of demography.

Demographic Profiles of an Urban Population. V. P. Pethe. Popular Prakashan, Bombay, 1965.
A study based on data obtained from 3,289 city-dwelling women.

Chromosomes, Giant Molecules and Evolution. Bruce Wallace. Newton & Co., New York, 1966.
Chromosomal and biochemical evidence of evolution for the general public. Cc. W. U.

POPULATION STUDIES

March 1967, Vol. 20, No. 3.

Law, Marriage and Illegitimacy in Nineteenth-Century Germany by JOHN KNODEL.

In certain German States in the nineteenth century, laws were passed limiting marriage to
persons considered to be morally and financially capable of raising a family. These laws were
subsequently repealed. The author studies the marriage and birth rates of the period in order
to ascertain how effective the laws were. They appear to have restricted marriage rates, and also
to have reduced legitimate birth rates; but much of this reduction was compensated for by a rise

in illegitimate births.

Abortion in Amsterdam by P. E. TREFFERS
This is a study of abortions according to such factors as religion, social background, family
circumstances, use of contraceptives and whether or not the abortion was induced.

Family Planning and Fecundity by ROBERT G. POTTER, JR. and JAMES M. SAKODA.

A statistical model of family-building is described which allows for the following items:
length of reproductive period, chance of spontaneous abortion, chance of still-birth, length of
gestation period, anovulation and fecundability. The model is a stochastic one and is evaluated
on a computer. It is used to evaluate success in family planning, and the incidence of unsought
births, according to the level of natural fecundability and according to the effectiveness of contraceptive practice. The authors emphasize that, even with average fecundity, unwanted births can
be avoided only by very efficient contraceptive practice.

Local Variations of Fertility in Taiwan by ANDREW COLLVER, ALDEN SPEARE, J. R. and PAUL
K. C. LIU.

This paper reports on an inquiry that was made in order to measure the correlations between
declining fertility (attributable to birth control) and various socio-economic factors. The factor
having the strongest association was population density. Others were the nearness of residence
to a town and non-agricultural employment, but these are correlates of population density and
do not contribute anything additional to density in the analysis. Another, more independent,
factor associated with declining fertility is the height of the educational level.

The authors have formed the hypothesis that the desire for smaller families, having been

first felt in the cities, has spread very rapidly to the countryside.

The Malthusian Theory of Pre-Civil War America by EDMOND COCKS.

An account of the attacks on Malthusian concepts made by the schools of Boston idealists
and of Pennsylvania protectionists. In spite of the title of this paper, its main subject is the
popularity of Malthus in post-Civil War America. The author seeks to explain this popularity
in terms of the influence of Spencer, Mill and Darwin, and of the War itself.

This issue also contains obituary notices of Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders, including one reprinted from THE EUGENICS REVIEW, and some book reviews. P.R.C.

210
FROM THE PRESS CUTTINGS

RESEARCH

£8,000 Gift to Fight Mongolism

RESEARCH WHICH MAY prevent the tragedy of mongol babies went a stage further in
Britain yesterday with a gift of an £8,000 extension to the Kennedy-Galton Centre, at
Harperbury Hospital, Hertfordshire.

Fingerprint, footprint, hair, skin, and blood tests on patients and parents offer a
new hope that one day doctors will understand enough about mongolism to prevent it
by treating parents before children are conceived.

The £8,000 gift came from the Wates Foundation....A grant of $50,000 by the
Kennedy Foundation to Professor Lionel Penrose, director of the centre, has equipped it
with electronic microscopes. Medical research staff, led by Dr. Joseph Berg, come from
many parts of the world to study the pioneering work.

Investigation of the number of white cell chromosomes in the blood is part of the
major research. Professor Penrose said yesterday: “Little is known about mongolism,
but we have compiled a vast amount of information, and that is the only way to get a
breakthrough to prevention or cure’.

Babies from maternity hospitals and patients up to the age of 80 with some mongol
characteristics are being closely examined at the centre... .

“It may take years to get through them all”, Professor Penrose said. ““We carry out
such thorough tests that we examine only four patients a day from the hospital and two
or three a week from outside. We make sure that the patients and parents are not rushed
through in a way that would distress and upset them.

“Only a proportion of cases of mongolism are the result of genetic accidents, such
as mutations and transmissible errors,” Professor Penrose said. ““Environment often plays
a decisive part in causation. There are instances of poisoning and infections to be tracked:
down by careful history taking. .

Mental retardation is a neglected branch of medicine. Apart from the scientific
advantage of their work at the centre, he said there were other aims. Precise medical
understanding of the patient’s condition would allow them to realize their full capabilities,
and parents and relatives could be advised on the risks of repetition of a similar disease
in their family.

“T think this is the first time electron microscopy has been applied specifically to
mental deficiency research,” he said. “It allows us to magnify chromosomes and other
structures by 50,000 diameters and search for abnormalities.

“We can also study divisions of human cells. By this means we hope to obtain
information about errors of cell division which lead to the presence of wrong numbers
of chromosomes and which cause serious defects in certain types of patients.”

—The Times, 7th June 1967

Fight to Save Babies in Danger Moscow

AN EXCITING NEW research project, designed to reduce the number of hereditary diseases,
especially in babies, has just been started by medical researchers here.

They hope to be able to protect our bodies from natural agents in our surroundings
that can cause damage to body cells, leading to illness in future generations. These include
chemicals found in food, the atmosphere, and processes like rubber or asbestos production.

Already here at the modern new Institute of Genetics a hundred researchers and
scientists have been able to discover protective drugs against the radiation from nuclear
explosions.

Similar work is being done in Britain on a radiation antidote drug.

ER—P 213
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Academician Nikolai Dubinin, head of the centre, said his scientists have developed
drugs which can restore 30 to 50 per cent of the damage caused to body cells by radiation.

He was asked if he and his team were now hoping to reduce the number of children
born with defects.

He replied: “That is our task”

But he also gave a warning that a fourfold increase in the amount of background
radiation in a generation because of continued atomic testing could lead to the number
of such genetic defect cases in children to double.

“We must watch the radiation increase on earth very carefully,” he said.

—Evening News, 6th June 1967

BIRTH CONTROL

French alter Law on Birth Control PARIS

THE DECISION OF the National Assembly, before dispersing late last night, to adopt
on a show of hands a new law on birth control involves a fundamental revolution in
French social habits and thought.

The law reverses forty-seven years of rigid prohibition of all forms of contraception.
It allows the manufacture, import, and sale of contraceptives, with strict controls.

The sale of contraceptives is allowed only through chemists, on a doctor’s prescription
limited both in time and in quantity. Intra-uterine appliances are to be issued only to
registered physicians and the sale of contraceptives to people under twenty-one is authorized
only on doctors’ orders, and with the written consent of the parent or guardian. All publicity
for contraceptives is forbidden.

Heavy penalties are provided for infringement of the new law—up to four years’
imprisonment and a fine of from 4,000 francs (about £300) to 40,000 francs, for instance,
for unauthorized sale to minors. The Times, 3rd July 1967

Eire Doctors “are prescribing pill’’ CoRK

A BRITISH PROFESSOR Of obsetetrics and gynaecology told the Irish Medical Association
conference in Cork today that he was saddened by the number of Irishwomen he had
seen worn out, grossly anaemic, and old before their time because of incessant childbearing.

Professor J. C. McClure Browne, of the Institute of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
University of London, and Hammersmith Hospital, said he thought doctors in the Irish
Republic were taking the law into their own hands and prescribing the “Pill” for family
planning purposes. “I cannot believe that the vast sales of the pill in the Republic of Ireland
can only be for medical purposes,” he said.

Professor McClure Browne added that in the Republic of Ireland families of ten or
twelve children seemed “‘ commonplace’. Obstetric dangers and complications increased
sharply with the number of children a woman bore. —The Times, 11th July 1967

Now the Birth Pill that lasts up to a Year
By MICHAEL JEFFRIES

NEW LONG-LIFE CONTRACEPTIVE pills, designed to stop a woman from having a baby
for up to a year, have been developed by doctors.

The first trials on volunteers are to start “within six months’’, it is reported today from
America.

But instead of swallowing them the “guinea-pig” wives will have them injected just
under the skin.

214
FROM THE PRESS CUTTINGS

A built-in “time capsule’’ in the pill will release the contraceptive hormone, progesterone
in small amounts.

Protection will last between three and twelve months. And there is a revolutionary
difference. Unlike present oral contraceptives, this long-life pill will not affect a woman’s
monthly cycles.

If the new pill—or more correctly, pellet—proves successful and safe, it will be made
available to British women.

Other American doctors are working on contraceptive capsules “‘the size of cigarette
butts” which will eventually give protection for several years, says Science Journal. These
would be implanted below the skin.

The new developments were announced to the American Association of Planned
Parenthood Physicians in Atlanta recently.

Birth control experts were told that in the trials on women, “mini-dose’’ pills would
be injected which contained only one hormone instead of the usual two.

But the way the new pill worked was still a mystery, he added.

Meanwhile Dr. Sheldon J. Segal is conducting animal studies to find the right human
dosage.

The key to the solution of longer-acting one-shot contraceptives is a drug which releases
small amounts at a time.

“You can get a lot of mileage from an active drug with a slow release rate,”’ says
Dr. Segal. —Evening News, 27th June 1967

99

New Ideas to cut India Birthrate

SINCE MR. C. CHANDRASEKARAN, a demographer, became Minister for Health and
Family Planning in the Indian Cabinet this year the air has been full of imaginative
schemes to ease the unrelenting pace of India’s population growth.

The Minister has lately mooted the idea of compulsory vasectomy for fathers of three
children.

A more draconic suggestion has been made in Haryana where a private member’s
bill in the state assembly would impose six month’s imprisonment or a fine of 1,000 rupees
(about £48) on fathers begetting a fourth child, with the concession that two more children
would be permitted on remarriage.

- Mr. Chandrasekaran has urged that the marked reduction in the rate of population
increase that India needs could be achieved by raising the legal age of marriage to twenty
—it is at present fifteen for girls and eighteen for boys. But popular practice lags so far
behind social legislation in India that these ideas are little more than words on the wind... .
Somewhat more tangible in its effect might be the Central Government’s move towards
legalizing abortion. Recommendations of a comittee set up by the centre are now under
consideration by the states. The Minister hopes that a new abortion Act will be on the
books this year.

He may there be overestimating the speed and perhaps even misjudging the direction
of political opinion. A conservative backwash is becoming apparent in the state legislatures
and there is no reason to expect that the central Parliament will be immune to it... .

The attempt to control India’s population, now more than 500 million will have to
rely on methods of contraception rather than on legislation and changes of social attitude.
The great hopes aroused last year by the loop or interuterine contraceptive device have
largely been dashed; there has been an unexpectedly high rejection rate among village
women and the conservative elements of village society have gladly spread rumours of
the loop’s dangers—to husbands as well as to wives. —The Times, 22nd June 1967

215
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
OLIVER AND BOYD LTD.
EDINBURGH
Contents September 1967, Volume 59, Number 3

 

Notes of the Quarter page 149

THE GALTON LECTURE 1967—CONTROL OF WORLD
POPULATION—WHO WERE THE FIRST HOMINIDS ?2—
LECTURES ON GENETICSIN NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE—
OBITUARY: G. AIRD WHYTE

Sociology, Biology and Population Control A. H. Halsey 155
The Role of Genetic Factors in the Human Face, Jaws and

Teeth: A Review . . . Wilton Marion Krogman 165
Notes and Memoranda. “ ‘ ‘ ‘ . 193
Reviews of Books . ‘ i é ‘ ‘ , . 195
Other Notices . . . . . . . . . 202
Periodicals . . . . . . . ° . 206
Urban and Rural Fertility: Some Facts . : ° . 2ii1
From the Press Cuttings . “ ® . ‘ “ . 213
Correspondence , . 3 . ‘ ‘ ‘ . 216

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY OLIVER AND BOYD LTD., EDINBURGH
