THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

MENTAL DISEASE IN RELATION
TO EUGENIGS.

THE GALTON LECTURE.

By A. F. Trepcoup, M.D., F.R.S.Ed.

I have chosen as my theme for the Galton Lecture Mental Disease
in relation to Eugenics for two reasons. In the first place, it seemed to
me appropriate because of the particular interest which Galton always
took in mental capacity and development, and the valuable researches
which he made in these subjects. In evidence of this I may remind
you of his important works ‘‘Hereditary Genius’’ published in 1869;
‘‘English men of Science, their nature and nurture,’’ published in
1874; ‘“Enquiries into Human Faculty and its Development,’’ first
published in 1883 and reprinted in 1911, together with many smaller
essays in the same field.

Secondly, the subject of Mental Disease is one which, of itself,
possesses a particular importance for Eugenists. It cannot be doubted
that the evolutionary change which has taken place in man since his
emergence from the anthropoid apes has been mainly, if not entirely,
in the sphere of mind. This change consists in the development of his
powers of understanding and comprehension, in the elaboration of his
emotions and capacity to appreciate and be influenced by ideals, and
in the expansion of his ability to think, to reason and to construct.
No doubt this increased development of mind has rendered man more
potent for evil as well as for good, but.on the whole he has progressed,
and he stands at the present day on a much higher plane than did his
2 EUGENICS REVIEW.

primeval ancestors. If man is to undergo any further progressive
evolution, I think it may safely be assumed that it will be in the same
direction and will consist in a still greater development of his mental
capacity. The important question is—lIs such further progress possible? To this we can give no definite answer. When we consider,
however, how stupendous must be the process which has led to man
being evolved from that first primitive speck of protoplasm, and how
silently and persistently it has been at work through immeasurable
ages, it would seem unreasonable to think that it is now played out,
and that it has reached its culmination with man as he now exists.
On the contrary, I think we are justified in concluding that further
evolution is certainly possible. But progressive evolution is dependent
upon vitality and health. Ill-health and incapacity of mind will not
merely prevent advance, they will inevitably lead to retrogression.
Hence the importance of Mental Disease from the aspect of Eugenics.

In order to appreciate fully this importance of disease of mind. it
is necessary that we should understand its nature and causation, and
it is with these points that I propose first to deal. In doing this I
shall make no attempt to discuss the nature of mind and its relation
to matter. In the present state of our knowledge any such discussion
is futile. We do know, however, that in some way or other mind is
made manifest through brain; that brain is, in fact, the organ of mind,
and it is from this aspect that I shall consider the subject of its disease.

If we view the subject broadly, we may regard disease in general
as the result of a failure of the organism to adapt itself to the inimical
agencies of its environment. If this failure is slight and temporary, the
departure from health is transient; if it is severe, a grave illness or
disease results ; if the failure is complete, the organism dies. In short,
efficient adaptation is not only essential to health, but it is probably
the basic characteristic and the distinguishing feature of life. Disease
of mind is no exception to this general rule. The efficient adaptation
and response of mind to the experiences and demands of the environment constitutes mental health. Failure of adaptation is the essential
feature of mental ill-health and disease.

It is very necessary that we should distinguish between disease
and eccentricity of mind. Many persons exist whose mode of thought
and behaviour differ so much from the majority of mankind as to cause
them to be regarded as queer and eccentric. But these are by no means
inefficient or lacking in adaptation; on the contrary they are often
pioneers in thought and.valuable members of the community.

The failure of adaptation which is the essential feature of mental
disease may be divided into three forms. In the first, failure is due
to the fact that the mind has not developed up to the stage which is
requisite for efficient adaptation to take place. There is a permanent
and incurable deficit. This condition constitutes Mental Deficiency.
In the second form, the failure of adaptation is due not to incomplete
development, but to a disturbance of mental function. This disturbance may be slight and transient, or it may be profound and of long
duration. It may involve minor mental functions only, or it may be
so extensive as to upset the whole mental balance. In short, it ranges
through various ‘‘borderland’’ conditions to Insanity. _ In the third
MENTAL DISEASE IN RELATION TO EUGENICS. 3

form, adaptation fails because mind is in process of deterioration and
decay. This may, of course, be a consequence of old age and it is
then merely physiological; but it very frequently occurs long before
the average span of life has been reached, and it is then pathological.
In one of the commonest forms of mental disease such decay sets in
during the period of adolescence and it may even appear in the first
decade of life. Deterioration of this kind is usually steadily progresSive and it constitutes the various types of Dementia. I may remark
that although it is convenient for purposes of description, thus to
speak of defect, disorder and decay of mind, as if they were totally
separate conditions, there is nevertheless a very close relationship
between them. While it is true that mental disorder is often only
temporary, and completely recovered from, yet in many cases recurrences occur, and in a considerable proportion such disorder is but the
initial manifestation of an incurable mental decay. Even the subject
of mental deficiency not infrequently suffers also from disorder and
decay of such mental capacity as he possesses. I shall also hope to
show that, with certain exceptions, all three forms are really but
different manifestations of one and the same underlying cause.

With regard to the cause of mental disease there is not the slightest
doubt that a proportion of cases are the result of adverse external
agencies acting directly upon the individual. Thus, the development
of the brain may be arrested by injury or disease and Mental Deficiency
result. The normally developed brain may be damaged by poisons or
inflammation and Insanity or Dementia supervene in consequence.
A perfectly healthy individual may be subjected to such extreme mental
‘stress as to cause mental derangement. Cases of this kind, however,
comprise a relatively small proportion of the whole, and there is clear
evidence that the great majority of persons suffering from defect,
‘disease or decay of mind, owe their condition to an inherent predis
position. This predisposition may be so great as to produce its effect
in the entire absence of any external factor ; in other instances it is conjoined with such factors, which, however, are usually so trivial that
they would have had no effect upon a normally constituted individual.

Thus, I estimate that about 4/5ths of all cases of Mental Deficiency
are entirely due to inherent causes. It is generally agreed that the
great majority of cases of Dementia Precox are the result of an inherent
predisposition. With regard to Insanity and the various psychoses,
external influences play a considerably larger part, but even here it is
generally accepted that the main cause is constitutional rather than
environmental. As is well known, a very large number of cases of
mental disorder occurred during the recent war and were attributed to
‘*‘shell shock.’’ But the men so affected were exposed to no worse
conditions than were thousands of others who suffered from no serious
mental disturbance, and in very many cases so called ‘‘shell shock’’
occurred in men who had never left England and had never even seen a
shell. The real cause of the breakdown was mental stress, and in most
of the sufferers a definite predisposition to such breakdown was present.

In short, whilst recognising the contributory, and in some cases
the directly causal, part played by the environment, I have no hesitation in saying that an overwhelming proportion of cases of mental
4 ed EUGENICS REVIEW.

disease must be regarded as primarily due to innate and not to external
causes. .

But there is something more. When careful enquiries are made
into the family histories of these persons it is found that in very many
instances other members of the family have also suffered from some
form of mental abnormality. That is to say, there is evidence of a
family predisposition. The connecting link between the members of a.
family is, of course, the germ plasm, and hence it is justifiable to conclude that in such cases the predisposition is germinal and has been
hereditarily transmitted. It follows that the majority of cases of
mental disease are the result of inheritance.

At this point it is important to refer to a matter about which there
is considerable misunderstanding. It is often assumed that when a
condition is said to be due to inheritance it necessarily follows that it.
has existed in the same form in the ancestors, and that it will be transmitted in the same form to succeeding generations. Thus, in the
particular instance of mental disease, it is assumed that the person whois mentally deficient must be the offspring of a mentally deficient
parent, or the person who is insane the offspring of an insane parent.
This is not the case. Speaking strictly, there is no such thing as the.
inheritance or transmission of mental defect, or insanity, or indeed
of any quality as it actually exists in the individual. It is, of course,
certain that every organ and tissue of the body is represented in the
germ cells from which it is derived, but such representation is not in
the form of the actual organs or tissues, but as ‘‘determinants’’ or
‘‘directive forces,’’ and it is important to realize that what is inherited.
is a tendency for development to proceed in certain particular directions
and up to a certain limit ; in other words, a developmental potentiality.

Now there is reason to think that the developmental potentiality
of the germ cells may, in certain circumstances, be considerably im-.
paired. Ifsuch impairment is general and widespread, it is extreme-.
ly probable that the embryo will die at an early stage of its career.
In such cases the general devitalization does not permit of that degreeof development which is necessary for the maintenance of independent.
life. If the impairment is localized to one ‘‘determinant’’ only,
there will then be a tendency to imperfect development or defective
durability of the corresponding organ or tissue. This localized im-pairment constitutes a diathesis and when it concerns the central
nervous system it is termed the ‘‘neuropathic diathesis.’’ The point
I desire to emphasize is that in cases of mental disease the inheritance
is not of the disease itself, but of this neuropathic diathesis. In other
words, what is inherited is a diminished vitality and an impaired
developmental potentiality of the neuronic determinant.

I think we have now arrived at a point at which it is possible to:
formulate a working hypothesis of the genesis of mental disease and a
concept of the manner in which the three chief forms of this disease are
linked to one another ; what I suggest is the following:

First, the basis of most cases of mental disease is an inherited pre-:
disposition. This predisposition is the result of an impairment of the
developmental potentiality of the neuronic determinant within the.
germ cell, which is caused by adverse factors of the environment..
MENTAL DISEASE IN RELATION TO EUGENICS. 5

In all probability these factors consist of toxins, which are either
introduced into the body from without, or are developed within the
body itself.. These act either by directly poisoning the germ cells or
by depriving them of some essential food constituent. Im consequence
of differing degrees of susceptibility of the germ cells and of differing
degrees of potency of the factors to which they are exposed, the intensity of the impairment varies in different individuals and in different
germ cells of the same individual. Although some advocates of
Weismannism hold that the germ plasm is not only ‘‘continuous,’’
but that it is proof against such influences, I am of the opinion that
there is clear evidence that such an impairment does actually occur.
Secondly, the results of this impairment of the germ cell are. influenced by the condition of the cell which it fertilizes or by which it is
fertilized. This raises the question of the mode of hereditary transmission: namely, whether this is in accordance with Mendelian Laws
or whether it is by blending. Numerous attempts have been made to
show that mental disease, and particularly mental defect, is a Mendelian unit which is transmitted according to Mendelian Laws. In my
opinion these attempts have completely failed, and I think the evidence is strongly against the impairment being a Mendelian unit and
in favour of the condiiton of the zygote being a blending of the developmental potentiality of the two gametes. I think, therefore, that if
there is a similar impairment of the combining cell the developmental
potentiality of the embryo will be still further reduced, but that.if this
cell is healthy the developmental impairment will tend to be lessened.
Thirdly, since inheritance is of developmental tendencies only,
the environment will play a part in their realization. Adverse factors
of the environment which are in operation before the development of
the brain is complete may still further embarrass development and
accentuate the tendency to imperfection. Factors acting after the
completion of development may render any latent defect of durability
patent and may cause the mental breakdown of an individual in whom
the predisposition is only slight and who might otherwise go through
life apparently normal. .
, The view I put forward, therefore, is that (with the exception of
those cases which are directly caused by the environment) the various
forms of mental defect, disorder and decay, are manifestations of one
and the same condition; namely, an impairment or devitalization
of the germ cell. This impairment occurs in varying degrees; when
severe, it causes brain development to be soincompletethat the individual is mentally deficient. When less pronounced, brain development
may take place normally, and the temple of mind may be erected, but
the structure is so lacking in durability that it at once begins to crumble
away and Dementia Preecox results. When the germ impairment is of
still less degree, mind is completely developed and may, function
normally for many years, indeed should the individual live in sheltered
surroundings, it may do so for the whole span of life; but exposure to
mental stress or physical illness, or the changes incident to the climacteric or other critical period of life, will be very prone to result in a
breakdown, and this in many cases will be the beginning of a steadily
progressive dementia.
6 Oe _  .EUGENICS REVIEW.

As I have pointed out, however, two other factors have to be taken
into account ; namely, the condition of the second or combining germ
cell, and the nature of the environment, especially during the early
and rapid stage of brain growth. If the second cell is healthy and the
early surroundings entirely favourable, I think that a slight degree of
impairment may be entirely neutralized, it may even be ‘‘bred out.’’
On the other hand, if the second gamete is similarly impaired, there
will be an accentuation of the process and a tendency for the developmental potentiality and durability of the brain cells to be still further
lessened. This may itself give rise to mental defect, or defective
development may result from the operation of some comparatively
trivial environmental factor.

It is. clear that combinations of these three factors, namely,
‘variations in the. degree of germ impairment, the condition of the
combining cell, and the nature of the environment, will be responsible
for very varying results in different individuals derived from the same
stock or belonging to the same family. It is well known that these
‘differences occur and they are a cause of much perplexity ; but I think
they are explicable on this view. It not infrequently happens that an
individual who has inherited the neuropathic diathesis mates with one
who is similarly tainted. There is then a predisposition for the mental
impairment to assume a more severe form in the next generation, or
to occur at an early period of life, a process which is called ‘‘antedating,’’ and which has long been known to mental specialists. The
final result of this process is pronounced mental defect with sterility
and extinction, and hence I have termed Idiocy the logical culmination
of the neuropathic diathesis. In other instances a victim of the
neuropathic diathesis mates with an individual who is healthy.
Their offspring, although carrying the taint, and probably showing
some impairment of mental capacity and resistance, may not actually
suffer from mental disease. But the fire is only smouldering and
should one of these in turn mate with a neuropath, or should he or his
offspring be exposed to some adverse environmental influence, it may
readily be fanned into a flame, and Dementia, Insanity or Mental
Defect result. In this way mental disease is kept alive by ‘‘carriers,’’
who may themselves appear to be normal, or who at all events do not
suffer from a degree of abnormality which would be recognized as
disease.

In giving this short outline of the genesis and mode of production
of Mental Disease I wish to make it clear that I am only advancinga
working hypothesis. The complexity of the subject is great and there
are many gaps in our knowledge, but I venture to think that the
hypothesis is a logical one and that it does afford an explanation of
facts which are otherwise extremely perplexing.

We have now to consider the bearings of Mental Disease upon
Eugenics. -At,the outset it is necessary to allude to a prevalent misconception regarding the relationship of mental disease to Genius.
‘Since Dryden proclaimed that

‘* Great wits to madness nearly are allied,
And thin partitions do their bounds divide,”’
MENTAL DISEASE IN RELATION TO EUGENICS. 7

it seems to have been commonly assumed that Genius is so intimately connected with Insanity that we must cheerfully put up with
the latter for the sake of the former, and that any attempt to diminish
mental disease by restriction of propagation may have the disastrous
result of robbing the world of a possible superman. Now I fully
admit, of course, the great benefits which have resulted to mankind
from the works of men of genius; it is, indeed, to the existence of such
men of outstanding ability in the various departments of human
knowledge, thought, feeling and action, that we largely owe our past
progress and our present civilization. There is also no doubt that
some of these men have been of poor physical constitution and prone to
ill-health, whilst others have been eccentric and possessed of delicately
balanced minds. But I have searched in vain for any close correlation
between genius and insanity, and I believe the commonly accepted
view that such exists to be a completely mistaken one. On the contrary I think it will be found that the great majority of menand
women of outstanding ability have been particularly sane, and have
come of sane and healthy stock. It is, therefore, an utter fallacy to
assume that the elimination of mental disease would mean the elimination of genius, and I am in complete agreement with the views on this
point expressed by Major Darwin in his valuable work on ‘‘Eugenic
Reform.’’ |

On the other hand, there is clear evidence that mental disease is
closely correlated with social incapacity, inefficiency and retrogression.
To appreciate this we have only to consider the number of mentally
affected persons, their cost to the community, and the influence they
exert upon the race. With regard to number it is impossible to give
any precise figures for the reason that very many cases exist which are
not notified. The special enquiries made by the Royal Commission
of 1904 showed that there were four Mental Defectives per thousand of
the total population, equivalent at the present time to approximately
174,000 persons in England and Wales. Im addition to these, the
Report of the Board of Control shows that on Ist January, 1926, there
were 133,883 persons under care suffering from Insanity. There is not
the slightest doubt, however, that both these figures understate the
real incidence of these conditions, and I think we shall be well within
the mark in saying that the total number of persons suffering from
certifiable mental disease in England and Wales at the present time is
over 1 per cent. and perhaps nearer 2 per cent, of the general population.
These figures, however, refer to certifiable cases only. In addition,
it is probable that there is an even larger number of persons who are not
certifiable, but whose efficiency is more or less seriously interfered with
by such conditions as Neurasthenia, Hysteria, Epilepsy, Mental
Instability and states bordering upon Insanity and Mental Defect.
A propos of this it may be stated that according to a recent report of the
Board of Education there are no less than 600,000 mentally backward
children in the country, and with regard to these the chief medical
officer says, ‘“This group is unable to respond with proper benefit to
our educational system, and adds 50,000 recruits to our industrial
army every year who are not only unprepared, by mental retardation,
to meet effectually the demands of full life, but who furnish society
8 : | EUGENICS REVIEW.

with the bulk of its inefficient adults—criminals, paupers, mendicants
and unemployables.’’

Unfortunately, although we have National statistics regarding
the mortality rates, we have none showing the incidence of disease
which is not fatal, and no adequate data regarding the health of the
Nation. This is a very serious defect and, in consequence, it is impossible to say what is the total number of persons in the country
suffering from disease or abnormality of mind, or whether such conditions are increasing or diminishing. It is quite clear, however, that
the number must be very great and I think there is no doubt that
disease of mind is far more prevalent than is disease of any other portion
of the body.

With regard to the total cost of mental disease to the Nation, it is
for the same reason quite impossible to give even an approximate
estimate. When we consider, however, how important, indeed vital,
is the part played by mind in the business of life ; what a serious effect
upon efficiency is exerted by even a slight degree of impairment; how
frequently mental disease and disorder are due to constitutional tendencies, and consequently are either persistent, are of long duration,
or are prone to recur; it is clear that the loss which results from the
lessened productiveness, together with the cost of maintenance, care
and treatment of affected persons, must combine to cause an enormous drain upon the resources of the nation.

But, serious as is the damage done by mental disease to the
present generation, I believe that inflicted upon the race to be even
greater. It is fallacious to assume that we can put out of court any
possibility of racial impairment because there is now no proof of an
increase in certifiable mental disease. On the contrary, if we take a
long view, it might even be argued that an increase in intensity, owing
to a concentration of the process amongst fewer individuals, would
be beneficial and that, under certain conditions, the danger to the
race would be greater with a diminution of the more pronounced forms
of mental disease. This appears paradoxical, but the conditions I
have in mind are these. As I have previously pointed out, mental
deficiency, the early dementias, and the chronic and incurable forms
of insanity are in many instances the result of an accentuation of germ
impairment consequent on the mating of like with like. The tendency
of such mating is eventually towards sterility and, although the process
would be attended with enormous cost, it is quite possible, if the
mating of neuropaths were rigidly restricted to those similarly affected,
that the disease would eventually work out its own elimination. It
seems not improbable that this is what has actually happened in the
case of certain maladies of the body to which the nation has long been
exposed, such for example as Tuberculosis, and that their decline may
really be due to the gradual eradication of the susceptible rather than
to preventive medicine. However this may be; I am disposed to think
that the gradual dissemination of the neuropathic diathesis throughout
the community, consequent on the mating of the affected with those
whe are healthy, may really be more costly in the end, inasmuch as it
may lead to degeneracy of the nation and the race.

It is sometimes stated that no families are free from the neuroMENTAL DISEASE IN RELATION TO EUGENICS. 9

pathic taint. This, however, is not so. While it may be true that a
case of mental breakdown exists in many genealogical trees, it does
not follow that this is the result of an inherited tendency, and I believe
that there are many families in the country which are sound and
healthy and which are capable of producing sound and healthy
successors. The danger to the race lies in the contamination of these
stocks by those who are predisposed to mental disease. Under such
circumstances it is true that the predisposition may be lessened, and
the neuropathic diathesis so diluted that it no longer manifests itself as
certifiable lunacy or deficiency; but the nervous stamina and vigour
of the offspring are lowered, there is a lessening of adaptiveness and
capacity for effort, and an increased proneness to mental instability,
defective control and inefficiency. In other words, the nation gradually becomes more neurotic; mental evolution is brought to a standstill, and there sets in that process of marking time which is only too
often the forerunner of retrogression. Although I am far from thinking that our nation, as a whole, is degenerate, yet signs are not wanting
that such a deterioration of nervous stamina is gradually diffusing
itself throughout the community; and if this process is allowed to
continue it must inevitably end in degeneracy.

It was for the purpose of averting this calamity and furthering
progressive evolution that this Society was founded, and we may
briefly consider the ways and means by which these ‘ends can be
achieved. There can be no question that one thing which is urgently
needed is the prevention of the propagation of those persons who suffer
from any form of mental disease due to inheritance. For instance,
if the Nation wishes to have a sane and capable posterity, the insane
and mentally defective should certainly not be allowed to procreate.
But there is no law to prevent any person with a marked predisposition
to insanity from marrying; there is no law to forbid him or her producing more children when discharged from an asylum during a period of
remission; there is even no law to prevent the marriage of a mental
defective, although such person is by legal definition incapable of
managing himself or his affairs, and is in need of care, supervision and
control.

In the case of mental defectives, two methods for preventing
propagation have been suggested; namely, sterilization and segregation. This is not the place to discuss in detail their respective merits.
I will merely say that after careful consideration of all the points
involved, such for instance as practicability, cost, the happiness of
the defectives, and the effect upon the community ‘of the release from
care of persons who are incapable of caring for themselves, I have come
to the conclusion that the advantages of segregation far outweigh
those of sterilization. In saying this I realize that there are many
persons suffering from the milder grades of mental defect who are not
themselves in need of institutional care, and in whose case the chief
danger is propagation. Even here I consider that there are abundant
reasons against sterilization, and I believe that if ascertainment were
only properly carried out, so that the whereabouts of each person were
known ; if ev ery person not in an institution were placed understatutory
supervision and the methods of such supervision improved, so that he
10 EUGENICS REVIEW.

could be removed to an institution should circumstances arise to make
this desirable; and if the marriage of mental defectives were made
illegal, the risk of propagation would become practically negligible.

It is necessary to point out, however, that even if, by sterilization or segregation or supervision, we could absolutely prevent propagation by defectives, we should by no means eliminate mental defect
or disease ; indeed it is very doubtful if we should produce any considerable effect at all. For, in spite of the fact that approximately 80% of
such cases are due to inheritance, the proportion who are the offspring
of a mentally defective parent is a very small one. The great
majority of defectives are produced by parents who have either been
insane, or have been carriers and have not been certifiable at all. The
sterilization or segregation of every defective would merely prevent the
birth of that relatively small number who are the offspring of parents
‘who are themselves defective. I think that if it were possible to
apply either of these methods to the insane the effect would be considerably greater, for propagation by the insane is much more extensive
than by defectives; but even then we should be a long way from the
eradication of mental disease. In order to produce any really marked
diminution in the amount of mental disease throughout the community it would be necessary to sterilize or segregate every carrier of
the neuropathic diathesis, which is obviously impossible.

But were it even possible to do this, we should be faced with
another difficulty. There is every reason to think that the causes of
germ impairment are still at work, and, this being so, a fresh crop of
persons suffering from the neuropathic diathesis would soon come into
existence. Although we have succeeded in removing some of these
causes, and are in process of removing others, it seems likely that
every change in social conditions and every advance in Evolution
brings in its train inimical agencies which may impair the germ cells
of those individuals who are unfit to continue the march. I have
little doubt that for many generations to come devitalization of the
germ cells and the neuropathic diathesis will continue to be produced.
It is possible that this process may even be a salutary one, andthat if
only such affected persons could be prevented from contaminating the
healthy, it might, in the long run and from the racial point of view,
be productive of good rather than harm. Unfortunately nothing is
done to prevent such contamination, and there is a very real danger of
the dragging of sound stocks into the vortex of disease and of the
diffusion of the impairment throughout the mass of the community.

It is probable that if Society were so constituted that the burden
of any inefficient and defective offspring fell entirely upon the shoulders.
of those producing them, this would act as a decided deterrent. It
would cause much greater attention to be paid to the health of a prospective partner and would certainly tend to diminish the production
of defective and diseased children. But Society is very far from being:
constituted on these lines. There is no question that present conditions and the whole trend of social legislation, instead of acting as a
deterrent to the production of the unfit, distinctly tend to limit the.
production of the fit. It has been suggested that the State should.
provide an antidote to this process and should devise some means,
MENTAL DISEASE IN RELATION TO EUGENICS. 1L

such as by scholarships or relief from taxation, whereby the production.
of healthy and capable children would be encouraged. But it seems.
probable that the cost of this would ultimately fall upon the fit themselves, so that it is doubtful whether it could be applied on a sufficiently
extensive scale to be productive of much real good. We have seen
that, although it is possible by legislation to check the propagation of
the mentally defective, and this should certainly be done, it is impracticable to do so in the case of many other forms of mental disease, and
it is impossible to do so in the case of persons who may convey the
taint, but who are not themselves affected. What then is to be done?

My own feeling is that there is one way, and one way only, by which
we can hope to stem degeneracy and advance racial progress. That
way is by an educational campaign whereby the whole community
shall be enlightened as to the part played by inheritance in the causation of health and disease; in other words, by developing throughout
the nation the Eugenic ideal. By the Eugenic ideal I mean not merely
the intellectual recognition of the desirability of producing sound and
healthy offspring, but a feeling, or an emotion, regarding this idea;
a sense of shame and repugnance at the thought of bringing into the
world delicate and defective children; a sense of satisfaction, of
increased self-respect, and of duty well done at the thought of producing
children who are healthy and capable. This may sound unpractical,
perhaps to some persons even fantastic, but I do not think it is either.
In terms of Psychology such an ideal constitutes a sentiment and the
human mind has a great capacity for acquiring sentiments. It has.
already developed the religious and the aesthetic sentiments to a very
high degree, and, just as all moral and cultured persons now feel deep.
repugnance at the idea of committing a crime, or when confronted with
a disharmony in music, colour, form, or social decency, so I believe
it to be equally possible for them to develop the Eugenic sentiment,
or if we prefer so to call it, conscience.

No doubt our knowledge is far from complete, but there is quite
enough to go upon, and I think the Education of the Nation should be
the main objective of this society. It is impossible to conceive of
any more important task or of one which would be attended with
greater benefit. For it does not admit of any question that in the iast
resort the very existence of a Nation must depend upon the condition
of its citizens, and it is extraordinary that a people which prides itself
upon its sound common sense and business capacity should be content
to spend millions upon the cure, care and maintenance of persons.
suffering from disease, and take practically no steps to prevent it at
its source.
