CEST weet Test O66t 6tbl " 8tol Ltt Sol

 

ainjyipuedxy pus suroouy jo uostisdui0g—Aja100¢ solusgny

 

288
THE TREASURER’S PAGE

HE Hon. Treasurer of a society such

as the Eugenics Society can interpret

his functions on narrow or broad lines.
My inclination is to interpret them in terms
which will enable me to serve in my small
way the cause of eugenics to the utmost limit
of my capacities and experience. It is for this
reason that I have suggested to the Editorial
Committee that, at least for the next year or
so, there should be included in every issue of
the EUGENICS REVIEW a Treasurer’s Page,
through which I propose to make contact with
my fellow-members and with all subscribers
and donors towards the funds of the Society.
In the coming months I shall call attention to
certain aspects of our financial position, in
a way which I hope will strike your imagination and arouse your determination to add
largely to the financial support of the work
which the Soczety is doing.

In this number I shall ask you to consider
the facts illustrated in the chart on page 288.
That chart shows the growth in our income
and expenditure from 1924 to 1935. Its outstanding feature is, of course, an enormous
growth in both income and expenditure, but
it also shows the large fluctuations in the
annual figures. These latter are to some
extent fictitious, for inevitable delays in the
transfer of funds from the late Mr. Twitchin’s
estate to the Society give an appearance of
variation in income which in fact hardly
existed. There is the further fact that
income was not completely separated from
capital, so that some of the over-expenditure
shown in the years 1930-2 is undoubtedly
more apparent than real.

I joined the Council of the Society at
the request of the late Sir Bernard Mallet
on May 13th, 1931; Mr. B. S. Bramwell was
then Hon. Treasurer. On May 3rd, 1933, Mr.
Bramwell was appointed Chairman of the
Council and I was asked to take over the
Hon. Treasurership in his place.

To explain the problem with which I found
myself confronted, it is necessary to recall
that Mr. Twitchin had died on March roth,
1930, and that the whole financial outlook of

the Soczety had been transformed by the
money left to it under his will. As soon as
I had grasped work to be done, I realized
that instead of the £70,000 (approximately)
we had anticipated receiving from the
estate, it looked as if, owing to the slump,
we would hardly receive £45,000. These
figures were so startling that it seemed to me
essential to concentrate on recovering so far
as possible the loss which the Socrety looked
like suffering. With the help of my colleagues
on the Finance Committee, this has proved
possible to the extent of something between
£20,000 and £30,000 in the years which have
intervened. It has proved possible because
this Committee and the Council of the Society
have been willing to undertake greater responsibility in relation to the funds of the
Society than is usual in such circumstances.
It is also due to the wisdom of Mr. Twitchin
and the drafters of the Constitution of the
Society that no obstacles were placed in the
way of our investing those funds over wider
fields than is usual in the case of such gifts
and such societies.

With the gradual achievement of our
purpose there took place a very great expansion in the Soczety’s activities—so great
that the opportunities which were presented
to us outran even the largely increased income which we received from the benefaction
of Mr. Twitchin. In view of all the circumstances, however, the Soczety decided to go
boldly forward with the policy of spending
out of capital the necessary additional funds
required during the years 1934, 1935 and
1936.

What, then, is the present position?
In the past year we have been gradually
arriving at a time when the possibility of
increasing the value of our capital has grown
less, and the danger of its falling has grown
more. It has therefore become obvious that
we must make strenuous efforts to increase
our income from other sources. It is to the
continuation of this story that I will return
next quarter.

C. F. CHANCE.

289
