ANIMAL

HYBRIDS

And Another Method of Progressive Breeding,
By ELDON MOORE

(From the Imperial Bureau of Animal Genetics, Edinburgh.)

themselves in a complex and variable

environment, and breeding livestock
to be of use to their owners in comparatively
simple and uniform conditions, are two very
different things. Most such livestock are,
to begin with, pathological exaggerations,
quite unfitted to survive at large and on
their own merits, and with some one or two
special characteristics developed to a
grotesque degree.

There is, moreover, another important
difference. The popular belief, mentioned
by Miss Fleming, that human hybrids inherit the worst characters of both stocks,
has this foundation in common observation :
inter-racial crossing is more frequent among
degenerate types than among normal or
above-average people—whose pride of race,
race prejudice if you like, tends to keep
their line pure—and the offspring, consequently, do not have much chance to inherit
anything except poor qualities. Among
animals, on the contrary, there are not
usually many degenerate specimens, while
the man who is deliberately making an experiment in crossing tends to choose his best,
not his worst, animals as parents.

But after allowing for these differences of
detail, the phenomena of hybridization
appear to have certain common principles
throughout the organic kingdom; and the
first of these is heterosis, or hybrid vigour.
Miss Fleming’s data do not indicate how
marked this is among humans, and I do not
know what foundation in fact there is for
the common belief that the leaders of social
revolutions are nearly always hybrids—such
men as Eugene Chen. But Pearl, in his
Rate of Living,* records a very striking in
* Pearl, Raymond. The Rate of Living. London,
1928. University Press.

B REEDING humans to be of use to

271

stance of heterosis in Drosophila under wellcontrolled conditions which allowed of no
other interpretation. After carefully
observing the longevity of two types, the
vigorous wild Drosophila and a common
pathological mutation with vestigial wings,
he crossed the two and obtained an F,
generation whose average longevity was
markedly superior to that of both parent
stocks.

Mean age at death : Wild, 44 days; Vestigial, 14 days; and F,, 51 days.

He continued a very pretty experiment
by crossing the F, both inter se and back to
the parent stocks, and obtained clear-cut
segregation in the F,’s. Not only did the
characters of normal and vestigial wings
segregate out in due proportions, but with
them went the longevity appropriate to the
two types: normal-winged flies reverted to
the length of life of their normal-winged
grandparents, and vestigial-winged to that
of the vestigial-winged grandparents. Since
he found, by amputation experiments, that
mere absence of wings in itself was no bar
to a long life, one must conclude either that
the mutant gene was genetically or physiologically linked with other characters of
importance, or else that a whole complex
of characters sometimes tend to segregate
out together. The latter hypothesis is interesting in view of what I shall later have
to say about hybridization in the pig.

Hybrid vigour has for long been a commonplace, though unexplained, observation
among practical animal husbandmen. ‘The
prevailing genetical explanation to-day is
that valuable qualities tend to be dominant
to their opposites of less value, and that
first-cross hybrids therefore exhibit a
double set of useful characters. Professor
Crew feels that there may be more in it
‘272

than this, and that the rationale may ultimately have to be sought in the bio-chemistry of the cell—since one usually notices
that the more violent the cross the greater
is the vigour in the hybrid.*

However that may be, the experience of
animal breeders certainly does not confirm
the view that hybrids inherit the worst qualities of both stocks.

The prevailing theory that hybrid vigour
is due to a mosaic of dominant characters,
seems to be confirmed by the cattle hybridizing experiments which have been made for
many years past in most of the tropical and
sub-tropical parts of the Empire. While
conditions and types of animals vary, of
course, they all have much in common. The
native cattle are usually small and either of
the humped, zebu type, deriving originally
from India (which some authorities, however, dispute), or else of a type that approximates to that of the newly named ‘‘ West
African Shorthorn.”’ In either case, they
are, as I have said, small and, to the eye of
an English farmer, hopeless in conformation
for either meat or milk. In fact, their milk
yield is so low and so dependent on the
natural suckling of the calf that they are
practically useless as dairy animals.

The advantages of these animals may be
summed up in the two words hardiness and
resistance. They can forage for themselves,
go for long periods without water or trek
considerable distances to it; mineral deficiency does not seem to affect them very
much, and they are comparatively unharmed by the native’s methods of husbandry. Above all, they have a high resistance not only to the various tick-borne diseases—piroplasmosis, East Coast fever, and
the like—but also even to trypanosomiasis
(carried by the tsetse fly), rinderpest, and
foot-and-mouth disease. In short, they are
not * pathological ’ specimens like some of
our own milk and beef breeds, but animals
that have been naturally selected, through
many generations, for survival.

But the incoming English agricultural
oficer wants meat and milk, and he imports

pr
_Usually, too, such extreme hybrids are also
sterile, like the mule, for reasons not yet explained.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

—or, rather, he used to import—our ‘ improved ’ European breeds, which promptly
succumb to disease, mineral deficiency, lack
of water, native husbandry, and the rest. So
the usual practice now is to import bulls,
which are kept in nursing homes, so to
speak, and only used to cross with picked
native cows. Usually (though there have
been disappointing exceptions) the results
are good, the F’,’s inheriting the hardiness
and resistance of their dams and a high
degree of the milking qualities of their imported sires’ dams.

HYBRID VARIABILITY

So far, so good. It is in the next generation, if these are crossed inter se, that the
disappointment comes, for the resulting
animals, according to most reports, inherit
the worst qualities of both grandparental
stocks. But the reports are vague, and the
men who make them are not usually geneticists. ‘There can be little doubt that what
actually occurs is ‘rather different—a very
high range of variation, some animals showing one combination of qualities and some
showing other combinations, which is cnly
to be expected as the various grandparental
qualities segregate.

Consequently, the practice has grown up
of going no further than the first generation, :
and, therefore, of continually importing
fresh bulls to breed one single generation
of desirable animals. It is a pity, for it
means that these husbandmen, regardless of
genetic probability, just stop short of the
point of building up herds whose desirable
qualities are permanent. There seems little
doubt that out of the range of disappointing
F,’s could be picked one or two animals
possessing at least moderate milk yield combined with native hardiness and resistance.
A few such animals could be used as the
progenitors of a herd which, with careful
culling from generation to generation, would
be naturally hardy and naturally milk yielding. The problem should prove still easier
if the expectation is fulfilled of certain
observations of Mr. A. D. Buchanan Smith.
It seems highly likely that one of the factors
ANIMAL

for milk yield—probably that which differentiates medium from high yield—is sexlinked, carried in the X-chromosome. If so,
it is not only transmitted from mother to
daughter, but also from mother to son to
granddaughter—though never through two
consecutive males. Also, since the factor
is thus isolated and well marked, it should
be possible by continual back-crossing to the
native stock—and, of course, selection—to
breed a herd purely native in all qualities
except those governed by the X-chromosomes.

COMBINING DIFFERENT QUALITIES

I have gone rather deep—for this REVIEW
—into this purely technical agricultural
matter, because it illustrates the fundamental genetics of hybridization. The organism, man or beast, is a product of the interaction of a large number of separate genetical
factors, any two of which, provided they
are not linked in the same chromosome, can
and do separate in the breeding process.
Miss Fleming is talking sound genetical
sense when she suggests combining ‘‘ the
Nordic nose and the common sense of the
half-caste’s father, and the dark skin,
musical ability, and lesser tendency to endocrine and nervous disorder of the coloured
mother’’—if it be granted that all these qualities are genetic in nature. On the other
hand, the factors of different grades or kinds
of the same character cannot be combined—
e.g. high and low milk yield, nor, probably,
the phlegmatic and the ‘ temperamental ’
temperament. Or, rather, they can be combined in the F,, with a degree of dominance,
one way or the other, and—in human beings
—diverting results! But in the next breeding process the factors responsible for the
two characters will separate.

This, the existence, not of unit characters,
but of separate unit factors and their segregation, are the essence of Mendelism; and it
is exemplified alike in the variation shown
by the grandchildren of the European x
native cattle crosses and in the varieties of
colouring and temperament exhibited by the
children of mulattoes. An instinctive recog
HYBRIDS 273
nition of the principle is evident in the
methods, a century and more ago, of the
““ great improvers ’’ of English cattle and
sheep.

CREATING “CATTALOS ”

This principle, too, is guiding those responsible for a queer experiment in Canada,
where, in Buffalo Park, an attempt is in
progress to breed beef cattle that can withstand bitter weather, and forage for themselves under range conditions and in snow.
Crosses were first made between domestic
cattle—mainly beef Hereford and AberdeenAngus—and bison bulls. It was attended by
much maternal and infant mortality; and,
though the surviving female hybrids were
fertile when crossed back to cattle or bison,
the few males were sterile.

Much the same difficulties attended some
earlier experiments, which did, however,
produce an occasional fertile male, and, by
crossing these with female hybrids,
““ cattalos ’’—a hybrid word itself which
offends the sense of one who likes linguistic
purity of race.

The next step was to import the Asiatic
yak, which crossed successfully with both
bison and domestic cattle, bridging the biological gulf between the species; and then
to make various experiments in crossing the
different hybrids, in back-crossing, and so
on. It1is not possible yet to say much more :
the hybrids are queer, uncouth-looking
beasts, in which the white face of the English Hereford, the beef qualities of the
Aberdeen-Angus, and the hardiness of the
bison are noticeable.

One series of experiments on pigs is interesting, since it illustrates the fact that
hybridizing is always an experimental process, likely to yield unforeseen results.
Simpson first, and since him several others,
crossed domesticated pigs with the wild
European boar; and here, at the Animal
Breeding Research Department, there are
two specimens of the progeny of the domestic pig crossed with the semi-wild New
Hebridean pig (imported and lent by Dr.
J. R. Baker). All experiments show the
274
same result in the progeny—neither the
worst nor the best qualities of either stock
are shown, but the majority of the qualities
of one stock, the wild, are almost completely
dominant. It is a remarkable instance of
‘ pre-potency,’ to use the old farmer’s term,
and it is extremely difficult to tell the hybrid
children from their wild parent—‘“' a large
litter all much resembling the wild boar,
having his colour [russety-grey, agouti],
snout, eyes, ears, length and size of legs,
tail, shape of body, size, wildness, and
characteristic movements.’’ ‘To these may
be added fertility, for a Tamworth x Wild
Boar female gave four pigs in a litter, which
is about the same as that of the wild type,
and a long way from the normal ten-eleven
of the Tamworth.

WILD x DOMESTIC CROSSES

The papers of Simpson and Spillman also
hint—no more—that in the F, generation
all these different characters behaved like
one pair of allelomorphic units, and segregated out in the 1: 2: 1 ratio. As with the
flies, it is difficult to believe that all these
widely differing characters are physiologically linked (e.g. by some endocrine factor),
while a genetical linkage so wholesale is no
easier to digest. Body build and body
colour, hair form, texture, and colour, type
of bone and length of limb, type of face,
snout, ear, and eye, health and vigour,
metabolism, habits, disposition, fertility—
these are all, apparently, carried in the same
portmanteau! It may be, indeed, that where
the types crossed are widely separated,
there is a physiological, a biochemical, incompatibility, which causes the two sets of
chromosomes in the hybrid’s gonads to part
company like two armies.

Dominance is really a problem in physiology, but the ‘ pre-potency ’ of the wild type
may reasonably be explained by resort to
the genetical * presence-and-absence ’
theory. ‘The type and characters of the
domestic pig appear to be due to the loss of
certain genetic qualities which are present
in the wild hog, and which, when the two

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

are combined in the same individual, compensate for their allelomorphs’ defects.

As I have tried to indicate, hybridizing is
a gamble, a mixing of unknown ingredients
in the first cross, with quite unpredictable
segregation and re-combination in subsequent generations.

There is one other method of breeding—
selection. One finds that in those parts
of the Empire where hybridizing and firstcrossing are the practice, the native cattle
exhibit, as would be expected, a high range
of variation among themselves. It seems
more than probable, as many authorities
have declared, that the desired qualities
could be bred by pure selection; and they
would certainly be more stable and permanent than those of even the fifth or sixth
generation of a cross. Jt is true that selection is sometimes a slower process—though
no slower than an unsuccessful gamble—but
it is surer, and for this reason. Adaptation
to surroundings—which is surely the most
important quality for any being, if you
grant that a live dog is better than a dead
lion—is the function of a complex of qualities, slowly built up by generations of
natural selection. It is easier to take that
as the basis, and to add by further selection
the one or two particular qualities desired,
than to take milk or beef qualities as the
foundation and add the complex of adaptive
characters. Pure selection has developed
good dairy cows from the zebu type
(Sahiwal) and one of the finest horses in the
world—the only pedigreed all-purpose horse
—the French-Canadian, an animal which
could survive at large and on its own merits.

To the biologist—if he can forget his own
private race prejudices—human hybrids are
only interesting experimental material,
which generally confirm his observations of
other organisms. America, that land of
social experimentation, which is always producing such amazing and unstable mixtures
of human qualities, is a good example both
of the interest and the gamble. But, without prejudice, it seems to me that we have
here in this country enough good stock to
choose from without overmuch experimenting in the dark.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 4.
