THE EUGENICS REVIEW

MEDICINE

McKeown, Thomas. Medicine in Modern Society.
London, 1965. Allen and Unwin. Pp. 234. Price
35s.

DR. THOMAS MCKEOWN, Professor of Social
Medicine in the University of Birmingham,
examines in this book the present-day problems
of the medical services against the background
of what they have achieved so far, and he
divides his subject matter into six parts. In the
first he inquires into the reasons for the great
increase in the population from the eighteenth
century onwards and concludes that the principal explanation has been a decline in mortality.
The reduced incidence of tuberculosis accounts
for nearly half of this, that of typhoid, typhus
and continued fever for about a fifth, scarlet
fever also for a fifth, cholera, dysentery and
diarrhoea for nearly a tenth, and smallpox for
only a twentieth. It is with considerable Shavian
relish that McKeown points out that the effect
of therapy on all these conditions was negligible
except in the case of smallpox where it made
only a trivial contribution. Improvement in
nutrition, in the control of water and sewage
disposal and in some cases a favourable trend
in the relationship between infecting organism
and the human host were the effective agents
and the medical profession can take little or no
credit for any of these.

In Part 2 the consequences of this decline in
mortality are considered. It has resulted in a
change in the age structure of the population
(and therefore an increase in degenerative and
neoplastic diseases), and in the younger age
groups prenatal influences and congenital defects
have become relatively more important—and
we have not yet reached the stage of selective
breeding to try and eliminate these. The problems confronting medicine have also been
altered by the environment, particularly by the
increase in atmospheric pollution, by smoking
and by the prevalence of accidents and violence.
In McKeown’s view all these changes have not
resulted in much modification in the medical
services and, in a review of the evolution of
these, the teaching hospitals are shown in an

34

unfavourable light with respect to the medical
care of the community as a whole.

In Parts 3-6, the author discusses how he
thinks the contemporary medical services should
be organized. Each hospital, both teaching and
non-teaching, ought to provide all major services
(general medicine and surgery, psychiatry, geriatrics, obstetrics and paediatrics), but some in
addition should include specialized units, e.g.
for radiotherapy, and for treatment of the young
chronic sick. McKeown thinks that the present
difficulties in staffing are due to treating chronic,
mental and acute patients in different hospitals,
and this lack of flexibility would be remedied
by his “balanced hospital community”. Though
this is something of a hobby-horse he knows
when to dismount and emphasizes that the most
important point of all is that the future is uncertain and the keyword in site planning is unpredictability. New hospitals should allow for
growth, change of use and replacement of outdated facilities.

Outside the hospitals, McKeown thinks there
should also be radical changes. The general
practitioner as we know him should disappear—
all doctors should have a speciality and in a
group practice there should be an obstetrician,
a paediatrician, a general physician dealing with
adult disease, and a geriatrician—such a team
would obviate unnecessary referrals and would
keep us tidily pigeon-holed from the womb to
the tomb. As regards the local Public Health
services, which at present overlap with many
hospital services, McKeown thinks these ought
to be curtailed and centralized.

Much more home care (organized from the
hospitals) he thinks should be available for
short-term acute cases as well as for the chronic
sick, the old and the mentally ill—though in the
reviewer’s opinion indoctrination of the public
to accept long-term responsibility for their
relatives may be difficult.

From what has been written it will be obvious
that there are revolutionary ideas throughout
this book which command respect and attention
and it is high time that the National Health
Service was given a spring-clean on the lines
McKeown indicates.

C. A. CLARKE
