EUGENICS IN ‘THE LIGHT OF POPULATION
TRENDS *

By A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS, ™.a.

NE day someone-will write a history
, of the eugenic movement. The his
torian will have some puzzles to solve.
How did it come about that the subject was
ventilated as early as the ’sixties of the last
century though no real knowledge of the
mechanism of inheritance was available until
the early years of the present century ? That
we may attribute mainly to the genius of one
man. Sir Francis Galton foresaw the importance of applying our knowledge of heredity
to social problems ; at the same time he did
not fail to realize that the knowledge available in his day was very limited. Indeed he
devoted much of his time and energy to the
building up of a science of inheritance. But
it is not the case that his followers have
always been equally impressed with the
necessity of postponing the formulation of
policy until the relevant facts are certainly
known, and of this opportunity for criticism
the opponents of the movement have not
been slow to take advantage.

THE QUESTION OF NUMBERS

Our historian will also note and feel called
upon to explain the lack of terest shown by
eugenists in the quantity aspect of the population problem. For it is a fact that eugenists
have been little concerned with numbers. It
is not difficult to understand why this should
have been so in the first decades of the movement. The widespread interest in numbers,
which the work of Malthus had aroused,
began to flag after the middle of the century.
When Sir Francis Galton wrote it had
withered away. In their neglect of this
matter, therefore, eugenists were like others
of their day. But it may be urged that there
is an aspect of the question of numbers that
is of permanent interest to eugenists, though
it may not appear to touch any immediate

* The Galton Lecture, delivered before the Eugenics
Society on February 16th, 1935.

or urgent problem. As Sir Josiah Stamp
pointed out in his Galton lecture of last year,
it is by no means certain that the economic
optimum density coincides with the eugenic
optimum density ; and this point deserves
more attention by eugenists than it has
received. Again it may be urged that, unless
there is an interest in the quantity problem,
it may be difficult to understand some aspects
of the quality problem. For an investigation
of the former involves a review of all the
forces bearing upon a population, and in the
absence of such a review it may be difficult to
interpret correctly the forces lying behind
those particular phenomena which attract the
attention of eugenists, for example, the forces
producing differential fertility. But however
that may be, I hope presently to show that
there are now other and more pressing
reasons why eugenists should no longer
neglect the question of numbers.

NEED FOR POSITIVE EUGENICS

The concentration upon what is usually
called negative eugenics is another fact
which our historian will note. To some
extent this is connected with the lack of
interest in quantity. No one ever thinks of
negative eugenics as likely to have any noteworthy effect upon numbers, whereas the
question of numbers is at once brought to the
fore by any programme for positive eugenics.
But the concentration upon negative eugenics
is mostly due to the fact that it has seemed
hitherto to be both more urgent and more
practicable to restrain the unpromising than
to encourage the promising. And so far as.
urgency is concerned, this was true during the
earlier decades of the eugenic movement.
But it has always seemed to me premature to
hold any view about the possibilities of
positive eugenics; and throughout this
paper I mean by positive eugenics, not an
12 : THE EUGENICS REVIEW

attempt to breed a race of supermen, but to
raise the fertility of those who are not
definitely subnormal until at least they
replace themselves.

No such effort has yet been made, and in
the absence of evidence we can only speculate; and I shall presently point out that
those speculations which lead to pessimistic
conclusions omit some very important considerations. Leaving that aside for the
present, it is, I think, a fact worthy of note
that the concentration upon negative eugenics
has had unfortunate consequences. The outlook and activities of eugenists have seemed
to be repressive rather than creative. There
has been little place for generous constructive
enthusiasm within the movement. Eugenists
have appeared to find much to censor but
little to praise. In consequence the public
has come to attribute to eugenists a disposition to scold and to prophesy disaster. There
is a well-known charitable society with a long
record of most useful achievement to its
credit. It has, however, made a strong point
of the importance of discriminating between
applicants for help. This has aroused criticism; a critic once called it The Society for
the Detection of the Undeserving Poor.
Would not one of the numerous critics of our
Society have summed up the impression
which concentration upon negative eugenics
inevitably makes upon the public mind, if he
had adapted the jibe, and called our Soczety
The Society for the Detection of Persons
Undeserving of Posterity ?

My thesis to-night is that in the field of
population changes are in progress which will
require eugenists to take an interest in
numbers, and which will offer an opportunity
for a policy of positive eugenics, thereby
opening the way for a more creative kind of
activity and a more generally attractive
programme. These changes are no doubt
fairly familiar to you. But I must go over the
matter, though in very brief outline, because
it is only by so doing that I can place before
you the reasons for my belief that positive
eugenics will be urgently demanded by the
new situation, whereas the need for pursuing
a policy of negative eugenics will become less
pressing.

THE PREVALENCE OF SMALL FAMILIES

The changes to which I have referred originated neither in a decline of the frequency
of marriage nor in a diminution of the proportion of women of child-bearing age in the
population, but in a decline in the size of the
family. In order to draw out the significance
of this fact we must probe a little way into
its causes. The smaller family is due in the
main to a decrease in the fertility of married
women in each age group. In other words the
only factor of major importance in producing
these changes is that the chance has greatly
diminished that a married woman of given
age, say thirty, will bear a child within a
year. Thus far there is no difference of
opinion. But when we ask why the fertility
of married women has decreased, somewhat
divergent views are expressed. While some
consider that birth-control is the only factor,
others believe that additional influences are
at work. But no one has proved that any
factor other than birth-control is in operation,
and there does not seem to be any aspect of
the decline in fertility which indicates that
such a factor exists though it has not been
identified. If, for instance, it had been proved
that involuntary sterile marriages were on the
increase, the presence of some additional
factor would clearly be indicated. But this
has not been demonstrated. Further in my
opinion there is no aspect of the decline of
fertility that cannot be interpreted with
comparative ease as due to birth-control.
Thus I accept the view that birth-control is
the only important cause, if not the only
cause, of the decline in the fertility of married
women of given age, and therefore also the
chief cause of the decline in the size of the
family. |

The decline in the size of the family has
reached a point that is not apparent at first
sight. This can be illustrated in various ways.
We may use the method evolved by Mr.
Kuczynski which consists essentially in
assessing the present forces of birth and
death. If that is done for this country, it is
found that we are not only not replacing ourselves, but are between 25 and 30 per cent.
below replacement rate. In other words, if
the forces of birth and death, as they now are
EUGENICS IN THE LIGHT

  
  
 
  
  
   
  
   
 
  
   
  
   
   
  
 
 
   
     
   
 
  
  
   
   
   
 
  
   
  
   
 

pi sbuntry, were to play upon a populaPitabilized age grouping, the populajald decrease by between 25 and 30
. in thirty years.
may illustrate the position by
ag figures for the population at some
. When doing so, there are roughly
ats sof procedure that can be adopted.
Feo present figures of purely theoretical
Bt, such as Sauvy gave for France when
pwed what the future population of
7 p would amount to if the birth-rate for
sable of France was at once reduced to
fel now prevailing in Paris. The other
ittempt to discern the most probable
wf births and deaths and to give figures
| Phy on the assumptions so arrived at.
_ . he most useful method of illustrating
+ ent position of this country so far as
mmediate purpose is concerned. I may
fe select this course.

EATING FUTURE POPULATION

3 statistical procedure involved is simple
gp atorions, We begin with the present
mtion divided into age and sex groups.
Ben add the births and subtract the
. hat we estimate as likely to occur
& now and the future date for which a

B ruied It is m connection with
mg the number of future births and
pyiee aths that difficulties occur. But in
to future deaths the difficulties are
a as, We can take it that everyone will
r-to live as long as they can; we
- tly what scope there is for a
mee in the death-rate during the childmw period, the only period during which
| et in the death-rate will affect the
ef population; and we know a good

the chances of decreasing the
2m this period. Thus there are no
f differences of opinion about the
© of deaths that are likely to occur at
Mi the near future.

r hen we pass to the question of future
; ; is different. We do not know how
‘will come to regard marriage and size
E vy: we do not know what their atti
g birth-control will be. The most
y¥ procedure is perhaps to assume

&

beige

ca ee
oe re:

ior

pe

OF POPULATION TRENDS 13
that the recent decline in fertility will continue at least for a time, and to estimate
future births upon that basis. Then we may
examine the implications of this assumption
with the object of throwing some light on its
probability. Thus, for example, if we project
the present downward trend of fertility into
the future, in such manner that fertility
stabilizes in 1944, it can be shown that the
population of Great Britain will be rather
over 41 millions in 1956 and about 32?
millions in 1976, that is a decline of 34 millions by the former and of 12 millions by the
latter date, migration movements being left
out of account.

Let us examine the implication contained
in this assumption that there will be some
further decline in the average size of the
family. The average family is much larger
among the poorer than the richer classes in
this country. We know the exact position in
Ig1I, but owing to the deplorable failure to
keep the information up to date on comparable lines we do not know how far there
has been, during the last twenty years, a
tendency towards equality between the
classes in this respect. But from inquiries
that have been made in Sweden, Germany
and Holland, it emerges that there is movement towards a reduction in the fertility of
the poorer classes to the level reached by the
wealthier classes. An approximation to
equality seems to have been reached in
Stockholm. It cannot well be doubted that
things are moving or will move in this direction in all Western countries. If equality
comes about in this country at the present
level of the more prosperous classes, the
decline in the fertility of the whole population will be greater than was assumed in the
calculation quoted above.

But existing methods of contraception are
not very effective ; if they were improved,
the decline would be more rapid and probably, though not necessarily, ultimately
greater. With these considerations in mind it
would seem probable that the figures suggested for 1956 and 1976 will not be reached
unless there is an increase in the size of
family in sections of the population where it
is already low. In other words, in order to
14 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

avoid a greater decline than this, the size of
family among the less fertile must move up,
as that of the more fertile moves down. It
follows that the increase of size of family
among the former must be still greater if the
population is not to sink to the figures given.
That there will be a movement downwards
among the more fertile is almost certain ; it
is impossible to estimate the chances of an
upward movement among the less fertile, but
in my opinion it is not likely to come about in
the absence of a policy directed to that end.

POPULATION TREND AND NEGATIVE
EUGENICS

It is in the light of these considerations
that I wish to discuss the eugenic movement, and in particular the policy of this
Society. Let me first take negative eugenics,
which at present occupies most of the attention of the movement. The situation for
which a remedy is sought is the existence of
persons with inadequate or unpromising
mental or physical endowment. It is sometimes forgotten that a problem is created by
the mere existence of such persons. The
problem is aggravated, but not created, by the
fact that in general such persons have families whose size is greater than the average for
the whole population. The view is prevalent that this type of differential fertility is
bound up with the differential class fertility
of which I have spoken. Those who hold this
view will therefore derive comfort from the
changes which I have just described. For
differential class fertility is likely to pass
away, and, to the extent to which the two
matters are in reality one, the difficulty will
solve itself.

I cannot share this optimism. The view
that there are innate differences between the
classes rests upon two arguments. It is
inferred that social mobility must result in
the sorting out of innate characters and in
the concentration of the more valuable
characters in the prosperous classes. It is
held that the result of applying intelligence
tests shows that there is in fact a higher level
of ability in these classes. It is impossible to
enter upon any adequate discussion of the
matter here. It must suffice to point out that,

 
  
   
   
  
    

even if the evidence of intelligence tests
taken at its face value, it points to diffa
ences between the classes which are smd
compared with the very large differen
which are known to exist within the classe
Within each class at one end of the sca
there is material of the highest value and z
the other end of the scale material which |
poor to worthless. There is evidence
families are largest within the classes at tl
wrong end of the scale, and there is no reasq
to suppose, so far as I can see, that attaix
ment of equality in respect of fertility be
tween the classes, which is being brougt
about by the forces now at work, will invol
equality within the classes. If that is so, th
main problem of negative eugenics rem
untouched by the population movement
now in progress.

PRESENT-DAY EUGENICS POLICY

What are the prospects of solving it by th
methods advocated by the Socrety? Th
Society relies upon three methods. In th
first place it attempts to build up a eugeng
conscience in the sense that it tries to spreag
more widely a feeling of responsibility com
cerning the bringing into the world of the
who are inadequately endowed. But it i
fully realized that this can achieve very lit
where most needs to be done. There are als
certain dangers inherent in this propagand
to which I shall refer later. Secondly, th
Society desires to see sterilization legalized
and though the case for this step is ove
whelming, the quantitative results, whic
may be expected, can be and frequently ar
very much exaggerated. Quite clearly the
Society must rely in the main upon the thir¢

method—the spread of birth-control.

If what I said above is true it would seen
at first sight that the prospects of achievi
the desired end in this manner are unpromi
ing. Birth-control is going to equalize the
birth-rate between but not within the classes
But when speaking of birth-control I have
had in mind existing methods ; they are not
very effective, and relative to the situatio
of many not very easy to employ, and rela
tive to the resources of many not inexpensive
If they were improved, especially in the

   
  
   
  
     
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
   
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
 
 
   
  
  
 
   
 
  
  
 

rection of greater simplicity, the situation
weuld change. The reason why the birthMate is highest at the wrong end within the
Hcial classes is not so much absence of
mowledge that the family can be limited or
any aversion to doing so, but the fact that to
people of little or no foresight the care and
rouble immediately involved by present
paethods of limitation weigh more than the
a ant possibility of unwanted children.
hat is required is not so much propaganda
r in favour of existing methods of birth-control
yr indeed propaganda at all, but improved
ethods, coupled with better economic and
social surroundings.
» I do not wish to minimize the possible
gitimate importance of voluntary sterilizaion. Dr. Blacker has recently given reasons
or supposing that, if it was legalized, many
hose qualifications to be numbered among
the parents of the future are doubtful might
m time submit to it. If these reasons are
pound, as I am inclined to believe, it seems
me to follow that, given improved
methods of contraception, these same people
would limit their families readily in the near
mture; that is to say that, as between
voluntary sterilization and improved contrakeptive methods, there is much more to be
wnticipated from the latter than from the
mrmer. Therefore I welcome the recent
ecision of the Society to subsidize research
mto contraception as the most hopeful,
deed the only hopeful, way of dealing
ively in the near future with the situaion which I have described and which
Benstitutes the core of the problem of negaave eugenics.

[UGENIC CONSEQUENCES OF POPULAFION DECLINE

: The Society is thus driven to rely in the
preld of negative eugenics upon a course of
ion which will improve and spread the
Mractice which, even in its present form and
: ension, is going to bring about a heavy
Mecline in population. I fail altogether to
federstand the complacency with which the
Mituation is regarded by eugenists. There
meems to be an idea among them that within
peids outside their immediate purview there

 
 
  
   
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
  
   
   
   
   
   
  

 

EUGENICS IN THE LIGHT

OF POPULATION TRENDS 15

are considerations of a social and economic
nature which make a decline not unwelcome.
But this is not so. Excessive numbers, for
instance, are not a cause of unemployment.
To a sociologist there is something radically
unhealthy about a situation where people are
failing by so large a margin to replace themselves. And within the field of eugenics the
situation is surely deplorable if the essence
of eugenics is the perpetuation of the community from its more promising elements.
The fertility of this section, and I am speaking not in terms of social classes but of
endowment wherever found, is 50 per cent.
below replacement rate.

It would be interesting to speculate, if
there was time, on the reasons for this
amazing complacency. It is due in part no
doubt to the fact that the measures which are
proposed for raising the birth-rate are
thought to be incompatible with the policy to
which the Society is already committed in its
efforts to reduce the fertility of certain sections of the population. In my opinion it isa
mistake to believe that this incompatibility
exists; to this point I shall return later.
Another fact impresses me. Eugenists are
mostly drawn from the prosperous classes,
and they want their children to find a secure
place in these classes. But small though their
families are, they find this increasingly difficult to bring about, and they attribute the
trouble to excessive numbers. This is an
erroneous diagnosis ; the increased competition for the eligible posts is due to the extension of education and to the breakdown of the
barriers which formerly reserved many eligible occupations to the more fortunately
situated. Under modern conditions the
difficulty cannot be escaped and has nothing
at all to do with numbers.

The coming decline is as yet hidden from
the people at large. Prophecy is dangerous ;
but it needs no courage to foretell that, once
the decline in numbers becomes apparent,
universal interest and concern will be
aroused in the population problem. This
problem may well assume first place among
public questions, and put in the shade these
economic and social matters which now
occupy attention. Discussion will lead
16 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ultimately to action, and this is the point to
which I wish to draw special attention tonight. If eugenists set to work now and
formulate a policy designed to lift the birthrate, they will be first in the field. Under
such circumstances their proposals will at
least obtain sympathetic attention, and may
well be adopted in whole or in part. Such
proposals will possess the great merit of
having been formulated with the problem of
quality as well as the problem of quantity in
mind. But if they delay, measures will be
proposed by others who have quantity alone
in mind, and the nation will get committed
to a population policy in which eugenic considerations find no place. I would urge with
all the force at my command that the Soctety
has an opportunity which is never likely to
recur. Everyone will soon be asking what
can be done. A population policy will
certainly be constructed ; now is the time to
ensure that it will be a policy in which
eugenic considerations are not omitted.

THE ALLEGED RETREAT FROM
PARENTHOOD

Before discussing what would be the content of a policy designed to raise the birthrate eugenically, we must pick up the
threads of the discussion of the origin of the
present situation. I got as far as giving
reasons for supposing that the immediate
cause of the present situation is the increasing
prevalence of contraception. But why do
people employ contraception ? The essence
of the matter is simple. There has long been
a latent desire for a smaller family. Queen
Victoria, writing to the King of the Belgians
in 1841, said: ‘‘ I think, dearest Uncle, you
cannot really wish me to be the ‘Mamma
d’une nombreuse famille,’ for I think you
will see with me the great inconvenience a
large family would be to us all, and particularly to the country, independent of the
hardship and inconvenience to myself ; men,
never think, at least seldom think, what a
hard task it is for us women to go through
this very often.’’ The great place which the
Queen held in the esteem of her people was
due to the fact that she shared in so many
ways the views of the mass of her subjects.

  
  
  
   
  
   
   
   
   
    
    
 
   
   
   
  

And in respect to size of family she was nc
exception. The desire for a small family was
present. Early in the last century the means
to limit the family were made known. Some
decades passed before people in generé
became willing to employ these means, and
it was not until the ’seventies that the
became extensively used in this country.

The story is of course full of complexi
which I do not wish to minimize. But it is
not necessary for my purpose to probe
further ; I need only draw out two infer
ences from the chapter in the story which we
have reached. Children were formerly the
inevitable accompaniment of married com
panionship and home life. There was na
question of any attitude to size of family 3
that settled itself. There was no thought of
replacing the present generation ; replace
ment was automatic. Children were a forced
levy ; they are now voluntary contributions
But though size of family is now a matter of
deliberation, replacement as yet plays no partg
in those deliberations. To how many people
does it ever occur to connect the size of their’
family with the future of their country ? No!
such notion ever enters the head of the man
in the street.

Voluntary contributions have, as we all.
know, to be earnestly solicited ; but for these
essential contributions there is as yet no’
solicitation on behalf of society. It is there-j
fore a mistake to speak of a retreat from}
parenthood if by that is meant a deliberate4
refusal to replace the present generation.‘
Replacement is not and never has been a’
conscious matter. But with a system of,
voluntary parenthood it must become so if
society is to survive. That is the first inference. I may now pass to the second.

When children were a tax which could not |
be escaped by those who desired home life,
the community, which relied on this revenue!
for its perpetuation, was under no pressure to
smooth the path for those who had to pay it.
Whether the path was rough or smooth,
children found their way in. Under a system
of voluntary parenthood, however, the situation undergoes a profound change ; the community now relies for its revenue upon
voluntary contributions, and it must see, not
EUGENICS IN THE LIGHT

   
      
  
   
   
   
  
   
  
   
   
   
 
 
    
   
  
   
   
   
 
   
  
   
    
  

my that obstacles do not stand in the path
Som: knowle but that all the resources of
fdern knowledge and skill are employed in
er to assist those who take their share in
ip essential task of replacement.
os fhile this metaphor of taxation and
iter does indicate one aspect of the
. tter, it may perhaps obscure another and
Wy important aspect. Children are a pride
ed a pleasure and a necessary fulfilment of
ty normal life. But again, now that children
 volnmtany. the greater the pride in them
d the higher the anticipations for them, the
gre hesitation there will be in producing
em, if conditions are such that these very
leper emotions are unlikely to find satisfacfn and these very reasonable expectations
Blikely to be realized. This implies that all
pe relevant conditions must be carefully
Mamined and purposely modified where they
w found to be antagonistic to the founding
ft it building of families.

‘ NEED FOR A SCIENTIFIC POPULAKON POLICY

i ny positive population policy must there2 have two objects: first, to make it
hiversally understood that, with a system
F voluntary parenthood, a community can
My survive if participation in the task of
islacement is undertaken as a normal social
y, and secondly, to remove obstacles to,
a to create facilities for, the fulfilment of
fs duty.
Bt is perhaps less easy to understand the
bed for the second than for the first of these
jo points in the programme. It arises in
way. The circumstances surrounding
prriage, the procreation and upbringing of
Midren, raise medical, psychological, social
mi economic problems of the utmost comrity. As yet we have made hardly any
en emp to examine and far less to solve
i, because, under the conditions formerly
| g, there was no pressure to do so.
i give one example of what is meant, go per
ic . of the population is remunerated by
bge or salary. But neither wage nor salary
rs any relation to size of family, and every
id diminishes the income per head of the

OF POPULATION TRENDS 17
family. This is a positive and serious
obstacle to parenthood.

Though a striking example, this is only one
of the many which could be given. If we
examine the circumstances surrounding the
setting up and equipment of homes, the
construction of houses, the lay-out of towns,
our transport facilities, the innumerable
duties which face the mother with young
children, how much evidence shall we find of
thought and planning for the family? In
addition to social and economic, there are
medical and psychological situations and
problems requiring attention. There has
been research into birth-control, both medical and psychological, but next to none into
birth promotion. There are birth-control
clinics, but what help or advice, based upon
adequate scientific foundation, is available
for those who want to have children? The
need for research and planning in all these
directions is rendered more urgent by the
fact that it is the unmarried and the childless
who have money to spare. In consequence
the ingenuity of inventors and the activity of
entrepreneurs are largely exercised to fulfil
the wants of such people. How much of the
talents and enterprise of the commercial
world is directed to them, and how little of
modern knowledge and skill is called into the
service of those who are seeking the best
environment for children. We all know the
attractive model flats, fitted out with every
modern device, which appear at every housing exhibition, and in which no child could
ever find a place ; how often do we See in any
such exhibition similar model day and night
nurseries? Perhaps the organizers of such
exhibitions know their public and realize that
the inhabitants of the West End who flock
to them would smile at the suggestion that
anyone could so inconvenience themselves as
to require to use rooms for such a purpose.

Upon reflection it becomes plain that the
new situation demands a complete reorientation of outlook, a thorough examination of all circumstances which bear upon
parenthood and the formulation of carefully
constructed proposals designed to assist
parenthood. In many spheres it will be
necessary to call upon expert knowledge and
18 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

specialized experience. No one society could
undertake so huge a task.

TASK OF THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

How then could this Society proceed if it
decided to construct a positive population
policy ? When we look round and take note
of some contemporary activities, we find
reason for thinking that the task is not so
overwhelming as appears at first sight.
Already many of the difficulties confronting
parents, or those who would like to become
parents, have been made the subjects of study
by groups of people who are often organized
into societies. Those who initiate or engage
in these efforts have as yet seldom or never
any views about the population situation.
They have become aware of some aspect of
our social organization which, whether it
takes the shape of a positive obstacle or of a
lack of facilities, creates a difficulty for
parents. Thus we find a society engaged in
the study of family endowment, and we find
organizations devoted to the study of day
nurseries, nursery schools, parent and teacher
co-operation, child and vocational guidance,
the position of married women in industry
and the professions, the planning of houses
and towns and other matters too numerous to
mention. Any attempt to construct a positive population policy must draw upon the
results of all these activities. What is required is that some organization, which has
the whole population situation under review
and desires to construct an adequate programme, should examine all the proposals
made to deal with these difficulties, and
weave them into a coherent population policy.

What organization is better fitted to
undertake this work than the Eugenics
Society ? Its special interests are biological,
and that means that it is primarily concerned
with matters which are fundamental to the
special interests of all these other organizations. Further, I have argued that the
special interests of our Soczety, unlike those
of these other societies, require it to give
some attention to the whole population
problem. It would take me too far afield to
inquire in detail what form the activities of
the Society might assume if it set out in this

direction. But in general it is clear that i
would find points of contact with man
organizations, the objects of which hav
hitherto seemed remote from eugenics. I
developing these contacts it would mak
these organizations aware that a bon
exists between them, and that the bond is an
interest in the family and in family relationships. The task of the Society would be, in
the first place, by dwelling on this fact, t
co-ordinate their efforts, and in the secon
place, by bringing the population situatio
into view, to direct them to acommon purpose.

Though I have selected this aspect of any
population programme for some discussio
before saying anything about the other, it is
of the greatest importance to realize that it is:
subordinate and accessory to the other. The
removal of obstacles to parenthood alone can:
never achieve the desired end ; it is impossible to bribe people into parenthood, for it is
impossible to throw the weight of material
advantage into the scale of parenthood. And
it is not merely that the removal of obstacles
is insufficient by itself; it is that this objective and the promotion of the idea of parenthood as a social duty do not march in harmony. No method can be successful whi
couples an appeal to responsibility with
material considerations. The appeal must b
made first and independently ; the smooth
ing of the path to parenthood should be
undertaken merely to ensure that those who
are already disposed to shoulder their responsibilities shall not be hampered by overwhelming and quite unnecessary difficulties..
But this appeal is not to the performance of
some harsh and stern duty; it merely
endeavours to bring men to realize that the
fulfilment of any normal life involves parent-.
hood, and that it is only communities whose;
members so fulfil their lives which will survive—though this fulfilment does involve for
the individual a sacrifice of short to long-run
satisfactions, as do in fact all other achievements that are finally worth while.

PROSPECTS OF A SUCCESSFUL “ APPEAL
TO RESPONSIBILITY ”

It would be possible to quote recent sayings which indicate the most profound

 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
EUGENICS IN THE LIGHT OF POPULATION TRENDS 19

zimism about the likelihood of the success
, }any such appeal. It has been said that
Re present trend of population shows that
eve of children and sense of responsibility
mr the future are not strong enough to
sure the perpetuation of the race. But
pefore we can say that these or any other
motions and sentiments are too weak to
Mthieve any particular purpose, they must
w given due opportunity to express thempives. Anyone surveying this country a few
Mecades ago might well have concluded that
me native senses of decency and self-respect
were too weak to induce the mass of the
wople to wash. But that was at a time when
Mtle or no attempt had been made to conct cleanliness with self-respect, and when
Most people lacked the facilities for achieving
eanliness even if they desired it. The change
€ attitude to personal cleanliness, brought
bout by propaganda in the schools and elseWhere, coupled with greatly extended faciliwes for washing, have wrought a transformafon in the habits of our people in the present
wntury. A similar change of attitude and
pactice may well be achieved in the sphere
jew under discussion.
On the other hand it would be foolish to
Sdulge in any facile optimism. Voluntary
Marenthood is the greatest innovation that
} race has ever made. It may well be
a ed for a time ; a few centuries are as
Sething in the history of the race, and the
ext few generations may perhaps see a
Mamatic decline in numbers. For many
feasons such a decline is not to be desired ;
mnequal rates of population growth, and
yyen more so diverse directions of population
hhange, introduce an unsettling factor into
mternational relations. Again it is by no
means certain that declining populations
would be left in peace and free to build themgelves up once more. But, given the chance,
p population would no doubt be built up
Regain out of those with more than average
wonsiderations for others and endowed with
e virtues which find their expression in the
ts r my circle and unpretentious lives.
This would be a gigantic eugenic purge of a
hind for which there is something to be said,
ppince in my opinion eugenists have always

   
 
  
  
   
 
   
  
   
   
  
   
  
   
 
  
   
  
 
   
 
  
   
  
 
  
  
 
  
   
  
  
 
 

over-rated the importance of mere intelligence. In gatherings of persons busily devoted
to plans for the radical transformation of
society I have sometimes been surprised to
observe how slender the chance is that any of
them will be represented in the society for
which they plan. It may be that westenders and left-wingers alike are destined to
disappear ; but further reflection does not
suggest to me that their disappearance will
be any great loss. A very eminent member
of this Society once remarked that the
Romans prided themselves upon being the
degenerate descendants of gods, but that we
pride ourselves upon being the very creditable descendants of apes. There may be
truth in both views, and it may be that we
retain an uncomfortable number of persons,
some innately disposed to lordly dissipation,
and others to the tiresome chatterings of
busy bodies.

A NEW POLICY FOR THE EUGENICS
SOCIETY

Whether we take long or short views,
voluntary parenthood occupies the centre of
the field. So far as negative eugenics is concerned the inference that I have drawn from
this fact is that parenthood must be made
truly voluntary throughout society in the
sense that all births must become wanted
births, and I have argued that the only
promising method of bringing this about in
the near future is through research into
contraception. It is to this, I suggest, that
the energies of the Society should now be
directed rather than to the movement for
sterilization which is going forward by its
own momentum, or to the arousing of a
negative eugenic conscience. The latter may
do more harm than good. Cases have come
to my notice in which people, who would
make the most desirable parents, have been
frightened out of parenthood by some baseless apprehension that a defect is lurking in
their strain. An appeal to the degrading
sentiment of fear, whatever its immediate
results, seldom or never produces desirable
results in the end ; such appeals are only too
common to-day, as for instance those made
by well-meaning persons who would save us
20 - THE EUGENICS REVIEW :

from war or revolution. The cumulative
effect which they produce upon current outlook tends to smother the natural buoyancy
and resilience of men upon which alone we
can rely to get us out of our present troubles.

It is precisely this mood of apprehension
that a policy of positive eugenics would seek

to dispel. Sir William Beveridge ended a

recent broadcast talk by saying that the
governments of the world may well find “ that
the possibility of preventing ultimate disappearance of their peoples depends upon the
kind of world that they can make for people
to live in.”* If Sir William is thinking of such
measures as I have suggested, I would of
course agree. But some of his hearers may
have concluded that the world must first be
made safe and comfortable before men can
be expected to continue to people it. I
suggest that there is a circle here since confidence among the people at large alone can
make the world peaceful and prosperous.
It is not necessary to believe in progress or to
nurse anticipations of a millenium in order to
feel confidence in life and to experience joy
in it. It is necessary only to return to a
simpler and clearer conception than now
prevails of the abiding human task.
Doubts, however, may arise in the mind of
eugenists about the methods which in my
opinion are alone likely to be effective in the
field of positive eugenics. They may ask
how, if a call to parenthood is made, they
can be assured that it will not be heard by
that section of the population which is least

* The Listener, February 6th, 1935, p. 226.

well fitted for parenthood. The answer is
that, if parenthood is truly voluntary and the
appeal is made to unselfish motives, the
response will come from just those people
who are the most desirable as parents of the
future. Effective voluntary parenthood is in
fact the most promising condition upon
which eugenic effort can be founded. They
may also ask whether, if obstacles are
removed from the path of parenthood, the
less desirable section of the population may
not be thereby encouraged to reproduce.
The answer is that material inducements will
achieve little or nothing by themselves ;
they will never be more than encouragements
to those who are already disposed to parenthood. The two apparently opposed policies
of promoting birth-control and of encouraging parenthood are therefore not incompatible. They can be pursued together, and
unless they are pursued together the goal of
eugenics cannot be reached.

What will the historian of the eugenic
movement have to say when he comes to
record this phase of its history? Will it be
that early concentration upon negative policy
had developed so myopic a vision that
eugenists failed to observe the threat to
normal people, and that when generous constructive enthusiasm was aroused to counter
that threat, they failed to associate themselves with it, and passed out of sight with
the gloomy sects of the time whose faces were
turned more to death than to life? Or will it
be that they seized their great opportunity,
came forward, and gathered and directed the
forces making for preservation ?

 

Engenics Review, Vol. XXVIL,'No. 1.
