RACE AND CANCER

An Investigation of Its Incidence Among Jews

Carried out under the auspices of the Jewish Health Orzanization of Great Britain

By MAURICE SORSBY, M.D., F.R.C.S.

T is said that cancer of the stomach is

very common amongst Japanese, and that

it is infrequent amongst Scandinavians.
Cancer of the breast is stated to be almost
absent in Japanese women, and it would
appear to be rather high amongst English
women. Uterine cancer is certainly more
frequent amongst the women of this country
than amongst those of Holland. ‘The total
incidence of cancer computed per 100,000 of
population likewise shows remarkable variations when different countries are compared.
Thus in 1920 it was 87 in France, 116.1 in
England and Wales, 72.4 in Belgium, and
112.6 in Holland.

A study of the incidence of cancer among
Jews is of interest from more than one
aspect. It has been known for many years
that two forms of cancer are particularly
uncommon among Jews; cancer of the cervix
of the uterus is generally regarded as being
met with only rarely among Jewish women,
whilst penile cancer is stated to be totally
absent in Jewish men. These marked variations lead to the question whether other
forms of cancer also show distinct differences of incidence upon the Jewish population, and this in turn leads to the question
whether Jews have an incidence of cancer
different from that of their neighbours.
What is the significance of such variations?
Is the explanation to be sought in environmental factors or in an inherent racial
basis?

London* Vienna Amsterdam Warsaw Budapest

IQI0-25 1921-27
Jews bee 1,490.2 174.6
Non-Jews ... 1,411.5 158.3

THE TOTAL INCIDENCE AMONG JEWS

Different countries report different rates
of cancer. Have the Jews in the different
countries where they reside the same incidence of cancer as their neighbours, or is
there a uniform rate of incidence for the Jews
the world over, no matter whether they live
in a country with a high rate of cancer, or
in one with a low rate?

The summary table below is elaborated
from the returns of some representative
cities and gives the answer.

It is clear from this that there is no specific Jewish rate. On the whole there is a
remarkable approach of the Jewish rate to
the non-Jewish rate. Cancer among Jews
seems to turn not around.a racial centre, but
to vary with the geographical background,
though there are differences in the various
cities ; sometimes the Jewish rate is lower,
and at other times higher than the nonJewish rate.

The fact that the incidence of uterine and
of penile cancer is lower amongst Jews,
whilst the total incidence of cancer is
approximately the same among them as
among non-Jews, suggests that the incidence
of cancer of other organs must be higher
among Jews. An analysis of cancer according to organ should therefore be of interest.
Such analyses vary to some extent with the
different cities in which the investigations
were conducted, but the Warsaw figures may
be taken as fairly typical.

Lodz Leningrad

1922-26 1921-26 921-27 1921-27 1925-27
120.4 72.5 133-5 65.5 131.0
128.5 85.0 116.6 76.8 115.9

* For London the calculation is per 10,000 deaths in the cancer-age (40 and over)—for Jews and the

total population.
Jews and non-Jews.

99

In the other cities the computation is per 100,000 people alive in each group:
IOo
WARSAW, 1921-26.
Rate per 100,000 population.
Non-Jews Jews
Buccal Cavity z 1.3 0.38
Pharynx, Oesophagus, Stomach,
Liver, and Adnexa _... we = 47 40.2
Peritoneum, Intestines, and
Rectum ... wee ba 5.8 8.7
Female Genital Organs sins 25-5 7.0
Breast ‘ as we 73 4.8
Other organs 17.9 17.0

These results, fortified by data from other
places and analyzed in greater detail, show
that apart from the low incidence of uterine
cancer, and the apparent immunity to penile
cancer there is a higher incidence of cancer
of the alimentary canal, a rather lower inc1dence for cancer of the tongue, and a breastcancer incidence which is variable, being
sometimes higher and at other times lower
for Jewish women compared to non-Jewish.

Thus, in spite of an approximately equal
incidence of cancer for Jews and non-Jews
there is a considerable difference in the distribution of these cancers according to the
site affected. If, therefore, the total incidence of cancer in the two groups is against
any suggestion of a racial factor in cancer,
the markedly different distribution according to organ strongly suggests such a factor,
unless these variations can be explained on
the basis of a different environment and
mode of life of the two groups.

RACIAL FACTOR OR ENVIRONMENT ?

The cause of cancer is unknown, and it
would therefore appear a hopeless task to
try to disentangle the possible racial and
environmental factors from the problem presented by the different incidence of cancer
by organ met with among Jews. But though
the cause of cancer is still a mystery, a good
deal of knowledge is available as to preexisting conditions and contributory factors
in the causation of this disease ; and a review
of the findings as to the distribution of cancer among Jews, in the light of this knowledge, leads to the strong probability that
environmental factors rather than a racial
predisposition or immunity underlie the
variations under discussion. A consideration of the different organs separately is

useful :

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(a) Toncue.—The lower incidence of cancer of the tongue among Jews is readily explained by the fact that syphilis is relatively
less common among Jews than among nonJews, and that syphilis is the ‘‘ cradle in
which cancer of the tongue is born.’’ A very,
frequent pre-existing condition of cancer of
the tongue is chronic superficial glossitis,
almost always a syphilitic condition.

(b) Pents.—The apparent immunity of
Jews to this form of cancer is not altogether
confined to them alone. Mohammedans also
appear to be but little prone to this affection,
and in India penile cancer is very rare
amongst Mohammedans, but quite frequent
amongst Hindoos. ‘There is considerable
evidence that amongst Europeans development of penile cancer is dependent on a preexisting condition of phimosis. ‘The great
rarity of penile cancer amongst Jews and
Mohammedans would therefore appear to be
due not to a racial factor, but to circumcision
which acts as a preventative means against
phimosis and its complications.

(c) Breast.—Cancer of the breast shows
considerable variations in different communities. In Warsaw it is less frequent among
the Jews, in Vienna it is more frequent
among them than amongst the non-Jews.
Thus there is no unifying principle in the
different Jewish rates, the variations being
most extreme. ‘That in itself is an argument against a common racial incidence, but
the discrepancies observed are to be explained by the different social groups seen in
the different towns. Warsaw Jewry is a
poverty-stricken community, labourers or
small merchants by occupation; Vienna
Jewry is almost entirely an intellectual and
professional aristocracy. Ina social group
like the Jews of Vienna the women marry
late and many do not marry at all; ina
social group like Warsaw Jewry the unmarried are few and late marriages are uncommon. These are factors of profound
significance on the incidence of cancer of the
breast, for it has been found that cancer is
much more prone to develop in the breast
that has not functioned physiologically than
in one that has, breast cancer being relatively more common in the unmarried
RACE AND CANCER

woman of the cancer age than in her married
sister. The discrepancies observed in the
incidence of breast cancer in the Jewish
communities find a ready explanation in the
consideration of the social strata of which
these communities are composed.

(d) Cervix or Urerus.—The incidence
of this form of cancer in Jewish women is
remarkably low, being one-half to one-third
of the incidence among the surrounding
population. This is certainly not due, as
has been suggested, to the avoidance of contraceptive agencies by Jewish women, for
Roman Catholic women are just as prone to
this form of cancer as the women who do
avail themselves of these means. Moreover,
uterine cancer is low in Holland, where contraception has a considerable history. Nor
can the immunity of Jewish women be
ascribed to numerically excessive or to insufficient child-bearing, for the number of
children borne is a factor of no significance
in the causation of cancer, though the fact
of giving birth to a child is of paramount
importance.

Cancer of the cervix is a pathological
curiosity in the unmarried, so that sexual
life in one or more of its phases must be the
exciting cause of this form of the disease.
It is not at all unlikely that the great freedom from this form of cancer among Jewish
women is to be explained by the observance
of the Mosaic code, which regulates sexual
life in such a way that periods of rest to the
local parts are ensured at times when rest is
probably beneficial. This complicated code
may not have been devised as a measure of
hygiene, but it is certainly effective in that

Ior

direction. Of late years these regulations
are being disregarded to an ever-larger
extent, and in Budapest there is some evidence ‘that cancer of the cervix is on the
increase among Jewish women. Comparative statistics in this sense for other cities
are not available.

(e) ALIMENTARY Canat.—The higher incidence of this type of cancer among Jews cannot be explained in the light of any known
facts. But to invoke a hypothetical racial
factor as an explanation is only to give a
verbal solution to a genuine difficulty. It is
much more likely that some factor in Jewish
mode of life or diet is the underlying cause
for this discrepancy: but this suggestion
takes us from facts into the arid fields of
hypothesis.

CONCLUSION

The total incidence of cancer among Jews
lends no support to the view of a racial basis
for this disease, though an analysis of the
cancers according to organ brings out some
remarkable features which strongly suggest
a racial immunity or predisposition. However, a review of these detailed features in
the light of the known facts as to the causation of cancer lead to the suggestion that the
discrepancies are best explained not on a
racial basis, but as the result of environmental factors.

A detailed study of the incidence of cancer
among Jews is all against the view that race
is a factor of significance in the ravages of
this disease. Cancer is a universal foe who
breaks into the camp by crashing through
the outer defences.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 2.
