HEMILATERAL ASYMMETRY

Its Relation to Cross-breedin?, in Animals and Man

By C. J. BOND,

OP-SIDEDNESS, i.e., hemilateral
. asymmetry, is the mark of a hybrid.
Just as the hybrid, by the segregation
of hereditary factors among his germ cells,
is liable to give rise to different types of
offspring, so, too, by an essentially similar
process of cell-division the body of the
hybrid may itself be built so as to display
on the one side a quality derived from his
father and on the other the contrasting
quality derived from his mother. These, at
least, are the suggestions I now want to put
forward for consideration.

In discussing the problem of asymmetry
from the genetic point of view, we start from
the fact that vertebrates, in common with
certain invertebrate individuals, are built
up on a symmetrical plan. The two halves
of the body, as far as the boney and muscular
structures, limb appendages, sense organs,
and accessory structures like horns are concerned, resemble each other on each side
of the median line, and are arranged on a
hemilaterally symmetrical plan.

We are now concerned with certain
exceptions to this rule of hemuilateral
symmetry, and I propose to illustrate
my points with examples of individual
asymmetry drawn from irregularities of horn
curve in oxen, heterodactyly (or odd-toedness) in fowls, tail-feather pattern in
pigeons, feather-colour pattern in birds,
gynandromorphism in birds and insects, and
some abnormalities in eye-colour and earshape in the human subject.

In addition to asymmetry in the two
halves of the body of this hemilateral kind,
asymmetry may also occur in the serial or
*‘end on ”’ reproduction of vertebrate (and
some invertebrate) structures or parts. I
do not propose, however, to deal in any
detail with this longitudinal or serial kind of
asymmetry, except to mention one or two
examples which bear upon the hemilateral
aspect of the problem.

C.M.G., F.R.C.S.

A few words must be devoted at the outset
to the embryological or developmental aspect
of the subject.

The old preformation theory of Roux
and Wiseman (at any rate in its original
form) has now been discarded by the newer
school of experimental embryologists. The
process of growth and differentiation of parts
in the fertilized egg-cell is now regarded as
dependent on a number of factors, among
which polarity, chemical differences in nutritive material, and a special capacity for
regulating cell growth in certain areas, are
some of the more important.

The tendency to-day is towards an eptgenetic rather than a preformative theory of
embryonic development.

If we assume that a newly-introduced
character, such as the presence of the fifth, or
extra digit, when a four-toed breed of fowls
is crossed with a five-toed breed, is controlled during development by the same factors,
and in the same way that old-established
racial characters are controlled when they
emerge at the appropriate time and place in
the growing embryo, then, a consideration
of these and other examples of hemilateral
asymmetry, such as gynandromorphism in
birds and insects, may throw further light
on the actual method of embryological
development.

Thus, whatever be the method (preformative or epigenetic) which starts the development of the fertilized egg-cell on a bilateral
plan or foundation, the fact that an oldestablished racial character is distributed
equally to both halves of the organism,
while a newly-introduced character (such as
the extra toe) is often distributed unequally,
suggests the idea that the new character
complex only fuses with difficulty with the
old-established character complex ; and that
segregation tends to occur during the process of cell differentiation, which underlies
bilateral development, with the result that

109
Iio

the factor or factors which represent the new
character are distributed unequally to the
two halves of the organism.

In fact it may not be altogether fanciful
to regard the individual vertebrate organism
as built up of two half individuals, fused
along the longitudinal median plane. In the
same way we may regard a segmented
organism like a worm as built up of a number of potential worm individuals, joined up
in longitudinal or linear series.

EACH INDIVIDUAL A TWIN

This Siamese twin-like view of the structure of the vertebrate individual may indeed
have some bearing on the view we take of the
nature of segregation.

Thus, during the process of Mendelian
segregation, a heterozygous mother germcell, containing different chromosomes or
genes representing alternative or allelomorphic characters, derived from each parent,
divides at a certain stage into two daughter
gametes, one of which may contain the
paternal, and the other the maternal group.
From the division result two gametes, which
differ in their chromosome or gene complex,
and, when fertilized, these give rise to
differently constituted individuals.

In like manner during the process of socalled somatic segregation in the apical cell
of a growing plant shoot, when the cell undergoes qualitative division : certain factors
or genes are, or may be, eliminated, and a
shoot differing in genetic composition, the
so-called ‘‘ bud sport,’’ results.

So also in the irregular distribution of
characters in the two halves of the vertebrate
body, as in the various examples of hemilateral asymmetry which we are going to
discuss, the same process of segregation or
qualitative cell-division occurs ; but it takes
place at a very early stage in the growth
of the dividing egg-cell, at the time when the
two halves of the embryo are being marked
out, with the result that one half differs from
the other half in respect of the asymmetric
character under observation.

Thus, though the process of segregation
occurs among different units in the two
cases, 1.e., between two daughter gametes

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in the one case, and between the two halves
of the developing embryo in the other, and
although it takes place at different stages
of ontological development, yet the actual
process by which differentiation is brought
about is probably essentially similar in both
cases.

In this way, the study of hemilateral
asymmetry in animals and man (and perhaps in some plants) becomes fundamentally
a study of cases of unusual or abnormal
segregation among the units (factors or
genes, whatever be their nature) which
underlie and control the evolution of
characters during individual development.

When I first dealt with this problem of
asymmetry in a communication to the Genetical Society in 1926 and later in a lecture to
the members of the Eugenics Society (on
April 24th, 1929), I was able to illustrate
my remarks with lantern slides, and to discuss at length each individual example. Unfortunately, this is not possible in this
article, and I must request my readers to
accept instead the following shorter descriptions.

ANCIENT BREEDS AND CROSS-BREDS

The shape and curve of the horns of cattle
afford a good example of symmetry and
asymmetry in the individual. In the prehistoric races (e.g., Bos Primigenius and
Bos Longifrous) the horns curve forward
and upward, as they do, too, in the drawings
of the oxen of ancient Egypt and also in the
modern Eastern races. The type is stable.
In Western Europe there has arisen a race
of cattle with an equally stable horizontal
sweep or downward curve of horn ; and these
two ancient differences in horn curve can
still be seen in the modern breeds derived
from the old types, such as the Longhorns,
Herefords, Lincolns, Welsh cattle, and
others. But in modern cross-bred animals,
such as Shorthorns, asymmetric individuals
occur with one horn curving up and the
other down. Such an animal exhibits in its
right horn inheritance from one race, and in
its left horn inheritance from the other race
—yjust as it is liable to bequeath upward
HEMILATERAL ASYMMETRY

curving horns to.some of its progeny and
downward curving horns to others.

I have observed similar results from experimentally crossing four-toed breeds of
fowls, such as the game-fowl, with five-toed
breeds like the Dorking or Chinese silky
fowl. Most of the offspring of the first
generation in such a cross have five toes, but
there are also a certain number of asymmetric birds, having five toes on one leg and
four on the other. I have also found (and
this has been confirmed by Barfurth and
others), that the odd or extra toe more
usually appears on the left side. In later
generations the discordant influence of this
cross-breeding sometimes causes asymmetry
or irregular development in other structures,
e.g., in the claws, both on the other toes, and
at the end of the wing bones.

One remarkable instance of hemilateral
asymmetry of the secondary sex characters
was that of a pheasant in which the right
side was coloured like a female, and the left
like a male. The right foot had no spur,
on the left a well developed spur was present. An ovo-testis was present on the left
side. To attribute the asymmetric colouration and spur formation to the differential
action of the two sex-hormones is obviously
an insufficient explanation. The tissues
themselves which produced these secondary
sex characters must have differed on the two
sides of the body; and this different receptivity can be attributed to abnormal segregation of the corresponding and controlling
genes during the development of the ovum.
Similarly in cross-bred fowls—such as the
five-toed Houdan and the four-toed Andalusian hybrid—a spur on only the left foot may
be connected with asymmetric development
of the ovary on the left side.

In the wild species of pigeons the tail
feathers or rectrices are, as is well known,
twelve in number, and they are arranged
symmetrically, six on each side. But such
a cross as that between a Fantail and a Homer
produces the following results: (1) An increase in the number of the tail-feathers in
the offspring ; (2) An asymmetrical development of tail feathers ; and (3) double feathers.
Here again there is a tendency for these

Iit

double feathers to appear on the left side,
as in the case of the asymmetric toe development in fowls. Asymmetrical human beings
are not uncommon—in fact few people’s
faces look alike from both sides, while their
finger prints on the right and left hand are
never identical, and further observations
have led me to conclude that this phenomenon is precisely analogous to those already
quoted.

ASYMMETRY IN MEN

The ears of the English population are
either (1) lobed; (2) lobe-less; or (3) semilobed. I was recently able to examine the
ear shape in the children of a marriage
between parents of different types. One
parent had large ears with well-developed
lobes, while the ears of the other parent
were small with scanty lobes. Some of the
children of this mating showed one type of
ear-pattern, and others the other ; while one
individual showed both, one ear resembling
his father’s and the other his mother’s type.

The condition known as Heterochromia.
Irides, in which one eye may be wholly or
partly dark and the other light, is comparatively rare, appearing in only about 1 or 2
per 1,000 of the population. But it is much
more common among the children of certain
families where there is a marked contrast
between the eye-colour of the two parents.
The same thing has been observed in dogs,
horses, and rabbits. In the last the phenomenon of so-called ‘‘ wall-eye’”’ is frequently associated with the ‘‘ Dutch ”’ pattern of coat-colour, and is an indication of
cross-breeding between white and black or
the wild agouti colour pattern.

It is significant that gynandromorphism,
in which the individual is a complex mosaic
of male and female characters, is most common, as the result of cross-breeding, in insects, whose secondary sex characters are
directly controlled by the sex chromosomes.
and not by sex hormones. Gynandromorphism, though present, is less common in
birds, in whom the secondary sex characters
are mainly controlled by the sex hormones.
and only partly by the sex chromosomes
directly. In man and other mammals the
112

condition of hemilateral gynandromorphism
is practically unknown, because the influence
of the sex hormones is all important.
Gynandromorphism, in short, only fully
appears where abnormal segregation during
cell-division has a chance to make itself
amanifest.

Returning for a moment to man, my
readers must often have noticed how children do, in fact, tend to resemble their
father from one side, their mother from
the other, and that they will alternately exhibit the mental characteristics of both
‘parents. May not these be instances of the
same phenomenon which, when carried to an
extreme stage is productive of those abnormal cases of ‘‘ dual personality ’’’? The
brain is a dual organ, highly asymmetrical,
with a complex development of connecting
cross fibres, by which the right hemisphere
controls the left side of the body, and the
left the right side. Any marked segregation of the duplex factors concerned might
indeed result in the two parts of the brain
‘working independently or alternately.

Perhaps my suggestions may eventually
‘provide an explanation of the recently recorded case of twins, of whom one was a
Mongolian imbecile. Segregation of the
normal and Mongolian tendencies may have
occurred before the developing ovum divided
completely into two individuals. There may
be a similar explanation of the recent dis‘covery that so-called ‘‘ identical ’’ twins are
not always completely identical. They may,
in fact, represent the right and left sides,
so to speak, of one original heterozygous
individual. We have also the case of the
child, the offspring of a Chinese father and
English mother, in whom one eye was dark
in colour and Mongolian in type while the
other was light in colour and European in

type.

CONCLUSION

From our study of hemilateral asymmetry
in the vertebrate organism, we arrive at the
conclusion that the process of ‘‘ Segregation,’’ as it occurs among cells or groups of
cells, is essentially one in nature. |

In the case of the so-called Mendelian

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Segregation, the segregating or differentiating process takes place among reproductive
germ-cells, or gametes, during phylogenetic
development, and results normally in the
appearance of individuals from the same
mating having different genetic characters.

If during the course of racial evolution
this segregating or differentiating process is
carried to the extent of causing physiological incompatibility between the different
germ-cells, sufficient in degree to prevent
physiological fusion during the process of
fertilization, then complete or partial sterility may occur, as in the case of some interspecific hybrids.

If, on the other hand, the segregating or
differentiating process takes place among
the somatic cells of the developing ovum,
at the stage of growth during which the
bilateral plan is laid down, then it gives rise
to one individual made up of two halves
which differ in their characters, and hemilateral asymmetry results.

In an address to the Oxford Medical
Society some years ago, (see B.M.J., February 24th, 1912) attention was drawn to
the fact that all variation—i.e., the assumption of new characters by any individual
organism, cell group, or cell—is the outcome
of segregation occurring among units of
different order, size, or complexity.

In the case of hemilateral asymmetry
which we are now considering, the units
among which the segregating or differentiating process takes place are the body cells
which form the two halves of the individual,
and it occurs at that stage in embryonic
development at which the bilateral scheme of
growth is being laid down.

Finally, the study of hemilateral asymmetry offers a wide field for the collection of
data regarding the influence of previous
cross-breeding on individual development,
and also on the mode of action of the hereditary influences which control it.

It is not wise to allow imagination to outstrip present realities unduly, but one wonders at times what men and women will be
like in future.

Structural and functional asymmetry with
a corresponding division of labour of a
HEMILATERAL ASYMMETRY

physiological kind has become a marked
feature of the integrating and controlling
organ, the human brain. We know that
asymmetry has been and is associated with
cross-breeding ; and it may be that the interbreeding between different races and peoples
which is now taking place in an increasing
degree in many parts of the world, will bring
about an increased asymmetry in human
beings, not only of external form and feature, but also in the unifying organ, the
human brain.

The extent, however, to which such asymmetry can develop must be limited and controlled by the necessity for integration and
a unified personality.

It is in this direction that the study of
individual asymmetry becomes of special
interest to students of genetic and eugenic
problems. We have shown, for example,
that the gene complex, or factor which controls the development of the extra digit in
fowls, the increased number of tail-feathers
in pigeons, and asymmetric eye colour in
man and animals, is not only transmitted
hereditarily, but that under certain conditions of selective breeding its influence tends
to spread to other characters and other
structures.

This fact is of importance as indicating
the extreme complexity of the hereditary
process, and the mutual interdependence of
the factors concerned in it.

But, it may be asked, how does this ques
113

tion of asymmetry of form and function
bear on the practical problem with which
eugenists are called upon to deal—the breeding of a better race of citizens, that is, citizens
endowed with greater capacities of response
to good environmental influences, both intellectual and moral, and of greater power of
resistance to bad and harmful influences?
The answer, surely, is somewhat as follows :
Before we can advance safely along eugenic
lines, we must first know something of the
laws which control the hereditary transmission of good and bad qualities from parents
to children and from generation to generation. Hugenics must rest upon a sound
genetic basis. It is because I am hopeful
that the further study of asymmetry in the
individual, like the study of dissimilarity
among individuals, will lead to further
knowledge of genetic problems, that I venture to bring forward these examples of
hemilateral asymmetry.

Whatever may have been the directional
influences within or without the organism
which together determined the bi-lateral
plan of development along which the vertebrate family, including man, has evolved,
that plan of growth has at any rate provided a field for the occurrence of asymmetry as well as an increased capacity for
making spatial adjustments. For this, and
other reasons, the study of asymmetry, in
its serial, as well as in its bi-lateral form,
deserves careful attention.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 2.
