THE GERMAN STERILIZATION LAW

Discussion on Professor Muckermann’s Lecture

N October 30th, at the rooms of the

Linnean Society, Professor Hermann

Muckermann, until July 1933 Director of the department of eugenics in the
Anthropological Institute at Berlin, addressed
a Members’ Meeting on ‘“ The Eugenics
Movement in Germany.”’ The President of
the Society, Sir Humphry Rolleston, took
the Chair.

In the first part of his address, Professor
Muckermann dealt with questions of race,
defending his thesis that it was necessary to
protect the indigenous racial composition
from mixture with other races which were
alien and perhaps antagonistic. Every
nation, he said, had its special character,
which depended not only on history and
environment, but essentially on heredity.
If we wished to retain our own character, we
had to preserve our racial composition. This
principle involved a deep respect for the
cultural abilities of every nation, though our
love was primarily directed to our own, as
to a mother. This love, he asserted, did not
depend on a sense of racial superiority. The
practical measures in Germany were concerned with certain enactments governing
the contracting of marriage, supervision of
immigration, and the control of racial
influences upon education and public life.

Turning to problems of human heredity,
the lecturer outlined the progress that had
been made in research upon the heredity of
useful and pathological qualities, especially
of a higher psychic kind, and discussed
differential fertility in the eugenic sense of
the term. The offspring of hereditarily wellendowed families were not sufficiently numerous to replace their parents. The practical
steps taken in Germany included eugenic
education, schemes for diminishing the
number of hereditarily afflicted persons and
preserving and increasing the number of
those with useful qualities, and sterilization.

Some of the figures relating to the practice
of sterilization under the new German Act

were highly instructive. In Baden up till
June 15th, 1934,* there had been 3,025
petitions for sterilization, i.e. on behalf of
1-2 per cent. of the inhabitants of the state.
Of these petitions 675 were voluntary and
2,350 were compulsory, that is to say they
were sent in by some person other than the
candidate for sterilization. A few of the
total number of petitions were refused before
receiving consideration by the Eugenic
Courts—66 out of 3,025; of the remaining
2,959, I,903 were granted or ordered, and of
these 572 (289 males and 283 females) have
so far been carried out. More of these 1,903
persons will doubtless be sterilized in due
course. Professor Muckermann did not say
how many of the 572 sterilizations above
referred to were voluntary and how many
were compulsory.

In Hamburg, 1,325 petitions had been
received, 782 voluntary and 543 compulsory.
A few—8 of the total number—had been
refused before consideration by the Courts ;
761 sterilizations had been ordered; and
364 persons (155 males and 209 females) had
been sterilized.

From March 5th to June 21st there had
been 244 petitions in Kiel, 131 concerning
males and 133 females. All had been granted
or ordered and 62 persons had been sterilized
to date. In approximately the same period
there had been 325 petitions in Berlin, 143
voluntary and 182 compulsory. All of them
had been granted or ordered.

It was noteworthy, said Professor Muckermann, that two-thirds of these petitions were
on behalf of feeble-minded persons and the
remaining one-third were almost exclusively
concerned with schizophrenics and epileptics.
Extremely few members of the other categories specified in the German Sterilization
Act had hitherto been sterilized.

Prof. Muckermann concluded his instructive
lecture with the following sentences: ‘“‘I have

* The Act came into force on January Ist, 1934.

267
268

tried to give you an objective account of all practical measures referring to national eugenics in
Germany and of their scientific foundations. There
is no doubt that in this respect great progress has
been made in my country. I should be happy if the
acceleration given to the eugenic movement in
Germany by legislative measures might greatly
assist the growth of the eugenic movement and of
eugenic ideas in England. In both countries there is
no more important idea than to remain as faithful
as possible to scientific principles and to the supernatural principles of ethics that involve the respect
for the well-founded liberty of conscience. The
national honour and welfare depend on this fidelity
to truth and conscience. This attitude is in accordance with the views of Sir Francis Galton, the
founder of eugenics, whose epitaph ought to find a
place beside those of Newton and Darwin in
Westminster Abbey.”

Major A. G. Church said that when he introduced the Sterilization Bill in the House of
Commons in 1931, he was bitterly attacked
by many bodies, but more particularly by
Catholics and in the Catholic Press. It was
therefore of particular significance that Professor Muckermann, himself a _ devout
Catholic, should openly advocate sterilization as a means of dealing with one of the
gravest social problems of our time and
proclaim as he did the fact that he was the
inspiration of the present Sterilization Law
in Germany. It behoved us, as Members of
the Eugenics Society, to give wide publicity
to this fact, which he hoped would serve to
remove the misconceptions and misapprehensions of large sections of the religious
community in this country regarding the
effect of the measures which we advocated.

Dr. A. J. Lewis said that for him the chief
interest of Professor Muckermann’s guarded
presentation lay in the references to compulsory sterilization. The earlier part of the
paper, which had dealt with the racial
question, excelled in under-statement, which
was perhaps to be expected in any apologia
about such “delicate matters,’ as Dr.
Muckermann had called them; the theories
and practice put forward were matters of
political feeling ; they rested on belief and
not on biology, as might be seen from Dr.
Muckermann’s own writings and those of
other German proponents of Heimrassigkeit.
But for us in England the question of compulsory as against voluntary sterilization

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

was a more relevant issue. The German law
was a compulsory measure. This had social,
medical and eugenic consequences. Socially
there were evident an indifference about the
individual and a readiness to apply force in
this most personal matter, which conflicted
with civilized ethics; and this indifference
was sometimes openly expressed by responsible biologists and administrators in Germany. It was unpleasant to consider that
policemen were to be invoked to hale along,
and even to hold during the sterilizing
operation reluctant subjects, from the age
of 14 onwards.

Medically the measure had already been
reported by responsible authorities to be
prejudicing the relations of patient to family
doctor, promoting distrust on the one side
and erroneous diagnosis on the other ; it was
making mental hospitals and the psychiatric
clinic places which people shunned and
feared. As to these consequences there was
the testimony of well-known psychiatrists :
it was doubtful whether any amount of propaganda would counteract them or restore
that confidence in doctors and their discretion, which was an essential element in
treatment. Many persons who had recovered
from their mental illness had now to choose
between sterilization and lifelong incarceration in hospitals for the insane. Catholics,
for example, had only this latter alternative
to being sterilized. It was a cruel dilemma
for those whose religion or conscience forbade
sterilization.

All these dangers and sufferings might be
thought, by those who put the State before
all, to be worth incurring if eugenic ends
were being truly served. But it was doubtful
whether compulsory sterilization did this.
For one thing the German law expressly
forbade voluntary sterilization: however
clear it might be that a person was a carrier
of transmissible disease, or was unfit to
bring up children, he could not be sterilized
unless he had manifested one of several
named diseases. It ignored in its drastic
provisions the possibility that most valuable positive qualities might be present in
those who had also one of these specified
conditions. However high their endowments
THE GERMAN STERILIZATION LAW

in many directions, the definite occurrence
of, say, an attack of mild mania meant compulsory sterilization. In this, as in many
other ways, the wholesale and ruthless provisions of the German law, as laid down and
already widely enforced, were out of keeping
with eugenics in its positive aspect, as well
as its negative. The individual case might
properly be judged on its merits in the present
state of knowledge, but the studies made did
not justify sweeping measures of this sort
applied to the whole nation willy-nilly.
Much further research was needed, as the
scientific writings of Professor Riidin and
others showed in less propagandist days.
But the new law had already, according to
foremost workers in the field, made it difficult
to collect trustworthy information from
which further knowledge might be drawn as
to the heredity of these somewhat heterogeneous groups of diseases, like schizophrenia.
If research was impeded or stifled by a law,
if people became afraid of consulting doctors
and of entering hospitals, if valuable qualities
were in part extirpated, if voluntary sterilization was forbidden, if human privileges and
fundamental rules of civilized life were
ignored, then a law which did such things
was scarcely a step in advance.

In concluding his remarks Dr. Lewis
reminded the audience that it was not
sterilization that was the root of those evils,
but compulsory sterilization ; from voluntary
sterilization, he said, no such consequences
were to be feared.

Dr. A. Gilpin amplified Dr. Lewis’s
remarks on some of the dangers of compulsory sterilization by an account of some of
the events that took place behind the scenes
in connection with amplications made under
the German law. Ina town of 200,000 inhabitants, applications for eugenic sterilization
had been made in 4,000 cases and it was
interesting to note that of these merely a
handful had been notified by general practitioners. When a general practitioner was
informed that such and such a patient of his
was probably suffering from a disease that
came within the categories mentioned in the
Act, and was asked for further information

269

about his patient’s medical history, he often
replied that he did of course realize the
situation in regard to this particular patient
and had actually completed an application
for his sterilization; but he had omitted
to send it to official quarters—an oversight
on his part! Or again, he would say that, on
the medical history, he could not make a
definite diagnosis and so had not considered
it timely to apply for sterilization. In many
cases an intentional misdiagnosis was made
in order to obviate the necessity for making
an application.

The general practitioner was often faced
with the choice of loyalty to his patient or
adherence to the state laws, and for a variety
of reasons he was likely to choose the former
and as best he could circumvent the latter.

Professor F. C. S. Schiller suggested that too
much stress should not be laid on the defects
of the German eugenical legislation or on the
administrative difficulties to which it gave
rise. No doubt it was unwise to force the
pace, and probable that compulsory sterilization would prove less workable and effective
than a voluntary measure. But these mistakes could be corrected, and should not
stand in the way of our recognising the great
historic importance of the action of the
German Government. The eugenics movement had been started in this country and
we had talked about it for some fifty years ;
but we had never succeeded in getting anything done. Now for the first time a great
modern state had committed itself to a farreaching eugenical programme. If it succeeded, or even seemed to succeed, similar,
possibly improved, programmes would have
to be adopted in all countries that were not
inclined to resign themselves to progressive
internal decay. There was one point he was
very curious about, and about which he
would like the lecturer to give some information. Could he tell them by persuading whom
it had been possible to put through this
legislation? If it was by convincing one
man, or even a few, it seemed to him an
important argument in favour of institutions
that rendered such action possible, for he had
to confess himself very sceptical whether it
270

could ever be obtained from the vote-catching timidity of the leaders of our present
democracy.

Dr. D. I. Frost expressed the view that
politics and medicine nowhere linked up
more closely than in eugenics, and asked the
Society, as a scientific body, to accept the
implications of this connection and admit
that Professor Muckermann’s address reflected the revolutionary changes in Germany
chiefly from their political facet. The shifting
of the eugenic leadership from Berlin to
Munich corresponded only to the translation
of political leadership from the Reichstag to
the Brown House.

_ Examining the situation in England, the
speaker reminded the audience that the
certified insane numbered roughly 150,000
persons, and that, in addition, there existed
in the country over 350,000 persons who at
some time or other had been certified. If a
sterilization measure similar to the German
one operated here, not only this half-million
persons would be affected but lar ;e numbers
of their collaterals. Enough was known
about mental disorder to show that hereditary transmission was not the dominant
factor in its etiology. While {10,000,000 was
spent on more segregation and only £10,000
on research, it was impossible to say that we
had exhausted every avenue of investigation.
Even within the category of mental deficiency
only 5-10 per cent. of patients had mentally
defective parents. Mental defect had increased 100 per cent. in the past twenty
years, while the population had grown only
by 14 per cent. The effects of social and
economic stress had never been worked out ;
nor had the effects of maternal malnutrition
or of attempted abortion—which, he said,
was in many cases “ an economic incident.”’

In times of crisis it was particularly important to bear in mind the social factor in
mental disorder. In France, 20 per cent. of
the inmates of mental hospitals in the larger
towns were (according to the speaker)
foreign immigrants—chiefly political refugees
from Germany. What, he asked, were the
effects of political persecution in Germany
itself ? Mental breakdown under terror con
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ditions and sterilization of the unfit and their
progeny were not instruments of race purification but of political extinction. On purely
technical grounds we should note with dismay
the application of the German Sterilization
Law not only to manic-depressive psychoses
but also to schizophrenia. Application of the
latter term was being widened from the
concept of the dementia praecox group to
refer to any dissociating process in any
psychosis ; not to schizophrenia the disease,
but to schizophrenia the symptom, which was
part and parcel of the majority of psychoses.
So that the carefully numbered and apparently limited list to which the German law
applied really included every form of mental
breakdown.

The voluntary sterilization advocated in
the Brock Report was also suspect. Sterilization, voluntary or compulsory, added no
advantage to the individual sufferer and
indeed it added one more inferiority to those
already heaped upon him by society. Voluntary sterilization was the thin end of the
wedge and threatened not only the person of
the unfit but the liberty of political malcontents. Sterilization might be advantageous
after social changes had eliminated unnecessary conflicts and hardships; but till then
he opposed it.

Mrs. Grant Duff said that at the International Hygiene Exhibition in Dresden,
three and a half years ago, the following
warning was set up in large letters on the
walls of the German section: “If you
have a disease, don’t get married until you
are cured. If your illness is incurable and
hereditary, don’t get married without first
being sterilized!’ She had inquired at the
time if it was legal to get sterilized in
Germany, and the answer was “No, not yet,
but we have prepared a Bill which we hope
will soon become law.’’ This was in June,
193I—nearly two years before the National
Socialist Party came into power.

Dr. Kenneth B. Aikman asked the lecturer
whether in his opinion, considering that the
German people had been inundated with
eugenic propaganda and were highly patriotic,
THE GERMAN STERILIZATION LAW

sufficient numbers of volunteers for sterilization would be forthcoming to allow of a
useful scientific investigation of the results
if (1) their sterilization law had been on a
voluntary basis originally or (2) were made
voluntary now.

Mrs. C. B. S. Hodson suggested as a possible explanation of the wide variations in the
number of cases of sterilization from different
areas in Germany the possibility that these
might be correlated with differences in the
method of administrating the new law.
Taking an analogy from America she said
that States with compulsory laws for the
most part showed a negligible number of

271

operations whereas California, having administered as a voluntary measure a law
which read as entirely compulsory, authorizing the operation only on patients who had
signed an application for it, had its wellknown high record of sterilizations for
eugenic purposes. The administrators of the
German law, whom she herself had met, had
an infectious enthusiasm for the racial value
of sterilization and proclaimed as heroes of
the Fatherland those who volunteered for the
operation or freely consented to it. Where
they succeed in carrying public opinion with
them the grave difficulties created by a compulsory system would not be likely to arise.

CHARACTER AND PERSONALITY

An International Quarterly for Psychodiagnostics
and Allied Studies

Editor :

ROBERT SAUDEK —London

Contents of Number 2, Volume III, December

j. B. RHINE, Duke University : Telepathy and Clairvoyance in the Normal
and Trance States of a Medium.

WILLIAM BROWN, Oxford University: Sleep, Hypnosis, and Mediumistic

Trance.

WILLIAM McDOUGALL, Duke University: On the Nature of Spearman’s

General Factor.

A. A. ROBACK, Cambridge, Mass.: Personalysis: A Study in Method.

News and Notes.
Book Reviews.

Subscription price 7/6 per annum ; Single Copies 2/
The previous numbers have now been reprinted, so that a complete set of the Journal can be supplied.

LONDON : GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD
40 MUSEUM STREET, LONDON, W.C.I

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 4.
