EUGENIC ASPECTS OF CHILDREN'S
ALLOWANCES*

By SIR WILLIAM BEVERIDGE, K.C.B., E.B.A.

spent most of to-day in the gallery of

the House of Commons listening to the
opening debate on the Beveridge Report.
During the latter part of it—in fact just
before I came here—Sir John Anderson was
speaking amid considerable protest from the
other side because he was reading his speech,
and a discussion arose as to whether or not
he was entitled to read a speech in the House
of Commons. I am in rather the opposite
difficulty, in that I am supposed to be reading you a lecture, but I have nothing written
which I can read. I shall have to ‘‘ speak.’’
a lecture, for I have not had time to give to
the preparation of what I have to say to you
to-day anything like the care that my
subject deserves.

Nevertheless, just because the subject is
so enormously important, I felt bound to
accept your invitation, and, having accepted
it, to fulfil my promise. I ought perhaps to
add that there was a secondary reason which
led me to accept your invitation, namely
that I did not answer it for some time, and
when that is the case I find it harder to send
a refusal than an acceptance. But I am glad
to be here, and I want to make it plain that
my title is, not the eugenic aspects of social
insurance, but the eugenic aspects of children’s allowances. That is really what I am
going to talk about, and I hope none of you
will be very much disappointed by that
limitation.

| DO not mind telling you that I have

The economic aspect

In this question of giving allowances for
children—that is to say, adjusting the income of the family according to the size of
the family and to the number of the children
—there are both economic and biological
aspects. My approach to this question of

*The Galton Lecture delivered before the Eugenics
Sociely on February 16th, 1943.

children’s allowances hitherto has been
wholly economic. In the Report which the
House of Commons is debating at this
moment I have proposed children’s allowances as a means of preventing want and
putting an end to lack of physical necessities
for the nurturing of children already in
existence.

Any of you who may have read my Report, or Part I of it, will note that it starts
by pointing out that there are two causes of
want in this country. One of these is the
interruption of earnings by unemployment,
accident, disease, and so on, and the other
is the non-adjustment of the family income
to the size of the family. The latter factor
leads to a very sinister concentration of
poverty upon the children. If one takes the
various surveys made by sociological experts, like Mr. Rowntree, of want or poverty
in the period between the two wars, one finds
everywhere that of the people who have not
enough to keep them physically healthy not
far short of one-half are children under 14.
The proportion varies generally from 40 to
50 per cent.

I want to emphasize this fact because it

has a bearing on what I am going to say later

about the working of our financial or economic system upon family life and the
prospects of people who belong to different
sizes of families. Before the war more than
40 per cént of the want in this country was
experienced by children under 14. Another
way of putting it, by Mr. Rowntree, is that
at least half the population pass through
two periods of physical want in their lives,
even in relatively prosperous Britain as it
was in 1936. One of these is the period when
they are children, the other is the period
when they are old; poverty in this later
period has been diminished a good deal since
the social surveys were made by the grant of
better old-age pensions. There is a third

117
118

period of want which occurs very frequently,
namely, among young married people with
dependent families.

That is the problem with which I was
faced and for which I have recommended a
system of children’s allowances. I may
remind you that my actual proposal is that
there should be an allowance for each child
after the first at the average rate of 8s. per
week, in addition to the existing provision
in the way of school meals and so on, which
is taken as of the value of 1s. a week,
giving gs. as the assumed cost, on the
average, of children from o to 14. Of course,
the cost is much less for the younger and
more for the older ones. This cash allowance
of 8s., plus 1s. by way of what is given
already, should be provided by taxation.

I may say that about the last thing I
heard in the House of Commons just before
I came away was Sir John Anderson’s
announcement that the Government proposed to give children’s allowances, beginning with the second child, but that they
thought that the services now provided
might be regarded as equivalent in money
value to 2s. 6d. a head as against the Is.
assumed by me, and that the rate of children’s allowances should be fixed at 5s, for

the second and other children instead of the .

8s. recommended by me. That makes only
47s. 6d. as compared with gs., but it is a
forward step of great importance in dealing
with this problem. That is what Sir John

Anderson has announced, and one may

assume that children’s allowances in one
form or other will become part of our social
and economic structure, and will do so
essentially on economic grounds, as a means
of dealing with want.

Effects on numbers and quality of population

That makes it all the more important to
consider what is likely to be the biological
effect of such a change in our economic and
social structure. What will be its effect on
the number of the population and on the
quality of the breeding ?

On the first point, as to the number of the
population, I have very little to say here
to-day. It is not essentially an eugenic

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

question. I will only say, as I have said in
my Report, that I do not imagine that there
will be much direct effect from children’s
allowances on the number of children born.
Nobody is going to have children in these
days as a profit-making business, if he or she
does not want them otherwise ; in any case
8s. a week is not a profit, it merely neutralizes
the extra cost of the child. But I do think
that children’s allowances will have some
effect on the number of the population.
There are certainly some parents who have
already one or two children and would like
to have more, but have been deterred
hitherto by fear of damaging the prospects
of their children already born. Children’s
allowances will make it easier for such
parents to have additional children. But
making a large change in the birth rate will
depend not on children’s allowances but on
the formation of public opinion.

What I am concerned with to-day is the
eugenic question, the effect of family allowances on the quality of the population. The
thought of that makes me very much alarmed
indeed to come among you, partly because I
come wholly unprepared, and partly because,
at one time at any rate, your Soczety condemned in rather strong terms just exactly
what I have proposed to the Government.

Professor Fisher had the kindness to send
me a paper which he read to this Soczety in
1932, in which he said that a proposal to give
5s. for each child through the post office,
whether the parent was employed or unemployed, could be received with little enthusiasm on eugenic grounds. In another paper I
think he referred to a statement of eugenic
policy which this Society got out in 1928 or
1929, saying that the Soczety was strongly
opposed to redistribution of income by means
of. taxation or to allowances being made a
charge on the State. Well, children’s allowances such as I have proposed, and such as
to some extent the Government has accepted, are a charge on the State and a
means of redistributing income by means of
taxation, as between those with family
responsibility and those without it.

What I am here to find out, among other
things, is whether people who are interested
EUGENIC ASPECTS OF CHILDREN’S ALLOWANCES

in eugenics would take the same rather
critical view of the actual proposal which I
put forward and which has been accepted by
the Government to-day, of something like a
flat subsistence allowance for children, as
expressed in those statements which I have
read. I rather hope they will not take a
critical view, and I am fortified in that hope
by something else I read by Professor Fisher,
in which he discussed the possible eugenic
effects of a system of family allowances, as a
means of correcting the main dysgenic factor
in our society to-day, namely, the inverted
birth rate.

Economic versus biological success

As you all know—as everybody really
knows although they do not always realize
how much it means—there is in Britain
to-day an inverted birth rate, in the sense
that the poorer and, less successful sections
of the community, generally speaking, are

more prolific than the more prosperous and

successful sections of the community. That,
of course, is not confined to Britain. I think
Professor Fisher points out that it is found
in every civilized country wherever the data
have been examined, and it is not, of course,
confined to the contrast between the wealthy
and the poor. The inversion of the birth rate
extends right through the social scale. The
data derived from our census of 1911 show
that bricklayers’ labourers, for example,
have more children than bricklayers ; that
agricultural labourers have more children
than agricultural foremen. All the way up
the scale you get fewer and fewer children.
If you group together—I think Professor
Fisher gives this figure—all the people of a
social status equal or superior to a railway
booking clerk you will find that they have a
birth rate just about half that of the population as a whole, which means that they are
replacing themselves to the extent of only
40 per cent, while the population as a whole
is replacing itself to the extent of 80 per cent.
One need not use many words to suggest
that that is an unsatisfactory state of affairs.
It is summed up again by Professor Fisher
when he says that it means that economic
success implies biological failure, that in the

119

struggle for existence, which is essentially
dependent upon the birth rate, the man most
likely to be selected as the ancestor of future
generations is he who has been least successful in getting either admiration or rewards in
this generation. Biological and economic
tendencies are in conflict. The position is a
bad one and not one to be contemplated with
contentment. But if one is asked how it is
to be remedied, the first and most sensible
thing is to find out what is the cause of this
state of affairs. There is an interesting
division of opinion as to the reason why in
Great Britain and other civilized societies
economic success means biological failure,
or, if it may be put the other way, biological
failure means economic success. .The phenomenon has two sides, and raises, therefore,
the question as to which of the two sides is
cause and which is consequence. Does success
lead to infertility ? Do people tend to have
relatively fewer children because they are
rich, or is it the other way round, that
infertility is the cause of economic success ?

The common-sense view, of course, is the
former; that wealth itself, or being successful in life, or being well-educated, taking
a university degree, and so on, causes people
to have less children, either because they
do not want them or because there is some
connection between intellectual ability and
infertility. Most of you who have read
Professor Fisher’s work know that he takes
the exactly contrary view, that it is the
biological failure which leads to economic
success, because to belong to a small family
—that is, to belong to an infertile stock—
gives one the best chance of social promotion
to a position above that to which one was
born. It is quite obvious that that does
happen. Consider the case of the labourer
with six children and the labourer, with the
same income, with one child. The one child
has a far better chance of being allowed to
stay at school and take higher education
than any of the children in the six-children
family, because the first of those six children
will have to go out and earn at the earliest
possible moment and the others will be in
want at some time or other during their
childhood.
120

That is the argument of Professor Fisher,
which, of course, he deduces from the founder
of this Society, Francis Galton. Biological
failure is the cause of -social promotion,
and not the other way round. People
just because they come of small families rise
in the social scale along with those who rise
through their ability and service, and as
people tend to marry in their own social
class, infertility tends to breed ability out of
the race.

The classical illustration of that is found
in Galton’s study in which he pointed out
how the able men who rose to eminence—
judges, statesmen, soldiers, and others—
having founded peerages, all thought they
must marry a heiress, or have their sons to
marry a heiress in order to maintain the
peerage, and the heiress—not necessarily but
more often than not—came of an infertile
stock. Galton speaks of the ‘ destroying
influence of heiress blood.’’ He even went so
far as to say that the rate at which peerages
became extinct varied according to the
higher or lower scale in the peerage ; that
dukedoms were more deeply infested with
heiress blood than earldoms, and earldoms
more than baronies. With each step in
the peerage a fresh heiress was brought in ;
she brought money, but she destroyed the
race.

The inverted birth rate is an established
fact. The theory to explain it has, of course,
two sides. It has a positive side, that the
fact that infertility ¢auses social promotion
must inevitably mean that the higher social
classes are less fertile. The other, the negative side, is that there is no other cause of
this lower fertility of the higher social classes.
. I have some doubts myself as to the negative side. I do not feel that the evidence
which Professor Fisher gives for that view
is as decisive as the rest of his evidence, and
it 1s not easy to believe that there has been
enough time for selection, working by itself,
to produce those enormous differences between the relative fertility of different classes.
After all, natural selection is a relatively slow
process. When the chance of secondary
education is accorded to the poorest class,
the boy with the best chance of secondary

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

education is the boy from the small family ;
but secondary education is a modern
development, and there have not been
enough generations for selection to produce
the result which you see. Therefore I am
inclined to think that probably there is also
a reverse action; that economic or social
success, rising in life, for one reason oF
another has also a direct effect in causing
people to have fewer children than otherwise
they would have. Not only is infertility the
cause of social promotion, but social promotion in turn causes infertility.

Social promotion of the infertile
But whether I am right or wrong in
doubting the negative side of the theory, I

do not myself see that one can reject the

positive side, namely, that so long as a
premium is placed upon belonging to a small
family, so long as in every class the child
of the small family has an economic advantage over the child of a large family, forces
are set in motion which bring about the
social promotion of the infertile. At the
same time rendering special service also
leads to social promotion, putting people up
into a higher place on account of ability.
Ability and infertility rise together and infertility tends to kill ability out of the race.
As a layman in these matters, I am inclined
to accept that argument as a positive explanation, not necessarily of the whole but
of a substantial part of the inverted birth
rate.

I want to refer at this point to the figures
which I gave you at the beginning, of the
severity of the pressure from poverty on
children: that about half the population
passed through actual physical want at some
time in their lives, and that 40 per cent of all
want is that of children. This means that
the difference between life in a small and life
in a large family in the lower economic groups
of the community is very great indeed. It
means that the child of the small family may
never have been in want throughout his life,
while of the children of large families in this
country only a very small proportion can have
avoided being in actual physical want during
their childhood, or can have avoided -the
EUGENIC ASPECTS OF CHILDREN’S ALLOWANCES

necessity of going out to earn money at the
earliest possible moment. A very large proportion of ail the children in this country
come from the large families, and therefore
have passed through this period of want.

The social promotion of the unfertile,
therefore, tends to breed out ability from the
race. Professor Fisher introduces the biological argument for children’s allowances by
pointing out the fact that if you give subsistence allowances for children you equalize
the conditions as between large and small
families and therefore remove the present
premium on infertility. The child of the
poor man who has six children has in that
event just as good a chance of living as the
single child of the poor man. The premium
on infertility is removed.

Eugentc consequences and limitations of
proposed allowances

Accepting that, as one is entitled to do
from Professor Fisher’s argument, I would
suggest that the proposal I put forward in
my Report so far as it goes is good and not
bad eugenically. I think it is good eugenically
for the reason that it will diminish the
premium on infertility and so diminish the
social promotion of infertility and for a
second reason, that in so far as it adds to
the number of births at all, it can only do
so by influencing parents who take some
thought over the begetting of their children.
You cannot influence people, whether by
money or anything else, who take no thought
at all. People who have no thought for the
size of their families will not be affected by
children’s allowances. The people who will
be affected are the parents who have certain
social virtues, who want children and will
take care in bringing them up. For that
reason also children’s allowances, so far as
they go, should have a eugenic effect.

But the children’s allowances on this basis
which I proposed—8s. a week, in addition to
what is given in kind, for each child—do not
go far enough from the eugenic point of view.
They will equalize the conditions between
the large and the small family in the very
poorest families, but only in the very poorest
families. They will not do so for any family

Izi

which is above the subsistence level. Of
course, it is pretty certain that the actual
expenditure on each child rises with the
income of the parent. It does not rise strictly
in proportion ; but there is no doubt that
the parent with an income of £500 a year is
apt to find each child a larger expense than
the parent with an income of {100 a year.
The cost of children rises with the family
income. What people think they should
spend, and in fact do spend, on each child
rises with the earnings. Thus, wherever you
have a child according to the common
standard costing more than subsistence, a
child’s allowance based on subsistence does
not equalize conditions between the large
and the small family, does not remove the
premium on infertility, and does not check
the social promotion of the infertile.

Supplements to Government scheme

That leads to the suggestion that a system
of subsistence allowances for children such
as I propose in order to abolish want, needs,
from the eugenic point of view, to be supplemented in two ways. First I should like to see
it supplemented by occupational schemes of
allowances in the various occupations which
are open to ability and which have an
entrance test of ability. Such occupations
include teaching of all kinds, in universities
and schools, the civil service, local government service, law, medicine, accountancy,
and others.

One general thing which I would say about
an educational scheme of children’s allowances
is that the cost would not have to be borne
by general taxation—for you cannot tax the
general taxpayer for the benefit of members
of a particular profession. Every profession
would have to deal with the children’s allowances for its own members. At the London
School of Economics, with the very important
help of the late Lord Stamp, I did introduce
a system of children’s allowances on a very
much larger scale, namely, £30 a year for
every child up to the age of 8, and {60 a year
for every child from 8 to 21, for as long as
the child was being educated; that was
paid by the School as an addition to the
standard salary. The exact nature of these
122

occupational schemes would depend upon the
occupation. There is a good deal to be said
for applying to children’s allowances the
principle of the superannuation scheme in the
case of university staffs, in which deductions
are made proportionately to income from
everybody’s salary and something is added
by the employer. I do not see why that
should be limited to providing for old age
and should not be accepted as providing for
posterity. Such a scheme would have the
advantage of adjusting the allowance to the
salary. Most occupational schemes probably
should give allowances to some extent
graded to income. |

The second direction in which subsistence
children’s allowances should be _ supplemented is by the system of income-tax
rebates. Many people have suggested that
if you give subsistence children’s allowances
as I propose them, and as the Government
say they are going to introduce them, you
ought to abolish income-tax rebate. To me
that proposal is both-wrong and reactionary.
The method by which you tax has nothing
to do with children’s allowances at all. On
the contrary, I would like to see income-tax
rebates for children maintained and even
extended. They have one great advantage.
The chances are that income-tax will fall
upon a larger proportion of the total community after the war than in the past, and
that means that if you get income-tax
rebates for children you can get a scheme of
children’s allowances right down the social
scale into groups of people like the skilled
wage earners, where it is very important
indeed to have them. I suspect that the
‘greatest store of unused intellectual ability
in the country is among the skilled wage
earners. So many of these have been kept
where they are by their relatively high
fertility. The more easy you make it for
them to rise now into the frigid unfertile
atmosphere of the social classes above them,
the more you are going to breed out that
ability. I do not want people to rise out of
that class by infertility. Instead of a policy
of diminution of income-tax rebates for
children, I should like to see the maintenance
or even extension of them.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

I am sure you will not think that I have
any impression that intellectual ability is
now confined to a small section of the community. It is not. Of course, you find more
of it in occupations which have been selected
for it; but you find people of above the
average intellectual ability in all sections
of the community, and quite a substantial
number of them. That is because they have
not been socially promoted. But we are now
busily engaged in looking for ability and
sending it up the educational ladder. If you
are continually looking for ability and
sending it up the educational ladder and, on
the other hand, by your salary and wage
system are putting a premium on infertility
and sending that up also to mate with ability,
you are strengthening the tendency to the
inverted birth rate, and helping infertility to
kill out the ability. Everything we can do to
give greater equality of opportunity as
between different classes of the community
emphasizes the importance of giving greater
equality of opportunity as between the large
and the small family.

I have confessed my own doubt as to the
negative side of Professor Fisher’s argument.
If, contrary to what he said, the lower
fertility of the wealthy class is due, to some
extent, not to selection, but to the fact that
they are wealthy or are educated, that still
more strengthens the argument for what I
may call super-allowances for children, for
allowances above the subsistence level in
these higher grades so as to remove as
completely as possible the premium on
infertility in these higher grades.

Criticisms of the proposals

I have already talked as long as I should.
I want to conclude by looking at certain
difficulties which will be put forward by the
general public against my proposal that the
community should concern itself with the
future of its breed. First, I suggest that it is
not in the least undemocratic to consider
children’s allowances as a means of neutralizing the premium on infertility and improving
the quality of the race. The differential
birth rate is not a difference simply between
the rich and the poor. It extends throughout
EUGENIC ASPECTS OF CHILDREN’S ALLOWANCES

the social scale, and what I suggest as a
reason for children’s allowances is from many
aspects extremely democratic. It is the
acceptance of the democratic idea of equality
of opportunity. You do not get equality of
opportunity as between children of large and
of small families so long as you have the cost
of children wholly borne by the parents.
You get instead inevitable inequality of
opportunity according to the size of the
family. Like most scientific arguments, this
argument cuts across the ordinary political
differences. In one sense it looks undemocratic to say that people are unequal and
therefore you must favour those who have
greater ability. On the other hand, it is
democratic because it favours equality of
opportunity for children whether they belong
to large families or small. My argument is
“ left-wing ’’ also in the sense that it is an
argument against inheritance of wealth
concentrated by infertility on heirs and
heiresses.

A second objection certain to be taken is
that any interference with human breeding
is dictatorial and against the liberty of the
subject. What I am proposing here is not
that at all. It involves no interference with
the liberty of individuals in choosing their
mates or in rearing their children. All that
I am suggesting is that one should use
children’s allowances to bring economic and
biological tendencies into line with one
another.

Finally, if one advocates children’s allowances as a means of improving the breed,
people will say: “But what will it do in
this generation?’ Well, it will not do any
123

thing in this generation, and probably not
much in the next. It is not a question of
to-day, but of 200 years hence. One of the
things which we in this country like to do
is to look back with pride upon our
ancestors. As a nation we look back with
pride on our ancestors of 200 or 300 years
ago, and some can look back individually to
ancestors of distinction. If we look back, I
do not see why as a community we should
not look forward 200 or 300 years and see
that we ensure the best possible posterity.

That depends on breeding not from the

worse stocks, but from the better. That is
worth doing and ought not to be regarded as
anything fantastic or unreasonable. We
ought to take thought not of to-day, nor
perhaps of to-morrow, but of I00 or 200
years ahead. We have need to look forward
as well as to look back.

I hope that what I have said will lead you
to agree with my appeal that the biological

argument should be regarded as reinforcing

the economic argument for children’s allowances. The actual proposal which I have
made, with some modifications, seems likely
to be accepted for a children’s subsistence
allowance for every family. That is good so
far as it goes, but the next step, and an
essential one on eugenic grounds, is to be
sure that those allowances are supplemented
in the two ways I have suggested, through
income-tax rebates and through the development of schemes of occupational allowances,
including occupations of all kinds—whether
manual or intellectual—in which there is a
test of ability.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXIV, No. 4
