POPULATION PROBLEMS IN THE
BRITISH CARIBBEAN’
By C. M. STEWART, FILA., E.S.S._

FEW years ago, at the time of the
Report of the Royal Commission on
Population, thought in this country
was directed towards the problems of a
population which was producing insufficient
children to ensure the maintenance of its

present numbers. Since that time, however, —

there has been a growing awareness that the
world in general is facing a very different
problem, one of uncontrolled population
increase which in many areas is already
outstripping the capacity for food production.

One of the areas where this problem is
becoming acute is the British Caribbean,

where the island territories are already .

thickly populated, and there is no prospect
that the rapidly increasing population can
be adequately provided for. Lord Simon of
Wythenshawe illustrated this very effectively
in his r954 report on the Population and
Resources of Barbados.t The report stated,
briefly, that the land in Barbados is fully
given over to its best use, which is the
production of sugar cane; the prospects of
industrialization are poor, so the future
prosperity depends upon the sugar crop
which cannot be expanded any further or,
so far as can be seen, cultivated more
efficiently than at present—and already
there is considerable unemployment and
under-employment in the island.

The general picture of the whole Caribbean
area is one of low wages and widespread
substandard housing accommodation. The
standard of living is very low: the national
income per head in Jamaica in 1947 was
estimated to be about one-quarter of that in
Great Britain. The capital invested in the
area is about one-tenth of that of the United
Kingdom on a per capita basis. The area is

* A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the
Eugenics Society on May 22nd, 1957.

i Privately printed. See EUGENICS REVIEW 1955. 46,
196.

115

very largely dependent upon the fortunes of
the sugar crop which accounts for about
half of all Caribbean exports but which varies
with the annual rainfall. This one-crop
economy results in considerable off-season
unemployment.

From this area have come an increasing
number of coloured migrants to the United
Kingdom in recent years. Various estimates
have been made as to their numbers but in
round figures the annual number of arrivals
appears to be about 25,000 and the total to
date probably 80,000 or 90,000. This is a
sizeable inflow of migrants who, because of
the difference in the colour of their skins,
remain conspicuous and who for this and
other reasons may be less easy to absorb
than the (so far) more numerous refugees
from central Europe.

Analysis of Population by Area and Race

The several island Colonies in the area
(with the special exception of the Virgin
Islands) have combined to form the West
Indies Federation whose capital is to be in
Trinidad. It had been hoped that the two
remaining British Colonies in the area, the
mainland territories of British Honduras and
British Guiana, would decide to join the
Federation, but recent developments suggest
this to be a forlorn hope in at least the first
of these. Nevertheless, I have included all
these territories In my examination in order
to present as complete a picture as possible
of the whole British Caribbean area.

If we study a map of the area we see that
long distances separate the different territories. From British Honduras in the west
to the island of Jamaica is a distance of about
800 miles and a similar distance separates
Jamaica from the Leeward Islands of
Antigua, Montserrat, St. Christopher-Nevis.
and the Virgin Islands. From the Leewards,

THE ‘EUGENICS REVIEW, September 1957. 49, 3.
116

the chain of islands including the Windward
Islands (i.e. Dominica, Grenada, St. Lucia
and St. Vincent), Barbados and Trinidad
and Tobago stretches a further 800 or so
miles to British Guiana.

The area of all the islands put together is
about 8,000 square miles—or about oneseventh of the size of England and Wales.
Jamaica accounts for more than half and
Trinidad and Tobago for one quarter of this.
British Honduras contributes a further
8,000 square miles or more. British Guiana
however, measures ten times this area, over
80,000 square miles and thus contains fivesixths of the total land area.

The population is distributed very differently. British Guiana with five-sixths of the
land has less than one-seventh of the
population, while Jamaica with less than
one-twentieth of the land area has more than
three-sevenths of the population.

We may look at this another way by
considering the population per square mile.
Again it may be helpful to use England and
Wales as a yardstick but it must be borne
in mind that ours is a highly industrialized
community importing food to live whereas
industrialization is negligible in the Caribbean.
Furthermore, allowance should be made in
any comparison for the different proportions
of the countries which are habitable. In
England and Wales there are about 760
persons per square mile. Generally speaking,
the islands have about half this number
with the exception of Barbados which has
nearly double, about 1,360 persons per
square mile. The two mainland territories,
on the other hand average about six persons
per square mile, less than I per cent of the
number in England and Wales. The coastal
strip, of course, will show a higher density
than this if considered separately.

-QOne feature stands out, and that is the
contrast between the small over-populated
island territories and the vast sparselypopulated territories on the mainland. When
Federation was first planned, it had been
hoped that the mainland territories, in
particular British Guiana, would be able to
absorb the overflow population from the
islands. Their unwillingness to participate

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in the Federation, however, appears to have
dashed this hope.

The last censuses of the populations of the
British Caribbean area were held in 1946,
except in the case of Jamaica where the
enumeration took place earlier, in 1943. (In
the latter months of 1953 a sample survey
of Jamaica was carried out, but no data
have so far been publishéd.) A block diagram
has been prepared of the numbers recorded
at the census in the various colonies divided
according to racial group; the total population of each colony is measured by the area
of the block. Of the total population at that
time, Jamaica accounted for nearly half and
Trinidad and British Guiana together for
another one-third.

Popunatios of Baitisn Cariseban ar 1946 census

CTamaica 1943)

 

2

  
  

AMERINDIAN

EAST INDIAN

MAIC

se — puinase)
f B. HoNDULAS

° B. GHANA

rr"

pane

Iproene

FIGURE I

It will be seen that the population of the
area is composed of a mixture of many races.
The largest racial group is of African descent,
from negro slaves liberated more than a
century ago. The next largest is the mixed
group arising mainly from the miscegenation
of negroes with members of other races,
notably Europeans, although a multitude of
other racial intermixtures are also represented here. These two groups form over 80
per cent of the whole. Apart from the small
number of Europeans, American Indians
and Caribs, the only remaining racial groups
of significance are the East Indian populations in British Guiana and Trinidad and
- POPULATION PROBLEMS IN THE BRITISH CARIBBEAN

Tobago. These groups of East Indians
claim special attention in any examination
of the demography of the area, because of
their homogeneity and particularly because
of their. very high fertility (which will be
discussed later). They arrived,. or are
descended from those who arrived, in the
latter half of the nineteenth century from
India, Burma and Ceylon as indentured
labourers. At the time of the 1946 census
they accounted for 35 per cent of the
population of Trinidad and Tobago, and
44 per cent in British Guiana, and these
proportions have since increased.

Annual Population Increase

The total population of the area is by now
approximately 34 million. Sixty years ago
it was half this size, but the rate of increase
has not been the same over the whole of the
period. For the first forty years or so the
rate of increase was about I per cent per
annum, but after that it increased steadily
and is now over 2 per cent per annum.
These figures, however, are affected by
migration, in particular by the recent
migration to this country and it is instructive
therefore to examine also the crude rates of
birth and death since 1920. Figure 2 below

BRITISH CARIBBEAN |

CRUDE RATES OF BIRTH AND DEATH

rea, be fod Ation
+

NATURAL INCREASE

  

DEATH

49$0 = 1984

+980

1930
TFIGURE 2

'Guo

shows that the crude birth rate has always
been high, but latterly has increased even
further to about 3? per cent; the death

Cc

117

rate, however, has fallen steadily from 2}
per cent to just over I per cent. The rate of
natural increase, which is the difference
between the two, has therefore increased
from I per cent per annum to about 2? per
cent per annum.

This annual increase of 2? per cent per
annum on a total population of about 34
million results in an addition of nearly
100,000 persons each year for whom food,
clothing, shelter, education, employment and
so on must be provided. The mainland

_territories appear to offer the only hope that

this can be achieved within the British
Caribbean area. Even a continuation of the
present volume of migration to the United
Kingdom, perhaps 25,000 per annum, could
account for only one-quarter of the annual
increase.

The crude death _rates for the different
colonies show that the considerable improvement in mortality has been experienced in all
of them. The crude birth rates, however,
reveal significant differences between the
several colonies. In Jamaica and Barbados
it is somewhat lower than the 32 per cent
average: correspondingly, in the two mainland territories and in Trinidad and Tobago
it is higher, about 44 per cent. These latter
areas are thus seen to be experiencing a rate
of natural increase in excess of 3 per cent
per annum which is exceeded in very few
parts of the world today.

Mortality

The considerable improvement in mortality
already referred to has resulted in a position
where the crude death rate in the area, just
over I per cent per annum, is at the same
level as in this country. We might find this
surprising in view of the different standards
of living, did we not know that the age
distributions in the two regions are very
different. We cannot but be aware that in
this country there is a large and growing
proportion of old persons, a feature which is
not present in the Caribbean Colonies, and
which must result in a higher average death
rate than would otherwise be the case.

A more revealing mortality comparison
can be made by calculating the number of
m8)

deaths expected among the. population in
the British Caribbean subdivided by sex
and age, were they to experience the mortality
rates current in this country, and comparing
the results with the deaths which actually
took place. Such a comparison for the year
1954 shows actual deaths to be about double
those expected were Great Britain mortality
rates to apply. Males under the age of five
suffer about four times as great a loss from
mortality as in Great Britain; over this age
the factor falls steadily to about one and a
third times at ages over sixty-five. For
females, the pattern is similar although the
excess over Great Britain is somewhat larger
than for males. There is thus seen to be considerable room for further improvement in
mortality in the area, in particular at the
youngest ages.

Although the crude death rates indicate
that there is now little to choose between the
mortality of the different colonies, there are
in fact differences which have been consistent
for a number of years. Mr. G. W. Roberts
gave examples in his note on mortality in
Jamaica published in Population Studies.*

He indicated that. Trinidad and Tobago |

show much lower mortality rates than
Jamaica at ages under ten, whereas at ages
over forty Jamaica consistently shows rates
well below those of Trinidad and Tobago or
any other West Indian colony; that Jamaica
shows infant mortality rates well below the
high rates in Barbados, but in childhood and
adolescence Barbados shows rates much
lower than those of Jamaica.

Infant mortality rates, i.e. the number of
deaths under one year of age per thousand

births, deserve special mention in view of.

their use as an index of social advancement.
In 1954 they varied from sixty-one in
Trinidad and Tobago to 109 in Barbados,
i.e. from more than double to four times the
rate in this country. It would appear that
there is still much to be done in improving
standards of child welfare and nutrition,
and more in some colonies than others.

One further feature of the mortality
experience is worthy of note. In Great
Britain, mortality rates for women are

* 1950. 4, 64.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

lower than those for men at all ages, but
this is not the case in the Caribbean. The
mortality rates in the three largest colonies
for example, all show an excess of female
over male mortality, in Jamaica between
ages five and twenty-five, and in Trinidad
and Tobago and British Guiana over most
of the child-bearing ages. It is tempting to
jump to the conclusion that this feature is
attributable to the much higher frequency
of child-bearing in the Caribbean.

Fertility

We come now to what is perhaps the most
interesting and important demographic
feature of the British Caribbean, the fertility.
There are two main sources of data on this
subject. The first of these is to be found in
the answers to questions put to all women
over fourteen years of age at the census, as
to how many live born children they had
had, if any. The second is in the records of
birth registrations. We thus have information on what is usually termed the “ stock ”’
and “ flow ” of family building in the area.

There are, however, considerable difficulties in interpreting the results because of
the different generations of women concerned.
For example, at the census women over the
child bearing ages are recorded as having
given birth to about five children on average
in Jamaica, while in Trinidad and Tobago
and British Guiana the figure was only four
and a quarter, i.e. completed families
were about three-quarters of a child smaller
in the two last mentioned colonies. On: the
other hand, for women in their twenties the
position was reversed, Jamaican women
having had half a child fewer than women
in the other two colonies. We'could explain
this in a number of ways. First, that in
Jamaica family building starts at a later
age but contmues apace at ages when
births are falling off in the other two
colonies and. ultimately reaches a higher
level. Alternatively, it may be that younger
women are building their families at quite a
different rate from the older generation; in
Jamaica they may be having smaller families
than their mothers, while in the other two
colonies they may be having larger families,
POPULATION PROBLEMS IN

or it may be that both of these things are
happening. It cannot be ruled out, however,
that memories may be different in the various
colonies. If there were circumstances in
Trinidad and Tobago and British Guiana
which resulted in older women, or some of
them, forgetting or not counting some of the
children born to them, children born many
years earlier a large proportion of whom may
have died soon after birth, then clearly any
deductions we might make from the data so
obtained would be vitiated.

Data from the second source, i.e. birth
registrations, have been tabulated in the
majority of cases by age of mother. We can
relate these to the numbers of women at
different ages in the population and thus
obtain issue rates, i.e. the chance that a
woman of a particular age will give birth to
a child. By summing these rates progressively over the fertile age span we obtain the
family build up determined by a continuation
of the underlying issue rates. Once again,
however, we have a mixture of generations
in the issue rates obtained in any particular
year for different ages of mother.

The following diagrams show the increase
in family size with age in certain of the

BRITISH CARIBBEAN

NUMBER OF CHILDREN EVER BORN

 

Is 20 as 30 3§

40 45 So

AGE OF FEMALE.
FIGURE 3 .
territories according to these two sources of
data. Figure 3 shows clearly the quicker

THE BRITISH CARIBBEAN 119
build up of families in British Guiana
relative to Jamaica among young women,
although older women at the census had
apparently had the larger families in Jamaica.
The joining up of the figures for the successive age groups to form a graph recording
increase of family size with age can be
criticized because of its mixing of different
generations of women and of data of different degrees of reliability, but it does present
the data in an easily understandable form.
Figure 4 shows the relationship between
BRITISH CARIBBEAN

SUMMATION OF CURRENT FERTILITY RATES

7
B.GUthNA (993
EAST INDIANS
é
-©T. 1954
a no
BOO SAMAR,
(943 census)
4
JAMAICA I9SI- 52
3
2
f
i
(5 20 as so 3s 40 4s so
Ace of FeEmALE
FIGURE 4

family size and age according to current
issue rates. The dotted line repeats the
curve for Jamaica from figure 3. for
purposes of comparison. The indication is
that a continuation of present fertility rates
will result in completed families in Jamaica
smaller than those recorded in the 1943
census, but much larger in Trinidad and
Tobago and in British Guiana. (The highest
of the curves shows the very high fertility
experience of East Indians which will be
examined more fully a little later.)

Reproduction Rates

It is a small step from the completed
family sizes implicit in current fertility rates
to the calculation of Gross Reproduction
Rates. If we multiply the completed family
120

size by the proportion of births which are |

- female, we obtain the female Gross Reproduction Rates.
Rate for the whole of the area is 2-4, but it
varies, for example, from 2-0 in Jamaica to
2°8 in Trinidad and Tobago. The excess of
male births over female in the area varies
from year to year and from colony to colony,
but generally averages perhaps half of the 6
per cent excess current in this country, but
for the purpose of these broad comparisons
the excess has been ignored and half of all
births assumed to be females.

A better measure of the extent to which
women at the fertile ages are currently
reproducing themselves in the next generation is the Net Reproduction Rate, which
allows for mortality taking its toll before the
children born will grow up and replace their
parents. In this country the N.R.R. is
currently about 1-0 indicating, with some
reservations, approximate replacement. In
the British Caribbean, the N.R.R. is about
2:0 which suggests that the population will
double itself in a generation. This is consist
ent with the crude rate of natural increase of ©

22 per cent per annum already mentioned
which, if continued, will double the. population in a little over twenty-five years.

Fertility of East Indians

Mention has been madein reports emanating
from the Caribbean area of the phenomenal
reproductive performance of the East Indian
communities in British Guiana and Trinidad
and Tobago. This racial group is given the
credit for the relatively very high crude
birth rates in these territories, and not
without justification. The Registrar General
for British Guiana has published figures
relating to the East Indian section of the
population which show the crude birth rate
to exceed 5 per cent. The crude death rate
is just over I per cent as for other sections
of the community, leaving a natural increase
of almost 4 per cent per annum. The rate of
natural increase for all races in British
Guiana is only a little over 3 per cent, so
that for races other than East Indians the
rate must be about 24 per cent.

The Gross Reproduction 
THE EUGENICS REVIEW .

Fertility data available from the census
are subdivided according to racial group, and
indicate that in both British Guiana and
Trinidad and Tobago East Indian women of

all ages have given birth to a greater number

of children than women of the same age
belonging to other racial groups. For
families complete at the time of the census
(i.e. women over forty-five) the figure was
five children for East Indians and four
children for other races. |

Current fertility rates for East Indians
are not published but they can be estimated
by combining data of births and populations
available for British Guiana and Trinidad

‘and Tobago. The rates produced are very

high indeed and figure 4 above showed how
they built up to a completed family size of
nearly seven children. The Gross Reproduction Rate is 3-4, and allowance for mortality
produces a N.R.R. of 2-8. We have already
mentioned that the population of the British
Caribbean as a whole appears likely to
double itself in a generation. We now see
that it will not require a great deal further
improvement in mortality at the youngest
ages or increase in fertility for East Indian
parents to produce sufficient children to
replace themselves three times over in the
next generation. All this of course is on the
basis that the current high fertility rates are
stable and not a transient feature.

One consequence of the high fertility of
this racial group has been its increase as a
proportion of the total population. In
British Guiana since the war East Indians
have increased from 44 per cent to 47 per
cent of the population of the colony. Looked
at another way, while East Indians accounted
for about one-third of the children born some
sixty years ago, they now provide more

than half the births in the colony each year.

It is only a matter of time therefore, before
Kast Indians comprise over half the total
population of British Guiana, and perhaps
of some political importance, over half the
electorate. The growing importance and
power of East Indians in- British Guiana is

one reason mentioned for. that colony’s

reluctance to join the Federation where they
feel they might become a helpless minority.
POPULATION PROBLEMS IN THE BRITISH CARIBBEAN |

Conjugal Condition and Illegitimacy

The latest available statistics show that
about 60 per cent of children born in the
British Caribbean territories are illegitimate.
The figures for the separate colonies vary
considerably, but they are all extremely
high and are indicative of the rather unusual
family forms among coloured peoples in the
area. The subject is most interesting but
also most complex, and has been dealt with
much more thoroughly than can be attempted
here in a paper by Mr. G. W. Roberts,
‘“Some Aspects of Mating and Fertility in
the West Indies,’ published in Population
Studtes.*

The tradition of the unstable family has

its origins in slavery. As Mr. Roberts puts
it:

The slaves, uprooted from various environments and thrust into oppressive slave regimes
where the maintenance of stable family unions
had no social or economic advantage to slave
owners and where in fact formal marriage was
often not allowed, inevitably experienced a
dissolution of their traditional family patterns.
The subsequent introduction of marriage ordinances based on English law wrought no basic
change; the formation of unions by means other
than formal marriage continued . . . marriage
in the West Indies does not always signify the
establishment of a union. Many, if not the
great majority of marriages represent no more than
the cementing of unions long in existence...
demographically it [marriage] does not necessarily
connote commencement of the exposure to the
risk of child-bearing.

As an example of conditions in the area,
figure 5 below indicates the marital status of
women of different ages in Jamaica in 1943.
The pattern is very different from this
country where there is a steep rise to 80 or
go per cent married. The proportion legally
married rises slowly and to a not very high
45 per cent or so. On top of that we have the
consensually married, 1.e. cases where a
permanent union has been established but
where the marriage has not been registered.
The remainder are termed single but this
will include women who have formed a
temporary union, a not uncommon arrangement in the Caribbean. It is interesting to
observe the trend of the two lines beyond the

* 1955, 8, 199.

‘121

late thirties. The proportion legally married
is still increasing at a time when in this
country it has flattened out or even started
to fall as a result of widowhood and divorce.
The simultaneous fall in the proportion
consensually married suggests this to be
caused by Mr. Roberts’ “cementing of
unions long in existence.”’

: JAmAica 1943
OF WOMEN

MARITAL STATUS

 
  
  

8e SIN@LE

CONSENSUALLY MARRIED

     
 

LEGALLY MARRIED
aa

EY) 2s ao ag 4o 45 Se
AcE

FIGURE 5

It is interesting to consider the connections |
between marriage and fertility in the light of
these proportions. If the present small
proportion married were to increase it might
be reasonable to expect an increase in
fertility, not only because of a more stable
family life, but also on a strictly arithmetical
comparison of the continuous exposure to
risk of childbirth in the married state with
the interrupted exposure over a series of
“keeper unions.”’ There may indeed be a
connection between the higher fertility of
East. Indians and their more stable family
conditions. On the other hand, it is not
impossible that a change in outlook as
regards the desirability of formal marriage
might be accompanied by a desire to limit
the size of the family.

Future Population ,
Having completed the examination of

mortality and fertility we are now in a

position to make a more scientific estimate
122

of the future population. The present
population of each sex in five year age groups
has been projected in five year steps.over the
next twenty-five years, using survival factors
based on mortality rates half way between
the present rates here and in the Caribbean,
i.e. allowing for some continuation of the
recent improvement. Births in future years
were calculated on the assumption that
current fertility rates would continue. The
result is once again a population doubling
in just over twenty-five years, one in which
the present low proportion of old persons
continues (about 4 per cent over sixty-five)
as does the present very high proportion of
children (about 40 per cent under age fifteen).
The problem in the Caribbean is not of a
growing proportion of old persons, but of
growing numbers at all ages.

Education and Literacy

The growing numbers of children forming
such a high proportion of the population
(the 40 per cent compares with 22 per cent
in this country), must be expected to impose
a considerable strain on the educational
system. This strain is certainly being felt in
Jamaica. The 1953 Colonial Report for
Jamaica states that enrolment in schools is
only about four-fifths of the school age
population, that attendance does not average
more than two-thirds of enrolment, and that
with the exception of some urban centres
there is not sufficient accommodation to
make attendance compulsory. In _ these
circumstances we are not surprised to learn
that of children aged ten to fourteen in
Jamaica at the census, 18 per cent of boys

and 11 per cent of girls were illiterate. These.

however, are the highest rates for any of the
Caribbean Colonies. Elsewhere the degree of
literacy among ten to fourteen’s was generally high, of the order of 98 per cent;
exceptions to this were found in some sections
of the community which were at a disadvantage because education is based on the
English language.

Population Pressure and Migration

The population pressure is seen, therefore,
to be increasing and with it the urge to

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

migrate in search of work and a higher
standard of living. Migration has long played
an important part in the area. Prior to 1921
the movement of emigrants from Jamaica
and Barbados to the American Continent
(notably Panama) and Cuba played a large

part in checking population growth, but the
subsequent period saw employment oppor
tunities for emigrants dwindle considerably
in consequence of changed economic conditions and new legislation, and there resulted
a net migration in the return direction.
Following the second world war the islands
were faced with growing unemployment
which could not be relieved through migration to countries that had formerly received
large numbers of West Indian immigrants.
Great Britain on the other hand was experiencing a manpower shortage, news of which
started the wave of migration which has not
yet abated. Indeed it has been suggested
that the present flow might increase but for
the limited number of passages available and
the limited number of persons able to pay
for them. It is odd to think that any progress
made in the way of raising the standard of
living in the area may result in an increase
in the number of persons migrating on
becoming able to afford the fare.

It is not difficult to see why there is this
large movement of population from an area
where death and disease are still higher than
they might be, where wages are low, unemployment widespread, educational facilities
stretched to their utmost, and where the
future holds out little prospect of improvement, to this country to which they are
admitted without question as British citizens
(in particular, without medical examination
which is in contrast to conditions for
admission to other Commonwealth Countries),
where wages are much higher, where unemployment in recent years has been negligible
and then covered by insurance benefits,
where education is available to all according
to need, and where medical facilities are
freely available. The Governmentin Barbados
has gone so far as to subsidize migration and
to provide migrants with a booklet of advice
on adapting themselves to the change. of
environment. In Jamaica, however, the main
POPULATION PROBLEMS IN THE BRITISH CARIBBEAN

force is said to be in the activities of travel
agents painting glowing pictures, sometimes
too glowing, of conditions in this country.

In the circumstances it is difficult to foresee
any slackening of the flow of migration so
long as employment opportunities continue
to be available in Great Britain. If this
country experienced a trade recession, however, the position might be very different,
but more important than the effect such a
recession might have on the flow of migrants
would be its effect on the employment of the
coloured workers who are already here. They
would be among the first to fall out of work
in view of their lack of seniority—last in,
first out, is the rule. In addition to this, it
has been suggested that there. might be
resentment among workpeople born locally
at the retention of coloured migrants in
time of general unemployment.

Fortunately, no trade recession of any
magnitude has occurred, but there are other
problems already being faced by the immigrants. Two of these, of which we read in the
press, are the provision of living accommodation and the problem of the unmarried
mother. The latter is the result of the
Caribbean background where we have seen
no stigma attaches to illegitimacy, but in this
country, as we know, more important than
any social stigma there might be is the
physical difficulty of a young mother trying
to be both guardian and breadwinner at the
same time. She cannot do both, and to find
someone with whom to leave the child, or
children, while she goes to work is an almost
impossible task, however straightforward it
might be in the Caribbean. As a community,
we are geared to a way of life in which each
family looks after its own children without
help and tends to expect others to do likewise. It is very far from certain that the
flow of coloured migrants from the West
Indies to Great Britain is not creating more
problems than it is solving.

Birth Control

So far no mention has been made on the
subject of birth control, but it will be quite
clear that some move in this direction
provides the only permanent solution to the

123

problem of increasing numbers in_ the
British Caribbean area, as elsewhere. Migration can provide an immediate though
temporary alleviation of the position, but
it would have to be on an increased scale.
The importance of reducing the birth rate
has been realized in Barbados where a
committee was appointed by the two Houses
of the Legislature to examine the question of
over-crowding. The following are extracts
from their report which was presented in

1954:

The Committee is completely convinced that
this problem can no longer be left to the sporadic
and unorganised efforts of a few individuals and
that the Government must take action.

It points out that if early action is not taken,
the result must be an increasingly lower standard of living with consequent misery for everyone... .

The first objectives of the health programme
should be the development of means whereby
the birth rate is reduced as rapidly as modern
science and services have reduced the death
rate. It is therefore recommended most strongly
that family planning be incorporated in the
work of the Health Centres immediately, and
that the work be extended as soon as possible
to embrace the General Hospital, the Maternity
Hospital, the almshouses, and all privately-run
Maternity Child Welfare Clinics.

It is recommended that Family Planning
Clinics should be set up and be operated directly
by the Government.

It is believed that this forthright report is
beginning to bear fruit in Barbados, but no
information can be found on the views of the
other territories on the subject of birth
control except a small paragraph appearing
in the 1954-55 Colonial Report for St.
Vincent under the heading “ Planned
Parenthood.”’

In accordance with the official policy of the
St. Vincent Government there is no systematic
teaching of birth control, nor are there any
family planning or planned parenthood organizations operating in this colony.

It is to be hoped that the other territories
will soon be converted to the Barbados way
of thinking, and that we shall see throughout
the West Indies Federation an awareness of
the population problem confronting the
124_

area, a realization of the crucial part to be
played by family planning in its solution,
and of the urgent necessity to take active
steps in the matter.

DISCUSSION

During the discussion which followed Mr.
Stewart’s paper, Mr..G. W. RoBERTs said:
I should like to begin by complimenting Mr.
Stewart on his able paper. He has dealt
with the problems of West Indian population
in an excellent manner. .

I should like to add something to what he
has said about migration and fertility as
components of growth, with special reference

to Jamaica. And as many questions have.

been raised this afternoon concerning West
Indian migration to Britain it seems best to
begin with this. The movement is of very
recent origin. It seems that the possibilities
of West Indians obtaining remunerative jobs
in the United Kingdom were first made
known to those coming to serve in the armed
forces or to work in factories during the last
war. The movement they initiated developed
swiftly after 1953 and by 1955 had reached
such dimensions that the Government of
Jamaica, apprehensive of its possible effects
on the island’s labour force, arranged for a
study to be made of it. This will be published
shortly, but perhaps members will like to
learn something about its main findings.
The movement was increasing by about
10 per cent per month in 1953 and by 13
per cent in 1954. By 1955 the island was
experiencing a monthly loss of 900 males

and 510 females, as compared with 110 and '

70 respectively in 1953. The movement
to the United Kingdom (there were, of course,
small numbers emigrating to other countries,
and these are included here) has been:

YEAR MALE FEMALE
1953 2,100 1,500
1954 6,000 3,500
1955 11,600 6,800

1953-55 11,800

19,700

It began with mostly skilled workers.
(The term skilled is of course not strictly in
accordance with English usage.) But in
1955 increasing numbers of unskilled workers
were being involved. Whereas early emigrants were drawn mostly from the town of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Kingston, by. 1955 a large proportion were
rural dwellers, while increasing numbers of
illiterate persons were leaving for Britain.

The effects of emigration on population
growth in Jamaica have been marked. In
1953 the overall increment to the population
(mostly from births) was 52,300. This rose
slightly to 54,300 in 1954 and in 1955 stood
at 57,200. On the other hand decrements to
the population rose impressively as a result
of mounting emigration. In 1953 there were
15,400 deaths, and emigration to all destinations totalled 3,800, but by 1955 emigration
(18,900) exceeded deaths, which remained
almost unchanged in number. Thus within
three years emigration had become the
principal source of loss to the population,
and resulted in a reduction of the annual
rate of growth from 2-2 per cent in 1953 to
I'5 per cent in 1955.

More important has been the effects of
emigration on the growth of the island's
labour force. Over the three years more than
60 per cent of the males emigrating to the
United Kingdom consisted of men claiming
some degree of skill, such as mechanics,
electricians, masons and carpenters. On the
other hand mostly unskilled workers, such
as dressmakers and domestic workers, were
involved in the case of the females.

Crude estimates of the increments and
decrements among the male labour force
bring out forcibly the effects of emigration.
It is estimated that in 1953 the annual

‘increment to the male labour force was

8,600. In 1954 male emigration rose to 6,000
and the increments to the male labour force
were down to 4,700. By 1955 when emigration reached 11,600 the increment was
converted to a loss of 700. In 1953 these

_crude estimates indicate a rate of growth for

the male labour force of 2-3 per cent; this
declines to 1-2 per cent in 1954, while in 1955
the indication is of a loss of 0-2 per cent.
The high proportion of skilled workers
involved has meant that the skilled sector
of the labour force has been seriously affected.
Evidently the number of skilled workers
emigrating has greatly exceeded the estimated number of accessions.

It is therefore clear that the present
“POPULATION PROBLEMS IN THE BRITISH CARIBBEAN ~~ ‘125

emigration, though constituting a seemingly
welcome curb on population growth in
Jamaica, may not be an unqualified advantage for a country crying aloud for industrial
development.

Fertility in the West Indies demands close
study not only because of the very high levels

prevailing, but also because of the complex —

mating patterns involved. These have
already been adequately considered by, Mr.
Stewart. But I should like to raise an issue
of some relevance, the relation between
movements in fertility and the improvement
of the hgalth of the population.

Attention to this has already been drawn
by the claim, made in respect of British
Guiana, that the control of malaria has

Annals of

Human Genetics
Formerly “Annals of Eugenics "’

Edited by L. S. PENROSE

Contents of Vol. XXI. Part 4. June 1957

Familial distribution of erythrocyte sedimentation rate.
M. Fraccaro.

Body size and weight in relation to varicocoele and hernia.
SHeiia M. Smiru.

Defective colour vision, PTC tasting and drepanocytosis
in samples from fifteen Brazilian populations. H.
Ka.Lmus.

Dystrophia myotonica with special reference to Northern
Ireland. Marcaret A. Lynas.

Genetics of dermal ridges. Sib pair correlations for total
finger ridge-counts. Saran B. Ho rt.

On the estimation of intraclass correlation. C. A. B. SmitH.

Le nombre de dermatoglyphes dans un échantillon de
jumeaux. M. y, J. Frezat, J. pE Groucny et
Mme. J. KELLEY.

The log likelihood ratio test (the G-test). Methods and
table for test of heterogeneity in contingency tables.
B. Wootr..

Further families showing linkage between the ABO and
nail-patella loci, with no evidence of heterogeneity.
Syivia D. Law.er, J. H. RENwicK and L. S.
VANCK.

Blood
(Yoru a) schoolchildren. J. P.

BARNICOT.

Reviews.

WILDER
roups and haemoglobin variants in Nigerian
G N. A.

ARLICK and

Subscription price, Bos. net per volume
Single issues 255., plus postage, 7d. inland, 4d. overseas.
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Bentley House, 200 Euston Rd., London, N.W.1

 

ACOA

resulted in a rise in fertility. Though this
remains an unproved assertion in the light
of the parallel fertility rise in Trinidad, the
relation between health and fertility remains
a real problem. Recent campaigns specifically directed against yaws but equally
effective against venereal disease, have
suggested very strongly that the control of
the latter diseases will result in marked rises
in general fertility levels.
succeeds in reducing sub-fertility as it

reduces the incidence of yaws and venereal

disease the reductions in fertility expected
from campaigns for the spread of contraception will be nullified. This is one indication
that fertility control may not be as easy as
it seems.

ta

210 TN NTT TT

THE WORLD’S GREATEST
BOOKSHOP 
a * BOR BOOKS:

FAMED CENTRE FOR

Medical
Books

Departments for Gramophone Records,

Music, Stationery, Handicraft Materials,

Lending Library, Children’s Books, Fine
Bindings

JOIN THE SCIENTIFIC BOOK CLUB!

You buy outstanding. Books (published
at 10/6, 12/6 and more) for only 4/-.
Write today for details

119-125 CHARING CROSS ROAD
LONDON, W.C.2
GERrard 5660 (20 lines) Open 9 to 6 (Thurs. 9 to 7)
Two minutes from Tottenham Court Road Station. _
IGIAEAETULT TOAGCROULT Pet AHET TRO AGRE IGT TES GUL ETE SAREE SANE RAT

If penicillin.


JUNE TAT RTE AHN HRA HE
