 
 
  
  
  

HEN I received the invitation to
give a Galton lecture this year my
ey first feeling was perhaps not unpetarally to refuse. After all eugenics is a
Melogical subject, and my knowledge of
ie ogy is only amateurish ; and I felt that
werely to express a deep belief in the
prtance of eugenics would hardly provide
e matter for a whole discourse—at any
B: to spin it out for the requisite time

d call for a special skill which I do not

meess, that of the political speaker who
ads a a single idea (and that usually a simple
i y and knows how to reiterate it for an
sr. However, when I began to think about
‘proposal more closely, I reflected that
yamably when the Council gave me the
Mitation they supposed that I might have
Mite less simple ideas on the subject, and so
geegan to search my mind for what these
fas were, and I think I have found someing which is not entirely familiar, at any
e to the extent of my very limited study
‘i the subject. It was about this time that I
er ened to meet my old friend Professor
s Bohr the physicist, and found that he

Re been thinking profoundly on certain
Mets of the subject and that his views
pe certainly not commonplace. As far as

y Bohr has not written on the subject,
ost of our conversation was conducted
2 course of a walk in a crowded and noisy
Met, so that it is possible that I shall not
* is views justice. I can only say that in so
I have got hold of his ideas they
var to have a profound bearing on
mic policy, and they seem to me to
a m the much less definite views at which
fi :been arriving myself. But I ought to
the warning that I have no reason
Mier to believe that Bohr would express
e greement with what I am going to say,
is quite possible that I shall be

B Gatton Lecture delivered before the Eugenics
hh February 16th, 1939.

 
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
   
  

  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

ay

POSITIVE EUGENIC POLICY*
¢: By CHARLES GALTON DARWIN, mc. MA, SoD. FRS.

misrepresenting him in the part of my
discourse which concerns him.

Civilization and Free Choice

I had some difficulty in choosing a title,
and am afraid that the one I have chosen
may give a false idea of my subject. I have
no intention of dealing with the problem of
how we are to encourage the greater fertility
of those who we think ought eugenically to
be encouraged, but am going to try and
answer the question which must precede
this, the question of who those people are.
As you will see my answer is almost trivially
obvious and could be stated in a few words,
but that is not the point I want to emphasize.
Rather I am aiming at showing that it is not
merely the only immediately practicable
answer, but also the only absolutely admissible answer.

Before discussing eugenics itself I want to
set the stage by considering for what conditions alone a eugenic policy of any kind is a
possibility. This is broadly speaking the
condition that we call civilization. At
various intervals of history civilizations have
emerged, characterized by a great flowering
of the human intellect in one direction or
another. I want to maintain that the
primary feature of these civilizations has
been that for one cause or another it is only
at those times that men have been able to
do anything outside the mere task of keeping
alive. I remember a conversation some time
ago with a distinguished economist—it was
only a casual conversation, so I cannot put
it in as formal evidence—in which he told me
that he had once studied the value of wages
at different epochs of history. The earlier
civilizations must be left out because they
were based on slavery so that the question
of real wages would be hard to evaluate at
those times. For more modern times he
eliminated the arbitrary value of money by
expressing the day’s wages of a labourer in
14 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

terms of the price of wheat, and he found
that it was roughly constant from the dark
ages up to the middle of the eighteenth
century and then rose gradually to a very
much greater height. This means that up to
the eighteenth century the labourer could
get just enough food to keep himself and his
family alive, allowing I suppose for a hideous
degree of infantile mortality and a good deal
of adult mortality too. In fact he was living
in a state of natural selection, which though
it over-emphasized the dangers of infancy
still did a great deal to keep him up to the
mark in both body and mind. Then the
price of wheat started to go down, or if you
prefer it his wages went up, so that there
was plenty of food, with result the immediate
increase of population of the end of the
eighteenth and the early nineteenth centuries. Man became free from the daily
probability of death, and had the leisure to
invent all the marvels of our modern scientific development, which themselves in turn
further lowered the price of food and so made
possible still further increase. But these
increases of population were comparatively
free from the check of natural selection ; it
was no longer essential to be above a certain
level of intelligence in order to get enough
food to stay alive, or to have exceptionally
good health in order to escape the diseases of
malnutrition.

My picture is of course very much oversimplified, but it does suggest what I believe
to be the essential character of the civilized
condition, and that is that in this condition
natural selection ceases to operate, or anyhow only operates to a greatly reduced
degree. In speculating on this train of
thought I have been led to a curious, perhaps
frivolous, conclusion, which I would like to
propose, though it has little to do with my
theme. If I am right that the essential of
civilization is that there is something to spare
in life, then the civilized man earns more
than he absolutely needs for survival, and
can choose what he will spend it on. His
choice is capricious, and is largely determined by the persuasion exerted on him by
sellers, which is done by advertisement. No
one advertises comman bread, because we

   
 
   
  
   
   
   
  
 
 
   
   
  
   
   
 
  
  

have to buy it anyhow, but when a thigg
unessential we need some persuading b of
we prefer it to something else. Is it too m
to say that the advertisement is the 4
index of civilization, not because of @
civilizing influence obviously, but meg
because it is only in the civilized condif
that “it pays to advertise,’ for only a
have the majority any choice in what t mn
shall buy.

In the future of the world we cannot
any great confidence that civilization §
survive. If it should fail then we shall re
to a barbarous condition in which we s
be living a hard life, with the minimum
subsistence for those intelligent or cunn
enough to win it, and not enough for §
rest. Natural selection will again come 8
full play and will tend to maintain the le
of human intelligence. There will be neiti
the necessity nor the possibility for q
exercise of free choice which is implied
the idea of eugenics. Now in a game of ca:
the player who has to take a risk is rightj
postulating that the cards are so placed tl
he will win by his finesse, on the ground tk
if they are not he will lose anyhow; in t
same way in dealing with eugenic policy
may postulate civilization simply on
ground that, if we do not have it, th
eugenics becomes impossible. Whatever yf
think of the probability of civilizati#
collapsing, you can leave it absolutely outs
account in considering eugenics.

Absence of Natural Selection

We have arrived at the conclusion thj
we may assume that civilization will coj
tinue, and we saw that this implies
absence of the older checks of natur
selection. What follows? In most parts
the animal kingdom the absence of th
competition of natural selection seems 4
have disastrous effects on the qualities of ty
animals. The fauna of oceanic islands ¢
not seem capable of competing with lat¢
importations from continents. The liza
of the Galapagos are being killed out by tl
competition of pigs and goats, and tk
marsupials of Australia have been beate
by the rabbits. Even as to those rabbits
   
  
     
   
   
    
   
      

Ne ae
nee

Mnid venture the guess that the absence of
ae struggle for life during a century,
Mindicated by their rapid multiplication,
led to degeneration, so that an Austraicabbit, if brought back to England,
i have little chance in the competition
| bits untransported cousins. Have we

yright to think that humanity can escape
. fame tendency. I believe that investiga} $ carried out under the auspices of this
show the same trend even during the
p short period for which data can be
Mmed. If then civilization is the condition
a eb ‘natural selection is inoperative for
Binity, it must inevitably lead to degenerB-which for men means decay of the
pet, and such decay must surely lead
e of the civilization. The principal
f all of us, whether eugenists or not, is
se to maintain or improve our present
and our particular doctrine as eugennat the way to avoid its collapse is by
g up an alternative selection to that of
f , and that is eugenic selection. When
’ invented the idea of eugenics he did
athe idea of improving humanity, and
e would welcome such improvement.
Edhere is a more important need for a
mic policy even than this, for something
Mic must be done even to keep up to our
wt condition. We shall have to run

g.fast even to stay where we are, and
eefaster if we want to get anywhere

eal Disability and Eugenics

pee are two sides to a eugenic policy, the
we and the negative—to increase the
- d to decrease the tail. With regard
il I suppose there is complete agree5 No one, whether eugenist or not,
s divocates the unlimited breeding of
minded. The only trouble is the
aay of making politicians realize that
b-matter of desperate importance to
acticable methods of control, and
meome the legal difficulties of such
; ce with individual free action. If
say more than this I should be
Meaching to the converted. But
mmother part of the negative policy

    
  
   
  
 
  
   
  
  
 
    
   
   
  
  
   
   
   
 
  

poiiap

r POSITIVE EUGENIC POLICY 15

which does call for some comment, and on
which I would like to express my personal
opinion. This is the question of physical as
opposed to mental weakness. One sometimes
meets people, often of notably high intellect,
who feel that they are eugenically unfit for
begetting a family on account of some
physical disability, such as a bad digestion
or weak lungs, disabilities which are often
hereditary. It is a reasonable argument that
such a person should not marry for fear of
inflicting on his mate the hardship of a lifetime of living with an invalid, but that is
nothing to do with eugenics. I maintain that
eugenically there is nothing against such a
person founding a family. There are two
reasons. Firstly the advance of medical
science certainly accompanies the state of
civilization, and these organic weaknesses
may be largely nullified ; consider how many
there are now leading a normal life, who
fifty years ago would have been permanent
invalids, and in the future we may expect
still further progress in this direction.
Secondly if there are diseases which are not
to be conquered in this way, they carry with
them their own seeds of destruction in that
they will gradually eliminate themselves by
the earlier death-rate of their victims. In
spite of civilization natural selection is still
operating here, and will protect the community against these defects. Not so against
the mentally weak when their bodily health
is good, for they are protected, and I suppose
must continue to be protected, from the
selective destruction which ought to be
eliminating them. If anyone then, having
some purely physical weakness, were to
consult me as to whether he would be
eugenically justified in founding a family, I
would say without hesitation that the mere
fact that he had sufficient intelligence to ask
the question would be sufficient evidence
that he was justified in doing so. So much
for the negative side of eugenics.

Probability as Guide to Action

When we come to the positive side the
question at once becomes much more difficult. Many people who are quite ready to
subscribe to eugenics in general terms tend
16

to hedge or fail to make up their minds as to
what they really do want. When such a person
is faced with the direct question, ‘“‘ You have
said which part of the population ought to
breed much less, now tell us which ought to
breed much more,” he is apt to answer that
after all we know very little about the
genetic constitution of humanity and that
once we start breeding from such and such a
class there may emerge all sorts of wicked
recessive genes, and in a general way the
most awful things may happen. This is I
think partly plain timidity, arising from the
feeling that to do nothing has no consequences, which as I have tried to point out is
lamentably untrue. But it also arises from
an exaggerated reverence for the certitude of
science. There is a feeling that by waiting
only a few years we shall know absolutely
all about the human genetic constitution and
that we had better wait for this, so that at
the end we may construct men with the
certainty and accuracy with which an engineer can construct a bridge. Now this
reverend confidence in the certitudes of
science is not the outlook of the scientist
himself. I remember some years ago reading
a novel about a young scientist, who was
always being lectured by his patron on the
rule that he must never publish anything
until he was absolutely certain of it. I
remember thinking that such a man would
never really publish anything at all, either
because he would not attain the certainty,
or else, if he did, then the matter would be so
simple and straightforward that someone
else would have published it already.

The certainty of scientific truth is not like
that ; it is a reasonable certainty of the kind
that is accepted as evidence in a court of law.
To get on with the world in any way at all
we have to recognize always the possibility
that we may be wrong, and to work on that
basis. Even in fundamental physical science
it is now known—I would like to say with
absolute certainty! (with the caution I have
stated)—that probability plays an essential
part. How much more is that so in the
biological sciences where an experimenter
will regard as a highly satisfactory result one

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in which eight out of his ten test animals
verify his hypothesis.

If we are to accomplish anything at all,
we have got to take chances, and to do so is
not the desperate measure some are apt ta.
think. One of the defects of our present:
education is that people are not taught what
extreme certainty can be achieved out of
chance, so that the majority have no habit of:
thought which regards operation on oa
bilities as a really satisfactory method. B
that it is so is immediately obvious from th
existence of two very highly paid professions
those of the insurance company and of tj
bookmaker. As the chief present applicatidj
of what I mean by operating on probabilitij
we may cite and refute the sort of argumeg
used by the opponent of eugenics. He wv
point to so-and-so, a brilliant man with 4
intelligent wife but children hardly abe
the sub-normal, and such-and-such, a seni
wrangler sprung from half-witted parents 4q
a slum, and will argue that therefore ¥
cannot do any good by eugenics. Now§
suppose there are examples of the sort §
cites, but I simply decline to believe thi
they are not highly exceptional ; can anyof
doubt that if the offspring of a hundrq
intelligent people are compared with thc
of a hundred stupid, the averages will not
markedly different ? Even if it were onf
slightly more probable that children @
intelligent parents should be intelligent, st@
that slight chance would be quite enough f¢
the laws of probability to work on in betta
ing the wits of humanity. So I conclude thg
firstly we cannot afford to wait for accural
information about human genetics, thi
secondly such information if obtained woul
surely not be very accurate, and that ther
fore our method must be to work on tl
principle of probability, and in doing so §
see that we take so many good chances thé
it becomes a very strong probability th
the total result will be favourable.

     
 
  
   
 
   
 
  
   
 
   
   
   
   
 
   
 
  
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
 

Analogy between Man and Domestic Ami ‘

In his original conception of eugenif
Galton laid stress on the analogy of tl
domesticated animals, and it is the obviof
one to take, but it is not a perfect analog}
   
   
  
   
   
 
   
 
   
   
   
   
  
   
 
  
   
   
 
   
   
  
 
 
   
   
 

tly the appreciation of this fact,
“ 166 D a completly understood, that has
the progress of eugenic doctrine.
ane that we can take the analogy
bi were perfect, and see where it

_ We will suppose that we have a
y-slave-owner possessed of a large
t.the South Seas. He is a firm
in eugenics and decides to improve
fe tion by means of it—we must of
adow him with the capacity for
“9 patriarchal age so as to give him
Bio it. By selective unions among his
avi succeed in making his navvies
gs artisans will get defter fingers,
mtants will do their additions
s engineers will devise yet more
. labour-saving machines, his police
meener detective ability, his civil
r » higher efficiency in their admini“ fr power, and everyone in his
will be entertained by better
is and funnier comedians than ever
Ee Bat in accomplishing all this there
| he will not do, and that is
the race of slave-owners, because
an ot know what improvement to

Rey:
mon this point that the analogy
; B:man and the domestic animals
fown, and it is the chief point that I
B vemphasize in our subject. Let us
* to general terms. The greatest
Ml idea developed in the nineteenth
Ravas that man is only one of the
‘ and it was an idea which has had
$- effect in improving our underg of the world. But there is an even
padamental idea, which cuts right
; Which does not arise in many
po biology, but which is essential
and this is the idea of the
Bor between subject and object. It
: per eatially different thing to make an
Ment .on oneself and to make one on
mer object—including an animal or
Biave in the term. I am going to
Mhe point in greater detail, but you
bat once by asking of any convinced
sthe awkward question: ‘“‘ How
aren have you.” If the answer is

“fo

POSITIVE EUGENIC POLICY 17

the fashionable “‘ Two,”’ one thinks ‘‘ Well,
you don’t seem to be living up to your
principles.”” But if the answer is ‘‘ Twelve,”’
then one’s thought is, ‘What a good
opinion this man has of himself and his
family.’’ This is a crude way of putting it,
and I am going to develop it in a more
general manner.

Bohr’s Principle of Complementarity

This is the aspect of our subject which has
been specially considered by Bohr. I think
his main interest has been not so much the
question of eugenics as the question of
whether there are such things as racial
characters, but the argument is sufficiently
cognate to be worth developing in detail.
His starting point was certain very important
theories in pure physics that were made
about twelve years ago. I have no intention
of explaining an exceedingly subtle piece of
reasoning, but shall take the liberty of paraphrasing it into a much simpler process ; if
this contains fallacies I will ask you to
believe that they have arisen in the paraphrase and that they do not occur in the
original. Suppose that one wanted to
measure the diameter of a cylindrical shaft,
one would take a pair of calipers, and one
would open them out until the jaws could slip
freely across the shaft. One would then push
them a bit closer together and try again,
and go on until they would only just pass,
and then record the distance between the
points. At the next attempt the points are
too close together and the calipers will not
pass, and the diameter is somewhere between
the ‘‘go”’ measurement and the “stop”
measurement, and by delicate handling
these two measures can be almost indefinitely
close together. But now suppose that the
shaft is made of soft wax. Then in one of the
trials the calipers will pass but in doing so
will scratch the shaft. What is the diameter ?
The answer is that whatever it was before we
measured it, it is different afterwards by the
depth of the scratch. By how much? To
measure it we must use the calipers again,
and in doing so shall deepen the scratch
further, and so shall not get an answer to
the question we asked of how deep the
18 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

scratch was before the second measurement.
The only answer we can give is that there is
no exact answer, and that any answer given
is only accurate to a length equal to the
depth of the scratch. But we might try to do
better by going another way about the
business. If we are afraid of scratching the
shaft, why not take calipers with very soft
points. They will not scratch it ; quite the
contrary, for now the shaft will damage the
points of the calipers, and it is these points
that we are trusting for our measurement.
Whichever way we go about it in the course
of comparing the two things one of them
must alter the other a little, and so defeat
the attempt to get an exact comparison.
Of course with actual hard steel shafts and
strong calipers the damage is slight and in
practice no one cares about it, but that
merely means that we do not happen to be
interested in so high a precision. In other
cases this will not be so, and the effect will
become of the greatest importance.

This parable will represent Bohr’s idea
sufficiently for our purpose. He expresses it
by the word complementarity. In studying
the world we always take a certain part of
it for granted, and use it as a yard-stick to
describe the rest. In doing so we always
find that the yard-stick interacts with the
object measured, so that the object is
altered, and the measurement is not absolutely trustworthy. Moreover it is no use
interchanging the two halves of the world,
since that only means putting our trust in
the other half and regarding the first as the
untrustworthy one. His principle goes extraordinarily deep into all branches of knowledge, but we are here only concerned with
one aspect of it, that concerning man, and I
cannot do better than quote an example he
gave. He put it in an intentionally exaggerated and picturesque form.

Bohr takes as his two complementary
quantities the English and the French cultures. He asks how is an Englishman to
understand the nature of French culture.
The characteristic of the perfect type of
Englishman is the conviction that his way of
living is not merely the best one, but really
the only right one—we could all name

    
  
   
 
   
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
    
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
  
   
  
 
 
   
   
 

friends who are perfect Englishmen in
sense—in fact the only really human way
living. This Englishman starts to tryj
understand French culture, and will §
succeed till he has understood the charag
of the perfect Frenchman. Now of cog
one of the doctrines of the perfect Fres
man is that his way of living is the of
really human one—most Frenchmen seen
us to believe this—and so as soon as {
Englishman has understood the French ¢
ture he will have mastered this fact and}
will have ceased to be a perfect Englishm§
The two cultures are mutually exclusive,}
that neither can gauge the other withe
damaging it and so depriving it of {
perfection which is one of the qualities
it claims.

Objectivity and Subjectivity

As its name suggests the complementa
of Bohr is a mutual relation, in which eitl
or any half of the world may be taken}
basis for measuring the other. But for @
purpose we shall simplify by fixing speciaj
on one aspect for basis. The shaft is
object that I am studying, and the calipa
as being my instrument, is a part of
subject which is studying the object.
experiment consists in setting up certi
specified conditions for the object and th
seeing what it does. If anything precise*
to be found, that implies that the seein
what-it-does has no further effect on
object. In nearly all scientific work f
objects we study are not disturbed by ft
subject seeing what they do; at any r@
the disturbance, though always present,’
demonstrably of negligible importang
These are the experiments we like, but
all experiments can be brought into
category, and we have to keep in mind thy
as soon as the subject, in the course of &
experiment, exerts a perceptible effect q
the object, then the observation becom
unreliable. Moreover we must remember t§
complementarity, that it is just as true, a
only a change of language, to say that
object disturbs the subject. We may put &
whole matter crudely by saying that dif
culties may arise when subject and obje
  
 
   
  
  
  
  
  
   
 
   

Mt mixed together. In most experiments
ibe of the main concerns of the experimenter
* eaten them apart, and so to achieve good
Wkve results, but sometimes this cannot
me and then we must look out for
a For example the psycho-analyst
Set always be on his guard against the
e er of himself filling his patient’s mind
men the ideas that he hopes to extract from
. F Or we may take an even more general
Ss ample in the study of the ultimate nature
Flife. Perhaps the experimenter may try
study it by the ordinary methods of
In doing so he will treat the
Mtg animal with chemicals according to
Sxurrent methods of the laboratory, and
| will die. Result—he is studying
ma matter, and the nature of life has

  
 
   
 
 
   
   
 
  
  
 
  
  
   
  
   
  
   
   
 
  
 
  
   
  

BINISITy.

mec

tKculties of Subjectivity
Siow in the study of human characters this
feulty is present inevitably. A European
ay propologis may be able to keep his
* setivity when he is comparing the culture
_ a Australian aboriginal with that of a
@emon Islander, but if he tries to make the
Méparison with that of a European the
fdy becomes a comparison of object with
Pi Mect, and his conclusions must be judged
Sedlifferent standards. Let us take as an
: ae ale—I am quoting Bohr again—the
pknown case of the alleged inferiority of
F tegroes to the whites in America.
Weyer many intelligence tests are applied
memonstrate it, the test is never a “ clean ”’
eriment, because they are always a white
mrs tests and because in the present social
sigation of the United States part of the
ital make-up of the negro is invariably
g idea, “‘ After all Iam only a nigger, and
will ever give me the chance of rising.’
tts see what would be needed to make a
ly “clean ’’ experiment on the subject.
Mould have to go something like this.
™ all the negro children shortly after
sind give them to the white women, and
Ball these women black. Similarly paint
we tegresses white and give them the
e'infants. All the women must be
Wized so that they interchange the

EE POSITIVE EUGENIC POLICY

19

words black and white, and also so that they
believe the changelings are their own children, but otherwise each race must keep its
own mentality. Under these fantastic conditions the negroes, who will have inherited
most of the wealth of the country from their
blackened foster-parents, will grow up convinced of their superiority, and when the
little white child is submitted to an intelligence test, of course by a black professor, he
will stumble over his answers with the
thought at the back of his mind: “ After
all I am only a white—I suppose with great
luck I may some day become a Pullman car
porter.’ There can hardly be a doubt that
the social feelings of the two races would be
changed round in this way in the first
generation, and the experiment would only
verify the superiority of the whites—if they
are superior—if it were found that after a
few generations the whites were rising above
the level of Pullman car porters.

This is the sort of experiment that would
be needed to test the superiority of white
over black in a fully objective manner, and
its fantastic absurdity is enough to show
that in eugenic matters we have got to be
content with knowledge of a different quality
from that which may be used in fully
objective work. Experiments in which the
subject plays a part are radically different
from those in which the subject can survey
the object without interference from either
on the other, and we cannot take over the
full analogy from the biological theory of
genetics and apply it to ourselves without
attending to the entirely new factor that has
entered.

Method of Unconscious Selection

Must we then despair of finding anything
to do in positive eugenics. Quite the contrary. We must recognize that on account
of subjectivity, human experiments are in a
different category from others, and are to be
undertaken in a different way. Now Galton’s
original idea of eugenics arose from considering the domestic animals, and this idea
is still fruitful and does indeed suggest a way
out of our difficulties. For one of the most
remarkable facts about the domestication of
20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

animals is that all the most important of
them were domesticated in prehistoric times,
and man has accomplished much less in the
period when he knew what he was doing
than he accomplished before it. The process
of “‘ unconscious selection ”’ as it is called in
the Origin of Shectes, signifies that the
savage keeps the tamest or cleverest or
swiftest dog and breeds from it, but in doing
so has no thought of changing the race of
dogs. The immense change that he produced
in this way may be seen from the fact that
we do not know with certainty what were
the wild ancestors of many of the domesticated animals or plants. It is of course true
that the recent changes, when man recognized what he was doing, have been at a
faster rate, but in the sum they have been
very much smaller than those produced by
unconscious selection. Now as far as concerns himself we must regard man as a wild
animal, for his civilization means control
over other things, but not over himself. If
he is a wild animal, he is at any rate a wild
human animal, and the best he can hope for
is to proceed as other wild human animals
have proceeded in the past, and consciously
to adopt a method like that of unconscious
selection. He must pick out some of his
fellows without any exact analysis and say
to them: “ You are a useful citizen; be
fruitful and multiply,” and that is not only
the best thing he can do, but it is the only
thing he can do, and with no more than this
he can accomplish the most astounding
changes in the human race.

It may appear to you that I have spent a
very superfluous amount of time in reaching
what is an obvious and uninspiring result,
for all that I have concluded is that the
better and more useful members of the
community are those to be encouraged.
Nevertheless I think my elaboration is justified, for I hope I have shown a great deal
more than this. My point is that no conditions of scientific knowledge can arise by
which we can better the process. On the side
of negative eugenics that of course is not so ;
there the intelligent part of the community
are able to act quite objectively in restricting
the breeding of the less, and the more they

know about the genetic constitution
humanity the better can they operate so |
to eliminate the subnormal. But on @
positive side they cannot act objectiv ;
because they are to operate on themselv
and the best they can do is to try to increg
the numbers of their own type without m4
ing any exact enquiry into which particu§
members of it are to be distinguished 1 |
specially favourable treatment. 3

We have nothing to wait for

The most important practical consequen
of this view is that there is no excuse for m
starting immediately to put it into effe
It is worth while to consider the results:
this, as not all of them may be welcome 4
everybody. There is first the question of hq
we are to decide what we mean by a gos
citizen. The phrase itself has almost becog
a cliché with a slightly contemptuous mea
ing, and of course I want to dissociated
from that contempt; in this bad sense t
good citizen is the sort of tame animal th
we could breed like a domestic animal, ag
we would not improve the top of the hum
race in doing so. I mean the useful citiz
who is likely to beget sons who will becog
leaders in the next generation. Can anyog
suggest a better rough and ready way
estimating a man’s value than by the amoug
he is paid? There are obviously a greg
many cases which can be cited against thi
but is anything better possible. At any re
when we wish to mark our approval of
value of the services of someone we do so
increasing, not diminishing, his salary. Tha
will furnish a rough starting point, and {
suggests that our national organization oug!
to be such that the number of children wouf
bear some close positive relation to
income. It is true of course that there wa
be bad examples where none of us can fe
that a man merits the large income whi¢
he knows how to gain, but we may notid
that eugenically this will not do very mud
harm. Suppose we plan a scheme wherely
it would be usual that a man with £2,0004
year would normally have five children, th
the financier, honest or fraudulent,
made {20,000 would not thereby have fift

    
   
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
 
   
 
  
   
   
   
 
  
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
 
  
  
   
   
   
 
  
 
  
  
 

; 90: ‘that any excesses in population
Fed commit would hardly matter.
nil tising a plan on some such lines as
we apt to see these kinds of fault and
% because of them. But in blam| t an for these faults it should be
a that we are going far outside the
- enics into a general criticism of our
Senditions. I have for instance heard
- ent that if we merely adopt the
ro ere ne the well-to-do breed, we
rs no poets because poets are
Mbadly paid for their services. I will
pt to judge whether we ought to
a pe supply of poets—after all Plato
- tat they should be killed ; but the
ie. of this view regarded it as a major
W.against a eugenic scheme of the
ie oP ppose, that there would be no
pa in it for breeding poets. It is not
E is dn objection against our social
. i ion in general. If poets ought to
eo eater part in the world, then the
ay to do it is to reward their services
| Pe hich means to give them better pay,
Runder the eugenic scheme they will
poetic population.
seem rather gross and materialistic
; “4 ‘eugenic principles on a cash basis
way, but that is not the fault of
m.. We do reward those whose services
me by a rise of salary, and so pref; we estimate social values on the
wa, If you are a communist, this is
P able, but that has nothing to do
nics, but with the social organizawe applying positive eugenics in a
Mist state it would be just as necesied necessary in just the same way, to
; Bm the rewards that follow good sera.the encouragement to have chilforeover the objection is just the
fboth cases. If we have financiers
* managed to collect money which
# not deserve, there will in any other
e@ people who contrive to rise to
yand to win rewards which they do
, In either system such people are
pity (or if they are not then the
” needs amending), but the
meed not worry about such a

POSITIVE EUGENIC POLICY 21

minority, but may trust to the certain effects
of the law of averages.

Divergence of National Characters

There is one more point of interest in this
connection, but I hesitate to make it on
account of the danger of my own subjectivity. To a considerable extent each
nation has a different taste in the type of
character which it reveres, and this type will
therefore be encouraged by it to multiply.
For example the German seems to prefer the
docile type who will make a good soldier or a
capable and intelligent administrator in the
industrial machine. We seem to prefer something rather different. From the point of
view of an unfavourable critic, we like the
amateur who succeeds in whatever he tries,
provided he does not have to put too much
effort into it. I do not like this view at all,
but there is another aspect of it which is
much more satisfactory. What we value is
the quality of independence which goes
with not becoming too much of a specialist,
a quality found say in the general practitioner or the manager of a small works. To
us it seems that this independence is one of
the hardest things to seek and one of the
most important things to get. The dictator
can use something like the ordinary methods
of animal breeding to raise his soldiers and
his operatives, and if that is his ideal he will
presumably arrange his system of rewards
accordingly. But his difficulty will be to
provide future dictators; his habit of suppressing opposition will be dysgenic for all
the men of independent character who might
become his rivals. It has indeed always been
found that the chief trouble of dictatorships
is to provide a successor, and a eugenic
policy will make it even harder. The much
abused democracy of the present has many
faults—one of the worst is that it will probably be the last system to adopt a eugenic
policy at all—but if or when it does so, it
will succeed in improving the race at the top
in the region where independence and
originality may be found. It is not easy for
us to judge these national characters, so
that perhaps my speculations are not worth
considering seriously, but there emerges one
22

point from them. We may expect that whatever positive eugenic schemes are developed,
they will accentuate further any differences
of racial character that were present before.

That is as far as I am going in our subject,
and I know I am leaving out what is the real
immediate problem, that of making breed
those who ought to breed. How far this can
be accomplished I cannot judge, but it
seems to me that much might be accomplished by child-allowances in taxation on a
scale which would make it very expensive
for the well-to-do to be childless. And
perhaps a good deal would be done by a
genuine feeling for eugenic duty, which in a
democracy must certainly precede any
strong eugenic legislation. All this is very

DSSS SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSOSSSSHSHRSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS9SyF

SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

JOURNAL OF THE INSTITUTE OF SOCIOLOGY
Editorial Board :
A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS, ALEXANDER FARQUHARSON and MORRIS GINSBERG

VOL. XXXI, No. 1

The Adoption of Children
Three Aspects of Regional Consciousness

AASATSSSSROSSSOSSSESASHOSHSSSSSSSAs

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

CONTENTS

Science and the Social Relations of Industry
A Study of Population in Ulanga, Tanganyika Territory

National Socialism and the Social Sciences

Annual Subscription £1 1s. 0d., post free. 5s. 3d. per copy, post free.

The Le Play House Press,
35 GORDON SQUARE, LONDON, W.C.1

FATT GAGEIG STAG SSS SSS SS SHAS SSS SSS SSOSSSSNgEEggsggil

 
  
   
   
    
   
   
  
   

important, but it is on the political side q
I will leave it to others to discuss. Wha
have attempted to show is that the need fd
national eugenic policy is urgent and that w
we must aim at is simple. There is no hg
that a better positive eugenic policy mi
be attained by waiting for fuller scienty
knowledge, because of the essentially st
jective character of its application.
already have enough to go on, if, insteadj
aiming at an unattainable certainty, we
content to allow the law of averages 4
produce its inevitable result. There:
nothing to wait for in our positive eugeg
policy, and we shall hardly be pardoned
the verdict of history if we do not forthwy
set to work to carry it out.

JANUARY 1939

P. Sargant Florence

A. T. Culwick and G. M. Culwick
S. Clement Brown

F. W. Morgan

R. J. Baker

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXI, No. f
