LOUIS M. HELLMAN, M.D.
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, State University of New York

One Galileo is Enough:

Some Aspects of Current Population Problems*

FOR THIS LITCHFIELD LECTURE I have chosen
to relate a story the significance of which I hope
will do justice to this occasion and reflect the
honour I feel in accepting the kind invitation
extended to me by Professor Moir.

Although the story begins in Rome, it is a
tale of many cities, for it provided the setting
last year for an event that may influence world
history.

Shortly before the adjournment of the Council
of Fathers in the Vatican in November 1964, the
population problem was debated under Schema
XIII, Chapter 4, Paragraph 21, as it related to
the dignity of marriage and the family. Of the
nineteen addresses, three, all by liberal cardinals,
had been published. Cardinal Suenans, Archbishop of Malines-Bruxelles, was eloquent in his
plea for recognition of the significance of scientific
advance and discovery. In concluding that portion
of his talk he urged, “I beg you my brothers;
let us avoid a new Galileo case. One is enough
for the Church.”

Galileo, as you know, was tried and found
guilty by the Inquisition because he considered
the current Ptolemaic geocentric concept incompatible with his observations with the newly
discovered telescope. His objective findings
placed him in direct conflict with established
teaching. While the trial suppressed Galileo as
an individual, it merely postponed the acceptance of certain scientific facts, a miscarriage that
the Church failed to correct for 150 years.
Conflicts between scientific discovery and established order are not confined to the remote past,
but are rather reflections of human insecurity,
which seeks refuge in familiarly structured canon.
Religious bodies share with government and
individuals in this search for security. The plight
of the geneticists in Russia or of Robert
Oppenheimer in my own country are relatively

benign examples of the results of the same
pathologic thinking that often delays acceptance
of the truth lest it destroy the established order.
Cardinal Suenans protested, not in fear of
eventual recognition or solution of the problem,
but in fear that recognition and solution might
be too long delayed. A short ten years ago his
speech would doubtless have been considered
unconscionable and mad.

What new facts involved the Fathers in such
debate? Geometric expansion of population has
long been recognized and dire warnings have
frequently been sounded. These arguments have
been heard and denied in one way or another.
The change that has taken place is not in the
facts but in dissemination of knowledge in the
modern world, and true comprehension of the
threat to established order implicit in unbridled
fertility.

World Population Expansion

Until the middle of the last century population
growth was held in check by high death rates
coupled with the relatively slow breeding characteristic of the human female. Death rates then
began to fall; the world’s population doubled
and attained the two billion mark eighty years
later, or by 1930. By 1960 another billion had
been added and, were the trend of growth to
continue, not just another billion, but a staggering three billion will have been added by the
year 2000.7

Demographers have vied with each other in
presenting these cold statistics in the most
startling and bizarre terms. For example,

 

* The Litchfield Lecture presented at the University of
Oxford on 23rd June 1965.

t The word billion is not of course used here in its
English sense, but, as in France and the United States,
to indicate one thousand million.—Editor.

161

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, December 1965, 57, 4.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Professor Charles Westoff of Princeton University declares, “If the current rate of world population growth had prevailed since the beginning
of the Christian era, the world would have
contained 90 billion times ten to the twelfth
power of 90 billion times a trillion persons,”
a figure he regards, to say the least, as “staggering
to the imagination.”’ The prize for a shocker of
this sort should probably go to Professor Coale
of the same institution for the following computation, “In about 6,500 years, approximately
the period of recorded history, if current growth
continues, the descendants of the present world
population would form a solid spear of live
bodies exploding with a radial velocity that,
barring relativity, would equal the velocity of
light.”

It seems unnecessary to elaborate upon the
point with further similar data or to direct
attention to the spread of hunger and poverty
that resulted from the population explosion;
nor is it necessary to detail its causes. In simplest
terms, the prevailing high birth rate throughout
the world to-day coupled with the spectacular
fall in death rates, will inevitably create statistics
even more startling than those just presented.
These data would not in themselves have evoked
either the urgency or the alarm voiced by
Cardinal Suenans had they not been widely
publicized and had a growing and increasingly
well-informed segment of the public, aided by
increased ease and speed of travel, not understood the warning and seen for itself the effects
of unlimited growth of population.

When standards of living are so low and increases in population so rapid that there is
never hope of a better life, as in India; or when a
traditionally well educated people can send only
the eldest son to the university because of lack
of room, as in Taiwan, then, sooner or later,
governments fall and long established order
changes. These are no longer foreign concepts,
for even in America there is an incipient sense
of crowding. Formerly uncultivated woodlands
sprout ranch houses and water is often in short
supply. Megalopolis now extends from Maine to
Virginia. Our universities are over-crowded and
the best of them were forced to raise their
admission standards to extraordinary heights.
Only about half of the young people wishing to

162

study medicine can find a place in the medical
schools. These facts and their implications for
the future are understood by increasing numbers
of people and with increasing clarity. Cardinal
Suenans may have been advanced in his thinking
but an aroused and vocal public forced the
debate. The prelate does not doubt that his
Church will eventually reconcile its doctrine
with modern requirements, but he fears that a
repetition of the delay of 150 years required to
correct the error made in Galileo’s case could
put the world beyond the point of return.

New York City and Contraception

The effectiveness of public opinion in this
situation is well illustrated by the changes
wrought in my own city of New York during
the past few years. I present the narrative with
some hesitation, lest it become overly personal
or immodest, but I feel that no event in recent
times focusses the issue more sharply. The bitter
controversy in New York City in 1958 over
the distribution of birth control information
in public institutions may well have marked
a turning point in American thinking on the
subject.

New York City operates about twenty
municipal hospitals, which are the principal
sources of medical care for the city’s needy.
They are tax-supported institutions in which
there is no charge to the indigent for medical
care. The municipal hospitals are the direct
responsibility of the Commissioner of Hospitals
appointed by the Mayor. He has an Advisory
Board, made up of ten prominent citizens. The
individual institutions are governed by a medical
board of senior physicians with the approval of
the Commissioner of Hospitals. Nearly half the
city’s babies are delivered in these facilities.

When I was appointed to the Chair of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the State University
of New York, I automatically assumed the
directorship of the Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology at the Kings County Hospital,
with the largest maternity service in the city.
Although both tubal sterilization and therapeutic abortions could be carried out in municipal hospitals on proper indications, there was
an unwritten ban on contraceptive prescriptions
ONE GALILEO IS ENOUGH

or even advice. In spite of clear permission for
such practices for health reasons by the laws of
the State of New York, patients, regardless of
their religious beliefs or personal preferences,
could not even be told where to obtain such
advice. The ban was rigidly enforced, not by
any written directive, but by a sort of “untouchability”’, although the unfluential New York
Academy of Medicine had contended for years
that the place for contraceptive clinics was in
hospitals. The ban was attributed to the power
of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New
York, to the Mayor (a Catholic) and to the
many Catholic members of local medical boards.
Perhaps the strongest element of all was the fear
of the staff doctors to speak out lest they offend
their Catholic colleagues.

My position, as well as that of my fellow
professors, was humiliating and paradoxical. In
lectures to medical students we talked of family
planning as an integral part of obstetrics, and
stressed its importance, especially among the
needy; but when asked where such services were
provided, we were forced to confess that our
hands were tied. Tied by whom or what?
Nothing was mentioned about our own fear to
speak out and take a stand.

Although some members of our local medical
board at the Kings County Hospital were
Catholic, the majority favoured birth control
services in the hospital. Not wishing to offend
the minority, the board unanimously approved,
and sent to the Commissioner of Hospitals a
resolution that did not mention birth control.
This resolution merely stated that Sections 1142
and 1145 of the State Penal Code (sections that
permit physicians to prescribe contraceptives)
should be extended to apply to physicians of the
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology of the
Hospital. The Commissioner of Hospitals, who
has power of approval in such matters, as well
as the ultimate power of appointment and dismissal of the staff, by refusing comment, initiated
a delaying process which was to last for fifteen
months.

But events more significant than man’s procrastination were already in progress. The city’s
unspoken ban on birth control was exposed to
the public through a series of newspaper articles.
With obvious public conflict in the offing,

medical leaders of the community, including the
New York Academy of Medicine, . intensified
their efforts to reach a solution. Finally, under
extensive pressure, a weak and _ vacillating
Commissioner of Hospitals, who had blocked
all previous efforts in a vain hope that the issue
would disappear, suddenly reversed his feelings
and replied to the New York Academy of
Medicine that “‘In the municipal hospitals there
shall be no interference in proper and accepted
therapeutic procedures nor intervention with the
ethical relationships between patient and physician.”’ I, and our medical board in general, took
the statement at face value and proceeded to
order needed contraceptive supplies. Although
none were forthcoming they were obtained
easily from private sources, and on 16th July
1958 the climax of the story was reached in an
attempt to fit a diaphragm for a severely diabetic
multigravida, who had been delivered several
times by caesarean section and whose life would
clearly be jeopardized by future pregnancy. On
the morning of the planned fitting, with the
patient already on the examining table, the
Commissioner telephoned an order prohibiting
the procedure. I complied but gave the story to
an alerted press. The Commissioner’s foolish
prohibition and our compliance reduced the
issue to simple, easily comprehended elements:
a cause and a victim. When properly mixed,
these elements assure victory in public controversy. The fight was on!

Pressure of Public Opinion

For two months the situation occupied the
front pages of all the city’s newspapers and
received increasing attention in national news
media. Spread upon the record was a more
comprehensive picture of the current political
and religious status of contraception than had
ever been seen. As expected, the Commissioner’s
position was defended by the chancery office of
the archdiocese, which issued a statement reiterating traditional Roman Catholic positions.
Further support was forthcoming from Catholic
medical and lay groups, which felt that public
monies should not be spent for services they
believed “immoral’’. Unexpected, however, was
the near unanimity of the rest of the community.

163
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Vigorous denunciation of the Commissioner’s
prohibition was spearheaded by the Council of
Protestant Churches, the Board of Rabbis and
the American Civil Liberties Union, as well as
the Planned Parenthood Federation and nearly
every other public-spirited organization in the
city. The staid New York Times summarized
public opinion in an editorial that characterized
as “‘astonishing’”’ any doubt that “birth control,
which is regarded by many medical authorities

. . aS an important element in preventive
medicine, can be prescribed in city hospitals. .. .
Birth control is profoundly objectionable to
many persons, and, whether as patients or nurses
or doctors, their views must be fully respected.
These views cannot be controlling in regard to
other persons in the community who also use
the city hospitals and to whom medical prescription of contraceptive devices presents no
moral or religious problem. Freedom of religion
works both ways.”

As the New York controversy reached this
stage, many thoughtful Catholics were embarrassed and saddened to find their Church placed
in the undemocratic position of attempting to
impose its views on others. An unusual editorial
by James Finn in The Commonweal, a Catholic
publication, reflects this concern. On the issue,
he writes, “It is evident that beliefs, teachings,
attitudes, and opinions have changed greatly
for many people during the past several decades.
Where consensus once existed, it no longer does.
Or more correctly, it has shifted ground. Other
citizens cannot expect Catholics to change their
beliefs or their practices merely to conform to
this new consensus. But neither can Catholics
expect to control the beliefs and practices of
others concerning these measures. . . . There are
many sound and compelling reasons why
Catholics should not strive for legislation which
clashes with the beliefs of a large portion of
society. In so doing, they do not only strain the
limits of the community and considerably lessen
the persuasive force of their teachings, but they
almost inevitably strengthen, in the minds of
non-Catholics, the already present worries about
Catholic power.”

This editorial was singularly effective, expressing a basic concept of democracy deeply
held by our people and soon to be clearly

164

enunciated by a young man destined to become
our first Roman Catholic president. It is entirely
possible that without solution of the New York
controversy, and without Mr. Kennedy’s unequivocal stand on the matter, he might not
have become President of the United States. In
any case, in face of an unmistakable public
attitude, the ban was no longer tenable. Keenly
aware of this situation, Mayor Wagner stated
that, despite his personal Catholic view, the
issue was a medical matter to be decided by the
Board of Hospitals. Their decision, written
largely by a Catholic member, Dr. Charles
Gordon, was a statesmanlike approach ““When
there are clearly defined conditions in which the
health of a woman may be jeopardized by
pregnancy, it is generally recognized by the
medical profession that contraceptive measures
are proper medical practice. Municipal hospitals
should provide such needed advice, preventive
measures and devices for female patients under
their care, whose life and health, in the opinion
of the medical staff, may be jeopardized by
pregnancy and who also wish to avail themselves
of such services.”

The story is almost completed. As Finn had
intimated, the controversy did not remain confined to New York, but initiated a national
revolution of opinion removing old taboos from
much of the public press and changing attitudes
of many city health officials. Our Federal
government switched from President Eisenhower’s “‘Nothing could be further from the
business of government” to “advise if asked’’,
and finally, to “help if asked”. The World
Health Organization, conservative to the bone,
allowed that teaching of population problems
was germane to medical education and now,
quite recently, has offered help and information
on these matters. Ex-presidents Eisenhower and
Truman have become vice-presidents of the
Planned Parenthood Federation. In New York
City a new Commissioner of Hospitals asked
the Academy of Medicine to define medical
indications for contraception and received the
reply, “Anything affecting the health of the
mother.”” Health was defined, according to
WHO, as not only “physical well-being” but
“mental and social well-being’’, as well. The way
was opened to a broad public health programme,
ONE GALILEO IS ENOUGH

but many still would not have it so. The argument at this time hinged on motivation. What
is the use of expending all this effort on the poor
when they are not properly motivated to use
contraception anyway. The belief that the poor
are a careless lot with little regard for their
health or way of living is still held by many.
Indeed, experience with older methods of contraception, such as the diaphragm, lent credibility
to the concept of lack of motivation. It was, of
course, naive to think otherwise for that particular device required an intelligent approach to
sex, privacy, and a high degree of motivation.
In addition, it necessitated a period of training
best given in a private doctor’s office, or at least
in an unhurried clinic. Motivation is complex.
People cannot generate enthusiasm for a device
that they do not quite trust, have not the privacy
to use and that an impatient husband will not
tolerate. For the population in question, a usable
contraceptive must be simple, cheap, virtually
100 per cent effective, and most important,
must not be directly associated with coitus.

Income and Family Size

Demographic studies in the United States
show that the historic differentials in family size
have been disappearing since the war. Specifically
the inverse ratio of size and family income, and
the difference between urban and rural families
are not so apparent as they were formerly.
Several recent studies such as The Growth of the
American Family* indicate that smaller families
are desired. Nine out of ten women, white and
non-white, considered two to four children the
ideal number; furthermore, the number wanted
was smaller than the number considered ideal,
and the lower income families wanted fewer
children than the more affluent.

A Health Department survey recently showed
that 70 per cent of 2,600 clinic patients wanted
no more children.

Desires have been far from fulfilment, for the
1962 census shows little restriction of fertility
among the poor. Thirty-four per cent of families
with four children, and 44 per cent of those with
six had incomes below $4,000 per year as com
* Freedman, R., Whelpton, P. K. and Campbell, A. A.
1959. New York, McGraw-Hill.

pared with 20 per cent of families with two and
22 per cent of those with three children. If excess
fertility be defined in terms of families in which
the last child is unwanted, the discrepancies
among the income groups are even more striking.
Low income, low educational achievement and
excess fertility go hand in hand, but not necessarily because the people want it so.

Granted, all the known differences in sexual
mores and living conditions between upper and
lower class families, a most significant factor
influencing excess fertility seems to be the health
opportunities available. Over 80 per cent of the
married non-white mothers in New York City
are delivered in municipal hospitals, but until
very recently, these institutions furnished their
contraceptive services in hurried and crowded
facilities, offering methods grossly inadequate for
the population served. Little wonder then that
there seemed to be a lack of motivation.

The New Contraceptives

The decision of the Board of Hospitals and
the broadening of the definition of health
happily coincided with two developments in the
field of contraception: the advent of the pill and
the re-introduction of intra-uterine devices. Both
are simple, relatively inexpensive and not directly
associated with coitus. The “‘pill’’ is known to
act through inhibition of ovulation. The method
of action of the intra-uterine devices, however,
is still unknown, although there are suggestions
that it may cause rapid passage of the egg down
the fallopian tube with the result that the ovum
arrives in the uterine cavity before the development of ideal conditions for implantation. Since
there is no evidence that the intra-uterine devices
cause abortion in the strict sense of the word,
they are more compatible with the thinking of
the relatively uneducated segment of the population. These methods of contraception have
received widespread publicity in the United
States, but newspaper and radio discussions
have been insignificant compared with the
spread of information by word of mouth. The
growth of contraceptive clinics in the municipal
hospitals of New York City has exceeded all
expectation. In our own clinic we now enrol
several hundred patients a week, and it is entirely

165
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

possible that new patients in the clinic this
year will exceed half the number of women
delivered in the hospital. About 90 per cent of
women choose the pill, which they consider more
positive protection. To date, there have been
only one or two pregnancies with a dropout rate
of about 10 per cent. This low rate figure is a
clear indication of motivation, for not only do
the patients have to return every three or four
months for a new supply of pills, but they often
have to stand in long queues to obtain them.

Our experience with the intra-uterine devices
is somewhat limited, but their effectiveness and
acceptability are clear, as indicated in the experience at the Sloane Hospital for Women, where
one-third of the three thousand women delivered
in 1963 had their contraceptive device inserted
postpartum.

News of their availability spread rapidly
among the largely indigent clientele of the
hospital. The Lippes loop D, probably the best
of all the devices currently employed was expelled spontaneously by ten of 230 women; nine
had it removed because of undesirable side
effects; and one became pregnant with the device
in place. On the basis of a much larger sample
in a collaborative study conducted by the
National Committee on Maternal Health, Tietze
cites a pregnancy rate of 2:4 per hundred women
-years of exposure and a combined rate of
expulsion and removal of about 25 per cent
during the first twelve months of use.

It is estimated that over 45,000 indigent mothers
will receive contraceptive information and services from the municipal hospitals of New York
City this year, a marked contrast with the situation of a few years ago, and even more marked
when one considers that the dropout rate with
the diaphragm during the early years was 50 per
cent with a pregnancy rate greater than 20 per
cent. Lack of motivation among the indigent
thus appears to be a myth.

166

The situation in New York does not necessarily
apply to all of America, nor to the rest of the
world, but it seems not improbable that the
events there may recur elsewhere in the world,
provided knowledge and information are widely
disseminated. If the thinking exemplified by
Cardinal Suenans prevails, they too will come
to pass. Methods of contraception are not yet
perfect, but they are far superior to those of a
few years ago, and moreover, there is real
promise in future research.

If a moral is to be drawn from this story, it is
that established tenets of neither the laity nor
the clergy necessarily pose serious obstacles to
the control of fertility in a population well
informed and fully cognizant of the perils of
unimpeded fertility.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Coale, A. 1959. Increases in expectation of life and population growth. Presented at International Population
Conference, Vienna.

DeSantillana, G. 1955. The Crime of Galileo. University
of Chicago Press.

Fermi, L. and Bernardini, G. 1965. Galileo and Scientific
Reogalion: New York, Fawcett World Library Premier
Book.

Finn, J. 1958. Controversy in New York. Commonweal,
12th September 1958.

Geymonat, L. 1965. Galileo Galilei—A Biography and
Inquiry into his Philosophy of Science. New York,
McGraw-Hill.

Gordon, C. Personal communication.

Jaffe, F. 1964. Family planning and poverty. J. Mar.
Fam., 26, 467.

Hall, R. 1965. Use of intrauterine contraceptives in an
indigent population. In A. J. Sobrero and S. Lewit
(eds.). Advances in planned parenthood. Cambridge,
Mass. Schenkmann, pp. 115-122.

New York Board of Hospitals Decision Memorandum
34, from the Commissioner of Hospitals, 1958.

Tietze, C. 1965. Progress report: cooperative statistical
program for the evaluation of intrauterine contraceptive devices. Presented to the International Conference on Family Planning. Geneva, Switzerland, August
196S.

Westoff, C., Potter, R., and Sagi, P. 1963. The third
child: a study in the prediction of fertility. Princeton
University Press.
