Some Observations on Fecundity,
By Masor LEONARD DaRwiy.

Major Darwin read a paper on Monday, October 9th, 1922, to the
Société Belge d’ Kugénique at a meeting in Brussels. After reviewing
the position of Eugenics at the present day he spoke as follows:

The point which I wish to insist on to-night is that in any such
enquiry, though it is to man himself that we should mainly look, yet
the study of animal life will also be of some assistance to us. And
rather than discuss this whole question in the abstract, perhaps I shall
make the best use of my time if I may put before you in some detail
one single point which I have lately been considering with great care.
It is, as far as I know, a new point, and it may therefore be in some
degree disputable. But if it should provoke discussion, so much the
better.

Questions concerning the density of our population have always
been important; but their importance has been greatly intensified by
the great war. All the factors on which population depends ought,
therefore, to be carefully investigated; and one of these factors is
human fecundity, or the number of children which a married couple
would produce in the absence of all impediments.f And this is an
example of a problem concerning men on which some light may be
thrown by a study of animals.

Some individuals produce larger families than do other individuals
belonging to the same species; that is to say that some are endowed
with a higher natural fecundity than are others. Moreover, the members of large families will in their turn as a rule produce somewhat
larger families than will the members of small families; or, in other
words, natural fecundity is an hereditary quality. Now amongst
wild animals, large families, like big batallions, will generally, in the
struggle for existence, overpower the members of small families merely
on account of their great numbers; and, this going on generation after
generation, what we should expect to find would be a progressive
increase in the sizes of families. But students of evolution will tell
us that in the course of ages, not only has natural fecundity not always
increased, but that is has often greatly decreased. There is no reason
to suppose that the size of the families of wild animals is, as a fact, now

fIt is to be noted that I am not speaking of fertility, or the number of children
which a ouple actually do produce.
SOME OBSERVATIONS ON FECUNDITY. 267

ancreasing or decreasing ; and what we want to know is how it has come
about that, in spite of the obvious racial advantages possessed by large
families, there now exists a nearly stationary position in regard to
matural fecundity amongst all animals. Here is a problem in natural
history for our consideration.

The answer to this riddle is, as I believe, to be found in connection
with the amount of care given by parents to their offspring. Any in‘crease in the number of a family must decrease the amount of parental
care which can be separately bestowed on each offspring; and from
this fact it follows that the mortality of young animals increases as the
family grows larger. As long as the family remains small, the additional risk which those already born will have to encounter because of
the appearance of another offspring will be small. But with each
‘addition to the family, this risk will increase; and a point will be
reached when further additions to the family will be so injurious that
there will be no corresponding further increase in the number of the
offspring who will grow up and will themselves become parents.
Indeed, if the size of the family increases beyond this point, the mor‘tality amongst the young may be so great that there will be an actual
‘decrease in the number of the offspring who will become full grown
animals. In other words, if, in the process of evolution, natural fecundity were to increase steadily, the number of offspring in each family
destined to become independent of their parents would at first increase
up to a maximum and then begin to decrease. Now in the struggle
for existence it is not the total number of the offspring which need be
considered in this connection; for it is only those who themselves
‘become parents who will help to maintain the race. Natural selection
will, therefore, only cause fecundity to increase up to, but not beyond,
this maximum point, that is up to the point at which the largest number of adults will be produced. There is no reason to believe that the
size of the family will go on increasing for ever, as at first sight seemed
probable.

Here I must briefly answer an objection which may be raised
against my arguments, an objection based on the fact that selection
‘takes place, not only between individuals, but also between tribes or
groups of individuals. If a pack of animals is too numerous, its
‘members may become so weakened by want of food as to make them
unable to compete with smaller neighbouring packs. The causes of
death, including the want of food, which affected all members of a
pack equally would not, however, tend to prevent the parents of large
families from playing the greatest part in the production of the descendants of that pack. The struggle between packs of animals might be
so severe as to cause the destruction of whole packs; but it would not
prevent natural fecundity from being slowly increased fron: generation
to generation up to but not beyond the point at which the largest
number of adults would be produced. And this point, as we have
‘seen, entirely depends on the high mortality which obtains amongst the
young in large families. Thus, as regards animal fecundity, natural
‘selection looks almost exclusively to deaths due to want of parental
eare, and hardly at all to the destruction of grown up and independent
individuals.
268 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Primitive man, or man when he first deserved to be described as @
human being, lived very much like other animals, and what was true
of one was probably true of the other in many respects. If my conclusions are correct, it would therefore seem probable that the fecundity
of primitive man was so regulated as to produce that density of population which would best secure the survival of large families if adults
only are counted, without any reference to the general death rate of the
whole community. There is, therefore, no reason to doubt that many
of our savage ancestors died of want. Moreover, there is no reason to
suppose that the fecundity of man has diminished in historic times;
and as infantile mortality has greatly diminished, the number of
offspring which a married couple can produce is far in excess of what is
now needed to maintain our numbers.* Science gives us no reason to
doubt that man, if he were to follow his natural instincts, would now
multiply so rapidly as quickly to cause great suffering.

This is no doubt all pure theory, and theory should always be
checked by reference to fact. When thinking over this problem it
occurred to me that an excellent test would be afforded by a comparison
between the fecundity of the cuckoo and that of other birds closely
related to it. The cuckoo lays its eggs in the nests of other birds, as
we all know; and the little cuckoos aid their unnatural mother in
her questionable designs by shouldering out from the nest their still
smaller foster brothers and sisters. The cuckoo, moreover, in order
to make her own egg less noticeable when she lays it, at the same time
robs the nest she is invading of one of its eggs and eats it; thus, if I
may so describe it, getting a free meal at the public expense. The
point is, however, that these immoral birds increase the amount of
care given to each of their young ones by delegating the whole of their
responsibilities as parents to several other birds. Now, if natural
selection in regulating fecundity is, as it were, only looking to the
deaths which occur amongst adults, we should expect to find nothing
unusual in the matter of egg-laying amongst cuckoos. But if, as I
have suggested, fecundity is regulated in accordance with the amount
of parental care available for the young, we should expect to find the
cuckoo laid more eggs than the nightjar or any other closely related
bird with more respectable habits. I confess that I was pleased to
find that the cuckoo may lay as many as twenty eggs whilst the nightjar lays only two.t It is even more interesting to note that the number
of eggs which the cuckoo actually does lay depends on the number of
the nests which are available, that is on the amount of delegated
parental care on which she can rely. Again, those fish which have
no parental cares produce an enormously greater number of progeny

 

*Some authorities consider that human fecundity is increasing. See The
Population Problem. A.M. Carr-Saunders. Clarendon Press, 1922.

{The evolutionary results of the cuckoo adopting these methods must have been
somewhat as follows. The size of the family at first increased considerably, the
size being measured at the time when the young birds became independent of parents
or foster parents. This must have resulted in an increase in the cuckoo population.
This in turn led to a rise in the death rate, until the size of the family, if measured
by the rumber of offspring who themselves became parents, again fell to two, no
more or no less; that is assuming the population to become stationary. See The
Cuckoo’s Secret. E.Chance. Sidgwick & Jackson, 1922. fs
SOME OBSERVATIONS ON FECUNDITY. 269

than do those fish which look after their young. These facts seem to
confirm my theoretical suggestions.

Thus far, we have been dealing with theory and fact, and now I
ask you to follow me fora little in the path of imagination. Shakespeare,
generally a sound guide both in fact and in fancy, tells us that the hedge
Sparrow is a bird whose nest is often invaded by the cuckoo.f And I
cannot but wish that Shakespeare were here to tell us what would
happen if the cuckoo and the hedge sparrow became as good and as
wise as human beings. Would cuckoos see the error of their ways, and
at once begin building their own nests? That is asking too much—
from cuckoos. Would they perceive that, if they invaded too many
nests, there would be an insufficiency of hedge-sparrows for their purposes in the distant future? I doubt it; for a cuckoo will always
remain acuckoo. Then as to a wise and good hedge-sparrow, no doubt
it would at once perceive that the cuckoo’s egg was a changeling for
one of its own. But would this virtuous bird think it wrong to eject
the ugly intruder? And, if so, would she limit the size of her family
so as to be able to give from the first undivided attention to her uninvited foster child? Ido not know. I leave it to you to answer these
difficult questions. And, in conclusion, I will only express the hope
that, when you hear the cuckoos singing in the spring, the following
four questions may recur to your minds. In the first place, have we
not now many human cuckoos living in our midst; that is persons of
low morals and poor intelligence, endowed with the natural capacity
for producing large families, the main object of whose life seems to be
to throw the burden of rearing their numerous offspring on to the shoulders of others? Have we not also amongst us noble-minded but mistaken human hedge-sparrows ; that is persons who, for the sake of easing
the strain on well-developed but unscrupulous human cuckoos, are
ready to sacrifice all their own chances of becoming parents of children
of their own kind. Again, in looking to the future of our race, ought
we not to consider quality rather than quantity. Lastly, for married
couples designed by nature for the task, is not one of their highest duties
on earth to take their part in peopling the world with descendants
hereditarily endowed with noble qualities?

 

¢Shakespeare was in truth a little too hard on the cuckoo.
*“The Hedge-Sparrow fed the cuckoo so long
That it had its head bit off by its young.’’
King Lear 1. 4.
