WEST INDIAN

IMMIGRATION

SOME CRITICISMS, COMMENTS AND A REJOINDER

S WAS to be expected the Society’s
A Beeisis on West Indian Immigration*

aroused a variety of comments, and criticisms. In general, however, it seems to have been
accepted as an honest attempt to provide a
wider perspective on this difficult topic. We here
print the recommendations set forth at the end
of the Broadsheet, followed by certain of the
Criticisms received, either in whole or in extract,
together with a final rejoinder from the namie
author of the Broadsheet.

Recommendations
The first is the promotion of research upon the
degree and results of race mixing so far.

The second is a deliberate and extensive effort
so as to educate people that there shall be proper
appreciation of the qualities of the human or
group which is exotic, coupled with the recognition that breeding with that which is different is
more likely to lead to trouble than to happiness.

The third is for real consideration to be given
to the advisability of imposing upon all immigrants of whatever origin or type, certain tests of
quality so as to limit the arrival of those with
attributes below the general average for the
United Kingdom.

The fourth is that the time has come for very
careful consideration to be given to the question
as to whether an annual quota should now be
imposed upon West Indians, and indeed upon
others, wishing to enter the United Kingdom,
and this in spite of the disadvantages such a
measure would entail.

* * *

Several letters appeared in The Times following
the publication of the Broadsheet; the correspondents included Dr. Kenneth Little (October
13th); Mr. George Unwin (October 16th);
Captain Richard Pilkington (October 24th).

* West Indian Immigration by Colin Bertram. Issued by
the Eugenics Society and circulated as an enclosure with
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1958, 50, 3. Price 1s. 6d.

A Comment by Dr. C. O. Carter, B.A., B.M.,
M.R.C.P.

The aim of the Eugenics Society’s Broadsheet
was to stimulate people to clarify their own
views on the social and eugenic implications of
immigration into this country of men and
women deriving ultimately from West Africa.
My own thoughts have been clarified, and those
bearing on the eugenic considerations are given
below, with the full realization that these are
matters of judgment about which there is no
scientific certainty. The eugenic considerations
fall, I think, under three heads: the problem of
miscgenation, the genetic quality of people of
West African origin as a group, and the genetic
quality of the immigrants as individuals.

My own view of miscgenation is that it is not
important. There are theoretical grounds on
which a mixture of British and West African
derived populations might be genetically harmful. In contrast to the other populations in
Europe and Near Asia which have provided
immigrants to Britain, the inhabitants of West
Africa differ widely, in many of the individual
gene frequencies that can be measured, from the
inhabitants of any European country. This is
true of many of the genes for the red blood cell
antigens, the plasma proteins, and the variants
of haemoglobin. Since genes undergo selection
as part of integrated gene complexes, population
mixture might have been harmful. My own view
is, however, that the theoretical arguments are
not compelling, and that actual observation of
mixed Negro-White populations suggests that
the mixture has neither any marked genetic illeffects, nor, on the other hand, produces any
obvious hybrid vigour.

The next eugenic consideration, that of the
genetic quality as a group of people of West
African origin, can be considered under the
heading of health, and of socially valuable
qualities of mind. As regards health, fortunately
none of the single gene-locus differences between
the two populations appear to cause maternal
251

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1959, 50, 4.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

foetal incompatibility. It is probable that the
immigrants as a whole will be genetically less
well adapted to diseases prevalent in Britain,
and also will carry genes (such as that for sicklecell haemoglobin) which had selective advantage
in West Africa, but are disadvantageous here.
However, the main environmental causes of
disease are being so rapidly eliminated that
genetic lack of resistance to them is, I think,
becoming irrelevant. With respect to mental
qualities, many research workers have shown
differences between the averages of populations
of European and West African origin, but none
which cannot be explained as due to cultural
differences. There very probably are differences
between the averages of the populations, but
they are dwarfed by the differences which may
be found between individual members of the
same population.

In my view, therefore, the eugenic effects of
West Indian immigration will, in the main,
depend on the individual genetic quality of the
immigrants. Little information is available on
this at the moment, and genetic endowment is,
in any case, difficult to measure. But, in my own
opinion, there is no doubt that, if immigration
in Britain was restricted to those who have
reached a good educational level, Britain would
be gaining from the narrow view-point of
national eugenics. A policy of restricting immigration to those for whom employment is
readily available would be selective in just this
way. Britain has need of nurses, teachers,
technicians and scientists. West Indians suitably
trained, or capable of being trained, for these
occupations could be accepted without difficulty.
In contrast, there is already unemployment, and
will probably continue to be unemployment in
this country as automation develops, among
those who cannot be educated beyond the requirements of simple manual labour. Taking the
wider view, however, talented West Indians
will be useful whether they come to Britain or
remain in the West Indies, and Britain’s gain
will be the West Indies’ loss.

My personal views, therefore, on the Broadsheet’s recommendations are that: the first is
valuable; the second is, given the right social
conditions, unnecessary; the third is valuable,
and best achieved by limiting immigrants to

252

those trained for, or suited. to training for,
occupations for which there is a national shortage; the fourth would then be redundant. [
would have liked to have seen two further
recommendations: first that Britain should intensify her present efforts to help the West
Indians develop a more balanced economy in
their own islands; second that Britain should
intensify her efforts to help West Indians learn
the art of planning the size of their families.

A Letter from Dr. Lucy Mair, Ph.D., Reader in

Applied Anthropology, University of London
Sir, In his preface to the Eugenics Society’s
Broadsheet on West Indian Immigration the
President warns us that policies dictated by
benevolence or sentimentality may be frustrated
by “‘the inherent qualities of humanity”. I must
therefore try to avoid basing arguments on
ethical presuppositions which might be discounted as sentimental, and consider only
matters of logic and factual accuracy.

The matters discussed in the Broadsheet
belong to quite different orders of fact—the
social, concerned with the relations of organized
human groups, and the biological, concerned
with the hereditary constitution of individuals
—but the line of argument slides to and fro
between them.

Undoubtedly certain social and administrative
problems have been created by the immigration
of West Indians in significant numbers to certain
localities (if West Indian immigrants are considered in relation to the total population of
the United Kingdom their numbers are not
significant). These problems may be regarded as
the cost of permitting free immigration from
Commonwealth countries. It is relevant to weigh
this cost against that of departing from the
principle of free immigration. The importance
of friendly relations between the United Kingdom and the members of a Commonwealth in
which people with white skins form a small
minority is recognized by the hard-headed at
least as clearly as it is by the soft-hearted to
whom the warnings of the Broadsheet are
addressed.

It is not clear whether we are being told that
the problems of inadequate housing and unemployment are peculiar when it is West Indians
WEST INDIAN IMMIGRATION

who are unemployed or live in slums. It is almost
universal to find that the most recent immigrants
to any urban area are the worst housed, and also,
because they are identifiable as outsiders, that
those who have been longer established in the
area resent their competition for accommodation
and for jobs. All that is said under this head
could have been said of Irish immigrants a
century ago. They entered this country, as the
West Indians do, because it offered prospects of
employment which were not available at home,
and those who did not move on to the even
better prospects of America attained in the
course of time to living standards comparable
with those of their neighbours and ceased to be
thought of as a different kind of human being.

One must also say something about the argument from the illegitimacy rate in the West
Indies, which is taken to show that ‘“‘the British
conception of family life must be alien to these
immigrants”. To a student of society it is not
entirely certain that there is a British conception
of family life, but one can see how most readers
of the Broadsheet will take it. The statement is
made, without any reference, that the permanent
unlegalized unions which have been called
“faithful concubinage” are now being replaced
by promiscuity. One may compare with these
statements the results of the intensive study of
family life in British Guiana made a few years
ago by R. T. Smith. He demonstrated that the
majority of fathers recognize their children, and
the latter suffer no social disabilities from their
illegitimate status. It is normal for children to be
brought up as members of a family, even though
the constitution of the family has not been
sanctioned by Church and State. The ceremony
of marriage is regarded as an element in middle
class culture, and is sought by people who wish
to raise their class status. A high rate of illegitimacy for first-born children has been found in
the lower status groups of many societies; it
proves little about attitudes towards the responsibilities of parenthood.

It is true that the number of illegitimate births
is high in places where there is a transient population of unattached males, as occurs particularly
where armed forces are stationed. It would be
interesting to know whether the illegitimate
children of “‘mixed”’ parentage in places where

troops of many nations have been stationed were
a significantly high proportion of the total.

But the Eugenics Society is actually less concerned about the birth of “unwanted” children
than about the birth of “‘racially mixed” children.
Why ? They say repeatedly that we know nothing
about the effects of “race mixture”. They say
that “‘a satisfactory study of the results of distant
intermarriage could only be carried out in a
place where social antagonism was negligible’.
But if this is granted it seems hardly permissible
to use phrases such as ““However conclusively
the unsuitability of race mixture may be demonstrated to be...” It cannot be seriously suggested
that this leaves the question open.

How do we know what is a race, and how do
we measure distance? West Indians have dark
skins; this is a conspicuous difference, but is it
correlated with other marked genetic differences ?
If so, why are we not told what these are? We
also learn that the Huguenots and Jews were
separate stocks which immigrated in the past.
They were not so markedly different that it
mattered; indeed they contributed, not genes,
but “‘notable talents”, to our “‘genetic pool’’. It
is as surprising to be told that “the Jews’’ are a
population with a constant genetic composition
as it is to have it suggested that the Huguenots
developed a mutation when they separated from
the Roman Catholic Church.

It is an observable fact that culturally different
peoples often find it difficult to live in amity, but
the Eugenics Society, in ascribing this to genetic
differences, disregards an enormous range of
facts which are directly relevant to this question.
These facts are the consequences of the one
fundamental fact that the human being is subject,
almost from the moment of conception, to a
process of environmental influences such that it
is extremely difficult to relate characteristics
of mind or behaviour with genetic factors. These
environmental influences include deliberate processes of education both in values and in
techniques, and it is by these latter that human
‘‘qualities’’ are commonly judged.

The Broadsheet bids us note that there are few
obvious examples of populations which are
“better for being the progeny of two markedly
dissimilar parent stocks”. Better for what?
Resistance to disease? To Communism? Passing

253
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the eleven-plus? Economic efficiency? Where a
population is denied economic and social
opportunities because of the attitude towards it
of other sections of the community, it is not
likely to be ‘“‘good for’? much. Nevertheless, the
“Indos” of Java made “‘better” Dutch soldiers
than did the Javanese. The coloured population
of South Africa have been found to be “‘good
for” quite a number of professional activities,
and, since they have attained to higher social
and economic status than the Bantu, could, I
suppose, be called “‘better’’ than the less mixed
population which ranks below them on this
scale.

If we follow the argument of the Broadsheet,
we are to explain the results of observable social
discrimination in terms of a genetic make-up
which is not observable. If this is a scientific mode
of argument, the difference between the natural
and social sciences is even wider than I supposed.

LUCY MAIR

Comments from Dr. J. P. M. Tizard, M.A., B.M.,
F.R.C.P., D.C.H., Reader in Child Health
at the Institute of Child Health of the
University of London.*

The Broadsheet contains many interesting facts

about immigration to this country and discusses

many varying opinions concerning the effects of
race admixture.

It is almost impossible to be wholly objective
in dealing with the subject of race relations and,
on reading and re-reading the Broadsheet, I
cannot but conclude that, in trying to present
the facts fairly, the author has unconsciously and
implicitly allowed a personal bias against
miscegenation to obtrude.

In the section on Biological Considerations
frequent reference is made to the “‘distaste”’ felt
by individuals or groups for the intermarriage
of men and women of widely differing genetic
stock. De gustibus non est disputandum and,
although I do not share this distaste, I willingly
concede that others have a right to their prejudices. But it should not be allowed that this
distaste, however widely held, is necessarily

* Dr. Tizard is a member of the Society’s Council. A
variety of his helpful suggestions were incorporated by
the author in the final draft of the Broadsheet, but Dr.
Tizard would have liked him to have gone further.

254

serving biological ends. There does not seem to
be a shred of evidence that the offspring of black
and white are biologically inferior. Theoretically
inferiority might exist, but to the paediatrician
working in an area of London that has a large
child mulatto population there is nothing whatsoever to suggest that these children compare
unfavourably with others in physical, intellectual and emotional health.

A “complete mingling of the races of mankind”’ is historically remote, would be essentially
unlikely if evolution remains selective and would
certainly be extraordinarily dull. But those who
value variety more than uniformity will feel that
there is something to be gained by “fringe”
mingling and that what is gained by the introduction of ‘‘new blood” will more than offset a
slight weakening of racial distinctions. Does
anyone feel that the eleven pages of Joneses in
the London telephone directory or the equal
number of Smiths in Edinburgh is evidence of
“emotional and genetic chaos” in this island or
has seriously diminished the separate identities
of the three nations?

Reference is made to the possible ‘‘stultification” of human evolution by miscegenation
(pages 19 and 20) since races have in the past
specialized in accord with climatic and other
environmental factors. It seems doubtful if
under conditions of modern civilization members
of any race (except perhaps a few of the most
primitive) could not be adapted to living in any
habitable part of the world. But if this is still the
case, then presumably natural selection will still
operate and the proposition that it is impossible
to “‘unmix’’ (page 20), once race mixture has
taken place, becomes illogical.

Common experience tells one that a marriage
stands a somewhat better chance of success if
the man and wife are not only of the same race
but also of the same nationality, intelligence, and
social class but this is not to say that marriage
between widely differing individuals is never
happy or should not be attempted.

It would seem likely that similarity in intelligence, taste, religious outlook, social class and so
on is of more importance in marriage than
nationality and these qualities might also prove
to be of greater importance than race if the social
prejudice against ‘“‘mixed”’ marriages disappeared.
WEST INDIAN IMMIGRATION

It is difficult to believe that “individuals of
widely differing genetic constitutions” can “‘live
in propinquity, harmony and in friendly esteem”
unless the idea of intermarriage is acceptable,
even if, in practice, such marriages are few.

On page 14 of the Broadsheet the author lists
a number of countries in which race mingling
has occurred peaceably, followed by the example
of the United States of America and South
Africa where race tension exists. He then continues “Viewed with distant dispassion, peaceful
happiness is not typical even of race juxtaposition, let alone race mixture, in many areas of the
world, from Ceylon to Southern Africa and from
Malaya to Kenya’’. If the word ‘‘even’’ is omitted
and the words “‘let alone” replaced by the word
“‘without”’ this sentence would in my opinion
sum up the situation admirably.

It is difficult to agree whole-heartedly with any
of the four recommendations which conclude
the Broadsheet. Research into the degree of race
mixing in this country might be interesting, but
research into the results of race mixing would,
as the author admits, be extraordinarily difficult
to evaluate.

The second recommendation is based on a
proposition which is debatable. The third implies
that the existing inhabitants of this island set a
recognizable standard of “quality” against which
would-be immigrants can be judged. The fourth
might in certain circumstances become a sad
necessity; my views on this have already been
expressed in THE EUGENICS REVIEW* A fifth
recommendation might have been added: namely
that steps should be taken to improve living
standards in the West Indies, with the hope
that the Federal Government will lift restrictions
against English immigrants!

I have been highly critical of the Broadsheet
but I think we owe a debt to its author for
collecting and presenting the facts and problems
and for giving us the opportunity of trying to
clarify our own thoughts on this vitally important
topic.

Letter from Dr. Richard Fox, M.B. (Lond.),
M.R.C.P.

Sir, Broadsheet No. 1, West Indian Immigration

is a rather bewildering document in that it sets

* 1958. 49, 185.

out to present a broad factual account of this
problem, gives wise warnings against emotionally-determined and premature views, and then
after a good clear beginning turns right round
on itself. Several recommendations of the latter
part appear archaic and based upon no sort of
valid evidence that one can gather in or out of
the Broadsheet. Restriction of immigration may,
with regret, become necessary from economic or
other necessity, but the eugenic grounds for this
are very doubtful. Dr. Kenneth Little has
demolished a good part of this publication from
the anthropological viewpoint in The Times of
October 13th, but I should like to add a few
comments.

It is suggested, for example, that the untutored
child basically discriminates on skin colour.
The authority for this statement is not given,
and several years with my children in India and
now in an immigration area in London convince
me that the reverse is true. Children are accepting
souls, and discrimination comes only with
sophistication. It is alleged too that the various
races evolve in their own ways depending upon
local conditions, and that the genetic constitution
appropriate to those conditions will be endangered by miscegenation. This theory would,
even if proved, be of slight importance. Adaptation over the centuries must have been to
terrain, climate, food and disease, yet never in
history has man been less dependent on such
local factors. The whitest man can live happily
in an air-conditioned house on the Equator, and
the blackest at the North Pole in electrically
heated clothes: food can be transported and
disease prevented. Emotion and group-attitudes
differ between communities, but surely the
Broadsheet treads on very insecure ground in
claiming them to be genetically determined?

The world grows ever smaller, and as we
impinge upon one another it becomes clearer
that racial discord will be the outstanding
problem of the future. The Broadsheet’s answer
to this falls not far short of a form of Apartheid:
we are told that the public must be educated in
the troubles and unhappiness that result from
most cases of mixed breeding (an unverified
assertion) and in the “ . . . appreciation of the
qualities of the human or group which is
exotic. . .”. This emphasis on differences seems

255
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

unfortunate at a time when reconciliation and
toleration are so vital, and especially as the
factual foundation is so much in doubt: the
memorandum is looking the wrong way. The
geneticists tell us that mixed breeding leads to
vigour in the species, and in-breeding to decline.
Surely the evidence must suggest that the illeffects of mixed marriages are culturally determined and that attack should therefore be
directed at cultural attitudes? Several examples
are mentioned in the Broadsheet of the troublefree and even beneficial mingling of races: in
Greenland, New Zealand, Portugal, parts of
South America, and England in earlier times. This
makes the conclusions still lesseasy to understand.

Another problem is that one is not clear from
this document how far to apply these views.
Although expressed in relation to West Indians,
there is nothing to prevent their extension to
inter-marriage with Jews, Celts, Latins, etc.
Should we educate the public against marrying
them too?

RICHARD FOX

Extract from a Letter Received from a Lady

I cannot see any purpose in the Broadsheet. .. .
Bloody-mindedness is no less revolting because
it is manifested by verbal attack wrapped up in
pseudo scientific language and under the pretext
of being high minded... . Your Society seems to
have as its aim the setting of man against his
fellows . . . hate seems to motivate every public
utterance . . . West Indian children . . . are
jolly little hybrids or shall we say pretty convincing conclusions of the qualitative results of
miscegenation.

Extract from a Crusade Appeal launched on
October 9th, 1958
After a considerable amount of thought and
prayer, over a period of many months, the
author of this appeal has been moved to send it
out believing that under God’s guidance and
help our British Isles can be delivered from the
invasion of the Black Man before it is too late. . .
Our White Women and White Girls are being
betrayed and being given up into the hands of
the Black Men, Pakistanis and Indians by the
very ones who should be protecting them. . . . To
ignore God-given aversion to inter-marriage

256

between White and Black is nothing less than
the height of folly. Miscegenation once it has
taken place will be irreversible.

Comments from Dr. J. R. Baker, D.Sc., (Oxon.),
F.R.S.

DR. G. C. L. BERTRAM’S broadsheet is in

many respects admirable, but it appears to me

that he has overlooked certain facts and given a

wrong emphasis in a few places. I believe that

the following notes are worthy of consideration.

(1) Our country—its customs, laws, literature,
learning, wealth, buildings, cultivated lands, and
natural scenery—is our heritage and our home.
Our ancestors intended it for us, their progeny.
It is proper for us to improve it as much as we
can and hand it on in turn to our own descendants.

(2) The people of any overpopulated country
can maintain or increase their standard of living
by restricting their birthrate. The effect of their
prudence must eventually be nullified if unrestricted immigration be allowed.

(3) Colour is over-emphasized in Dr.
Bertram’s broadsheet. It is true that colourdifferences are striking at a distance, but human
relationships depend on impressions gained from
nearby. It is obvious to Europeans who have had
opportunities for conversation with people of
various races that many dark-skinned people of
India have facial features closely resembling
their own, while negroes (especially negritians)
are sharply distinguished by their tightly twisted
hair, prognathous jaws, thick and often everted
lips, and broad noses. The emphasis on colour,
so frequent in discussions on race, tends to
minimize the very real structural differences that
exist.

Albinos occur occasionally among negroid
races. They are whiter than any normal European,
but people of the white races do not regard them
as similar to themselves.

Most Europeans do not consider that a dark
skin is necessarily disfiguring. Many of them take
a great deal of trouble to make their skin as dark
as possible.

(4) Those who consider it probable that
certain races are intellectually superior to certain
others, are commonly said to exhibit “racial
prejudice”. This is surely a wrong use of the
word prejudice. It seems to me probable that the
WEST INDIAN IMMIGRATION

various peoples of Europe are, on the average,
intellectually superior to the Australian aborigines. This does not imply that I had prejudged
the question before I knew anything about the
Australian aborigines.

To find out for certain whether different races
are (on the average) intellectually and emotionally equal, it would be necessary to separate a
very large number of new-born babies from
their parents, to educate them together in isolation from the outside world, and then to submit
them to tests of intellectual and emotional
development. Such an experiment cannot be
carried out, but this does not mean that it is
wrong to form an opinion on the subject. It
would be an extraordinary circumstance if races
that differ markedly in the structure of the skull
and in other measurable features were identical
in their nervous and sensory systems, and would
consequently respond in exactly the same way
to the same education. Many examples can be
quoted of species of animals which are so closely
related that even experts can scarcely distinguish
them by structural features, but which have
markedly different habits (and never breed
together in nature).

Rejoinder by Dr. Colin Bertram, M.A., Ph.D.,
General Secretary of the Eugenics Society
and named author of the Broadsheet

Life would indeed be dull without variety of
opinion: Something stimulating, too, would be
lost if critics and protagonists were to lose their
apparent consciousness of perfect rightness in
their own personal judgments. Life must be so
much easier if one feels like that. And it is
intriguing to attempt to identify some of the
many factors and circumstances in others, as
well as in ourselves, which lead to such diversity
of opinion.

It needs to be more fully recognized that a
Broadsheet limited to less than 10,000 words,
cannot but in some ways be inadequate for
presenting a complicated subject. Yet the more
the words the fewer the readers. One may
remark, too, that it is a salutary experience to
produce a Broadsheet which must pass through
the critical filter of an always helpful but nevertheless outspoken and varied Council of professional people. Responsibility for statements in

the Broadsheet is mine, but I am fortified by
appreciation of what seems to me to be the
corporate sound sense of that Council.

Criticisms of the Broadsheet are reproduced
above because they may help the achievement
of balanced judgment. Commendations of the
Broadsheet are not reproduced because praise,
of its nature, does not lead to further understanding.

I do not intend to deal in detail with points
raised by critics, though helpful some of them
are. But I do commend to all critics a more careful reading of what they criticize. A single
example will suffice. The Broadsheet includes the
remark that “the untutored child’s basic discrimination by skin colour is apt”. The use of
the Oxford dictionary will demonstrate that the
word “‘discriminate”’ does NOT include a value
judgment, and I did not intend to attribute one
to the child, which simply perceives a difference.
To “discriminate against” is quite another
matter. Or do I here misunderstand the critic?

The Broadsheet was written by a person, I can
say with all sincerity, who has benevolent feelings
and many personal friends of many makes in
many lands. The Broadsheet was written in the
simple belief that wider perspectives will lead
ultimately to wiser decisions. If critics feel that
success has not been achieved, I express regret
and add the hope that they will themselves be
more successful in the same endeavour. *

Truly did the Society’s President, Sir Charles
Darwin, write in the Preface to the Broadsheet:
“Judgment [on West Indian Immigration] is
apt to be charged with emotion, leading to
opinions, often violently held opinions, going
for some people in one direction and for others
in the opposite direction”. The Broadsheet “‘has
been discussed by the Council, and many amendments have been introduced in consequence. In
such a broad field unanimity could not be
expected, but there has been a wide measure of
agreement with what the General Secretary has
here written.”

POSTCRIPT: “‘Colour Prejudice and Violence’’ was debated
in the House of Lords on November 19th. The relative
Hansard Report (Vol. 212. No. 11. pp. 632 to 724) affords
most interesting and valuable reading. No one among the
bishops took part. No peer seemed to show any awareness that there might be relevant biological aspects. of
this difficult problem.

257
