REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 247

More generally, if ~ is the number of generations in the pedigree, # the
possible number, and g the actual number of ancestors in mth generation,
then Zn the coefficient of inbreeding for generations is given by the
formula Z®= 100 (fn41—¢n+1).

Pa+i

Dr. Pearl points out that in repeated brother-sister mating Za soon
approaches 100 per cent., so that if no effects are produced in a few
generations, any subsequent changes are probably not due to inbreeding
as such. Practical methods are given for working out the coefficient in
long and complicated pedigrees. The latter part of the paper discusses
the relation of inbreeding with continued self-fertilisation, but contains a
mistake which vitiates a considerable part of the argument; this mistake
is corrected by the author himself in Amer. Nat. XLVIII., p. 57.

The second paper is the presidential address to the Animal Section
of the American Breeders’ Association, 1913; it points out the importance
of the knowledge of the recently discovered principles of heredity in
checking the empirical methods commonly used by breeders of animals.

In the third paper the authors have collected records from breeders
of 480 births in cattle, in which it was known whether service by the bull
took place “early,” “in the middle,” or “late” in the heat period of the
cow. The “early” class contained 248 births, with 125¢, 1232; the
“middle ” class contained 125 births, 67 ¢, 58 ?;the “ late” class contained
107 births, 65¢, 42%. The ratio of males to females thus rose from
98'4¢,100¢% in the “early” class to 115°5¢ 100¢ in the “middle,” and
1548¢,100¢ in the “late” class. It is concluded that these changes in
the sex-ratio cannot be ascribed to any known cause except the difference
of time of fertilisation, and that possibly “staleness” of the ovum may
tend to destroy the activity of a female-determining chromosome, and
allow the ovum to develop into a male. L. DONCASTER.

Laughlin, H. H. Report of the Committee to Study and to Report on
the best practical means of cutting off the Defective Germ Plasm
in the American Population. 1. The Scope of the Committee’s
Work. II. The Legal, Legislative and Administrative Aspects
of Sterilization. Eugenics Record Office. Bulletins 1oA and
10B. Cold Spring Harbour, Long Island, New York; 1914;
Prices 20 cents. and 60 cents; pp. 64 and 150.

BULLETIN No. 10A appears to cover the whole scope of negative eugenics.
First the numbers of “ Socially inadequate in the American population ”
are estimated, and then “ Cacogenic varieties of the human race,” that is
to say those who are socially unfit on account of defective inheritance, are
classified with great minuteness. The ten main classes to which they
are referred are the feeble-minded, paupers, inebriates, criminals,
epileptics, insane, the asthenic class, the diathetic class (i.e., those who
have a tendency to some specific ailment). The deformed and the
cacaesthetic (those suffering from hereditary defects of the sense organs).
The remedies which have been proposed “for purging the blood of the
race” from the defects enumerated then receive consideration. They are
catalogued as follows. 1. Life segregation. 2. Sterilization. 3. Restrictive marriage laws and customs. 4. Eugenical education of the public
and of prospective marriage mates. 5. Systems of matings purporting to
remove defective traits. 6. General environmental betterment. 7.
Polygamy. 8. Euthanasia. 9. Neo-Malthusianism. 10. Laissez-faire. We
rather suspect that numbers 7, 8 and 10 were put in owing to the committee’s affection for the decimal system. In any case they are dummies
easily knocked down. Neo-malthusianism also receives rather scant
courtesy, and the efficacy of any “systems of matings purporting to
remove defective traits” is questioned. “General environmental betterment” is briefly conceded its place as a necessary part of social reform,
248 EUGENICS REVIEW.

but is regarded as inadequate by itself. Restrictive marriage laws and
customs are dismissed as unlikely to affect the “socially inadequate
classes.” For the more defective among them life segregation is the
remedy indicated, and sterilization is advocated “only as supporting the
more important feature of segregation when the latter agency fails to
function eugenically.” Eugenic education is commended as having an
important place to fill, but the committee do not seem to realize that
without it none of the other remedies can be made effective, because they
will not have sufficient backing of public opinion.

Bulletin No. 10B is a most useful record of legislation which, however it may be criticised, is an experiment of great interest. Its essential
features were communicated to the first Eugenics Congress by Mr. Van
Wagenen (Problems in Eugenics, Vol. I., p. 460), and so do not require
detailed notice on the present occasion. It is however worth while to
mention that some of the cases which were brought before the Courts in
America arising out of these laws are reported in the bulletin, together
with full particulars of the laws themselves, and Bills of a similar nature
which were introduced in some State legislatures, but did not reach the
statute book. EDGAR SCHUSTER.

Fairchild, H. P. Jmmigration. New York. The Macmillan Company;
19135 price 7s. 6d.; pp. XI. and 455.

THE problem of immigration is one of vital importance to America.
Since the original English colonisation at the beginning of the seventeenth century the increase in population has been effected to a predominant extent in this manner, and at the present day the stream of
immigration flows in an ever widening channel. The volume under
review is an attempt to describe the sources, course and conditions of
American immigration from the earliest times until the present day; to
study the fate of the immigrants in the country of their adoption, and
from these considerations to arrive at some solution of the immigration
problem. This problem Mr. Fairchild states in the following words :
“In the first place, it must be decided whether it is desirable for nations
consciously to interfere with, and try to control, such a natural movement as this; secondly, if interference is to be undertaken, whose welfare
is to be held prominently in view?” “There are four possible standpoints open to choice. First, that of the United States; second, that of
the countries of source; third, that of the immigrants; fourth, that of
humanity in general.”

In the historical and descriptive portions of the book Mr. Fairchild
has achieved a high measure of success, but when he attacks the exceedingly complex and difficult questions indicated above, though he is
always interesting, he sometimes appears rather superficial. For example,
when he says “the question of the desirability of immigration from the
point of view of humanity as a whole, . . . is a summation of the aspects
of the problem from the point of view of the United States, the countries
of source, and the immigrants,” he entirely disregards the effects which
the economic and ethical conditions of the countries primarily concerned
must have on the whole civilized world. Also his treatment of the
biological effects of immigration—the aspect of the question most
interesting to eugenists—is of an unsatisfactory nature. He is, perhaps,
not to be blamed for dismissing the important question whether race
mixture is beneficial or harmful with the statement that the authorities
seem equally divided, but when he discusses the effects of immigration
on the rates of increase in the various racial constituents of the American
nation he neglects much that is in the highest degree relevant. Thus he
affirms that the recent decline in the native birth-rate is due to economic
pressure caused by competition with backward peoples from south-eastern
Europe, accustomed to a very low standard of living, of whom the stream
of immigrants is now principally composed. That a corresponding
