- _ The Eugenics Bou Education Society.

. President: Major Luow. LEONARD DARWIN. —
Hon. Secretaries: Mrs. A. C. Gotro. Dr. SCHUSTER. ‘DON. Treasurer : MR.. VON FLEISCHL,
WON. embers: é

Tue Rr. Hon. A. J. Batrour, P.C., F.R.S. SIR ARCHIBALD GRIKIE, K.C.B., F.R. Ss.
HER GRACE, THE DUCHESS OF. MARLBOROUGH. PROFESSOR A. WEISMANN.
Vice=presidents :

Dr. RIcHARD ARTHUR, M.L.A., President, New South Wales Branch. .
Sir JAMES BARR, President, Liverpool Branch. Dr. BENHAM, President, Dunedin, New Zealand, Branch.
Mr. H. W. BisHop, S.M., President, Christchurch, New Zealand, Branch.
SIR JAMES CRICHTON-BROWNE, F.R.S., Ex- President, 1908 to 1909.
BisHop D’Arcy, President, Belfast Branch. : Pror. STARR JORDAN, Chairman, Education Committee, American Genetic Association.
Prorgssor H. B. Kirk, M.A., President, Wellington Branch.

4 Mr. W. C. MARSHALL, M.A,, ” President, Haslemere Branch.
Tue Ricut Hon. Lorp MouttTon, P.C., F.R.S., President, Birmingham Heredity Somely.

_ Mr. J. L. Orrer, J.P., President, Brighton Branch.

M. EDMOND PERRIER, ” President, Société Francaise d’Eugénique. Poy
Dr. A. PLoETz, President, Internationale Gesellschaft fiir Rassen Hygiene. ™~
ProFressor E. B. Poutton, F.R.S., President, Oxford Branch.
PROF. SERGI, President, Comitato Italiano per gli Studi di Eugenica.
Pror. S&waRD, F.R.S., President, Cambridge Eugenics Society. |
BisHop WELLDON, President, Manchester Branch.

fBembers of Council:

a

Mr. CROFTON BLACK. Mrs. HENDERSON. Dr. ARCHDALL REID.
Sir E. BRABROOK, C.B. Major HI ts, F.R.S. Mr. JOHN RUSSELL.
Mrs. THEODORE CHAMBERS. Very Rev. W. R. InGck, D.D., Mr, F. C. S. SCHILLER, D.Sc.
Hon. Sir J. CocKBurn, K.C.M.G. Dean of St. Paul’s. Pror. A. SCHUSTER, F.R.S.
Mr. R. NEWTON-CRANE. Miss KIRBY. Mr. EpcGarR ScHustTsER, D.Sc. Mr. A. E. CRAWLEY. Mr. ERNEST LANE, F.R.C.S. Dr. C. G. SELIGMANN.
Sir H. CUNNINGHAM, K.C.I.E. PROF. MACBRIDE. Pror. C. SPEARMAN.~
Dr. LANGDON Down. LADY OWEN-MACKENZIE.. - Pror. J. 'A.. THOMSON.
Mr. HAVELOCK ELLIs. Mr. ROBERT MOND. f Dr. A. F. TREDGOLD.
Pror. J. FINDLAY. - Dr. F..W. Mort, F.R.S. Mrs. ALEC TWEEDIE.
Mr. E. G. WHELER GALTON. Mr. G. P. MuDGE. Mr. W. C. D. WHETHAM, F. RS.
Mr. M. GREENWOOD JUN. M.R.C.S. Mrs. G. POOLEY. Dr. DOUGLAS WHITE.
Dr. W. HADLEY. Mr. W. REA, M.P. Dr. FLORENCE WILLEY.
Branch Representatives on the General Counctl, 1914-15. ~
° Birmingbam:
” MR. CAREY GILSON, | Mr. HumMpHrey HuMpuHReYs. | Mr. PERCIVAL MILLs.
~ . Liverpool : 2
Mr. R. T. BODEY. -  . Mr. R. D. LAURIE. ALD. T. R. BULLEyY. ve
‘bhasieniece :. - Manchester : Belfast : —
Mr. W. C. MARSHALL. Dr, MUMFORD. ProF. J. A. LINDSAY.
Rew Zealand: _ , Oxford:
Tue Lion. T. A. MACKENZIE. ; . Mr. E. SCHUSTER. ©
Rew Soutb Wales: BHrigbton: vs
(70 be appointed. ) ~ Mr. A. J. HALL.
Research Committec: | Education Committee :
Mr. EpcAR SCHUSTER, D.Sc., Chairman. _ Mrs. T. CHAMBERS, Secretary.
Mr. A. M. Carr-SAUNDERS, Secretary. Pror. J. A. THOMSON.
Pror. MACBRIDE. ' PROF. FINDLAY. Pror. SPEARMAN. . . Miss BULCRAIG.
Dr. TREDGOLD. | . - Miss TRENCH.
Dr.. GREENWOOD, . Mr. DIxon KINGHAM.
- Mr. LIDBETTER. MRs. GOrTo,

_ MRs. GorTo.

Publication Committee : | . en
"This “Committee cotisists of the Executive Officers of the Society, ‘Chairmen and Secretaries of Sub-Committees and_ thé:
Aixanch h representatives. : oe

N.B.—Other Conmittees are appointed from time to time for special Purposes:

“ Eugenics is the study of agencies under social control that may improve or impair es
the racial qualiives of future generations etther physically or mentally.” . =

. ns
a OBJECTS. oS
: ‘1.—Persistently to set forth the National Importance of Eugenics in order to modify public opinion, and create a sense of {respon
“sibilit in a respect of bringing all matters pertaining to human parenthood under the domination of Eugenic ideals.
fi — T> spread a knowledge of the Laws of Heredity so far as they are surely known, and so far as that knowledge’ may 3 affect the.
improvement ofthe race. .2 [ ~~ To farther Eugenic Teaching, at home, in the schools, aad elsewhere.

 

of gee SUBSCRIPTION. “one aul, A a es
rt ses ‘ -Membe “8 oe - ne Guinea per mnum
fe ty Nereeiate 1p nbership - =: Five Shillings per. Annum. 2 Soo ee
a . - PRIVILEGES. ae ped
me Attendance at Lectures, Discussions, and General Meetings, Use of Library. ° } _ < B
Bc _Members only receive THe EvGenics REVIEW. free. -- Ee

 
 

Si Farms of Applian for Membership: and Associate Membership. and full particulars of the. Seca
Pet can be Capel Hon, Secretarits. *

ES: Kingswa ars As
OFFICE HOURS) 16-30 cae to B pm, Singur cing er 16.00 s Sim: to dpame
252 EUGENICS REVIEW.

While the moral ideal of a man’s sexual life is regarded by the
author as strict monogamy—chastity before marriage and faithfulness
after—he is doubtful whether this corresponds to the inherent tendencies
and feelings of the average man, and thinks that, generally speaking,
the men who remain chaste are men of little worth. He hopes that we
may develop towards a state in which “the number of instances may be
diminished in which the first love and the first lover are not coincident,”
but he does not think that this desirability will be postponed by a greater
toleration of lack of control. Our own judgment is that the way out is
by heightening not lowering the standard, and we regard his depreciation
of the continent as untrue and unwholesome. We believe also that he
exaggerates what may be called the normal imperiousness of sexual
desire. This varies, of course, with race and other variables, but there
is much reason to believe that man often allows himself to drift into
hyper-eroticism and then supposes or tries to suppose that this is
“natural.”

The author is so much impressed with the evils of “ honeymoons ”
that he discusses, in a hesitating sort of way, a change, for the elect at
least, in the existing morality of the betrothal period. He seems to us on
sounder lines when he protests against the general loss of the woman’s
family name when she marries, and against the impertinent distinction
between Mrs. and Miss. We agree also with his plea for making more,
not less, of the organic factor in love, and with his argument for the
ethical justification of consciously regulated sexual intercourse within
the bonds of matrimony. We differ from the author mainly in rejecting
as ethically unsound his apolog. for the Don Juan and his compromise
in regard to chastity. We think, too, that there are many details in the
book that are unnecessary and unwholesome, and that there is much which
he would not have written if he had enjoyed some acquaintance with
“puritan England.” J. ARTHUR THOMSON.

 

OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS.

STATISTIQUE INTERNATIONALE DU MOUVEMENT DE LA POPULATION. Vol. IL.,
Années 1gor 4 1910. (Ministére du travail et de la prévoyance
sociale : Statistique générale de la France). Paris, Imprimerie
Nationale, 1913. Pp. xxxviii. + 163* + 298; 8vo.

In 1907 the Statistzque Générale de la France published a first volume
of international vital statistics, which included data for all available
countries from the origin of registration up to the year 1905. The present
volume continues the work up to the year 1910, but for convenience of
reference the data are given for an entire decade, and not only for the
five years 1906-1910. The first part of the volume consists of an introduction by M. Lucien March (pp. I.-xxxviili.). This is followed by a
general discussion of the data for the decade (pp. 1*-163*), and finally,
in the last part (pp. 1-298), the detailed tables are given with the absolute
figures for each year. Any data that came to hand too late for inclusion
in the earlier volume, though referring to years prior to 1901, are also
published in the present volume. These include, for example, several
life-tables for the decade 1891-1900.

During the decade 1:go1-10 the birth-rate and death-rate have alike
continued to fall in the vast majority of the countries for which we have
data, but the fall in the former has been in general the greater so that
the rate of natural increase has dropped. In England the birth-rate fell
between 1901 and 1g1o from 28'5 per thousand of the population to 25'8;
in Denmark from 29'7 to 28'2; in Austria from 37°3 to 32°6; in Hungary
from 389 to 35°7; in Holland from 31'8 to 286; in France from 22'o0 to
195; in the German Empire from 35'0 to 298. The fall in the case of
some of the component States of the German Empire is remarkable; thus
in Saxony the rate dropped from 359 to 27'2 or by practically 25 per
OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS. 253

cent. To the almost universal rule of a fall in the birth-rate there are
very few exceptions. Italy is one of the most remarkable, the birth-rate,
apart from some fluctuations, having been practically stationary, viz.,
32°5 in Igor and 32°7 in 1910. The same is the case in Ireland, and in
Australia and New Zealand also the fall seems to have been arrested.

Against the above-mentioned decreases in the birth-rate may be set
decreases in the death-rate, in England from 16'9 to 14°6 per thousand;
in Denmark from 15°8 to 133; in Austria from 249 to 21°3; in Hungary
from 271 to 236; in Holland from 16°3 to 136; in France from 20'1 to
191; in the German Empire from 194 to 162. In Italy the change is
very slight, the rate being practically stationary, viz., 22°0 in 1901 and
21°7 In rg1o. In the Australian Commonwealth the death-rate, already
remarkably low at the commencement of the decade, fell from 12°2 to 10°3,
while in New Zealand it has remained practically stationary at a level
slightly under 10 per thousand. It must be remembered that the above
are crude death-rates—the simple proportions of deaths to every thousand
of the population—and are therefore affected largely by the age and
sex-compositions of the several populations in question. The rates
cannot be compared as measures of the conditions affecting health in the
several States. What we most miss in the present volume is a series of
standardised death-rates for the different countries, all based on one and
the same standard population. Possibly M. March might be able to
attempt this in the next volume.

Space does not permit of any detailed examination of the data
relating to causes of death, but a glance at the figures for infantile
mortality may be of interest. In most of the countries of Europe this
fell during the decade, but in some cases the fall has been but slight.
In Austria and Hungary though the rate was appallingly high, little
improvement has been effected. In Austria the deaths of infants under
1 year of age per thousand births averaged 216 during the years 1gor-s,
202 during 1906-10, the corresponding figures for Hungary being 212 and
204. In Germany on the other hand the improvement has been considerable; for the Empire as a whole the rate fell from 199 deaths per
thousand births in the first quinquennium to 174 in the second. In
Bavaria the rate fell from 240 to 217 per thousand, and in Saxony from
246 to 198. The lowest rates are shewn by New Zealand and by Norway
which both experienced only 7o deaths per thousand births during the
quinquennium 1906-10. In England the rate fell from 138 per 1000
during 1901-5 to 117 in 1906-10. The great waste of life implied by the
high rates of infantile mortality ruling, for example, in Germany, is well
illustrated by some of the life-tables given. Few of these have yet been
published for the decade 1go1-10, but we can compare, as two extremes,
Germany and the Commonwealth of Australia. In the German Empire
on the average of the decade 1go1-10, of 1,000 males born alive only 798
survived to 1 year of age; in Australia as many survived to age 32.

A special section of the second part of the volume is devoted to a
study of the statistics of divorce, which should be useful in view of
recent discussions. It includes brief notes as to the law of divorce in
each country.

M. March and the staff of the Statistique Générale de la France
deserve the hearty thanks of all students of vital statistics for the time
and labour devoted to the compilation of this most useful volume.

G. U. Y.
BIRTHS, DEATHS, AND MARRIAGES IN ENGLAND AND WALES (1912).
Seventy-fiftth Annual Report of the Registrar-General. 1914.

_ __[Cd. 7028.] Price 5s. od. Pp. cxii. +611.

“The salient features of the vital statistics of 1912 are as follows :—
The marriage-rate was 15°5 per 1,000, being o'1 above the average for the
ten years 1902-1911. It is satisfactory to note that in each of the three
years 1910-1912 the marriage-rate has shown an increase upon that in the
preceding year. The provisional figures for 1913, however, do not
indicate a continuance of this rise, the rate remaining at 15.5 per 1,000.
254 EUGENICS REVIEW.

“The birth-rate in 1912 was 238 per 1,000, and was 3'0 below the
average for the preceding decennium; it was the lowest rate on record,
being no less than 0.6 below that of 1911, which was the next lowest.”

Phe death-rate in 1912 was 13°3 per 1,000, and was 1'9 below the
average for the ten preceding years. It was the lowest rate on record,
being o'2 per 1,000 below the lowest previously recorded, that in rgro.
Although the climatic conditions of the two years were very similar the
advantage of 1912 was mainly due to greater diminution of the mortality
of children under the age of five years.

Infant mortality was 95 per 1,000 births, being 30 per 1,000 below the
average for the preceding decennium. It was the lowest rate on record,
being ro per 1,000 births below the lowest rate previously recorded, that
for igto. It is of interest to note that if mortality from diarrhea—
naturally low on account of the cool and wet summer—is excluded from
the comparison the infant mortality of 1912 still remains the lowest yet
recorded.”

“Cancer caused a higher death-rate both among males and among
females than in any preceding year, but the rate from tuberculosis as a
whole was the lowest on record.”

The data on which the general results summarized above are based
have been analysed and tabulated in a detailed and lucid manner by the
new and improved methods which were introduced in 1911. The data
themselves admittedly leave much to be desired, but their improvement
would involve fresh legislation providing for a complete revision of the
present system of registration. Such legislation the Registrar-General
refers to as most desirable both from the administrative and statistical
standpoint.

The special features of the present report are (1) the detailed treatment of the deaths in 1911 and 1912 from syphilis and diseases dependent
on it, based on the report prepared for the information of the Royal
Commission, and (2) the tabulation of births registered in 1911 by parents’
occupations.

(1) Although the deaths certified as due directly or indirectly to
syphilis are not regarded as giving a reliable basis for an estimate of the
mortality truly attributable to this disease, they are a useful indication
of its relative prevalence in different localities and in different social
groups. It appears to be far more common in large towns than in rural
districts, and among the highest and lowest social strata than among the
remainder. Miners, weavers and agricultural labourers seem particularly
free from it, and unskilled workmen particularly liable to it.

(2) The legitimate birth-rate for 1911 arranged according to social

classes is shown in the following table :—
Rate per 1000 Males Rate per 1000 Married

Sucial Class. aged 10 years and over. Males aged under 55
ears.
I. Upper and Middle Class ... ees 47 "T19
II. Intermediate Class vee ee mes 46 132
III. Skilled Workmen wis 464 ss 73 153
IV. Intermediate Class wee ews vee 70 158
V. Unskilled Workmea _... a m0 _ go 213
VI. Textile Workers sia oie wee 50 125
VII. Miners vee wee eee w. 107 230
VIII. Agricultural Labourers _— _ 49 161
III.-VIII. Working Class _... wee wee 76 175
All Classes wre 62 162

An interesting discussion of the significance of these figures is also
included, but cannot be conveniently summarized here. The RegistrarGeneral and Dr. Stevenson are to be congratulated on the production of
a report which is of great interest and practical value. They have made
a dreary wilderness of official figures to bear fruit in season if not to
blossom. EDGAR SCHUSTER.
PERIODICAL LITERATURE.
ENGLISH.

THE SCIENTIFIC PROCEEDINGS OF THE ROYAL DUBLIN SOCIETy. Vol.
xiv. (N. S.), No. 22. June, 1914. Polygamous Mendelian Factors.
JAMES WILSON, M.A., B.Sc. Pp. 302-312. From a consideration of the
behaviour of the coat colour of horses and cattle in inheritance the author
draws the conclusion that each colour is produced by a single factor
which may “mate” with the factor producing any other colour.

JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY. Vol. xvii. No. 2, March, 1914.
The Action of Various Anesthetics in Suppressing Cell-division in Seaurchin Eggs, by Ralph S. Lillie. This is an interesting paper dealing
with the inhibitory action of certain anesthetics upon cell-division.
It is suggested that the rhythmical process of cell-division, as
well as the rhythmical contraction of heart muscle and _ cilia,
depends upon some reversible change in the permeability of the
cell-membraue to salt solutions, and consequently that neuromuscular anesthesia is caused by inhibiting these changes in the
permeability of the membrane. It is concluded, since the concentration
in a great number of anesthetics investigated, required to arrest celldivision in the egg, is the same as that required to produce neuro-muscular
anesthesia in the larva, that both phenomena depend upon the same
alteration in permeability.

UNITED EMPIRE MAGAZINE, Vol. v., No. 8, August, 1914. Zhe Problem
of Population, by J. Saxon Mills. Pp. 648-654. The writer deals with
the difficulty in retaining our Colonies when we can no longer supply
emigrants in large numbers, and instances the fact that we contributed
only one third while America and Continental Europe supplied two-thirds
of the emigrants to Canada between 1g00 and 1913. “A few more emigrants and a few babies less each year, and our population will be absolutely diminishing.”

THE ENGLISHWOMAN, Vol. xxili., No. 67, August, 1914. Zhe Unmarried Mother in France, by Mrs. Gertrude Austin. Pp. 138-151. This
article describes the Asile Nuchalet in Paris, a municipal establishment
for the shelter of pregnant women, which is run on admirably humane
and scientific lines. ‘There are also maternal canteens, and financial
assistance is offered in cases of breast-fed babies and boarded-out children.
Every effort is made to encourage mothers not to abandon illegitimate
children to the Hospice des Enfants Assistés.

THE JOURNAL OF STATE MEDICINE, Vol. xxii., No. 8, August, 1914,
has a note on the scheme to preserve infant life, recently brought forward
by the Women’s Co-operative Guild.

ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY. Vol. vi. 1914. This
periodical, published by the London County Council, contains an account
of research work done in the pathological laboratory and asylums maintained by the Council. It is edited by Dr. F. W. Mott, the pathologist
to the asylums, and the memoirs contained in it are based on work
carried out either by himself or under his direction or at his suggestion.
In the preface Dr. Mott reviews clearly and briefly the overwhelming
evidence that general paralysis is caused by syphilis. More than fifteen
per cent. of the male admissions to the asylums are general paralytics,
and as the total cost of the asylums amounted in 1913 to £600,000, the
expenditure of a considerable sum annually in the prevention of syphilis
by the Council would be justifiable on purely commercial grounds.

The Nature of the Condition termed Parasyphilis, by F. W. Mott,
M.D., F.R.S. Pp. 1-50. This paper is the report made to the neuro256 EUGENICS REVIEW.

logical section of the International Medical Congress, modified in consequence of certain discoveries made public after it was originally written.
There is a bibliography referring to works by more than fifty authors.

Statistics regarding General Paralysis in the London County Asylums,
by F. W. Mott, M.D., F.R.S. Pp. 51-58. These statistics were prepared
for the information of the Royal Commission on Venereal Diseases. As
is mentioned above, more than fifteen per cent. of the male admissions
to the asylums are general paralytics. The actual numbers for the quinquennial period 1908-1912 are: Total number of admissions—males,
9,087; females, 10,174. General paralytics—males, 1,469=16'1 per cent. ;
females, 268=2°6 per cent.

A Study of the Neuropathic Inheritance especially in Relation to
Insanity. F. W. Mott, M.D., F.R.S. Pp. 79-98. In this address, which
was delivered at the opening of the Henry Phipps’ Psychiatrical Clinic,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, U.S.A., Dr. Mott described his
system of ascertaining and recording those inmates of the London County
Asylums who have or have had relatives in the asylums; 3,485 cases of
this kind are now on record. Among the problems discussed is that of
“anticipation.” By anticipation is meant that the insane offspring of
insane parents become insane at considerably earlier ages than the
average. Dr. Mott brings forward the following tabular comparison in
support of the view that this occurs :—

Percentage comparison of the age at the time of onset of insanity in
the insane offsbring of insane parents, and the general admissions to the
London County Asylums.

Age 9579 direct 663 insane

of admissions during offspring of

Onset. last four years. insane parents.
Under 25 bes bee 20°1 ves mh es 44°0
25-34 was 4 ge <e 199 noe 2 wn nee 279
35-44 “ne an ens 21-7 a Hn Aa ss 15°5
45-54 ant sis bi 18'2 vee wee wee 8'5
55-64 vee vee vee 12°97 wee ems ma 32
65-74 _ oa bana 58 wee wes wee "7
75 tn vee wee 1S . vee —

The differences are large enough to be a convincing proof of the
theory of anticipation if there were not a possible source of error in the
greater likelihood of insanity of the parents escaping detection in persons
admitted to the asylums late in life than in those admitted early.

Another problem discussed is the origin of epilepsy and insanity in
healthy stocks. Dr. Mott, while recognising the difficulty of obtaining
evidence conclusively demonstrating that alcohol and syphilis may, by
poisoning the germplasm, give rise to these defects, brings forward
pemiprees which tend to show that such poisoning does actually occur.

‘he Investigation of Twenty-Five Pedigrees of Insane Persons, by
Dr. H. Wilson White. Pp. 99-126.

The Investigation of a Number of Family Histories of Patients in
Cane Hill Asylum, by Dr. J. C. Wootton. Pp. 127-138.

Hereditary Resemblance in the Fissures of the Cerebral Hemispheres,
by Dr. Edgar Schuster. Pp. 139-172. The interest of a study of this kind
depends largely on the fact that the fissures indicate, in some cases at
any rate, the boundaries of regions of the brain cortex differing from one
another in structure and function. The extreme difficulty of obtaining
brains of persons related to one another has prevented much attention
from having been given to the subject. Material, more complete and
Satisfactory than any hitherto available, is being collected from the
London County Asylums by Dr. Mott, and this forms the basis of the
present paper, which is published as the first instalment of what may be
an extensive study of the subject. The author first describes the most
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 257

important previous work on the subject, that of Karplus, and provides a
rough statistical analysis of the data obtained by him. The results
obtained amply prove the justice of his conclusion that “ inheritance of
the fissures of the brain does take place.” Dr. Schuster next gives a
detailed nomenclature of the fissures and gyri of the brain, based on the
names used by Gustav Retzius and with respect to the occipital lobe by
Elliot Smith. Two pairs of brains are next described in some detail,
namely, those of a mother and daughter and those of two brothers. The
points of similarity between the brains of the relatives in each pair are
many and striking, they are pointed out in detail in the text and clearly
shown in outline figures traced from photographs.

FOREIGN.

AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST. Vol. xv. No. 4. October-December,
1913. The Relative Time of Fertilization of the Ovum and the Sex-Ratio
amongst Jews, by Raymond Pearl and Redcliffe N. Salaman. Pp. 668-674.
The authors conclude from a consideration of some statistics of Jewish
families collected with particular care that “ (a) there is no evidence that
in the human race the time of fertilization of the egg relative to the
catamenial period has any influence on the sex-ratio exhibited by the
offspring. (+) The higher male sex-ratio shown by Jewish statistics, if
not entirely due to faulty registration, must owe its origin to other
factors than the time of fertilization of the egg.”

BULLETIN OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF MEDICINE. Vol. xv. No. 3,
June, 1914. Résumé and recommendations of the Committee to investtgate teaching of Hygiene in Public Schools. Pp. 121-126. This committee, appointed by the American Academy of Medicine, has done its
work in a very thorough manner. They first analysed the laws requiring
instruction in physiology and hygiene, then investigated the text books
on the subject, and finally visited the schools in eighty Communities east
of the Mississippi and north of Mason and Dixon’s line. Reports have
been published from time to time from 1904 onwards, of which a complete list is found in this article. Their recommendations cover hygiene
in its widest sense, and it will be seen from the section quoted below
that they advocate the teaching of eugenics although they do not mention
the word. The passage runs (the committee recommend) “I. That from
the Kindergarten up, by progressive steps, children be helped to learn
through studies of plant and animal life the essentials of human physiologic processes, parenthood, heredity; the essentials of influence of
environment in health and development, including micro-organisms,
insects and other carriers of communicable diseases; that included in
lists with typhoid, tuberculosis and other common contagions, syphilitic
and gonococcus infection be enumerated, corresponding data being given
for each in the list.”

For this purpose it is urged that Fellows of the Academy concentrate
individual influence on institutions training teachers and on boards
licensing them, insisting that they be adequately prepared and tested in
the elements of physical and chemical, biologic and social sciences with
special reference to their practical applications in hygiene and sanitation.

BULLETIN OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF MEDICINE, Vol. xv., No. 4,
August, 1914. The Relation of Modern Medicine to Some Social
Problems, by John L. Heffron, M.D. Pp. 185-193. The writer maintains
that scientific investigation into the conditions which are hurtful to society
and diminish human efficiency should be the duty of the medical world,
medical men should co-operate with experts in the practical administration
of protective and corrective measures. “What better statement of the
natural way of advancing the study of every variation from accepted
standards of life and of condyct can there be than the one pursued by
physicians in the study of disease, viz., first, etiology; second, pathology;
third, prognosis; fourth, prevention; fifth, treatment.” The writer touches
258 EUGENICS REVIEW.

on such subjects as mental deficiency, the teaching of sex hygiene, reform
by education in the laws of heredity, racial poisons contributory to
insanity, immorality and criminality, etc.

THE TRAINING SCHOOL BULLETIN. Vol. xi., No. 3. May, 1914. A
Study of the Intelligence of Delinquents and the Eugenie Significance of
Mental Defect, by Emile Renz. Pp. 37-39. Miss Renz has made a
careful investigation of the intelligence of all girls admitted to the Girls’
Reformatory of Ohio between January and July, 1912. The Courts may
sentence to this institution “ Girls from the ages of nine to seventeen, the
prevalent charges being incorrigibility, disorderly conduct, larceny,
street walking, immorality. All are subject to parole, on condition of
improvement in character and conduct, but remain charges of the State
till twenty-one years of age. The consideration is wholly one of moral
failure. The assumption is that these girls are capable of normal conduct, and that, if they are carefully piloted over several years of life,
their release will be warranted, and that a strict course of supervision
will reform the offender. The commitment paper vouches for the mental
normality of the delinquent.” The girls who numbered roo were graded
according to the Binet-Simon scale. Six were equal to or in advance of
age, two a year behind, eight from one to two years behind, five from
two to three years, and seventy-seven more than three years. Making
all possible allowances the author concludes that at least one-third of the
whole number are of such mental deficiency as to warrant the special
care of them as subnormal. Their school records appear amply to confirm
the results of the tests.

THE JOURNAL OF HEREDITY. Vol. v., No. 6. June, 1914. Eugenics
Program in Utah, by E. G. Titus. P. 248. Dr. Frank M. Briggs,
Superintendent of the Utah School for the deaf and blind, was elected
president of the Utah Eugenics Society at its annual meeting in Salt Lake
City during April. Many papers were read at the meeting, and “the
general trend of the discussions was all to the effect that we are not
ready for many of the odd and peculiar Bills which have created
enthusiasm in several of the States. That is, it is much better at the
present time to devote our energies to education along eugenic lines,
endeavouring to reach all the people possible and give them what we
consider a proper idea of eugenics, to have all the lectures possible
delivered before schools, church organisations and other general
assemblies; to endeavour to secure co-operation of libraries in order that
they may introduce books on eugenics to secure the co-operation of the
various Women’s Club, and, if possible, to secure at least one place on
the program of each club for the coming year; to endeavour to secure
better care and protection for the classes of people who are unable to
care properly for themselves.

THE JOURNAL OF HEREDITY. Vol. v., No. 7. July, 1914. Second
Report of the Committee on Immigration of the Eugenics Section of the
American Genetic Association. Pp. 297-300. The committee urge the
necessity of stringent immigration laws sternly enforced in view of such
facts as the following : “It appears that while the foreign born in 1910
constituted 30°2 per cent. of the entire population of New York State, the
foreign born insane constituted 434 per cent. of the patients in the State
hospitals on September 3oth, 1912.” On February 4th, 1914, an Immigration Bill (H.R. 6060) passed the House of Representatives by a two-thirds
majority. This Bill is recommended by the committee as embodying provisions which would result in the more effective detection, exclusion and
deportation of mentally and physically defective aliens. It is on the same
lines as a Bill which would have become law in 1913 but for the veto of
President Taft.

Biological Eugenics. (Address delivered before the First National
Conference for Race Betterment, Battle Creek, Mich., January 8th, 1914.)
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 259

Leon J. Cole. Pp. 305-312. A plea for eugenics expressed in very
moderate terms. The author sums up his practical programme for racial
betterment as follows: “ Eugenic selection must, I believe, for a long
time be confined to cases of marked defect and weakness. In addition
more study must be given to those influences which may weaken the
germplasm directly, such as alcohol. And medical science, rather than
desisting, must push on, especially in the field of general prophylaxy,
but with more thought to succeeding generations and the future of the
race than it has given in the past. Philanthropy and charities cannot
stop, but they must take more counsel of established sciences, and, like
medicine, give more thought to the future.”

Results of Early Marrtage. Casper L. Redfield. Pp. 316-7. Eugenists
sometimes advocate earlier marriages for the better members of the community that they may increase more rapidly. Mr. Redfield does not
believe that early marriages lead to desirable results and offers a prize
of 100 dollars to anyone who can show more than three cases in which
“the intellectually superior person has as many as four generations in a
century in the tail-male time alone.” This is a sporting offer, but we
cenuat see that the result is likely to prove anything one way or the
other.

THE JOURNAL OF HEREDITY, Vol. v., No. 8, August, 1914. Zhe Declining Birth-rate, by F. H. Hankins. Pp. 361-367. This attacks the problem
in America, and points out that though the better classes of the population marry earlier and more frequently than in the past, the number of
births is decreasing. He considers the cause to be mainly psychological.
Individual ambition being the central fact, the interests of the individual
conflict with the interests of the race. No special solution of the problem
is offered.

POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY. Vol. Ixxxiv., No. 6. June, 1914.
Facts and Factors of Development, by Prof. E. G. Conklin. Pp. 521-537.
This is the first of the Norman Harris lectures for 1914 at North-Western
University, on “ Heredity and Environment in the Development of Men,”
to be published by the Princeton University Press. It contains a clear
though very brief sketch account of fertilisation and the development of
the embryo, which is admirably illustrated from the classical authorities
on the subject.

POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY. Vol. Ixxxv., No. 1. July, 1914. Facts
and Factors in Development. II., Development of the Mind. Prof. E. G.
Conklin. Pp. 21-39. The mind develops from simple beginnings contained in the germ, in the same way as the body does, and the elements
in the mental processes of human beings have their parallels in the
“minds” of lower organisms, as shown by their behaviour. The simplest
of these elements which forms the basis of all psychic processes is
sensitivity or the capacity of receiving and responding to stimuli, which
is a fundamental property of all living matter. Ata slightly higher stage
one gets tropisms or reflexs, which, when they become complex, are
called instincts. Memory also in its simplest form may be found in plants
and lower animals, while the basis of intelligence and reason as shown
by the adoption of methods of “trial and error” is present even in the
protozoa.

POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY, Vol. Ixxxv., No. 2, August, 1914,
has two articles of special interest. The Cellular Basis of Heredity and
Development, by Professor Edwin Grant Conklin, pp. 105-133, and The
Réle of Sex in the Evolution of the Mind, by Professor S. J. Homes.

POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY, Vol. Ixxxv., No. 3, September. Conclusion of Professor Conklin’s article in the previous issue, pp. 232-246.
The Decreasing Population of France, by Professor James W. Garner,
Pp. 247-259. The writer gives statistics of the birth and death-rates in
260 EUGENICS REVIEW.

comparison with other countries. “ The recent census statistics show a
declining birth-rate in all the departments without exception. In many
of them the rate of mortality exceeds the birth-rate by a third, while in
some it is twice as great.” After discussing numerous causes which have
been suggested, Professor Garner considers that “the principal causes
of the low birth-rate are not due to external conditions, social, legal or
religious, but are the result of the general attitude of the French toward
family life. The relatively high rate of mortality, inadequate hygienic
conditions, alcoholism, divorce and other causes mentioned may be contributory factors, but the chief reason is that French people do not
desire to have children. This attitude has been powerfully accentuated
by neo-Malthusian propagandists... .” He concludes that “the true
remedy lies not in legislative, administrative or fiscal measures, but in a
reform of the morals and customs of the French people. There must
be a fundamental change in the attitude of French men and women
towards the obligation to rear families; there must be an awakening to
the duty which devolves upon the citizen to contribute to the perpetuity of
his race through the rearing of children to defend it in time of war
or to pay taxes for the maintenance of the Government.”

EUGENIQUE. 2e Année, No. 5. Mai, 1914. Les lots de NaudinMendel dans L’Espéce Humaine, en particulier dans L’Albinisme Humain,
by Dr. E. Apert. Pp. 129-141. This paper is based on an analysis of the
genealogies published in “A Monograph on Albinism in Man,” by

earson, Nettleship and Usher. The author argues that when two subjects
who are not albinos have among their children one or more albinos, one
can say that, if Mendel’s law is correct (and if albinism is a recessive
character), these two subjects are heterozygotes DR; and one knows that
the proportion of recesstves RR to be expected among the offspring of
heterozygotes is 25 per cent. But if one judges the parents to be heterozygotes from the fact that they have albino children, then one should not
et the theoretical 25 per cent. of albinos among their children, but a
arger proportion; and this proportion will increase the smaller the size
of the family is. If there is only one child in the family it must
necessarily be an albino. In families of two, there is one chance in four
that the first is albino and one chance in four that the second is an
albino, consequently there is one chance in 16 that both are albinos. On
the other hand there are three chances in four that the first is not an
albino and three chances in four that the second is not an albino; therefore there are 3x 3=9 chances in 4x 4=16 that neither child will be an
albino, but these will escape attention because we can only deal with
families in which one child at least is known to be an albino. Thus
one should expect to find among families of two one family with both
children albinos to six with one child an albino; in other words, eight
children in 14 or 57 per cent. will be albinos. In the following table
are shown, first the percentage of albinos to be expected in families of
different sizes calculated in the manner indicated above, and next the
percentage actually found in the published genealogies. Below this again
is given the number of families of each size.

No. of children in rj} 2] 3] 4] 51 6] 7] 8] go] 10] 11] 124 13
family.
Percentage of albinos |100 | 57 | 43 | 36 | 33 | 30 | 29 | 28 | 27 | 26 | 26 | 26 | 25

calculated.
Percentage of albinos [100 | 68 | 51 | 40 | 36 | 35 | 32 | 31 | 25 | 26 | 29 | 25 | 26

observed.
No. of families . | 64 | 80] 96 | 85 | 77 | 74157 | 49 | 34] 29/15 | 11] 7
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 261

It will be seen that there is a general agreement between the observed
numbers and the calculated numbers, except that in the smaller families
the former are higher than the latter. This divergence is probably due
to the fact that families containing more than one albino are more
likely to attract attention and to be recorded than those containing only
one. After testing the figures by considering the distribution of albinos
in families of particular sizes Dr. Apert remarks that it is difficult to
avoid the conclusion that human albinism is a recessive character obeying
Mendel’s law.

JOURNAL OF GENETICS. Vol. iii., No. 4. April, 1914. The Relative
Lengths of the First and Second Toes of the Human Foot, by Mrs. Merritt
Hawkes, is the paper of chief interest to students of eugenics. She
shows that there are three main types of foot; (@) in which the
big toe projects well beyond all the others, (4) in which the second toe
projects beyond the first, and (¢) in which the first and second are of
equal length. Of these types the first is much the commonest (89 per cent.
of men, 82 per cent. of women), the second is comparatively rare (commoner in women), and the third very rare. Most commonly both feet are
of the same type, but in over 5 per cent. of the cases examined one
belonged to the “ long,” the other to the “short” type. Details are given
of the anatomical relations of the types, and a considerable part of the
paper is devoted to a discussion of their inheritance. Mrs. Hawkes
concludes that the long type of great toe is in general dominant over the
short type, and that the cases of dissimilar feet are heterozygous, but it
must be confessed that the data given do not seem in accord with any
such simple hypothesis.

Hybrids Between Moths of the Subfamily Bistoninae, by Messrs.
Harrison and Doncaster, describes cases in which reciprocal crosses
between two species give only males in one cross and both females and
males in the converse. One of these species was found to have four times
as many chromosomes as the other, and in the spermatogenesis of the
hybrid hardly any pairing of chromosomes took place.

The Transmission of Secondary Sexual Characters in Pheasants, by
Mrs. Haig Thomas, gives detailed descriptions of the results of crossing
the Swinhoe male with the Silver female, and repeatedly back-crossing
the offspring with Silver females. The results suggest that the Silver
female is unable to transmit all its typical characters to its female offspring.

Heredity of Melanism in Lepidoptera, by Mr. W. Bowater. The
author shows from his own experiments that in one species the melan‘c
form is a simple Mendelian dominant, and gives a valuable summary of
the known facts in many other species, in most of which the same conclusion may be drawn.

JOURNAL OF GENETICS. Vol. iv., No. 1. June, 1914. Hereditary Lefthandedness, by Prof. H. E. Jordan. The pedigrees leave no doubt of the
hereditary nature of the condition, and some of them strongly support the
conclusion that it is a Mendelian recessive, but in view of the exceptions
recorded, and the several pedigrees in which it might be dominant, it
seems probable that the dominance of right-handedness is somewhat
irregular.

Note on Twinning, by Prof. Jordan, calls attention to the inheritance
of twin-production in man, and shows that the evidence indicates that the
production of twins may be influenced by the male parent, perhaps by
giving the fertilised ovum a tendency to divide. Other papers are:

Inheritance of Weight in Poultry, by Prof. Punnett and P. G. Bailey,
in which they conclude that weight depends on the cumulative action of
several independent Mendelian factors.
262 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Immunity to Fungous Diseases as a Physiological Test in Genetics
and Systematics, as Exemplified in Cereals, by N. I. Vaviloff.

The Relations Between Chromosomes, Sex-limited Transmission and
Sex-determination in Abraxas Grossulariata, by L. Doncaster, which describes the first known case of an impaired heterochromosome in the
female.

A Peculiar Negative Correlation in Oenothera Hybrids, by G. H.
Shull. In this last paper the author describes reciprocal crosses between
Oe. rubricalyx (Gates) and other forms, and points out that in the F,
hybrids the red buds of rubrvicalyx are always associated with green stems,
but green or pale buds with red stems. He maintains that in almost all
cases the genetic behaviour of Oenxothera appears to be inconsistent with a
Mendelian explanation, and severely criticises those writers (e.g. Gates
and Heribert-Nilsson) who have attempted to show that the many puzzles
presented by Oenothera are all susceptible of simple Mendelian solutions.

L. DONCASTER.

ARCHIV FUER FRAUENKUNDE UND EUGENIK. Edited by Dr. Max
Hirsch. I Band. I. Heft. March, 1914. Ueber Ziel und Wege frauenkundlicher Forschung. Pp. 1-20. The introductory article by the
editor gives the aim of this new scientific journal. It is intended to
bring together the various branches of knowledge relating to womanhood,
to co-ordinate all that is known about woman in medicine, hygiene, psychology, sociology, etc., etc., and thus pave the way for a complete
“Science of Womanhood.” As the problem of woman is closely bound
up with that of the future generation, eugenics forms an integral part of
any such science.

Die Statistik der Fehlgeburten. Dr. F. Prinzing. Pp. 22-33. A
useful compilation of statistics of miscarriages as far as known. Miscarriages occur in about ten per cent. of all conceptions, rising very much
in certain trades, as rubber, lead industries, etc. They rise with the
number of conceptions, and are more frequent in conceptions out of
wedlock. The male sex predominates over the female, the proportion
being 160 males to roo females. Miscarriages are much more frequent
among the working-class than among the well-to-do. There seems to
be a general concensus of opinion that criminal abortion has been on the
increase ot late.

Die Theaterprostitution in Wandel der Zeiten. Dr. Heinrich Stiimcke.
Pp. 33-55. A historical sketch showing the close connection between
prostitution and the theatre throughout the ages.

Die Frage nach dem giinstigsten Heiratsalter. Pp. 57-62. Discusses
various estimates of the “Most Favourable Marriage Age of Women,”
finds as the conclusion that the twenty-first and twenty-second years are
the best.

Uber die Sitten Polizei. Dr. Werthauer. Pp. 163-170. The authot
advocates the abolition of direct police interference in matters of prostitution, and gives various social remedies which are to take its place.

S.

ARCHIV FUER FRAUENKUNDE UND EUGENIK. I. Band, II. Heft, May,
1914. Sittlichkettsverbrechen von Frauen und an Frauen. Dr. M. H.
Goring. Pp. 121-129. Gives a review of the various paragraphs of the
German Penal Code relating to sexual crime.

Die Hochstichtung des Menschengeschlechts. Dr. Franz Schacht. Pp.
131-139. An argument against active eugenic interference with marriage
at the present day. The first object of eugenics can only be to select
reliable statistics, for the present, with reference to the transmission of
inferior qualities from good stocks, and vice-versa. Legislative interference with marriage at the present time would, according to the author,
only increase illegitimacy and concubinage.
PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 263

Dirt NEUE GENERATION. 10 Jahrgang, 5 Heft, May, 1914. Rassenmischung und Mischehenfrage. Ferd. Frhr. v. Reitzenstein. Deals with the
problem of miscegenation of white and coloured races as affecting the
problem of colonisation. The author shows that unfavourable results
are due not so much to race-inheritance as to adverse environmental
conditions under which half-castes are generally reared.

Von Liebe und Liebesfreundschaft, by Grete Meisel-Hess. A plea for
freer relationship between man and woman advocating the right of
“erotic friendship” when and where the “one great eternal love” is
unattainable. The article, being short, hardly does justice to the
tremendous social implications involved in such revolutionary proposal.

Dik NEUE GENERATION. 10 Jahrgang, 6 Heft, June, 1914. Rassenmtschung und Mischehenfrage. Ferd. Frhr. v. Reitzenstein (conclusion). As
Europeans (the article refers especially to Germans) are generally incapable of permanent acclimatisation in hot climates, while the hybrid
coloured offspring are on the whole not undesirable stocks, the author
advocates the encouragement of an indigenous coloured population as a
means of colonisation.

Daemmerschlaf, by Mary Summer-Boyd. A description of the painless
method of confinement by means of scopolamin-morphium injections as
practised at Professor Kroenig’s Frauenklinik in Freiburg in Br. H

La REVUE PSYCHOLOGIQUE, VI., 4, December, 1913. Sur les Rapport.
entre VAcuité Sensorielle et V Intelligence. Mme. Marie Lipska-Librach.
Pp. 425-so1. This, the concluding portion of Mme. Lipska-Librach’s
doctorial thesis, contains the chapters dealing with La Sensibilité @ la
Douleur, Acuité Visuelle, Acutité Auditive, La Force Musculatre, and
Conclusions Générales. Her experiments were carried out upon 420
children in Brussels. The children were divided into three groups according to their age, namely, nine, ten, and eleven years respectively; and
each group was again subdivided into two or three sub-groups of fifty or
sixty children according to intelligence. She gives average measurements
for the various groups and sub-groups. On the basis of her results she concludes that in tactile, visual, and auditory acuity, in sensibility to pain,
and in muscular force children of superior intelligence are throughout
superior to those of poorer intelligence. The difference is most marked
and most constant in the cases of sensibility to touch and to pain and of
muscular force. In the case of visual and auditory acuity, the more
intelligent children show a greater delicacy at the younger ages; but at
older ages they become equal or even inferior. At first sight, these results
appear to contradict the conclusions of other observers, and to suggest,
as the writer herself remarks, that the cutaneous senses and muscular
development are of greater importance for intellectual development than
hearing or vision. This inference, however, she disavows. As carried
out in these experiments, the process of tactile discrimination was something much more complex than a mere exercise of sensorial acuity. The
author herself emphasises in this relation that the aesthesiometric tests
required an effort of judgment and of sustained voluntary attention to a
far higher degree than the tests for vision or hearing. The tests for pain
she considers to have been equally complex. But here the comparative
obtuseness of the older and more intelligent children is to be ascribed
to their greater control of imagination and fear—both aroused by this
test—rather than to their superiority of judgment and attention. Voluntary effort also intervened in the test for muscular force. On the other
hand, pathological conditions are more common in children in the case
of eyes or ears than in the case of skin or muscles. Children are more
liable to be deaf or shortsighted than paralysed or anaesthetic. The
frequency of visual and auditory defects increases with age; and the
frequency of shortsightedness is greater among the cleverer children.
Mme. Lipska-Librach’s conclusion thus represents a very complex fact.
264 EUGENICS REVIEW.

It is quite possible that, if she had eliminated the influence of disease
from her measurements of sight and hearing, and if she had eliminated
(as far as such factors can be eliminated) the influence of intellectual,
emotional, and volitional factors from the tests of tactile discrimination,
pain, and muscular force, her conclusions would then have been in
harmony with that of others. In her final discussion she endeavours to
make theoretical allowance for these irrelevant influences; and it appears
that she would expect to find that, when this had been done, the highest
correlations would be found in the case of the highest senses. If so,
this would be in accord with the results of other investigators. That the
relations between sensory acuity and intelligence are closest in younger
children, that their intelligence is therefore sensorial, and that delicacy of
sense-perception is in consequence of great importance for their early
intellectual development—these further inferences are of considerable
value and interest. It is unfortunate, however, that the writer’s statistics
should stop short at the calculation of aVerages and their differences.

QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.

CENTRAL SOCIETY.
COMMITTEES.

July 6th.—First Meeting of the Local Administration Enquiry Committee.
», 16th.—Finance Committee Meeting.
», 17th.—General Council Meeting.
Sept. 15th.—Special General Council Meeting.

MEETINGS.

July oth.—Major Darwin before the Junior Constitutional Club on
“The Influence of Eugenics on Legislation.”

July 28th.—Miss N. March before the Ivy Leaves Girls’ Club,
Stepney, on “ Eugenics.”

Mr. C. S. Stock, before the Wealdstone Men’s Adult School, gave two
lectures on “ Eugenics” on September 13th and 2oth.

SUMMER SCHOOLS.

At the Oxford Summer School Dr. Schuster gave two lectures on
“Eugenics” on July 23rd and August sth.

WELLINGTON BRANCH—NEW ZEALAND.

President—Professor H. B. Kirk.

Vice-Presidents—Dr. J. B. Mason, Dr. F. Hay, Mrs. A. R. Atkinson.

Hon. Auditor—J. S. Barton, Esq.

Hon. Secretary—Miss England.

Counctl—T. King, Esq., Dr. Hardwick Smith, A. H. Hindmarsh,
Esq., Sir Robert Stout, A. Hamilton, Esq., F. G. A. Stuckey, Esq., Sir
John Findlay, E. J. Kennedy, Esq., C. B. Morison, Esq., F. W. Frankland, Esq., D. McLaren, Esq., J. S. Tennant, Esq., Dr. Platts-Mills, Rev.
W. Jellie, Miss P. Myers.

THIRD ANNUAL REPORT.*
1913-1914.

The work of the past year does not afford much material for comment. Owing to various causes there was no opportunity for any new
departure and the work undertaken had to be confined to the always
valuable, but not in any way sensational, monthly lectures given at the
Society’s regular meetings.

1 N.B.—Owing to late arrival it was not possible to include it in the Sixth Annual
Report of the Society.
QUARTERLY CHRONICLE. 265

The lectures given during the winter of 1913 were, however, some
of the best of those arranged for by the Council since the formation of
the Wellington Society. In June Mr. Pope lectured on “ The Work of
the Industrial Schools of the Dominion”; in August Mr. Hogben,
Inspector-General of Schools, explained with great wealth of detail the
results arrived at by the Medical Inspector of Schools in New
Zealand; in September Miss P. Myers based an admirable lecture on the
facts dealt with in Dr. Russell Wallace’s book, “ Social Environment and
Moral Progress.” All these papers provided useful discussion and were
much appreciated by those who heard them.

One public lecture was also arranged by the Society and was given
on July 7th by Professor Pickerill, of Otago University, at that time in
Wellington as a delegate to the Dental Conference. This lecture, which
was the result of much original and valuable research by the Professor,
whose services to dental science are well known to the dentists of the
world, was illustrated by lantern slides made on purpose and aroused
much interest and many pertinent questions from the audience.

In addition, papers have been read to various country societies by
Miss P. Myers, Mr. G. Nicholas, and other members of the Society, and
literature has been supplied for distribution. Requests for information as
to the formation of branch societies have been received from Brisbane and
Melbourne and information has been received that a society is being
formed in the former town.

At the Australasian Medical Conference held in Auckland, the Society
was represented by Dr. Hay, but it was not found possible to hold a
special eugenics meeting, as the programme was over full and the time
limited.

A former member, Rev. W. Jellie, resigned upon leaving the
Dominion to take up work in England, but has kindly agreed to act as
the Society’s representative in the matter of keeping touch with the
parent Society. His keen interest in the movement will enable him to
render good service to the Society in this respect.

The Society has suffered a most serious loss by the death of Mr. A.
Hamilton, late director of the Dominion Museum, and a member of the
Council of this Society. Mr. Hamilton was a man whose eminent sanity
of view and far-reaching and exact knowledge of biological science gave
a peculiar value to his advocacy of eugenics. For this reason, and for
his constant and kindly helpfulness, his death is keenly felt and deeply
deplored by the Society.

Arrangements have now been made with the London office to supply
the EUGENICS REVIEW direct to all members each quarter. It is hoped
that this will ensure its regular delivery and be in every way more satisfactory than the former arrangement.

The conditions of membership of the Wellington Branch of the
Eugenics Education Society are as follows :—Subscriptions for full members (alone eligible for a seat on the Council), 10s. 6d. per annum,
including the EUGENICS REVIEW post free. Associates, 5s. Yearly subscription to the EUGENICS REVIEW, 5s. 6d., post free.

CHRISTCHURCH BRANCH—NEW ZEALAND.

Lectures. The Hon. Secretary, Mr. W. H. Symes, lectured on “ The
Feeble-Minded ” at a meeting of the Society, and on “ Heredity” before
the Medical Society; in addition he has spacen at four small meetings at
private houses. Professor McMillan Brown has addressed various public

odies and thereby given moral support to the cause of eugenics.

Legislation. No eugenic Act has been passed since the Mental
Defectives Act of rgt1. A few persons have been dealt with under this
Act, and many more would have been, but that no place has yet been
provided for receiving adults. There is a home and school for defective
266 EUGENICS REVIEW.

boys, accommodating about 60, but roorn is wanted for three or four
hundred. A small home and school for defective girls is now being built.

The asylums are overcrowded and the demand for accommodation
increases every year. Home for epileptics and a home for alcoholics are
badly needed, although the latter is to some extent provided by the
Salvation Army. A start has been made this year with the medical
inspection of schools. It is too soon for any detailed reports of the
results to be available, but from the partial reports which have appeared
in the newspapers, it appears that many serious defects are prevalent,
although the proportion is perhaps not so great as in England. The
Australasian Medical Congress at Auckland memorialised the Government to provide increased facilities for the free treatment of venereal
disease. Owing to the efforts of Dr. Fenwick, the Christchurch Hospital
is the first in New Zealand to carry the recommendation into effect.

The Society are trying to promote preference of employment to
married men. It is badly needed because nearly all sheepfarmers, 3.e.,
runholders, invariably give preference to unmarried shepherds.

W. H. SyMEs, Vice-President and Hon. Secretary.

Leetures for Eugenists at the Imperial College of Science and
Technology, South Kensington.—Professor MacBride will deliver a
course of sixteen weekly lectures entitled “An Introduction to the Study
of Heredity,” commencing in January, 1915. This course was to have
been given by the lecturer in zoology, Mr. H. M. Fuchs, but owing to the
war he will not be available, so Professor MacBride has very kindly
undertaken to give the lectures himself. The exact syllabus is not yet
available, but the outline of its contents, which is appended, shows the
subjects to be dealt with. Members of the Society wishing to attend
this course should apply to the Hon. Sec., Eugenics Education Society,
Kingsway House, Kingsway, W.C.

OUTLINE SYLLABUS.

Introductory. The organism, growth and reproduction; the idea of
evolution.

Variation. The exact study of variability.

Statistical investigation of heredity. Methods and results.

Analysis of heredity by hybridisation. Mendel’s experiments and his
interpretation of them.

More complex cases of Mendelian inheritance; extensions of the
theory.

Heredity of sex. Mendelian interpretation; cytological evidence;
sex-determination.

Causes of new inheritable variations. Experimentally produced
mutations. The question of the inheritance of acquired characters.

Theories as to the ongin of new races.

Examples of inheritance in man.

Lectures at the Galton Laboratory.—A course of lectures introductory to the science of eugenics will be given in the department of
applied statistics and eugenics during the session 1914. In the first term
eight lectures on the biological basis of heredity will be delivered by Dr.
O’Donoghue on Fridays at 6 p.m., beginning October 16th. In the
second and third terms Prof. Karl Pearson will deal respectively with the
statistical basis of eugenic theory and the facts and theories of heredity.
A fee of £1 1s. is charged for the whole course, or 1os. 6d. for each
term, teachers being permitted to attend the whole course for a fee of
1os. 6d. In addition Dr. David Heron will deliver ten lectures on
elementary statistical methods on Tuesdays at 6 p.m., beginning October
13th. These are arranged for the benefit of teachers, and are intended to
illustrate methods useful in interpreting data in the reports of school
medical officers and in the reduction of material which can be obtained
from observations on school children by the teachers themselves. The
QUARTERLY CHRONICLE. 267

lectures will be followed by practical classes, in which the students will
apply to actual data the methods explained in the lectures.

Eugenies and Social Work.—Owing to the war the course of
lectures under the above title to be given during the autumn by Bishop
Welldon, Mrs. Clare Goslett, and Mr. Dixon Kingham has been postponed. It is recognised that the social workers for whom the lectures
were arranged are now overwhelmed with urgent calls on their time.
The same course was to have been given itt Birmingham and is also
postponed.

The Dutch Committee for Medical Examination before Marriage
is doing most useful work in the establishment of consultative medical
bureaux, at which people who desire to marry and wish to ascertain
whether there is any hygienic reason why they should not do so, can
obtain medical advice without payment. Many public-spirited physicians
have come to the assistance of the committee by offering their services
gratuitously, and it appears that eight bureaux are now at work. The
object of the committee is to prevent the marriage of persons suffering
from venereal disease and the infection of innocent people and the waste
of and damage to infant lives which it entails) The Dutch Committee
has its headquarters at The Hague, but the British Vice-Consul at Rotterdam has kindly informed us, in answer to our inquiry, that other
societies with similar objects are being formed at Naerden, at Amsterdam,
and at Utrecht.

The American Eugenics Committee.—To aid in guiding public
interest in eugenics along scientific lines, and to increase this interest by
propaganda, the President of the American Genetic Association has
appointed the following as members of the Committee on Education and
Extension which was created by the council of this association last
winter :

David Starr Jordan, Chancellor of Leland Stanford Junior University, California (chairman).

Dr. Rupert Blue, Surgeon, U. S. Public Health Service, Washington,
D. C. (first vice-chairman).

Mrs. John Hays Hammond, former National Chairman, Women’s
Welfare Department, National Civic Federation, New York, N. Y.
(second vice-chairman).

Dr. W. C. Rucker, Assistant Surgeon General, U. S. Public Health
Service, Washington, D. C. (secretary).

Irving Fisher, Professor of Political Economy, Yale University, New
Haven, Conn.

Dr. Elnora Cuddiback Folkmar, Superintendent of Women’s
Auxiliary Clinic, Washington, D. C.

Mrs. Charles Cary Rumsey, New York, N. Y.

The Very Reverend Walter Taylor Sumner, Dean of the Cathedral of
St. Peter and St. Paul, Chicago, [Il. |

Talcott Williams, Dean o the School of Journalism, Columbia University, New York, N. Y.

Mrs. Huntingdon Wilson, Washington, D. C.

The letter of invitation sent to those selected as members (all of whom
have accepted) states that “ The object of this committee will be to promote the education of public sentiment throughout the country, in order
that a ‘eugenic conscience’ may be formed in as many individuals as
possible; to oppose premature legislation and, if necessary, to suggest
desirable legislation, on the basis of scientific data. The work of this
committee will be focused in the organ of the association, The Journal of
Heredity.” ,

_ The committee expects to adopt every means possible to further the
interests of conservative and constructive eugenics, but its principal work,
for some time at least, will probably be the formation of local societies
268 EUGENICS REVIEW.

for the study of the subject, the arrangement of public meetings and
lectures by men of science, and the publication of results of research
which have direct application to the problems of human heredity. The
committee will in this way supplement the Committee on Research in
Eugenics of the American Genetic Association, and will also, it is hoped,
occupy a new field, which has hitherto been left practically unoccupied,
but in which there is the possibility of doing a great deal of useful work.

The Wages of Married Employees in German Towns.—In several
German towns the married workmen employed by the municipality
receive additions to their wages which vary with the size of their families.
Through the courtesy of the burgermeisters of Mainz, Strassburg and Ulm,
we are able to give the details of the regulations in force in these cities.
In Mainz married workmen with two children or less under the age of 16
receive 1°50 mk. a week additional wages; where the number of children
of this age is three or four the amount rises to 1°75 mk., and if there
are more than four to 2 mk. Single workmen without dependants receive
an addition to the standard wages of o'75 mk., but where they have to
maintain their parents they rank as married workmen without children.
In Strassburg married workmen receive an addition of 5 per cent.,
which is increased to 15 per cent., 20 per cent., and 25 per cent. as their
families increase to more than three, more than five, and more than seven
children under 16 years of age. In Ulm, since 1912, all married or
widowed workmen with two children, whose yearly wage is less than 1,800
mk., receive a monthly addition to their wages of 4 mk., which is
increased by one mark for every additional child.

Eugenie Problems discussed at a prominent political meeting in
Norway.— At a meeting in Christiania, where political delegates of the
“ Radicals "—-at present the ruling party in Norway—met to discuss new
lines in politics, Dr. Alfred Mjéen gave a lecture on eugenic problems
and outlined his policy of social reform. There were present several
Members of Parliament, the Minister of Justice, the Minister of Foreign
Affairs, the Minister of Finance, and Ministers of other departments,
and the Prime Minister of Norway, Gunnar Knudsen, who conducted the
meeting. Dr. Alfred Mjden’s programme for social and eugenic reform
is known from the meeting of the Permanent International Eugenics Committee and from his earlier lectures in Norway, Denmark and
London. He sketched out his programme and gave further an account
of eugenic work in England, Germany and America. Great interest was
aroused by the speech of the Minister of Justice, Abrahamsen. On many
points he expressed views on eugenics similar to those advocated by Dr.
Mjéen, and further he expressed his intention that in the new revision
of the criminal law he would, without doubt, take some of these even
more radical reforms into consideration. The Prime Minister of Norway
concluded by saying that the eugenic ideas deserved the serious attention
of practical politicians.

ADDITIONS TO LIBRARY.

ALDRICH, MORTON A., and Others, 1914. Eugenics. Pp. 348.

(L. 671.)
BATE ROMs W., 1909.  Mendel’s Principles of Heredity. Pp. 396.

(L. 665.)
ROE OTe A., 1914. The Problem of the Nations. Pp. 107.
. 670.
GALTON, FRANCIS, 1914. Hereditary Genius. Pp. 379- (L. 102.)
GALTON, FRANCIS, to. Inquiries into Human Faculty and Its
_ Development. Pp. 261. (L. 676.)
GEDDES P. and THOMSON, A., 1914. Sex. Pp. 255. (L. 672.)
ADDITIONS TO LIBRARY. 269

GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS :—
American Papers on Inheritance in Poultry, 1910-1912. (L. 406.)
Criminal Statistics, 1912. Relating to criminal proceedings in police,
coroners’, > prisons, reformatory and industrial schools, and criminal
lunatics. 186. (L. 678.)
Report of the Registrar-General of Births, EAS. and Marriages in
England and Wales, 1912. Pp. 611. (L. 6
LAUGHLIN, HARRY H., 1914. Eugenie Rscord Office Bulletin. Aspects
of Sterilisation. Pp. 150. (L. 680.)
LOVE, J. KERR, 1913. The Causes and Prevention of Deafness. Pp.
12 (L. 6
PEARSON 5 KARE. 1914. The Life, Letters and Labour of Francts
alton. Pp. 246. (L. 674.
PEARSON, KARL, 1914. On the Handicapping of the First Born. Pp.
68. (L. 681.)

READ, A. B., 1914. Social Chaos and the Way Out. Pp. 364. (L. ©77-)
THORNDIKE, EDWARD L., 1905. The Measurements of Twins. Pp.

64. (L. 668.)
VARENDONCK, - » 1914. Recherches sur les Sociétés d’Enfants. Pp.
93. (L. 6 |

PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED,

Annual Report of the Registrar-General of Births, Deaths and
Marriages in England and Wales, 1912. (Publishers: H.M. Stationery Office, London, 1914. C.D. 7028. Price 5s. 9d. Pp. 611.)

Biology of Sex for Parents and Teachers, by T. W. GALLOWAY. (Publisher :
Heath, London, 1914. Price 2s. Pp. 105.)

Causes and Prevention for Deafness, The. Four lectures delivered under
the auspices of the National Bureau for Promoting the General
Welfare of the Deaf. J. KERR Love, M.D. (Published by the
Bureau, 1914. Price 1s. Pp. 127.) Dr. Kerr Love’s conclusions are
of great Phe Prot They were described by Mr. Yearsley in his

aper on he Problem of Deafness and its Prevention,” EUGENICS

EVIEW, Vol. vi., Part 2, P- 116.

Feeding of School Children, T e, by M. E. BULKELEY. (Publishers: Bell
and § Sons, London, 1914. Price 3s. 6d. net. Pp. 278.)

Great Society, The. A Psychological Analysis, by GRAHAM WALLAS.
(Publisher : Macmillan, London, 1914. Price 7s. 6d. Pp. 406.)
Hygtene for Girls, by E. H. RICHARDS. (Publisher : Heath, London, 1914.

Price 2s. 6d. Pp. 257.)

Making of the Roman Peoole, The, by T. Ltoyp. (Publishers : Longmans,
London. Price 4s. 6d. Pp. 136.)

Meaning of Marriage, The, by G. Spiirer. (Publishers : Watts and Co.,
London, 1914. Price 1s. Pp. 120.)

Native Tribes of the Northern Territory of Australia, by BALDWIN
SPENCER. (Publisher: Macmillan, London. Price 21s. Pp. 516.)
Outline of English Local Government, An, by EDWARD JENKS, M.A.,
B. J rs sO). (Publisher : "Methuen, London, 1913. Price

2s. 6

Plant and Animal “aren, by E. TORELLE. (Publisher: Heath, London,
1914. Price 2s. 6d. Pp. 230.)

Principles of Eugenics, hy BLANCHE EAMES. (Publishers: Moffat, Yard
and Co., New York, 1914. Price 75 cents. net. Pp. 91.)

Probation System, The, by CectL LEESON. (Publishers : p. S. King and

n, London, 1914. Price 3s. 6d. Pp. 191.)

Royal Cc ommission on Venereal Diseases. First Report of the Commissioners. » 7474: Appendix to the First Report of Commissioners.
(Pablichers M. ) Stationery Office, London, 1914. Price 3s. 8d.
Pp. 462. Cd. 7475.)
270 EUGENICS REVIEW. |

Significance of a Declining Death-rate, The, by FREDERICK L. HOFFMAN. ‘
Address delivered before the National Conference on Race Better- ;
ment, Battle Creek, Mich., January, 1914.

Social Chaos and the Way Out, by ALFRED BAKER READ. (Publishers:
Hendersons, London, 1914. Price 7s. 6d. Pp. 364.) If this book is \
a joke it is in bad taste. The author’s “way out” of social chaos
would lead either to the extinction of society or of civilisation. The
“way out” may be indicated by a quotation from the contents—
“ Children are not wanted,” “ How infanticide will gradually become a
custom,” “ Willing pioneers,” “ No other means of settling labour
disputes.”

Some Recent Developments of Poor Relief, by W. A. BAILWARD, M.A.
Goee P. S. King and Son, London, rgr4. Price 6d. net.

~ Pp. 46

Summary of the Laws of the Several States Governing—I. Marriage and
Divorce of the Feeble-minded, the Epileptic and the Insane. I.
Asexualisation. III. Institutional Commitment and Discharge of the
Feeble-minded and the Epileptic. By STEVENSON SMITH, MADGE W.
WILKINSON, LoOviIsA C. WAGONER. (Publishers: Bailey and Babette
Gatzut Foundation for Child Welfare, Washington, 1914. Pp. 87.) )

Text-book of Insanity and Other Mental’ Diseases, by CHARLES ARTHUR i
MERCIER, M.D., F.R.C.P., F.R.C.S. (Publishers: George Allen and :
Unwin, Ltd., London, 1914. Pp. 341.) é

Theory of Civilisation, A, by SHOLTO O. G. DouGLas. (Publisher: T.
Fisher Unwin, London, 1914. Pp. 246.)

Way of God in Marriage, The, by May E. TeEaTs. (Publisher : Macfadden,
Physical Development, London. Price $1,20. Pp. 307.

Women under Polygamy, by WALTER M. GALLECHAN. (Publishers : Holden
and Hardingham, London, 1914. Price 16s. net. Pp. 332.)

Work and Wealth, A Human Valuation, by J. A. HoBSON. (Publisher :
Macmillan, London, 1914. Price 8s. 6d. Pp. 367.)

 

Eugenics Education Society.

FORM OF APPLICATION FOR MEMBERSHIP.

Jo THE SECRETARY, EUGENICS EDUCATION SOCIETY,
KINGSWAY HouskE, KINGSWway, LONDON, W.C.

Please enter my name as an applicant for membership of the Eugenics Education Society.
On my election I will forward the Subscription.

na me for Membership ee ,
Banker’s Order Life Membership ?

Name..................... bc eceeccencececeseceeessetssaceseeeee: AdGYESS..... 0.220.200. 2cc ccc ccccccecceceeccececccecseceveeceecesess

Occupation or Designation.............0.... 00.2. 2ccec eee c cece eee c eee eee eeeeee Date. 0.020.000... cccececececeeeeceeneceeees
Annual Subscription : Membership, including the Eucenics Revirw, £1 1s. ; Associateship, ss: ; Life Membership, £10 1as.
Associates may join without election by forwarding a Subscription of ss., which does not include the Revigw.

ZO MIRSSRS. .-~ cnnen oes coe seer ee eee in ee en ne nies ene OT AS BE WE BLA NSS MO oO RR OR eI Bankers.
Please pay the LONDON COUNTY AND WESTMINSTER BANK (Bloomsbury Branch), my Annual
Subscription of £.........-2..222-.-2-2--2-0++ to the EuGenics EDUCATION SOCIETY, due on January Ist,
19 » and the same amount on that day in each succeeding year until further notice.
I am,

 
