FAMILY PLANNING AND EUGENIC

MOVEMENTS in the Mid-twentieth Century*
By C. P. BLACKER

[oe paper reviews and relates to each
| other the histories of the birth control
and eugenics movements; and it
attempts to assess their respective positions
to-day, in the middle of the twentieth
century.

These two movements, which have developed somewhat independently of one
another, have now come more closely

together than before. The paper concludes .

with a tentative consideration of some of the
problems of the future.

The retrospect will, perforce, be mainly
concerned with my own country, Britain,
though I will mention other countries such
as the U.S.A., France and Germany. My
standpoint will be mainly European. I have
but small knowledge of Japan, this being my
first visit to your country.

My paper is divided into four parts. In the
first I will briefly outline the independent
developments of the birth control and eugenic
movements between the years 1830 and 1930.
In the second part, I will describe the changes
in standpoint, which occurred in both these
movements during the twenty-five years
between 1930 and 1955. In the third part I
will say something about the position of both
these movements to-day. And lastly I will
discuss some of the problems which may
present themselves in the years ahead.

1. Developments from 1830 to 1930
(a) Birth control movement

Round no figure in the domain of population study have more violent controversies
raged than that of the Rev. T. R. Malthus
(1766-1834). The controversies continue
unabated to-day. Francis Place (1771-1854)
has been described as the founder of the
British birth control movement. Last year
was the centenary of his death. But his

activities had no discernible effect on
Britain’s birth-rate which remained consistently high for the first three-quarters of the
nineteenth century. :

In the same century there were parallel
activities in the U.S.A. The Englishman
Place influenced the Americans Robert Dale
Owen (1801-1877) and Charles Knowlton
(1800-1850) whose writings were known in
Britain in the 1830s. It was one of Knowlton’s
pamphlets which, in 1876, became the centrepiece of the celebrated trial of Charles
Bradlaugh and Annie Besant, best known to
the world of to-day as a theosophist. It was
shortly after this trial, which received wide
publicity, that Britain’s birth-rate, then
standing at about thirty-five per thousand,
began to fall. With minor intermissions, it
fell steadily to its lowest peace-time record of
144 In 1934.

‘During the nineteenth century the birth
control movement was mainly espoused by
people who held unorthodox political and
religious views, many of whom described
themselves as atheists or rationalists. The
Churches and the weight of traditional
opinion were indignantly hostile. The arguments advanced during the nineteenth
century in favour of birth control were as
diverse as now, but they had a characteristic
politico-social tinge. They were much concerned with how the working classes could be .
plunged into dire poverty and degradation
by numerous children.

The movement made a noteworthy stride
forward in the last ten years of the period
under consideration—between 1920 and 1930.
The barrier of conventional and theological

* A paper read at the Fifth International Conference
on Planned Parenthood, Tokyo, October 1955.

225

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1956. 47, 4.
226

prejudice was then broken by Dr. Marie
Stopes, a woman of high scientific attain
ments whose well-written books were eagerly .

bought and read in successive editions which
ran into hundreds of thousands. The experience which guided this gifted woman’s
energies into these channels were in part
personal. She had been strictly brought up in
ignorance of the elementary principles of
sexual physiology and therefore suffered
much in early marriage. Her first book in
this field was concerned with the theme and
carried the title of Married Love; it was
essentially a plea for enlightenment in a
sphere of unique importance for women.
The theme of birth control was sounded in
her next book Wise Parenthood which was
published in November 1918—seven days
after the signing of the armistice which
ended the first world war. In the next two
years she raised funds for and opened the
first birth control clinic in Britain. Her
orientation, though in part ‘social and
eugenic, was mainly humanitarian and
personal. Birth control was for her a means
of freeing women from the bondage of
numerous and unwanted pregnancies; hence
her outlook was also feminist and libertarian.

There was much postwar unemployment in
the Ig20s and at the end of the decade the
world-wide economic depression set in, thus
aggravating the unemployment. There was
much deprivation and disillusionment among
the workless whose sufferings gave further
impetus to the birth control movement.
Support was energetically given by many
socialist writers and thinkers among whom
H. G. Wells and Bertrand Russell were
prominent. The medical profession mostly
stood aloof though some gave vigorous
expression to their convictions. Among
these Lord Dawson, the physician of King
George V, was noteworthy as a supporter.

A part which was not dissimilar to that
played in England by Marie Stopes was taken
in the U.S.A. by Margaret Sanger. She has
told us how her ideals and zeal were channelled into the birth control movement.
This happened not because of early marital
difficulties but because of what she saw when
working among the poorest families in New

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

York. Under her leadership the movement
spread in the U.S.A. during the ten years
1920-1930 much as it was doing in England,
though against more concrete legal obstacles.
Because she deliberately challenged laws
which she regarded as pernicious, Margaret
Sanger was committed several times to
prison. I like to think of the parallelism
during this decade between the movements
in Britain and the U.S.A., in both of which
the inspiration, provided by women, was
mainly personal and humanitarian. The
weighty demographic considerations, arising
from population pressure, which, since the

-end of the second world war, have largely

powered the movements in Japan and
India, played but a small part. |

(b) The Eugenic Movement

The originator of eugenics and the inventor
of the word was Sir Francis Galton (1822I9QII), an explorer and an investigator with
an exceptionally wide range of interests. He
was a half first cousin of Charles Darwin; and
it was the latter’s evolution theory, propounded in 1859, which provided both the
inspiration and the foundation of eugenics. ~

For Galton, eugenics was an attempt to
apply evolutionary principles to man; it was
a method by which man could further his
own evolution in desirable directions.
“Man,” he wrote at the age of eighty-six,
“js gifted with pity and other kindly
feelings. I conceive it to fall well within his
province to replace natural selection by
other processes that are more merciful and
not less effective. This is precisely the aim of
eugenics.’ A great power, he believed, was
here available which could be wisely or
foolishly directed.

What were the qualities which Galton
regarded as eugenically valuable? A considerable list could, he said, be compiled
upon which most people would agree. It
would include health, energy, manliness and
a courteous disposition. He would himself
take physique, ability and character into
account, the last being the most important
though the most difficult to measure. But
he did not lay down definite principles. He
recognized the need for variety. Civilizations
FAMILY PLANNING AND EUGENIC MOVEMENTS

differ; so do the ideals towards which they
strive and the human types they most admire.
The same can be said for classes and vocations. The qualities praised in a soldier are
not those specially valued in an artist,
artisan or statesman. But each class,
profession, vocation or sect recognizes its
good and bad types. “ The aim of eugenics,”’
Galton wrote, “is to represent each class by
its: best specimens: that done to leave them
to work out their common civilization in
their own way.”

“ Eugenics,” said Galton in his best
definition of the word, “‘ is the science which
deals with all influences that improve the
inborn qualities of a race; also with those
that develop them to the best advantage.”’

Eugenics has two sides. What has been
called negative eugenics is concerned with
restricting the contribution to the next
generation of persons of wunder-average
natural endowments; positive eugenics with
raising the same contribution of persons of
above-average endowment.

The idea of bringing about a differential
fertility favouring the better against the
worse halves or “ moieties ’”’ of the different
sections of a community, thus changing the
composition of succeeding generations in
favour of the better moiety, is an aspect of
positive eugenics which takes most of the
population into account. There might be
difficulties about where to draw the line
between the two moieties; but the further
we move above and below this area of uncertainty, the more recognizable does the
individual’s quality become.

But Galton discerned another and more
restricted aspect of positive eugenics. This
might be called élite eugenics in contrast to
the foregoing “moiety eugenics.”” There
exist in all sufficiently large countries a few
exceptional persons who combine in high
degree natural capacity, eagerness for work
or zeal, and power of work. These rare
persons, who compose less or much less than
one per cent of the population, become
outstanding figures. It was with such that
Galton was concerned in his book, Hereditary
Genius. He showed beyond doubt that their
abilities were hereditary and that other

227

members of their families were noteworthy
or outstanding in much larger numbers than
could have been yielded by chance. These
élite families, Galton declared, were a
country’s most valuable assets, being a
natural aristocracy. No efforts, however
strenuous or costly, to secure their fully
reproducing themselves would be wasted.

Both moiety and élite eugenics are
commended by Galton in programmes of
positive eugenics.

A similar distinction is applicable within
the sphere of negative eugenics. The equivalent of the élite, whose fertility it would be
an unquestionable service to the country to
promote, is here the small group who are
irremediably burdensome or harmful to
society. The fertility of these, Galton
thought, should be checked.

Before Galton’s death in IgII eugenic
movements were started in several countries.
In the U.S.A. extensive pedigree studies were
made of anti-social families whose cost to
the community was tentatively assessed.
In Germany the writings of Gobineau
(1816-1882), of Houston Stewart Chamberlain (1855-1926) and of Nietzsche (18441g00), all of whom lived through the
controversies about evolution which followed
the publication of the Origin of Species (1859),
were preoccupied with doctrines of race.
These doctrines were essentially alien to
Galton’s thought.

From this short review it will, I hope, be
clear how different were the origins of the
birth control and eugenic movements. The
former had complex origins in the doctrines
of Malthus, the afflictions of the industrial
proletariat, and the crusading zeal of social
reformers. The eugenics movement began
much later than the other (the word eugenics
was first used in 1883) and its origins were
simpler. It was derived from the evolution
theory and from the revisions of traditional
patterns of thought which this theory
necessitated. Compared to the other, the
eugenics movement could have but a limited
appeal. It satisfied no universal need and, in
so far as it involves the making of valuejudgments of human beings (from which as
many come out unfavourably as favourably),
228

it could in its early days scarcely commend
itself to more than a sophisticated minority.

2. From 1930 to 1955: Reorientations of
both movements

(a) The Birth Control Movement

Many important events have occurred in
the twenty-five years 1930-1955.

I mentioned earlier that, by 1934, the
birth-rate in Britain had fallen to 14:3 per
thousand. In the course of the decade 19301940 grave misgivings came to be felt in
several European countries about the prospects of maintaining numbers with such low
rates as were then prevailing. The population pyramid and the net reproduction rate
were popularised. Pyramids for Britain and
the Scandinavian countries showed sinister
undercuts which boded ill for the future; and
net reproduction rates had fallen well below
unity, It has been said of this period that an
over-population scare was suddenly reversed
into a depopulation scare. In Britain the
change came suddenly in 1936. Attention
was widely turned to events in France which
for some years had been haunted by fears of
depopulation and where, during years of
peace, deaths had been exceeding births.

The birth control movement reacted to
these events. By then a network of voluntary clinics had, in Britain, been established
throughout the country. Most of these were
affliated to the organization which later
became the Family Planning Association
which is represented at this conference.
The Association encouraged clinics to organize, in addition to the work on birth
control, services for the diagnosis and
treatment of infecundity; and the idea
spread that family planning services should
be dispensed as part of a .comprehensive
service concerned with the general well-being
of the family. Among these allied services
were marriage guidance, premarital examinations, guidance on genetic or eugenic problems, maternity and child welfare. This
view was, in 1949, authoritatively and
unanimously advocated by a British Royal
Commission on Population. If I understand
the matter correctly this is also the position

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

now taken by the Indian Government whose
intention it is that family planning services
should form part of wider health services.

I may add that, by the end of the 1930s,
the need for birth control on personal and
medical grounds had been so widely accepted
in Britain that organized opposition from all
except Roman Catholics had practically
disappeared. Hence the movement suffered
little if at all from the depopulation scare
which had by then become fairly widespread.

It was in the decade 1930~-1940 than an
interest in the possibilities of voluntary
sterilization also developed.

But another event of maximal importance
has occurred during the last twenty-five years
which I am now discussing. In 1947, India
became a sovereign nation. Plans for the
country’s future development were prepared.
It was quickly recognized by the planners
that hopes of raising living standards could
be frustrated if India’s recent increases in
population gained momentum. A “ demographic ’’ argument for birth control which,
though recognised, has never carried much
weight in western countries, was suddenly
brought into central prominence. This
‘““ demographic.’ argument derives its cogency from the sudden enhancement of
human powers over death—we might call
this power “death control ’’—by the discoveries of antibiotics and_ insecticides
and by iniproved methods of producing and
transporting food. Many lives are saved and
many prolonged. Unless the effects of death
control are balanced by a corresponding
exercise in birth control, populations must
increase at an accelerating speed. :

The newly-acquired cogency of this
‘““demographic’”’ argument in favour of
birth control seems to me to mark the decade
of the 1940s in much the same way that the
widely felt depopulation scare marks the
preceding decade of the 1930s.

(b) The Eugenic Movement

The eugenic movement no less than the
other met with difficulties in the years
1930-1940.

The manner in which the birth-rate had
been falling drew attention to the much
FAMILY PLANNING AND EUGENIC MOVEMENTS

discussed questions of differential fertility.
Not only was birth control being more used
by the upper and middle than by the lower
classes, but within each occupation or social
division it was being more used by the
intelligent and provident moiety than by the
other. These events caused misgivings to
eugenists who, in Britain, were divided over
the birth control question. Some condemned
birth control outright as a cause of racial
degeneration. Others gave it a qualified
approval, seeing it as a necessary instrument
of racial improvement; for these the problem
was how to get birth control responsibly used.

A more serious difficulty was presented by
current events in Germany. Hitler came
into power in 1933 and in 1934 his sterilization law, which contained compulsory clauses,
came into effect. Efforts to get a voluntary
measure legalized in Britain were much
hampered by what was going on in Germany.
Opponents were convinced that voluntary
measures were “ the thin end of a wedge ”’;
that they would prepare the way for a
dictatorship with eugenic courts such as the
Nazis had set up; and that in due course all
reproductive processes would be controlled
by the state.

During the 1930s, moreover, the socialist
movement made much headway among
voters. Socialists did not withdraw their
support from the birth control movement.
But many showed animus against eugenics.
During the decade sociological research was
active in Britain. It was shown that the
differences in diet and living conditions
between the urban working classes and the
middle classes were such that the working
classes were physiologically and socially
handicapped. In the early years of the
twentieth century social class had been
treated by some writers on eugenics as
providing a standard of eugenic merit, the
upper classes being regarded as eugenically
superior to the lower. This, as I have
already stressed, was not the standpoint of
Sir Francis Galton who recognized the need
for diversity and thought of each vocation,
however humble, as divisible into moieties.

It is not surprising that the equation of
eugenic merit with social class was found

229

repugnant by those who were concerned
about how the poorer classes were denied the
opportunity of realising their full physical
and mental potentialities. Eugenics, said an
influential socialist critic in the mid-1930s,
was a system of class prejudice masquerading
as science; and another such critic went so
far as to call it a system of fascist myths.
Differences between people or groups, it was
widely declared, would not be confidently
regarded as inborn until environmental
conditions had been made uniform for all.

I do not know how much of this sort of
criticism was heard in the U.S.A.

3. The Position To-day
(a) The Birth Control Movement

What is the position to-day in the midtwentieth century? I will mention two
features which seem to me noteworthy.

The first is the speed with which the
principle of birth control (I am not referring
to its practice by appliance methods) is being
accepted. throughout the world. This principle is now rarely held to be impious or
offensive to God. In Britain the Churches,
which were clamorously hostile a hundred
years ago, are now mostly well-disposed:
Indeed, their reactions to the recommendations of the Royal Commission on Population,
a mid-twentieth century event, would have
seemed almost unbelievable to the Anglican
bishops of a century earlier. I understand
that, in the U.S.A., the position is more
complex and that the different States vary in
their attitude.

It was a source of astonishment to me
when, in 1952, I learned from Lady Rama
Rau, Dr. Radhakrishnan and others in
Bombay that there was no doctrinal opposition to the principles of birth control in
Hindu philosophy, despite the position
adopted by the widely revered Mahatma
Gandhi. I know nothing about the Islamic
position, but I have recently been informed
on fairly good authority that, according to a
recent declaration by a high religious
dignitary, Moslems are enjoined not to bring
into the world more children than they can
themselves competently rear. If there are
delegates from Egypt here they may be able
230

to tell us more. That birth control is not
contrary to essential Shinto and Buddhist
precepts, or at any rate not more contrary
than is the practice of abortion, I infer from
the sponsorship of this conference. I am not
clear about the position of Jewry or about
that of the Greek and Russian Orthodox
churches. These may well succeed in
clarifying their positions in the next five
years.

The second feature which strikes me about
the mid-century is how the two-sidedness of
the population problem is being increasingly
recognized. One side of the problem is the
menace, or seeming menace, of depopulation
to some developed countries; the other side is
the simultaneous threat of over-population
to countries in different continents and
latitudes. Let me take France as an example.
As you know, metropolitan France has, for
the whole of this century, been uneasy about
the replacement of her population and,
during several peace-time years, has actually
experienced excesses of deaths over births.
Birth control is strongly discouraged and
abortions severely punished. But Algeria
is now a part of France. The Moslem population of Algeria, eight times more numerous
than the European, has a high birth-rate
(41.9 in 1952) and a low death-rate (13.0
in 1952). Hence the Algerian population is
rapidly increasing. There is developing a
considerable northward migration of Algerlans into France where difficulties are being
caused by differences in living standards.
These difficulties compel the French to
recognize the two-sidedness of the population
problem. One side presents itself in metropolitan France; the other in Algeria.

This recognition is to be welcomed. It
implies realism, flexibility of judgment and
emancipation from doctrinal rigidities.

(b) The Eugentc Movement

The policies of the Nazi government have
done this movement much harm; progress
like that made by the birth control movement has been impossible. Nevertheless,
knowledge of the genetics of many human
infirmities has been advanced and in some
countries services designed to provide

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

guidance on genetic problems have bee
established.

From the standpoint adopted in this paper,
however, the most important development of
the last twenty-five years has been a restatement of the standards of eugenic value.

The American Eugenics Society (most ably
led by Mr. Frederick Osborn to whom I wish
to pay a tribute) and the British Society
concur that to-day the most satisfactory
standard of eugenic value is a sort of
performance test which centres on the family.
This standard, which is at the same time
widely acceptable and easily translated into
policy, is one according to which eugenic
merit is assessed in terms of how far a
married couple succeed in producing by
design (i.e. by planned parenthood) a healthy
and a happy family. To plan the births of a
well-spaced family demands intelligence,
foresight and restraint; to produce enough
children for replacement implies a love of
children and a sense of duty to a community
which needs children; to provide them with
a good home requires the power to make a
success of marriage and of life outside the
home.

The stress here is on moral and social
qualities whose perpetuation is manifestly
desirable.

Eugenists therefore aim at replacing the
present generation by children who are
deliberately conceived in the light of known
medical, social and genetic factors. They
favour the planned as against the unplanned
family; and they wish to see the community
so organized that its best citizens will feel
eager to give full expression to the instincts
of parenthood. This ideal is in accord with
to-day’s trends in child psychology which
stress the importance for subsequent mental
health of a sense of security and of reciprocated affection in infancy. The effects of
heredity and of environment are not easy to
separate; nearly always they are closely
interwoven. The healthy and happy family

‘perpetuates valuable inborn qualities; it also

reproduces the conditions in which these
qualities can develop to the best advantage.

This standard, which puts planned parenthood into the centre of the picture, brings
FAMILY PLANNING AND EUGENIC MOVEMENTS)

the ‘eugenics and birth control movements
together; and unlike standards based on
class, it excites no prejudices. It remains to
be seen how it will serve in the future.

4. Problems of the Future 
These will be numerous, complex and
largely unforeseeable. I will briefly mention
five which I think likely to present themselves.

(a) Possible Recurrence of Depopulation
Scares

In the late 1920s there suddenly began an
economic depression which, by the early
1930s, had become world-wide. Another such
world-wide depression may descend on. us. If

_by the time this were to happen an efficient
oral method of birth control had been
discovered and had become widely used,
there might ensue surprisingly rapid falls
in the birth-rates of many countries, again
giving rise to depopulation scares. We may
thereafter witness oscillations between overpopulation and depopulation scares, varying
from country to country. During periods of
alarm and misgiving the birth control movement may be attacked and discouraged as it
now is in France. |

(b) Moral Problems of Freedom versus ©
Comtulsion

The problem is also likely to come to the
fore of how far freedom can be preserved in
the wide sphere of a political ideal and in the
narrower one of the ethics of parenthood. It
is a commonplace within the experience of all
of us living in the year 1955 that, in times of
danger and stress, freedom is curtailed
whereas in times of prosperity and plenty it
flourishes. During wars, compulsions and
restrictions abound; these range from the
compulsion of military service to the many
compulsory regulations which a few years
ago hemmed in every act of our daily lives.
The same applies to conditions of shortage
when, to prevent maldistribution of limited
goods, rationing is necessary. In conditions
of peace, abundance and prosperity regulations can be discarded and freedom becomes
maximal, — |

gr

How far do conditions of severe population pressure justify the principle of compulsion? In France misgivings about the
dangers of depopulation generated a legal
code which severely punished the practice of
abortion and proscribed the sale of appliance
methods of birth control. These restrictions |
of freedom were largely prompted by demo-’
graphic considerations. How far should.
compulsory measures of an opposite character
—measures designed to limit an excessive
fertility deemed to be injurious to national
interests—be tolerated?

The justification of such measures, as I see
the matter, depends upon how urgent are the
social or national issues which the measures
are designed to solve. These issues should
not be hastily judged by outsiders.

The essential point I am here making is
that the balance between the need for
compulsions and the claims of freedom is one
which every country and every generation
must interpret in its own manner in the light
both of the external conditions which prevail
and of the character and habits of that
generation.

The same can be said about the balance.
between duties and rights. The despot is not
much concerned with the rights of his subjects. But the extreme individualist and
over-enthusiastic democrat may go too far in
the opposite direction. He may be so.
concerned with an individual’s claims and
rights that he ignores his counter-balancing
duties and responsibilities for the common
good. This balance again needs to be
interpreted anew by each generation.

The sense of duty and responsibility, if
sufficiently strong in an _ over-populated
country, might of itself be sufficient to
influence the size of families in desired ways. .
If this were so, regulations and compulsions
would be unnecessary. In any case outsiders’
should be sparing in their criticisms. |

(c) Problems of Urbanism

The connection between urbanism and
fertility has long been recognized; that
between urbanism and mental health is now
being discerned. Children do not thrive in
narrow streets and on pavements. They
232

need fresh air, green trees and fields, the
sands of the seashore and familiarity with the
animals which play such a large part in their
imagination and in their story books. In
fascist Italy, Mussolini introduced “ ruralization schemes ”’ as part of a positive population policy. Whether or not depopulation
scares recur, the problem of the balance
between urban and country life will claim
increasing attention. Considerations of demography will be linked with those of child
psychology in attempts to provide rural
conditions for children, especially in their
early lives.

(d) The Roman Catholic Church

The Roman Catholic Church is now in a
somewhat difficult position. The Pope recognizes that the population problem has
“ anguishing aspects ’’ both in its personal
and demographic bearings. He has also
declared that the size of the family should be
determined by the parents in the light of the
well-being of their children. But the Church
opposes appliance methods of birth control.
Continence and the rhythm method are
alone permissible. But what of the rhythm
method?

A valuable beginning has been made in the
impartial investigation of this method by the
Indian Government. The results can scarcely
be regarded as favourable to the method. But
further inquiries are needed, and_ will
doubtless be made, in other countries. For
example, the method should be assessed
when used by a group of women who have
learned about it in a course of pre-marital
instruction. ,

The practicability and reliability of the
rhythm method are vital issues for the Roman
Catholic population of the world which
amounts to about half a billion. If the
method is conclusively shown to be inadequate, the Church will be faced with a serious
difficulty. In that case, other methods may
later be sanctioned ; but what these may be is
at present quite unforeseeable.

(a) The Problem of Shunned Indusintes

An unfortunate by-product of the industrial revolution is the unpleasant nature of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

-much of the work that must be done. Some

industrially developed countries are to-day
having troubles of recruitment into shunned
occupations. In Britain this is now happening in the coal mining industry. The

_admission to the coalfields of Italian miners

has been actively debated. Similar difficulties
have occurred in the hotel industry which, in
coastal areas, is largely seasonal. The
immigration of people from Barbados who
are willing to do this work is being discussed.

Difficulties of recruitment for shunned
industries may well increase. They may
result in new migratory movements and race
mixtures which, in their turn, may give rise
to problems of differential fertility. I do not
know how far Japan has had premonitions of
such difficulties. They will, in my opinion,
be increasingly felt by many developed
countries.

Conclusion

All these considerations are ultimately
reducible to a single question—that of how
and when people feel social responsibilities
and how they discharge these responsibilities.

The central problem of eugenics—a qualitative problem—is how to inculcate and
distribute a sense of social responsibility
which will encourage the better moieties of
each occupational grouping to make the
fullest contribution to the next generation;
and how to create environmental conditions
of such a kind as to favour the free exercise
of such responsibility.

But the immediate problem in Japan, if I
understand your present position correctly,
is a simpler one with mainly quantitative
implications. It first presents itself as the
problem of how to alter the timing of the
exercise of parental responsibility. Such.
responsibility can be exercised at three
different moments within a short period of a
few months, namely after the birth of a child,
between the child’s conception and birth,
and before the child’s conception.

Unless I am mistaken, the population of
Japan was, a hundred years ago, somewhat
cut off from the outside world. But your
people were then well aware of the balance
between human numbers and your islands’
FAMILY PLANNING AND EUGENIC MOVEMENTS

native resources. Numbers were then partly
regulated by infanticide: that is to say that
the sense of social responsibility found
expression in action after the child was born.
By the policy of abortion, the sense of
responsibility is exercised at an earlier stage,
namely between the child’s conception and
its birth. What is now desired is to shift this
exercise still farther back, namely to the
period before the child is conceived. Such
anticipation of events is easy to describe but,
I well appreciate, difficult to inculcate and
enact. Is this perhaps your central problem
—how to recondition, or condition anew, the
exercise of parental responsibility?

To an outsider like myself it seems that
the national characteristics of the Japanese
people, which have enabled your country to

233

industrialize itself and, in such a short time,
to take her place among the foremost
nations of the world, will favour her in the
task we are now considering. The Japanese,
I say respectfully, are intelligent, adaptable
and quick to learn. They are also disciplined
and dutiful, placing a high value on loyalty.
These characteristics, coupled witha capacity
for self-sacrifice which has made them
redoubtable in war, and coupled also with a
strong love of children, should equip them .
better than most western countries for the
cultural. transition now called for. The
experiment will be unique in the world’s
history and, if it is successful, may become
one of the most noteworthy features of the
second half of the twentieth century. The
rest of the world will watch your experiences
not only with interest but with sympathy.
