FAITH SCHENK and A. S. PARKES

The Activities of the Eugenics
Society

Introduction

The Eugenics Society, probably the first of its kind in the world, has had a comparatively long and somewhat chequered history, which falls into several different phases
according to the special interests of prominent members and the pressure of outside events.
The completion of its Jubilee year in November 1967 provides an appropriate occasion to
record something of this history, in the hope that it will promote interest in the Society and
that, contrary to the paradoxical proverb, we may learn from it. Of the Society’s many
activities and enterprises over the years, some have been short-lived, others have been longterm, some have been major, others minor, some have been successful, others unsuccessful,
some have still to prove their worth. Many of them have already been described in detail,
as will be seen from the section on publications sponsored by or relating to the activities of
the Society given on p. 157. These include the Problem and Promising Families projects
which occupied much of the Society’s attention in the decade after World War II, and the
campaign for the legalization of voluntary sterilization which continued, on and off, for
nearly forty years. The Society’s long-standing and cordial relations with the Family
Planning Association and the International Planned Parenthood Federation have also been
noted. In the account which follows are recorded some of the other activities of the Society,
especially long-term ones, and events in its history, arranged so far as possible in chronological order of their inception.

Origin and Early Activity

In the Editorial preface to the first number of this final volume of the REVIEW it was
noted that the Society was started by reformers more concerned with social evils than with
human genetics. This was literally true. On 15th November 1907, a meeting was held at
Caxton Hall, Westminster, attended by certain Members of the Committee of the Moral
Education League and a number of people interested in Eugenics; the word had been
invented some years earlier by Galton, and defined by him as follows:

Eugenics is the science which deals with all influences that improve the inborn
qualities of a race; also with those that develop them to the utmost advantage.

At this inaugural meeting a Provisional Council was elected to draw up a constitution for a
new Society to be called ““The Eugenics Education Society’. Many Members of the Moral
Education Committee resigned their places on that Committee and offered themselves for
nomination on the new Council.

On 9th December 1907, the Provisional Council (of which Dr. Slaughter was elected
Chairman) convened a meeting at the offices of the Sociological Society, when the rules
of the new Society were approved and the officers of the Society and a Council of twenty-one
Members were nominated for future election.

142
THE ACTIVITIES OF THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

The aims of the new Society were:

1. Persistently to set forth the national importance of Eugenics in order to modify
public opinion and create a sense of responsibility, in the respect of bringing all
matters pertaining to human parenthood under the domination of eugenic ideals.

2. To spread a knowledge of the laws of heredity so far as they are surely known, and
so far as that knowledge might effect improvement of race.
3. To further eugenic teaching at home, in the schools, and elsewhere.

The first general meeting was held at Denison House on 14th February 1908, with the
Hon. Sir John Cockburn in the Chair. The society lost no time in becoming active, because
at this first meeting it was decided to send a protest to the Home Secretary and London
County Council against the latter’s closing the homes for chronic inebriate women in the
Metropolitan area. A certain amount of correspondence ensued, some of which was
published in The Times. The Society’s efforts undoubtedly contributed to the appointment
by the Home Office of a Departmental Committee of Enquiry into the administration of
the Act of 1898. The Society was invited to assist this Committee by answering a series of
questions in writing, and a Sub-committee was appointed to furnish answers. These
answers were embodied in a Memorandum which was included in the official report of the
Departmental Committee.

A programme of monthly meetings to include drawing-room gatherings and evening
debates was drawn up. Sub-committees were appointed for Education, Library and Organization.

In May of 1908, Francis Galton became Honorary President of the Society; on 28th
June at the house of Mr. Crackanthorpe, the acting President, he read a paper on eugenics
which was published the following evening in The Westminster Gazette and which Karl
Pearson described as “‘a thoroughly good paper for a man in his 87th year, and expresses in
a marvellously brief space the creed of Eugenics”. This must have been among his last
active engagements because, to quote again from Pearson, “‘we find him from 1908 onwards
seeking, well wrapt in rugs, sunshine and quiet in a sheltered garden corner, or on the
‘stoep’ of a fitly chosen winter home”’.

In the following year, ambitious schemes were set on foot for propaganda, instruction
of members of the Society and education in the principles of Eugenics. It was brought to
the notice of the Council “‘that the organization of Boy Scouts would provide an excellent
medium for instilling the eugenic ideal into the rising manhood of the country”. BadenPowell was contacted and an interview arranged between the High Commissioner, Sir
Francis Vane, and two representatives of the Society. The matter was discussed and the
proposal made that lectures should be given to Scout Masters, who, in their turn, would
teach the boys more by indirect influence than by definite lectures. History does not record
the fruits, if any, of this enterprising plan.

Regulations were drawn up at this time for the formation of branches; eventually,
twelve branches were established, usually under University auspices, including one in New
Zealand which came into being as the result of an attempt to form a Moral Education
Society in Dunedin. In 1909, also, special meetings were held to consider the Society’s policy
on venereal disease—possibly the No. 1 social evil of the time. Later, in 1912, the Society
and the Royal Society of Medicine jointly formed a medical committee whose representatives urged the great importance of more attention being paid to the study, treatment and
prevention of VD. The matter was considered by the governing body of the RSM, with
the result that a committee was appointed on which members of the Eugenics Society were
asked to serve. A deputation was sent to the President of the Local Government Board to

143
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

present a Memorial urging that effect should be given ... to the recommendation of the
Royal Commission on the Poor Law for the detention in Poor Law Institutions of persons
suffering from VD when medically certified to be dangerous to others. In the following year,
1913, members of the Society’s Council served on the Royal Commission on Venereal
Diseases and also on the Committee of the Royal Society of Medicine appointed to deal
with these diseases.

Propagandist activities had also been going on in other directions and on 15th July 1910
a deputation to the Prime Minister urged the need for legislation to enable the feebleminded to be permanently cared for. Soon afterwards the Society’s membership lobbied
MPs to support a Feeble-minded Control Bill, presented by Mr. Graham Stewart who drew
eleventh place in the ballot for Private Members’ Bills to the House of Commons; it
received a unanimous second reading on 17th May 1912. In the meantime, a Government
measure, the Mental Deficiency Act, was brought in, with the same objects, which had its
first reading on 16th May, and came into force on Ist April 1913, a result due, at least in
part, to the activities of the Society.

It is perhaps the only piece of English Social law extant, in which the influence of
heredity has been treated as a practical factor in determining its provisions (The
Society’s Annual Report).

Throughout this period before World War I the Society was active in organizing
meetings and conferences. The Congress of National Health held in 1911 at Trinity College,
Dublin, included a section on ‘‘Eugenics and Child Studies’’. Five papers on eugenics were
contributed to the Congress by members of the Society. In July 1912, the First International
Eugenics Congress was organized by the Society, and held in London. The full proceedings
were published in Problems in Eugenics (2 volumes). The congress was favourably reported
by the Press. A nucleus of European organizations was formed: France, Italy, Denmark,
Belgium, Holland and USA. The Congress resulted in increased work for the Society’s staff
and the offices were moved to larger premises, in Kingsway House. An appeal was made
for funds. Shortly after, an Education Committee was appointed to organize an Education
Conference for heads of secondary and elementary schools. It was held on Ist March 1913
in the University of London, South Kensington. Expenses (£100) were paid by an
anonymous donor, and the proceedings published in THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April
1913.

Training courses in eugenics were also organized for students, and in 1912-13, eighteen
students attended. The fees were £10. 10s. Od. a year or £4. 4s. Od. a term. This £10. 10s. Od.
per annum represents £50 or more at the present time, and one may wonder whether
eighteen students, or still more so their present equivalent number, would enrol today for
such a course at such a fee. Around this time, also, committees proliferated freely. A
Research Committee, established in November 1912, adopted a code for the standardization
of symbols used in making pedigrees, and also a scheme to include the abstracting of
pamphlets and scientific papers bearing on human heredity, etc. A Medical Committee was
appointed in 1912, and held its first meeting in December of that year. A Special Committee was appointed to consider the ramifications of the National Insurance Act, January
1913. Finally, a Sub-Committee was formed to consider methods of exchange of information
between the various organizations represented in a newly established International Committee. Within this period, also, the first Galton Day Lecture was held as an after-dinner
event on 16th February 1913. Looking back on this early period of the Society’s history in
the days before World War I, one cannot fail to be impressed by the energy and enthusiasm
of the founders and early members of the Society.

144
THE ACTIVITIES OF THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

War-time Activities

Twice in its history the Society’s activities have been seriously curtailed by war, but on
both occasions the Council has made public-spirited efforts to help. On the outbreak of war
in 1914, the Council considered in what way the services of the Society could best be utilized.
It was decided that, as the care of the next generation and assistance to ‘“‘fit” parents would
be a practical expression of eugenic principles, a special Eugenics Maternity Fund should
be raised, with the idea of opening a Maternity Home for the wives of professional men
who had either enlisted or been adversely affected by the war. Concurrently with this
scheme the officers of the Society, in conjunction with the heads of the principal professional
societies and institutions, took an active part in the formation of the Professional Classes
War Relief Council. Mr. Pierpont Morgan lent two houses, 13 and 14 Prince’s Gate, S.W.1,
to be used for the nursing-home, and members of the Society and their friends, together
with other supporters of the recently-formed Council, furnished and adapted the three top
storeys to accommodate seventeen patients with the necessary nursing and domestic staffs.
When the Professional Classes War Relief Council was fully established, the Maternity
Committee, originally started as the Eugenics Maternity Committee, was adopted by the
Council as one of its sub-committees, and the Eugenics Education Society handed over to
the Council the balance of the special Maternity Fund subscribed by the members of the
Society, amounting to £161. 10s. Od. Up to the date of publication of the Annual Report in
1915, thirty-three babies had been born in the home, a number increased to forty-eight boys
and thirty-five girls by the end of that year.

In 1915, Professor Poulton gave a notable Galton Lecture on ‘‘Eugenic Problems after
the Great War’’. According to the Annual Report... ““The address, which was afterwards
published in the April number of the REVIEW, called forth a considerable amount of comment from the Press, and it is noteworthy that the point which aroused most interest and
sympathetic criticism was the lecturer’s indictment of the Governmental neglect of science,
the effect of which it was held had disastrously handicapped us in the struggle against
Germany’s almost perfect organization of its far-reaching resources.” This, however, was
the last of the Society’s activities during the war, apart from the Council’s consideration of
the eugenic aspect of certain problems of social reconstruction as a preliminary definition
of its policy on housing, divorce, emigration and maternity assistance.

On the outbreak of World War II in 1939, Dr. Blacker, the General Secretary, was
mobilized, and at the request of Lord Horder, then President, an emergency meeting of the
Council was called on 10th October. At this meeting it was agreed that the Society’s work
should be continued at 69 Eccleston Square and that an Emergency Committee of nine
should act on behalf of the Council for the duration of the war. Its composition was as
follows: Sir Charles Arden-Close, The Hon. Mrs. Grant Duff, W. T. J. Gun, Mrs. Hubback,
A. J. Lewis, Radcliffe Martin and R. M. Titmuss.

A meeting of the Emergency Committee in October 1940 agreed that in view of the
situation arising out of the war, the work of the Society should be placed on a care and
maintenance basis; the services of Miss Pocock (propaganda secretary) and Miss Dunn
(stenographer) were dispensed with and Mrs. Collyer (business secretary) was put in charge.

In June 1940, a cablegram was received from Dr. Hutton, President of the Eugenics
Society of Canada, offering homes in Canada for the duration of the war to children
selected by the Eugenics Society in the UK. This offer was gratefully accepted, and to deal
with the work a committee was formed, consisting of Lord Horder, C. F. Chance
(Chairman), A. J. Lewis, R. M. Titmuss and Miss Pocock (Secretary). Fellows
and Members were notified of the scheme, and within a short time applications were
received on behalf of forty-one mothers and 266 children. It did not prove possible, how
145
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ever, to send more than a fraction of those who wished to go. Three parties consisting in all
of five mothers and twenty-three children left between the beginning of August and the end
of September. All arrived safely, and judging from their letters were very happy in their
new homes. During the autumn, shipping accommodation became increasingly difficult to
obtain, but there was always a hope that the Committee would be able to send the remainder
of the applicants after the winter. Early in February 1941, however, a letter from Dr.
Hutton informed us that the Government regulations and restrictions in Canada were so
severe that the Eugenics Society of Canada could no longer carry on the work and was
obliged to “‘retire from the field’. This left us in a helpless position, and to its great disappointment the Society had to do likewise. Dr. Hutton, however, assured the Society that
he and the Secretary, Judge Harkness, would keep in touch and continue to see that those
already in Canada were well cared for.

The Library

As early as 1908 the Council appointed a Library Committee, one of whose tasks was
to purchase books for a lending library, though it was not until four years later, at Kingsway
House, that the project really got under way. In 1912, donations were received, from Mr.
Wheler Galton and Mr. Robert Mond, which made it possible for the first time to buy
books in any significant number, and in the following year further gifts were received for the
purpose. Consequently, a special committee was set up to administer the available funds, to
prepare a catalogue and to formulate library policy.

This Committee arranged that the library should be available to the Society’s branches
and their members on the payment of a small annual subscription or weekly fee. The policy
of making a charge for borrowing continued for some years—in 1920 other Societies were
allowed to take out books on payment of five shillings a year—until 1927, when it was
decided that facilities for non-members should be restricted to reading in the library.

From 1913 onwards the library, under the direction of Miss Edith Corry who was
formally appointed Honorary Librarian in 1922, grew progressively and by the time the
Society moved to Grosvenor Gardens in 1926 it contained over 1,300 books and a considerable collection of unbound pamphlets and reprints. Funds were still inadequate, however, to
print the catalogue, and a typed version was prepared which members could buy. Another
indication of financial stringency was the strict rule that books could not be sent out until
the postage money had been received!

In 1929 the number of books in the library reached 2,000 and a new catalogue, this
time printed, was issued in 1930, and served to stimulate borrowing which, to Miss Corry’s
concern, had begun to fall off; even so, she found that the users of the library still formed a
very small proportion of the Society’s members. As will be seen later, this apparent lack of
interest still engages the attention of the Council.

When the Society moved to Eccleston Square in 1933 there was for the first time
adequate space to house the library, and proper shelving and storage cupboards were
provided. When war broke out Miss Corry left London. Miss Lane (Mrs. Hodson), who
was then assistant to the Editor of THE EUGENICS REVIEW, took over the supervision of
the library and in 1943 was appointed Librarian. The war over, the Society was able to
make a new start in building up the library. Many people after reviewing books for
THE EUGENICS REVIEW presented them to the library—a generous gesture as no fee was
paid to reviewers—and these, with the purchases made from a special allocation by the
Council, increased the number of volumes to nearly 4,000 by 1960. During the period the
Society was given by Lord Avebury three of Galton’s works presented to him by the author
and therefore of special historical interest to the Society. Frederick Osborn, too, gave
copies of his Preface to Eugenics and of certain other books published in America. Another

146
THE ACTIVITIES OF THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

important addition, in 1960, was a selection of Dr. Marie Stopes’s books received under the
terms of her Will, by which she bequeathed to the Society such books on sex and sociology
as the Honorary Secretary (Dr. C. P. Blacker) might choose.

In the last eight years books have been added at the rate of about fifty annually, and,
fifteen periodicals are regularly bound. In spite of these additions and improvements,
however, the library, while being frequently called upon for loans by the National Central
Library, of which it has been an outlier since 1943, is used by members of the Society no
more now than it was in the 1930s. The Council has this problem under earnest consideration.

Galton Lectures
Under the heading “‘Galton Day” the Annual Report for 1914 records:

On Monday, February 16th, took place the first celebration by the Society of the
anniversary of the birth of Sir Francis Galton. The celebration was inaugurated by a
dinner at the Hotel Cecil, attended by 140 persons, members of the Society and their
friends. ... Immediately after the dinner the company repaired to the lecture room,
where a considerable audience had already assembled. Here the proceedings were
opened by Major Leonard Darwin, who, in introducing the lecturer, explained the
object of the gathering in the following words: ‘‘In the first place we desire to satisfy
the very natural wish which is felt for some outward expression of our firm belief that
posterity will owe a great debt of gratitude to the man who first made it possible to
start a definite campaign in favour of racial advancement; and, in the second place, we
hope by means of these gatherings to make more widely known the necessity for
eugenic reform. We trust, therefore, that this may prove to be the first of a long series
of such anniversary meetings.”’... Sir Francis Darwin then delivered an address on
“Francis Galton”.

As will be seen from the list at the end of this article, there has been a Galton Lecture
every year since, with the exception of 1918 and 1944 when war-time conditions made it
impossible; until 1965 it was arranged on or near Galton’s birthday but recently the timing
has been more flexible.

Up to the outbreak of World War II the Lecture followed a dinner at one of the
London hotels. In 1924, the celebration was held at Gatti’s Restaurant at a cost of half a
guinea a head, which was apparently cheaper than in previous years and for this or other
reasons the attendance was considerably larger. This occasion is clearly remembered by one
of the writers (A. S. P.), who as a guest of a member thus made his first contact with the
Society. In 1926 the New Criterion Restaurant was chosen and there were so many present
that the Lecture had to be given in the dining-room—a practice which was continued until
1939. In those days, the number attending was nearly always about 150, and 1937 was a
record year with 224.

For the first three years of World War II the Lectures were held after an informal
lunch. In the light of recent events it is interesting to note that in 1942 Professor J. D.
Bernal, the Lecturer for that year, spoke on ““The Need for a Social Sciences Research
Council’; unfortunately, this was one of the few Galton Lectures which were not published.

From 1945 onwards the Lectures were given after tea, first at the Royal Society for
Tropical Medicine and Hygiene and later at the Royal Society. It has been increasingly
difficult to achieve the size of audience that the Lectures merit and numbers have certainly
never reached the level of the pre-war years. The Council has therefore now decided to
break with tradition and in future to integrate the Galton Lecture in the annual symposium.

147
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Family Allowances

The subject of children’s allowances became of interest to the Society in its early days.
Thus, in 1913, it advocated that the principle of allowing rebates of income tax for each
child should be extended. The Society’s view was that if no account was taken in the tax
system of the expenses of a family, marriage and parenthood were penalized and the tax
fell most heavily on the middle and professional classes. Later, between the wars, the
Society considered, additionally, the more direct support which could be provided by cash
family allowances. Here, for reasons given in the 1932 article by R. A. Fisher, reprinted in
the preceding number of the REVIEW, the Society took a most positive attitude as indicated
in its evidence to the Royal Commission on Population and by the invitation to Beveridge
to give the 1943 Galton Lecture on Eugenic Aspects of Children’s Allowances. It may be
noted with interest, however, that at the Annual General Meeting in 1944 one lone voice
protested against the grant made to the Family Endowment Society, on the grounds that
family allowances are not eugenic in effect, a point of view heard more frequently now than
it was then.

The Society’s Finances

For many years the Society’s activities were severely limited by shortage of funds,
which in the first place depended entirely on donations and Members’ and Fellows’ subscriptions, raised successively from the original rate of 10s. to £1. 1s. Od. in June 1949 and
to £2. 2s. Od. in September 1960. In the early days its activities could only have been carried
on by a great deal of voluntary work. In 1923, however, a legacy made it possible to employ
a full-time assistant in the office. In the words of the annual report for that year:

... A full-time assistant is now regularly being employed in the Society’s office, a
reform which only became possible on the receipt of a legacy from the late Miss Hilda
Inez Scott. We mention these two facts together because we feel sure that the testatrix
would have been pleased could she have known in advance how quickly her bequest
would make an advantageous change in the conduct of our affairs. Miss Scott was
both a sound eugenist and a keen advocate of social progress, though she disbelieved
in the efficacy of many existing methods of reform. She held that the woman who with
adequate knowledge fails to limit her family according to her means and value, proves
herself unfitted for the high function—her fitness being but a veneer. In her letter to the
President she also made it clear that she held it would be very necessary for a successful
issue of the Eugenic Campaign largely to work through women, and felt it strange that
many of the women leaders who are proposing or aiding dysgenic remedies are University women. Miss Scott’s legacy ought to be regarded as an appeal by a woman to
come forward and give such assistance as may be in their power in the fight for racial
progress.

Financial security, however, came only in 1930, when the Society received the news
that Mr. Henry Twitchin, a sheep farmer of Western Australia who had been donating
£1,000 per annum to the Society, had died and left to it his estate. His Will contained this
clause:

It is my desire that the .. . bequest should constitute a permanent fund and that
the income derived therefrom should alone be used for furthering the objects of the
Society ... but I expressly direct that such desire shall not impose a legal obligation
on the Society or prevent the expenditure of capital if such expenditure is deemed to be
expedient at any time.

148
THE ACTIVITIES OF THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

This very practical expression of Twitchin’s interest in heredity, derived no doubt from his
experience in animal breeding, had an enormous influence on the development of the
Society. There were considerable delays in realizing the estate, but even so, the shadow of
continued financial difficulty was lifted immediately. The bequest, for which the Society
continues to be most grateful, also provided much needed encouragement for the Society
at a time when Catholic opposition to its aims was being intensified; the Pope circulated an
encyclical Casti Conubii attacking birth control and sterilization and a Papal pronouncement
made later specifically condemned eugenics and sex education for children.

The Twitchin bequest amounted in all to about £57,000, and apart from the purchase
of 69 Eccleston Square was invested in various ways, mainly in quoted securities. In 1963
when it was decided to take full advantage of the Society’s Charitable status and so avoid
the labour and delay of reclaiming tax deducted at source, the securities and some real
estate were realized and in 1964-5, 87,655 units were purchased in the Charities Official
Investment Fund, from which, after the withdrawal of 4,946 units, the Society’s income in
1967 was £4,838.

The Society’s Premises
The Society’s offices have successively been at

6 York Buildings, Adelphi, W.C.2 1908-1912
Kingsway House, Kingsway, W.C.2. 1912-1917

11 Lincoln’s Inn Fields, W.C.2 1917-1924
52 Upper Bedford Place, W.C.1 1924-1926
20 Grosvenor Gardens, S.W.1 1926-1933
69 Eccleston Square, S.W.1 1933
The Society’s move in 1924 to premises at 52 Upper Bedford Place has a special
interest in view of later events. The Annual Report for that year records:

A plan long in contemplation for bringing the work of three Societies dealing with
the scientific aspects of human life under one roof has materialized. Through the
initiative of the Royal Anthropological Institute which has recently acquired No. 52
Upper Bedford Place, a new home has been offered to this Society, the Psychological
Society being the other partner. It should be a great stimulus to eugenic work to be in
contact with the work of societies so closely linked in aim and method, quite apart from
the benefit of increased working space.

In view of this write up, it is not clear why the contact was so short-lived. Forty years later,
in 1964, the Institute hoped to acquire the lease of three houses in Bedford Square in which
the Society would have been offered accommodation. Had this been possible, history would
have repeated itself as the plan was to establish there a centre for human sciences. The main
event of 1933 was the purchase from the Twitchin legacy of a sixty-three-year lease of
69 Eccleston Square and its associated Mews for £2,000 at a ground rent of £70 per annum.
The management of this property has tended to be time-consuming and its maintenance
expensive, but overall the purchase has proved to have been a master stroke. It has ensured
the Society of adequate accommodation for its own needs and made possible the provision
by the Society of rent-free accommodation to less fortunate cognate organizations. The
property, bought during the depression of the early 1930s, has of course shown enormous
capital appreciation.

In 1953 the Society bought for a premium of £300 a new lease of ninety-nine years,
dating from December 1951 at a ground rent of £100 per annum to which, in 1966, a Deed
of Variation was entered relieving the Society of a restrictive user clause on the second floor

149
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in consideration of the ground rent being increased to £375. In 1967, this lease was surrendered and for the sum of £4,575 the Society bought a new lease of 134 years, at a ground
rent of £75, which contains no restrictive covenants on the use of the premises.

On the other side of the ledger, an eighty-eight-year lease of the Mews was sold for
£6,250 in 1962, the lease of the house is now valued at about £45,000, and the rental income
from the maisonette and the leased office accommodation is currently bringing in £1,700
per annum.

Detailed consideration in 1963 of the possibility of letting the whole house on a long
repairing lease to avoid the not inconsiderable work of managing the property failed to
reveal any suitable alternative accommodation at a rent less than several times the average
annual outgoing on the Eccleston Square house. With the recent installation of modern
lighting and central heating, and the purchase of a very long lease at a nominal ground rent,
the Society possesses most valuable and useful premises which should be developed to
the full.

Darwin Research Fellowships

The Society has organized two series of Darwin Research Fellowships, the first beginning in 1935 and the second in 1960. The earlier Fellowships (or Studentships as they were
called originally) were of a value of £250 and were tenable for two years. The Council
appointed a Selection Committee under the chairmanship of Professor R. A. Fisher, who
acted for the Society and was assisted by representatives of three other organizations,
namely, Dr. Julian Huxley for the Royal Society of Edinburgh, Dr. David Heron for the
Royal Statistical Society and Professor F. H. A. Marshall for the Royal Society. On their
recommendation the Council awarded Fellowships as follows:

In 1935, with a renewal in 1936, to Dr. R. B. Cattell, who was then Director of the
School Psychological Clinic at Leicester, for the investigation by tests of the intelligence of a
typical urban and a typical rural population of school children with a view to determining
the average size of the family at each level of intelligence. The results of his work were published in THE EUGENICS REVIEW in October 1936 and October 1937; he also published a
book The Fight for our National Intelligence, which appeared in 1937.

In 1936, to Mr. J. C. Trevor, then working in the Galton Laboratory, for making a
survey of the literature on the biological effects of race-crossing; Mr. Trevor held the
Fellowship for two years. In 1938 he published two papers, one in THE EUGENICS
REVIEW—Some Anthropological Characteristics of Hybrid Populations—and one (with
Buxton and Julien) in Man—Skeletal Remains from the Virgin Islands.

In 1937, to Mr. R. M. W. Travers for an investigation of psychometric differences
determining occupational selection and occupational success. He published in 1938 two
papers in Annals of Eugenics, A Psychometric Sociological Study of a Group of Speciality
Salesmen, and The Elimination of the Influence of Repetition on the Score of a Psychological Test. This was a one-year tenure.

In 1938, first, to Dr. Dora Ilse, then at Edinburgh University, for a genetic analysis of
psychological and physiological characters with special reference to twins. She was unable
to continue this research owing to the war and held the Fellowship only for eight months.
Second, to Mr. R. H. Pear for an investigation of the problems of the approach to marriage.
His report was not published.

The outbreak of war brought the first series to an end and the Fellowships lapsed until
1960. In February of that year the Council decided that they should be revived and be open
to those qualified in science or medicine wishing to pursue research work in the field of
human population genetics with special reference to the range of human variability. The

150
THE ACTIVITIES OF THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

Fellowships were to be offered in the salary range £800—£2,000 and to be tenable for up to
three years.

The Selection Committee this time was kept within the Society and consisted of Dr.
A. S. Parkes, Dr. J. M. Tanner, Professor C. H. Waddington and Dr. J. A. Fraser Roberts,
all members of the Council. On their recommendation, the Council made the following
awards:

In 1960, first, to Dr. D. T. Hughes for research on the cellular basis of inheritance and
the mechanism of genetic variability in man. His tenure was for two years, after which he
took up an appointment as William Shepherd Research Fellow of the Institute of Cancer
Research, London. A report on his work during his Fellowship appeared in the January 1963
issue of THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

Secondly, to Dr. A. W. F. Edwards for study of the mode of inheritance, variability
and selective forces involved in human child-birth. He resigned his Fellowship in September
1961 to take up a post in Pavia, but a report on his year’s work appeared in THE EUGENICS
REVIEW, also in the January 1963 issue.

In 1961, to Dr. Rodney Harris for a genetical survey in Merseyside of the relationship
between ABO blood groups and disease. His appointment was for two years, but he resigned
the Fellowship in August 1962 to take up a hospital appointment in Liverpool.

The Council then agreed that in future it would appoint a Research Fellow in alternate
years as probably each would have a two-year tenure. No appointment, therefore, was made
in 1962. In the following year the Fellowship was advertised, but none of the applications
was considered suitable by the Committee; instead, Dr. John R. Gibson was appointed to
an Honorary Fellowship in respect of his work on social mobility and differential fertility,
which he held for three years. The Council has decided against further appointments for the
time being so that all available funds can be applied to grants and the Society’s own activities.

The Population Investigation Committee

This Committee, established in 1936, has proved to be one of the Society’s most
successful initiatives. Its early aims and constitution are recorded at the beginning of its
first annual report, covering the year 1937:

The Committee had its origin in the Annual Galton Lecture entitled ‘‘Eugenics
in the Light of Population Trends” given on 16th February 1935 to the Eugenics
Society by Professor A. M. Carr-Saunders. Acting upon a suggestion contained in this
lecture, the Council of the Eugenics Society took the initiative in calling the Population
Investigation Committee together.

The Committee, while made up of representatives of various organizations, and of
certain individuals elected in a private capacity, is an autonomous body. It is in no way
subordinate to any of the organizations represented upon it. The Committee has power
to add to its numbers as it thinks fit.

The Committee has been formed to examine the trends of population in Great
Britain and the Colonies and to investigate the causes of these trends, with special
reference to the fall of the birth-rate. It is not a propagandist Committee and is not
concerned with advocating any social measure with the object of influencing the movement of populations. It will be impossible to adopt social measures without fuller
information than we possess at present, and it can be taken as certain that any policy
which, at a later date, the Government may see fit to adopt, will be influenced by the
findings of the new inquiries of the General Register Office, and by the findings of the
Committee.

151
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The Committee receives no subsidies from Government sources. It depends entirely
upon donations from interested individuals and organizations.

A statement of its financial needs and an income and expenditure account will be
found at the end of this report. From the former it will be seen that the Committee
has schemes for research which require the services of six research workers and would
cost approximately £4,000 a year. At present, the Committee has two research workers
and its expenses come to approximately £1,000 a year. It has, at the moment, a balance
of only £762, 12s. 2d.

The Committee has its headquarters at the offices of the Eugenics Society, which
has placed its staff at the Committee’s disposal. The Committee, therefore, has practically no overhead expenses and all its available funds are devoted to the direct furtherance of its aims.

Of the £1,000 per annum expenses mentioned, one-half was provided by the Society,
whose regular financial support continued year by year until 1948 and at times reached
£1,000 per annum. Apart from a period during the war, Dr. D. V. Glass was the Committee’s Research Secretary during this time.

In 1946, the Committee’s headquarters were moved from the Society’s offices at
Eccleston Square to the London School of Economics, where Dr. Glass subsequently became
Chairman of the Committee. Support by the Society continued sporadically until 1961.
The outstanding contributions of the staff of this Committee to the study of population are
too well known to need further reference here.

AID Investigation Council

In February 1958, the Society’s Council decided to establish an autonomous group to
review the existing status and future possibilities of human artificial insemination genetically,
medically, legally and socially.

The Society made a grant of up to £500 a year for two years to the group, appointed
Dr. A. S. Parkes, Dr. Margaret Jackson and Mr. Cecil Binney as foundation members, and
provided office facilities at Eccleston Square. The first meeting was held in March 1958, when
it was agreed that the group should be known as the AID Investigation Council and that
Dr. Parkes should be its Chairman. At subsequent meetings four other members were
co-opted: Dr. C. P. Blacker, Dr. Philip Bloom, Mrs. Mary Stocks and the Rev. Dr. H. L.
Philp.

There were at the same time two other bodies investigating AID; the Scientific Committee of the British Medical Association and a Committee of the Church of England under
the chairmanship of the Bishop of Exeter. Each of these Committees appointed an observer
to the AID Investigation Council: Dr. E. E. Claxton and later Dr. L. D. Gullick attended
for the BMA, and Dr. D. Sherwin Bailey for the Church of England Moral Welfare Council.

At its second meeting, in July, AIDIC decided to interview those known to practise
AID, and from the following October interviews based on a questionnaire drawn up by the
Council were recorded with nine practitioners. Details were given about demand for AID,
methods of assessment, selection of donors, number and type of patients, and results.

The information collected was intended for a long-term inquiry, but unexpectedly it
was put to more immediate use. In September 1958, the Government appointed, under the
Chairmanship of Lord Feversham, a Departmental Committee on Human Artificial
Insemination to which the Eugenics Society was asked to give evidence. The Departmental
Committee asked separately for medical and non-medical information and the latter was
dealt with by AIDIC; each member of the group wrote his views on the sections relating to

152
THE ACTIVITIES OF THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

his special interest, and these were co-ordinated by the Chairman in the definitive memorandum which was submitted to the Departmental Committee on 22nd May 1959. This
was later published in full in the January 1960 issue of THE EUGENICS REVIEW. In summary,
AIDIC concluded that in Britain AID is practised on a very small scale and that quantitatively the social problem involved is negligible; on the biological side there is clear evidence
that the use of the technique, in itself, does not lead to adverse effects; and on the eugenics
side, as AI donors have been selected for their mental and physical qualities, AID children
potentially are likely to be equal to or above the average of their kind. On 9th June 1959,
Dr. Parkes and Dr. Bloom gave oral evidence for the Council.

The Report of the Interdepartmental Committee appeared in July 1960. It embodied
all the information which AIDIC had aimed to collect and consequently the Council made
plans for a follow-up among those doctors who had given evidence. A questionnaire was
devised and circulated, but it became apparent that the technique was being practised on so
small a scale that no worth-while results could be expected.

What had emerged, however, was that the difficulties of AID would be much reduced
and the efficiency much increased if some method of preserving human spermatozoa for
long periods were available, that is, if a semen bank could be established. This point was
emphasized in a memorandum to the Council by its Chairman, who pointed out the
inadequacy of existing information in this field.

The AIDIC, therefore, decided to initiate a programme of research and to allocate for
the purpose the funds at its disposal. Dr. Agnes Onions, a graduate biologist who was
employed on the routine testing of spermicidal preparations for the FPA and IPPF, was
appointed for one year to undertake work on a part-time basis. In 1962 her work was taken
on by D. W. Richardson, who continued until 1966; during this period the research
was financed by the Eugenics Society as AIDIC’s funds were exhausted after the first
year.

Dr Richardson’s results were reported in a memorandum which he wrote for the
Eugenics Society’s Council in 1966.

The upshot of the work was the establishment of a small semen bank in liquid nitrogen
at —190°C. This was later transferred to the care of Dr. Margaret Jackson in Exeter,
who in confirmation of work in the US successfully induced fertilization and normal
pregnancy with stored material.

The Marie Stopes Memorial Foundation Limited

In the spring of 1959 the Society received, under the Will of Dr. Marie Stopes, various
legacies which included the freehold of her house, 108 Whitfield Street, W.1, where she
hoped her clinic would be maintained as an independent unit. Her choice of the Society,
of which she had been a Life Fellow, as the organization to be responsible for its management derived largely from her friendship with Dr. C. P. Blacker when he was the Society’s
General Secretary.

In June 1959, the Council appointed a Sub-Committee to deal with matters arising
from the bequest. This Committee completed its work by the formation, in 1960, of a
Limited Company, which was later registered as a Charity, called The Marie Stopes Memorial Foundation Limited, to manage the Clinic. In the same year the Society for Constructive Birth Control Ltd. was incorporated for the purpose of holding assets derived
from the unincorporated “‘Society for Constructive Birth Control and Racial Progress”
whose funds were transferred by resolution of its members, and from settlements comprising
106 Whitfield Street, investments and cash, which were transferred by agreement of the
Trustees.

153
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

These assets were not, however, a part of the legacy bequeathed to the Eugenics Society
itself. Of this latter legacy, a part was transferred to SCBC Ltd., especially 108 Whitfield
Street for which, at the request of the Eugenics Society, SCBC Ltd. paid £2,600 (the value
agreed for Probate purposes) to The Marie Stopes Memorial Foundation. The Articles of
Association of the Foundation include a provision for its control by the Society’s Council
through an appointed representative, currently Dr. Colin Bertram; the Company is thus a
subsidiary of the Society.

The Board of the Foundation, consisting at present of six members under Dr. Bertram’s
chairmanship and including the Society’s Honorary Treasurer, is responsible for all matters
of policy; the day-to-day running of the Clinic is deputed to a Clinic Committee on which
the medical and nursing staff are represented.

Under the Foundation’s management the Memorial Clinic has flourished, and each
year since 1961 surplus funds have accumulated of which part have been made available for
the general purposes of the Eugenics Society, and part used for research projects. The
Foundation initiated the first domiciliary birth control project to be carried out in London
and pioneered the advisory centres for young people. It also organized for overseas nurses
a training course in modern contraceptive methods which has become a regular part of the
Clinic’s facilities; six courses are now held annually.

The number of patients attending the Clinic has increased to such an extent that there
is now a long waiting list, but it is planned to provide more doctor sessions as soon as
possible. The special services available include diagnostic tests, advice on marital difficulties
and on termination of pregnancy.

Re-orientation, 1957-1963

Early in 1957, Dr. Blacker, then Honorary Secretary, drew up a memorandum entitled
“The Eugenics Society’s Future”, for consideration at a Special Meeting of Council on
Ist May 1957. The stated aim of this memorandum was to draw attention to recent losses in
Fellowship and Membership, to suggest that the losses were partly attributable to the lack
of a positive policy and to make suggestions for the future. The table accompanying the
memorandum showed that the number of Fellows and Members of all categories had
decreased from high-water mark of 768 in 1932 to 456 in 1956. Dr. Blacker further pointed
out that two recruiting campaigns since 1946 had had only limited success and had produced
the interesting generalization that the products of recruiting campaigns do not retain
membership for very long. Dr. Blacker went on to discuss three possible policies for the
future:

(a) that the Society should pursue eugenic ends by less obvious means, that is by a
policy of crypto-eugenics, which was apparently proving successful with the
US Eugenics Society;

(b) that the Society should concentrate on the eugenic aspects of current problems and
should campaign for the control of immigration, and for a reduction in the total
population of Great Britain;

(c) that the Society should change its constitution and adapt itself to a diminishing
membership and the possession of substantial resources by becoming a Trust,
Council or Foundation, which would be able to do most of what the Society was
already doing but more effectively.

Unfortunately, this valuable document received no adequate attention at the Council
meeting on Ist May but a spark had been struck, which finally caused flames on 17th

154
THE ACTIVITIES OF THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

February 1960, when four senior members of the Council presented to it a memorandum
making the following suggestions for re-orientation and reforming the Society:

(a) The Society should make use of one of the organizations specializing in public
opinion surveys to obtain some concrete information about what the educated
public thinks about eugenics, and that until such information is available the
Society should curtail its missionary work and, specifically postpone the broadsheet
programme.

(b) The Society’s activities in crypto-eugenics should be pursued vigorously, and
specifically that the Society should increase its monetary support of the FPA
and the IPPF and should make contact with the Society for the Study of Human
Biology, which already has a strong and active membership, to find out if any
relevant projects are contemplated with which the Eugenics Society could assist.

(c) The Society should seek opportunities to expand this [the research] side of its
activities, and specifically that efforts should be made to bring about more contact
between the Society and laboratories engaged in relevant research.

(d) The Society should change its name to ““The Galton Society’’.

(e) The Society should take steps to amend Article 26 by adding to the last line ‘‘up to
a maximum period of 6 years’ consecutive service as an Honorary Officer’’.

This memorandum evoked some hard discussion. Suggestion (a) was accepted; the Gallup
organization was called in to make a survey and the broadsheets project discontinued;
(b) and (c) were agreed in a general way. The idea of changing the name of the Society toa
less evocative one was shelved because of the internal emotional and external legal difficulties it might raise. On the other hand, the principle of limiting the terms of office of the
Honorary Secretary and Honorary Treasurer in the same way as were the terms of office
of the President and Vice-President was accepted, but at the Extraordinary General Meeting
called on 23rd November 1960 to make the necessary alteration of the Articles, the Special
Resolution was not put because it was pointed out, very reasonably, that limitation of terms
of office ought to include all members of Council. This was generally agreed, and at a second
Annual General Meeting held on 24th May 1961 the emendations of the Articles limited
continuous service on the Council in any capacity except that of Treasurer to a maximum of
nine years.

The next phase may be said to have started in 1963 with Sir James Gray as President,
Professor Parkes as Secretary and Professor Meade as Tieasurer. In the first place, it was
decided to seek registration of the Society under the Charities Act of 1960 and so to formalize the status of the Society as a tax-exempt organization. The Commissioners ruled that, as
a Charity was not allowed to campaign for the changing of existing laws, such registration
would mean striking out from the Memorandum of Association the clauses relating to
propaganda. This was agreed to by Council and the necessary alterations were made at an
Extraordinary General Meeting on 21st November 1963. The Society was entered on the
Central Register of Charities in December 1963. This action finally brought to an end the
propagandist work of the Society which had been a main part of its activities in its early
days—as witness the fact that at one time there had been a Propaganda Secretary—but
which had waned after World War II.

In the words of the 1944-5 Annual Report:

It is recommended that such propaganda as the Society undertakes after the war
should not be under the direction of a propaganda secretary. In addition to such
propaganda as is directed to the periphery of the body politic, the Society should use
its influence at the centre by close liaison with cognate organizations.

155
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Further references to propaganda are made in the article on the history of the REVIEW by
Mrs. Hodson.

At about the same time, towards the end of 1963, the Honorary Officers and the
General Secretary met and agreed to recommend to Council

(a) that the main activity of the Society should be devoted to the common ground
between the biological and social sciences and to bring together for the mutual
exchange of ideas and information those interested in genetic as contrasted
with environmental influences—an idea for which James Meade was primarily responsible;

(5) that the attempt to keep alive the series of ordinary members’ meetings should be
abandoned, and that effort of this kind should be concentrated on an annual
symposium, of which the proceedings would be published in book form.

In pursuance of this policy, a symposium on ‘“‘Biological Aspects of Social Problems”’
was held on Ist and 2nd October 1964. The success of this change of policy may be judged
from the facts that in accordance with the numerous applications for tickets the meeting
place had to be changed from the then small room of the Royal Society to the Botany
Lecture Theatre at University College, London, and that over two full days the audience
varied between 250 and 300, far larger than ever assembled at a Members’ Meeting, and
that within two years of publication some 1,800 copies of the volume of Proceedings had
been sold, compared with the 300 or so sales of THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

Biosocial Science

The success of the 1964 symposium confirmed the Council in its policy of pursuing
“‘Biosocial Science” and in 1965-6-7 equally successful symposia were organized on Genetic
and Environmental Factors in Human Ability, Social and Genetic Influences on Life and
Death, and Genetic and Environmental Influences on Behaviour. The last of these was held
in the Meeting Rooms of the Zoological Society of London. Volume 4 of the proceedings
in this series is due later this year for publication, as with previous ones, by Oliver & Boyd of
Edinburgh. The sales of Volumes 2 and 3 have already exceeded 1,000 copies, and this
indication of a demand for literature in this field led Council to consider whether some
more frequent publication would not also fulfil a need. Consequently, as recorded elsewhere,
in 1967 the Council decided to discontinue the issue of THE EUGENICS REVIEW with the
completion of its Jubilee Volume 60 in 1968 and at the beginning of 1969 to launch a
Journal of Biosocial Science to be published by Blackwell Scientific Publications of Oxford
under the auspices of the newly established Galton Foundation. This project has attracted
considerable interest and, as a practical expression of support, a promise of financial
assistance from the IPPF. The Journal will cater for

... Original papers, reviews, lectures, proceedings and major book reviews coming
within the common ground between the biological and the social sciences. Specifically,
it will publish material dealing with social aspects of human biology, including reproduction and its control, gerontology, ecology, genetics and applied psychology; with
biological aspects of the social sciences, including sociology, social anthropology,
education and criminology; and with biosocial aspects of demography.

The proceedings of the 1968 and later symposia will be published as supplements to the
Journal and like the Journal will be available to Fellows and Members at a much reduced
rate on a compound subscription of £6 per annum. The ordinary annual subscription to the

156
THE ACTIVITIES OF THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

Society of £2 will carry the right only to the ordinary privileges of membership together with
the receipt of a quarterly Newsletter which will also be inaugurated in 1969.

The Galton Foundation

In the decade following the presentation of Dr. Blacker’s 1957 memorandum to the
Council, three lines of thought coalesced: (a) that the Society should adopt a less evocative
name, (b) that it should cease to be a membership body and become a grant-giving and
promotional organisation, and (c) that it should devote itself to biosocial science. All these
objectives have been achieved without altering the constitution or nature of the Society by
the establishment of the Galton Foundation conceived in 1967 to mark the Jubilee year of
the Society and born in 1968. This is an autonomous body, established as a charitable Trust
“‘in memory of Sir Francis Galton and in recognition of his outstanding contributions to the
biosocial sciences”.

The declared Objects of the Foundation are:

(a) The promotion of the biosocial sciences including the study of the conservation,
evolution and progress of mankind.

(b) Such other charitable purposes of an educational, scientific or medical nature as
can conveniently be promoted in conjunction with the purpose set out at (a) above.

Support of this Foundation, in the first place, will no doubt be necessary by the Eugenics
Society, but it is hoped that its autonomous constitution and charitable status in a rapidly
expanding field will attract substantial support from other organizations. In the meantime,
it is assured of a modest regular income from a private endowment. The Trustees are Mrs.
Mary Adams, Mrs Frances Dennis, Dr. G. A. Harrison, Professor Sir Alan Parkes and
The Lord Platt.

The Society’s Publications

In addition to THE EUGENICS REVIEW the Society has been publishing books,
pamphlets and other material since its early days, though for some years this activity was
limited by lack of funds. The first of the books, entitled Problems in Eugenics, appeared in
1912; this was a pre-printed collection of the papers read later that year at the First International Eugenics Congress which was held in the University of London. In 1930, by means
of an anonymous donation, Family Council Law in Europe was published, a small volume
which summarized the findings of a special committee which had investigated European
Law and Practice “‘as touching the protection of unstable and irresponsible persons and
safeguarding their relatives’. .

The pamphlets which were produced during this period were mainly articles reprinted
from THE EUGENICS REVIEW as these were cheaper to produce in this way than if they
had been specially printed.

In 1931 the Society produced two schedules, for which there is still some demand, for
recording human pedigrees; one was designed for genealogical purposes, and the other was
for the use of medical practitioners in recording pathological pedigrees. The specific object
of the latter is to furnish the data necessary to enable a eugenic prognosis to be given in
cases of doubtful heredity.

Two years later two books appeared which, though they were not published by the
Society, appeared under its auspices—E. J. Lidbetter’s Heredity and the Social Problem
Group (Edward Arnold) and The Chances of Morbid Inheritance (H. K. Lewis) edited by
C. P. Blacker. Dr. Blacker also edited another book—A Social Problem Group ?—which was
published in 1937 by Oxford University Press.

ER—M 157
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

In the 1930s, too, the Society’s Committee for legalizing Eugenic Sterilization and the
Joint Committee on Voluntary Sterilization, into which the Society’s Committee merged in
1934, produced a considerable number of pamphlets and leaflets, a handbook for speakers
and (by permission of H.M. Stationery Office) an abridged version of the Report of the
Departmental Committee on Sterilization.

In 1936, the Society produced a pre-marital health schedule; this was accompanied by
a pamphlet, entitled Health Examinations before Marriage which was later included in a
series of educational pamphlets published in 1938 and 1939.

In 1938, six heredity charts for use in schools, with a descriptive handbook, were
published for the Society by George Philip & Son. These have had a steady sale ever since.
Immediately after the war, in 1945, the Society embarked on the publication of Occasional
Papers, of which nine appeared in the course of the next ten years. The second of these,
Intelligence and Fertility by Sir Cyril Burt, aroused considerable interest in the Press and
elsewhere and was twice reprinted.

In 1950 and 1951 respectively the Society was responsible for the reprinting of two of
Galton’s works; Hereditary Genius (1892 edition), which was reprinted by Watts & Co. with
the aid of a grant from the Society, and Inquiries into Human Faculty (second edition, 1907),
which was produced by J. M. Dent & Sons at the Society’s expense and published in its
name. In the same format as this reprint a pamphlet was produced, under the title Three
Memoirs, containing three chapters included in the first edition (1883) but excluded from
the second.

In 1952, Problem Families: Five Inquiries was published by the Society. This was the
report of the investigations carried out under the auspices of the Problem Families Committee which was called together by the Council in 1947 and whose work was at the time the
Society’s main concern. The report by C. O. Carter on the three surveys carried out between
1952 and 1956 by the Society’s Promising Families Committee appeared in the October 1958
issue of THE EUGENICS REVIEW. The Council decided in June 1953 to publish in pamphlet
form a paper by D. Caradog Jones called Marriage in Relation to Eugenics. This appeared
later that year and was brought to the notice, in particular, of members of the Society of
Friends.

The Society’s next publication was a report of a survey of infant sickness and infant
mortality in fifteen areas of England and Wales. Edited by F. Grundy and E. Lewis-Faning,
this appeared in volume form in 1958, and was well received. In the same year the Society
published a Broadsheet on West Indian Immigration by G. C. L. Bertram.

The current publication mentioned elsewhere in this history, of the Society’s symposia
is proving to be one of its most successful ventures.

Other papers concerning activities referred to elsewhere are listed below:

1, Blacker, C. P. (1961, 1962). Voluntary Sterilisation. Eugen. Rev. 53, 33, 145; 54, 9, 143.

2. Eugenics Society (1945). Memorandum submitted to the Royal Commission on Population. Eugen. Rev. 37, 92.

3. Eugenics Society (1960). Evidence submitted to the Departmental Committee on Artificial
Insemination. Eugen. Rev. 51, 225.

4. Houghton, Vera (1961, 1962). International Planned Parenthood Federation: its history
and influence. Eugen. Rev. 53, 149, 201.

5. Population Investigation Committee (1938). First Annual Report. Eugen. Rev. 29, 239.
6. Pyke, Margaret (1963). Family Planning: an Assessment. Eugen. Rev. 55, 71.
158
THE ACTIVITIES OF THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

The Society’s Honorary Officers

(Sir Francis Galton

Sir James Crichton-Browne
Mr. Montague Crackanthorpe
Major Leonard Darwin

Sir Bernard Mallet

Sir Humphry Rolleston

The Lord Horder

Mrs. A. C. Gotto
with Dr. E. Schuster
Lady Chambers

with Mr. R. A. Fisher

The Hon. Mrs. Grant Duff 1927-1933

Mr. D. Ward Cutler

Mr. P. von Fleischl
Mr. W. H. Hazell
Mr. B. S. Bramwell
Mr. C. F. Chance
Mr. Geoffrey Eley

Miss E. W. Corry
Mr. Cecil Binney

General Secretaries

Mrs. C. B. S. Hodson
Dr. C. P. Blacker

Galton Lectures

1914
1915
1916
1917

PRESIDENTS
1908-1911) Professor Sir Alexander Carr1908-1909 Saunders
1909-1911 Sir Charles Darwin
1911-1929 Sir Julian Huxley
1929-1932 Professor Sir James Gray
1933-1935 The Lord Platt
1935-1948 Professor Sir Alan Parkes

SECRETARIES
1907-1920 Dr. C. P. Blacker
1916-1917 Dr. J. M. Tanner
1920-1929 Professor A. S. Parkes
1920-1930 Dr. G. Ainsworth Harrison
1927-1934

TREASURERS
1907-1922 Mr. G. Aird Whyte
1922-1929 Mr. G. C. Seligman
1929-1933 Professor J. E. Meade
1933-1946 Mr. John Peel
1946-1954

LIBRARIANS
1922-1948 Dr. C. O. Carter
1948-1959 Mr. P. R. Cox
1920-1931 Dr. C. O. Carter
1931-1952 Dr. G. C. L. Bertram

and the Future of our Race.

1919
1920
1921
1922

Miss F. B. Schenk

Sir Francis Darwin on Francis Galton, 1822-1911.

Professor J. Arthur Thomson on Eugenics and War.

Professor E. B. Poulton on Eugenic Problems after the Great War.
Discussion, opened by Major Leonard Darwin, on The Disabled Sailor and Soldier

Dean Inge on What Nations and Classes will Prevail ?
Professor Arthur Keith on Galton’s Place among Anthropologists.
Mr. W. Bateson on Commonsense in Racial Problems.
Speeches for the Galton Centenary.

1949-1953
1954-1959
1959-1962
1962-1965
1965-1968
1968
1952-1961
1961-1963
1963-1968
1968
1954-1961
1961-1963
1963-1967
1967
1959-1965
1965
1952-1957
1957-1965
1965
159
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Professor A. C. Pigou (no title given).

Dr. G. Elliot-Smith on Problems of Race.

Dr. F. C. S. Schiller on The Ruin of Rome and its Lessons for Us.

The Rt. Rev. Bishop of Birmingham on Some Reflections on Eugenics and Religion.

Dr. A. F. Tredgold on Mental Disease in Relation to Eugenics.

Dr. C. J. Bond on Causes of Racial Decay.

Major Leonard Darwin on The Society’s Coming of Age: The Growth of the Eugenic
Movement.

Professor S. J. Holmes on Natural Selection in Man and the Evolution of Human
Intelligence.

Professor Sir J. Arthur Thomson on Warnings from Nature or Seven Red Flags from
Biology.

E. J. Lidbetter on The Social Problem Group as Illustrated by a Series of East London
Pedigrees.

Mr. Justice McCardie on My Outlook on Eugenics.

Sir Josiah Stamp on Eugenic Influences in Economics.

Professor A. M. Carr-Saunders on Eugenics in the Light of Population Trends.

Dr. Julian S. Huxley on Eugenics and Society.

Mr. J. M. Keynes on Some Economic Consequences of a Declining Population.

Dr. John A. Ryle on Medicine and Eugenics.

Dr. C. G. Darwin on Positive Eugenic Policy.

The Lord Horder on Eugenic Policy.

Informal discussion, opened by Lord Horder, on Eugenics in Wartime.

Professor J. D. Bernal on The Need for a Social Sciences Research Council.

Sir William Beveridge on Eugenic Aspects of Children’s Allowances.

Dr. C. P. Blacker on Eugenics in Retrospect and Prospect.

Professor Godfrey Thomson on The Trend of National Intelligence.

Dr. W. Norwood East on The Non-sane Non-insane Offender.

Sir Russell Brain on Some Reflections on Genius.

The Rt. Rev. Bishop of Birmingham on The Mixing of Races and Social Decay.

Dr. A. S. Parkes on The Primrose Path—Some Aspects of the Population Problem.

Dr. G. C. L. Bertram on Eugenics and Human Ecology.

Dr. J. A. Fraser Roberts on The Genetics of Mental Deficiency.

Professor T. H. Marshall on Social Selection in the Welfare State.

Professor F. A. E. Crew on A Eugenic Appraisal of the Welfare State.

Professor Sir Cyril Burt on The Meaning and Assessment of Intelligence.

Mr. Frederick Osborn on Galton and Mid-century Eugenics.

Professor Tage Kemp on Genetic-Hygienic Experiences in Denmark in Recent Years.

Professor Aubrey Lewis on Fertility and Mental Disorder.

Mrs. Mary Stocks on Reflections on a Changing Class Structure.

Dr. Eliot Slater on Galton’s Heritage.

Sir Robert Platt on Inherited Disease in Man.

Sir Julian Huxley on Eugenics in Evolutionary Perspective.

Mis. Margaret Pyke on Family Planning: An Assessment.

Piofessor Jan A. B66k on Some Mechanisms of Chromosome Variations and their
Relation to Human Malformations.

Dr. Howard B. Newcombe on The Study of Mutation and Selection in Human Populations.

Dr. J. M. Tanner on Galtonian Eugenics and the Study of Growth.

Dr. A. H. Halsey on The Changing Relations between Biological and Social Sciences.
THE ACTIVITIES OF THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

Darwin Lectures in Human Biology

1960
1961
1962
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968

Dr. C. E. Ford on The Cytogenetics of Sex in Man.

Dr. J. M. Tanner on Human Growth in its Comparative and Evolutionary Aspects.

Professor A. S. Parkes on Change and Control in Human Populations.

Professor P. B. Medawar on Natural Selection and the Concept of Fitness.

Professor L. S. Penrose on Congenital Malformation in Man and Natural Selection.

Dr. O. G. Edholm on The Physiology of Human Adaptation.

Professor E. C. Amoroso on The Evolution of Viviparity.

Professor J. S. Weiner on Human Adaptability: its World Wide Study within the
International Biological Programme.

161
