HUMAN GENETICS
By HANS GRUNEBERG, M_D., PhD.

Reader in Genetics, University Colleze, London

under Karl Pearson to establish
human heredity as a quantitative
science ended in failure. In the years
which followed,*a vast amount of information on heredity in man was published
all over the world. Much of it was collected
rather uncritically and without a proper
understanding of the requirements of a
scientific inquiry and is of little more than
anecdotal value. But during the past
decade or two, human genetics has once
more started to emerge as a unified branch
of science on new fundamental bases. First
and foremost among these is the realization
that human genetics is essentially the
genetics of a natural population. This shifts
the interest from the individual pedigree to
the population as a whole and leads to the
collection of data which can be interpreted
in terms of population dynamics. Next
comes the necessity of a critical re-assessment of human data in the light of concepts
established by experimental genetics such
as multiple allelomorphism, mimic genes,
modifiers, etc., and the attempt to construct
linkage maps of human chromosomes.
Finally, while inherited congenital abnormalities are difficult to study in man, the
numerous metabolic and degenerative disorders of post-natal life offer excellent
material for physiological genetics, and in
this field, at least, human genetics ean make
its own contribution to genetics as a whole
rather than appear in the role of a beneficiary. The progress made by human
genetics in these various directions is very
uneven, and the egg-shells of the anecdotal
phase still stick to it in all too many places.
To sift the enormous literature on the
subject which covers the whole range of
medicine ; to separate the grain from the
chaff ; to re-assemble and to re-assess the
data within the framework of a unified
scientific theory of human genetics; ulti
| early attempt of the biometricians

mately to present a readable account of
this vast field of inquiry—this would appear
to be the aim in writing a. modern and comprehensive book on the subject. It is a
Herculean task indeed, and no reasonable
reader would expect any single author to be
able to solve this problem with equal mastery
throughout. It is with this in mind that
the critical remarks on Professor Ruggles
Gates’s new work* should be understood.

The scope of the book may best be gauged
from the headings of the thirty-one chapters
into which the work is divided. They are:
Introduction ; General Principles of Heredity in Man; Human Cytology; Linkage ;
Eye Color and Hair Color ; The Inheritance
of Color-Blindness; Hereditary Variations
and Abnormalities of the Eye; Hereditary
Variations and Abnormalities of the Ear ;
Albinism ; Abnormalities and Diseases of
the Skin, Hair, Nails and Teeth ; Anatomical
Abnormalities of the Hands, Feet and
Limbs; Abnormalities of the Skeleton and
of Bone Structure ; Metabolic Defects and
Derangements ; Hemophilia and Related
Hereditary Conditions; Other Inherited
Diseases and Abnormalities of the Blood
System ; The Blood Groups—Genetical and
Racial Aspects ; Allergy ; Hereditary Syndromes; Inherited Abnormalities of the
Alimentary Canal and Adnexa ; Inheritance
of Various Sexual and Intersexual Conditions ; Twins and Twinning; Inherited
Muscular and Neuromuscular Abnormalities; Hereditary Variations, Defects and
Diseases of the Nervous System; The Inheritance of Mental Defects; The Inheritance of Normal Mental Differences ; Cancer,
the Genetic Aspects; Constitution, BodyBuild and Susceptibility ; Congenital Anomalies; Inheritance of Stature and Size;
Anthropological Characters ; Odds and Ends.

* Gates, R. R., Human Genetics, New York, 1946.
The Macmillan Company. 2 vols. Pp. xvi + 1518.
Price 75s.

59
60 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Throughout the book there are numerous
references to related conditions in various
animals which wil] be welcome to medical
readers. Each chapter is followed by an
extensive bibliography ; a rough estimate
of the total number of references leads to
the somewhat staggering figure of 5,500, and
for this large classified list of titles alone,
Ruggles Gates’s work will be of great
value to geneticists and medical men alike.
The book is supplemented by a carefully
prepared index of 89 pages.

A book of this dimension is unavoidably
based on thousands of notes and abstracts
of papers collected over a _ considerable
period of time. The editing of this raw
material when‘ writing the various chapters
unfortunately leaves much to be desired.
Very often, related matters in the same
chapter are separated by long passages or
pages referring to other subjects, and not
very rarely the same paper is summarized
twice over in the same chapter. The second
half of p. 442 occurs again verbatim on
pp. 508-509. As a consequence of these
editorial shortcomings, many sections do
not give the impression of an organic whole,
but of a succession of more or Jess unconnected notes which have not been sufficiently integrated when the chapter was
prepared for the press. Though this makes
for a somewhat jolting progress and requires
a good deal of extra attention when reading,
it is perhaps not easily avoided altogether
in a work of this magnitude.

As the author points out in the preface,
the approach has been biological rather than
more strictly genetical throughout. As a
consequence the treatment of data tends to
be qualitative rather than quantitative and
little attempt has been made at a critical]
statistical evaluation of the raw material.
Though this may be welcomed by some
medical readers, it will be regretted by
geneticists. However, the delimitation and
approach to his field is for the author to
decide, and it should not be held against
him if the reader does not find in his book
what he had hoped to find.

Criticism is, however, legitimate within
the confines of the author’s chosen field, and

in what follows, attention is drawn to
certain of Professor Gates’s tenets in the
field of genetics which may mislead the nongenetical reader and in particular the medical
man who is apt to accept this book as an
authoritative text in matters genetical.

In the field of cytology, Professor Gates
maintains that man and indeed the primates
in general are tetraploid species. This is
deduced from the fact that among the
marsupials the commonest chromosome number is 22 or just under one half of that in
most primates (48), and that in the nuclej
of normal human tissues four nucleoli are
found. The entire lack of evidence for the
existence of polyploidy in bisexual animals
and the serious theoretical grounds against
such a hypothesis are brushed aside by a
reference to certain dicecious plants (Melandrium, Salix) in which polyploidy has been
established without a serious upset of the
sex-determining mechanism, examples which
are not strictly relevant to the argument.
The non-genetical reader should realize that
this tetraploid interpretation of human
cytology is not shared by the overwhelming

majority of competent cytologists and is
almost certainly an erroneous conception.

In the field of genetics proper, only a few
of Professor Gates’s heterodox opinions can
be discussed here. He is impressed by the
fact that many conditions are known in
man which are caused either by an autosomal dominant, or by an autosomal recessive, or by a sex-linked recessive gene. To
account for this common observation, he
advances the hypothesis that such triple
genes are in reality only changes in a single
locus. As far as the autosomal dominant
and recessive are concerned they may be
allelomorphic to each other. The sex-linked
variety of “‘the’’ gene is regarded as due
to a translocation of the autosomal dominant
gene on to the X-chromosome, But, as most
sex-linked genes known are recessives, the
further (admittedly purely hypothetical)
assumption is made that a change of
dominance has taken place as a result of a
position effect! Let us suppose for the
moment that this hypothesis were true.
Then the gene in question would occur twice
HUMAN GENETICS 61

in the chromosome complement, once in
an autosome and once (by translocation) in
the X-chromosome. Then a recessive mutation happening in the autosomal gene would
not manifest itself because of the normal
allele carried in the X-chromosome, and a
recessive mutation occurring in the sexlinked gene would similarly be ‘‘ covered ”
by the autosomal gene. Hence Professor
Gates’s ingenious hypothesis does not even
account for the observed facts, at least not
without making further ad hoc assumptions.
Furthermore, spontaneous translocations are
extremely rare and very unlikely to establish themselves in an animal population.
That this should have happened not once,
but scores of times and hence involving
numerous different autosomes is too farfetched a supposition to be seriously entertained.

Actually, genes with similar effects
(‘‘ mimic’”’ genes) are not peculiar to man ;
many examples are known in Drosophila
where there is certainly no evidence whatsoever for such an explanation of “‘ mimics.”’
In mammals a very striking example occurs
in the mouse, though in this case autosomes
only are involved. There are seven recessive
genes, each occupying a different autosome,
which produce circling movements, headshaking and deafness and which are almost
indistinguishable from each other clinically ;
they are waltzing, shaker-1, shaker-2, jerker,
Kreisler, pirouette and dervish. In addition
there are some six other genes which produce
the same syndrome along with complications
elsewhere in the body. The pathological
analysis is not yet complete, but it is clear
that in some of these cases the same clinical
syndrome is produced by very different
pathological processes; in other cases the
syndrome is produced by similar pathological processes. Such ‘ mimics”’ probably
find their explanation by the fact that if a
succession of processes a>b->c+d-—e happening in series is interrupted anywhere along its
length, the final result will always be a
disturbance of the end product e. Models
of this type of mechanism have been discovered in recent years in the biochemical
mutants of the bread-mould Neurospora.

There is thus no need for the speculations
advanced by Professor Gates to explain the
mimic genes in man.

On p. 83 the author gives a list of “‘ probable or possible autosomal linkages.”’ Of
the 48 cases enumerated, 24 are given without
qualification, 8 as “ probable,” 13 as “ possible,”’ one case ‘may be one gene”’ and
two cases are given as ‘“?.”’ On closer
inspection this impressive list contains
numerous instances which almost certainly
are simply the pleiotropic effects of single
genes—for instance absence of macula and
aniridia, retinitis pigmentosa and deafness,
retinitis pigmentosa and glaucoma (“ possible ’’), aniridia and syndactyly (‘‘ possible ’’), opalescent dentine and lamellar
cataract and fits (‘‘ possible ”); defective
enamel and juvenile cataract (‘‘ possible ’’),
camptodactyly with (1) anonychia pollicum,
(2) absence of patella, (3) luxation of head
of radius, myoclonus and epilepsy (‘‘ possible ’), and tylosis palmarum and plantarum

and lipomata, to give only a few representative examples.

How has this misconception arisen? The
answer is perhaps best illustrated by a
further (“ probable ’’) case involving apical
dystrophy and macular coloboma which was
originally described by Sorsby.* The syndrome occurred in a mother and five of her
seven children; the mother’s parents and
her ten sibs were all normal. We read
(p. X91) :

“Probably two linked genes are involved,
the apical dystrophy being of the type described
by MacArthur and McCullough. It appears
probable (sic!) that the eye defect and the
skeletal defect were separate mutations, arising
together in the same chromosome in one of the
germ cells that produced the mother. If in
homologous chromosomes, they would not be
linked in the offspring. The alternative is one
mutation with multiple effects.”

To take an incidental error first, if the
postulated two: genes had arisen in homologous chromosomes, they would of course
still be linked, but they would be in the
repulsion phase. The main argument here
as elsewhere is that there are pedigrees with

* Brit. J. Ophthalm., 1935, 19, 65-90.
62 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

condition A alone, and pedigrees with condition B alone. Hence, Professor Gates
argues, if we find a pedigree with A + B the
two genes must be linked. Let us suppose
for a moment that in this and all the similar
instances quoted by Professor Gates we were
really dealing with cases of linkage. We
should then have to assume that all these

pedigrees show the two postulated genes in >

the coupling phase. But in a population at
equilibrium the coupling and repulsion phase
should be equally frequent. Hence we
should expect a similar number of pedigrees
with the two postulated genes in the repulsion phase. Their complete absence alone
is sufficient proof that Professor Gates’s
linkage hypothesis is untenable. The true
explanation is, of course, that which Professor Gates in this particular case quotes
diffidently as an alternative explanation,
namely one gene with effects A + B.
There are many cases in experimental
genetics where non-allelic genes with the
three phenotypes A, B and A+B occur.

For instance, as mentioned above, there are

several genes in the mouse with circling
movements, head-shaking and deafness.
Also, there are several genes which shorten
the tail. That the gene for shaker-short
which combines these features should be
regarded as a case of linkage of a shaker
gene with a short-tail gene would scarcely
have occurred to an experimental geneticist.

In addition, there are instances where
single and combination phenotypes occur
within the same series of multiple allelomorphs. In the mouse, for instance, there
occurs the series light-bellied agouti, darkbellied agouti, light-bellied non-agouti and
dark-bellied non-agouti. In this case the
hypothesis of two extremely closely linked
genes has indeed been ventilated though the
two suspected genes have never been
separated by an observed crossing-over.
That the two-gene hypothesis is almost

certainly incorrect follows from a recent |
observation* which can be explained as a
single mutation on the multiple allele hypothesis, but requires the very unlikely
assumption of two simultaneous mutations
on the alternative hypothesis. It will be
remarked that the latter is precisely the
interpretation which Professor Gates puts
on the case under discussion, and that apparently without any qualms.

Limitations of space, already unduly
strained, make a full discussion of many
other points impossible. These include sexlinked. inheritance, where crossing-over
between X and Y-chromosome is assumed
all too freely ; inheritance in the Y-chromosome which is postulated in several cases
where alternative explanations, such as sexlimitation, are far more likely, and attached
X-chromosomes which are several times
introduced on insufficient evidence.

Professor Gates’s work is likely to be
widely used on account of the large field
covered and of the extensive bibliographies
which make it an invaluable work of reference. In so far as the readers are geneticists,
the heterodox views discussed above and
others not mentioned will be of little consequence. But the work will also undoubtedly be used by medical men without
critical judgment in the field of genetics. |
As such readers will not be inclined to
question the validity of the genetical discussions, the critical remarks made above
were considered necessary. The reviewer
has done so with some reluctance ; being
himself the author of a much smaller monograph, he is full of admiration for the beelike industry with which Professor Gates has
tackled single-handed a field whose vastness
might have frightened many a syndicate of
authors.

_ * Little, C. C., and Hummel, K. P. (1947), Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sct., 33, 42-43.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXIX, No. 2
