EUGENIC LEGISLATION IN NORWAY AND
GERMANY

Text of Proposed Laws

The German Eugenic [Law was published
in Berlin on July 25th, 1933. We are
indebted to the Lancet for permission to
reproduce the following translation of its text.

LAW FOR THE PREVENTION OF HERE
DITARY DISEASE

qz. Anyone who is hereditarily ailing may
be made barren (sterilized) by surgical
operation, if in the experience of medical
science it is with great probability to be
expected that his progeny will suffer from
severe bodily or mental hereditary disorders.
Hereditarily ailing in the sense of this law is
anyone who suffers from one of the following
diseases: (1) congenital feeblemindedness,
(2) schizophrenia, (3) periodic (maniacdepressive) insanity, (4) inherited epilepsy,
(5) inherited St. Vitus’s dance (Huntington’s
chorea), (6) inherited blindness, (7) inherited
deafness, (8) severe inherited physical malformation. Further, anyone suffering from
severe alcoholism may be sterilized.

{z. Competent to make the proposal is the
person who is to be sterilized. Should he be
irresponsible or incapable of managing his
affairs on account of weakmindedness, or not
yet have completed his eighteenth year, then
the proposer is the legal representative who
requires the consent of the court for the protection of wards. In the remaining cases of
limited responsibility the proposal requires
the consent of the legal representative. If an
adult is under the care of a guardian, the
consent of the latter is required. The proposal must be accompanied by a certificate
from a doctor registered in Germany to the
effect that the person to be sterilized has had
the nature and consequences of sterilization
explained to him. The proposal may be
withdrawn. |

73. Sterilization may also be proposed (r)
by the official doctor, (2) for the inmates of a
hospital, institution or prison, by its director.

14. The proposal is to be made either in
writing or dictated at the office of the
Eugenic Court. The facts on which the proposal is based are to be attested by a medical
opinion or in some other way. The office
must inform the official doctor of the proposal.

75. Competent to give judgment is the
Eugenic Court in whose district the person to
be sterilized has his ordinary legal rights.

6. The Eugenic Court is to be attached to
a magistrate’s court. It consists of a magistrate as chairman, an official doctor, and
another doctor registered in Germany who is
specially versed in eugenics. For each member a deputy must be appointed. From the
chairmanship is excluded anyone who has
decided on a guardianship proposal under
q2 (x). If an official doctor has made the
proposal he cannot take part in the decision.

{7. The proceedings of the Eugenic Court
are not public. The court has to make the
necessary inquiries; it can examine witnesses and experts as well as order the
attendance and the medical examination of
the person to be sterilized and can have him
brought if he stays away without excuse. In
the examination and swearing-in of witnesses
and experts as well as in the exclusion and
rejection of members of the court the appropriate clauses of the civil law are applicable.
Doctors who are examined as witnesses or
experts are bound to give evidence regardless
of professional secrecy. Courts and boards of
management as well as institutions have to
give the Eugenic Court information if
required.

q8. The court has to decide to its own
satisfaction after consideration of the total
product of the proceedings and evidence.
The judgment follows as a result of oral consultation on a majority of votes. The decision
must be put in writing and signed by the
members who were concerned in the judg
179
180

ment. It must give the grounds on which the
sterilization is determined or declined. The
decision is to be communicated to the proposer, the official doctor as well as to the
person whose sterilization is proposed, or, in
case he is not competent to propose, his legal
representative.

{9. Against the judgment an appeal can
be lodged by any of the persons mentioned in
48 (5) within a period of a month after its
delivery, notice to be in writing or dictated at
the office of the Eugenic Court. The appeal
has the effect of delaying execution of the
judgment. The appeal is decided by the
Eugenic High Court. Until expiration of
the period for appeal the status quo may be
resumed in accordance with the provisions
of the common law.

zo. The Eugenic High Court is attached
to a High Court of Justice and covers the
same area. It consists of a judge of the High
Court, an official doctor, and another doctor
registered in Germany who is specially versed
in eugenics. For each member a deputy
must be appointed. §6 (2) applies here. For
the procedure before the Eugenic High
Court 97 and 8 apply. The judgment of the
Eugenic High Court is final.

qxzz. The surgical operation necessary for
the sterilization may be carried out only in a
hospital by a doctor registered in Germany.
He may only operate when the decision
ordering the sterilization has been made final.
The supreme State authority determines the
hospitals and doctors to whom the carrying
out of the sterilization is to be committed.
The operation may not be done by a doctor
who has made the proposal or has been a
party to the procedure. The operating doctor
has to make a written report to the official
doctor on the execution of the sterilization,
stating the method employed.

qz2. If the court has given its final decision
on sterilization, it is to be carried out even
against the will of the person to be sterilized,
unless he alone made the proposal. The
official doctor has to requisition the necessary
measures of the police authorities. If other
measures do not suffice, the use of direct
force is permissible. Should circumstances
arise which demand another testing of the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

situation, the Eugenic Court must take the
matter up again and forbid for the time
being the carrying out of the sterilization.
If judgment was given against the proposal,
revision is only permissible when new facts
have arisen which justify the sterilization.

713. The costs of the legal proceedings are
borne by the State Exchequer. The costs of
the surgical operation in the case of an
insured person are borne by the sickness
insurance office, in the case of other needy
persons by the public assistance. In all other
cases the costs up to the minimal scale of the
professional fee and the median cost in the
public hospitals is borne by the Exchequer,
beyond that by the person to be sterilized.

{z4. Sterilization, not carried out according to the terms of this law, as well as removal of the genital glands are only permissible when performed by a _ doctor
according to the rules of medical science to
avoid serious danger to the life or the health
of the person on whom the operation is
undertaken, and with his consent.

{z5. The persons concerned in the proceedings or in the carrying out of the surgical
operation are bound to secrecy. Anyone who
breaks this obligation without authorization
is to be punished with imprisonment up to
one year or with a fine. Prosecution is only
undertaken if a charge is made; the charge
may be made by the chairman.

qz6. The execution of this law is for the
State governments. The supreme State
authorities determine, subject to the provisions of §6 (1) and Io (1), seat and area of the
deciding courts. They nominate the members
and their deputies.

17. The Home Secretary in collaboration
with the Minister of Justice issues the necessary regulations for the carrying out of this
law.

418. This law comes into force on January
Ist, 1934.

* * x

THE following is the English text of draft
proposals for a law respecting sterilization
and other matters which has been prepared
by the Consultative Eugenics Commission
of Norway :
EUGENIC LEGISLATION ABROAD

I

By sterilization in this Act is understood
an operation which deprives a person of the
power of propagation.

By castration in this Act is understood an
operation the purpose of which is to deprive
a person of his sexual desire.

The performance of sexual operations on
medical grounds is not affected by the
following provisions.

2

Permission to carry out a sexual operation
under this Act is to be granted by the Chief
Medical Officer of Health.

3
A person who must be assumed to bear
hereditary taint of insanity, imbecility, epilepsy, or similar serious psychic disease or
defect may be sterilized :

1. When he is an inmate of a lunatic
asylum or of a prison or penal workhouse or of a reformatory or training
institution which is under official control, and when the application for
sterilization is made by the principal of
the institution or by its resident physician.

2. When he receives public relief and is not

by his own efforts able to provide for
himself and his offspring, and when the
application is made by the Medical
Officer of Health in question.

4
Any person having reached 18 years of age
may at his own request be sterilized when the
operation is found justifiable on eugenic or
social-medical grounds. Such application
should be accompanied by a certificate from a
physician declaring that the person concerned
understands the nature of the step he intends
to take.

181

5
A person who has had sexual intercourse
with children under 14 years of age can be
castrated when the application is made by
the Court of Justice or by the director of the
prison or asylum in question.

6

At his own request a person having reached
2I years of age may be castrated when he is
unable to control] his sexual desire and it is
thought probable that he thereby might be
dangerous to his surroundings. His application should be accompanied by a certificate
from a physician declaring that he understands the nature of the step he intends to
take.

7

When application under this Act for the
performance of a sexual operation is made,
the wife of the person concerned and/or his
guardian must, when possible, be notified of
the application. If the Chief Medical Officer
of Health decides that the operation is to be
permitted, the guardian can make appeal to a
Special Board. This Board shall consist of
three members, namely, a judge, a physician
with psychiatric education, and ar. expert in
eugenics. The members shall hold office for
5 years.

8

The Crown decides which Ministry shall
issue detailed provisions for the accomplish
* ment of this Act. These provisions shall con
tain particulars concerning the performance
of the operations.

* * =

These proposals and other activities of the
Consultative Eugenics Commission are discussed in ‘‘ Notes of the Quarter ”’ at p. 144.

S Oe

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 3.
