404 EUGENICS REVIEW

the preconceptions, and the prejudices of men. “ The history of religion,”
says Frazer, “is a long attempt to reconcile old custom with new reason,
to find a sound theory for absurd practice.” That is one point of view.
“ The essence of religion,” says Warde Fowler, “in all stages of civilisation lies in the feeling of the individual that his own life, his bodily and
mental welfare, is dependent upon the Divine, as he and his regard it.”
That is another point of view. To discuss these conflicting views with
any attempt at thoroughness would divert us too far from the proper field
of eugenics.

The concluding essays in M. Rignano’s work are devoted to a summary and criticism of collectivist and socialist theories and doctrines.
His remarks are temperate and lucid, but, as they do not present any
particular novelty, they need not detain us. He concludes this portion
of his subject with an amiable hope which we may be allowed to endorse :
“Quel que soit, du reste, cet avenir plus ou moins inconnu, nous pouvons
du moins—comme conclusion de tout ce qui vient d’étre dit—constater ce
fait qui est d’un bon augure. C’est que |’éveil d’une conscience collective
dans la classe la plus misérable, dans toute cette si grande fraction de
nos semblables jusqu'ici ravalée, constitute déja par lui-méme un
élargissement et un perfectionnement pour l’ensemble de la conscience
sociale; tandis que la puissance accrue de cette classe a déja rendu moins
inégales les diverses forces sociales en conflit. Il en est résulté un plus
grande sensibilité sociale 4 l’égard de toutes les peines et de toutes les
souffrances dont gémissent encore d’innombrables créatures humaines et
la formation d’un nouvel idéal supréme d’une équité plus grande. De
facon quil est permis désormais d’espérer que dans le choc de tous les
futurs antagonismes, quelle qu’en puisse étre la solution définitive,
YPhumanité n’aura plus 4 craindre de sombre dans de plus profonds abimes,
mais qu’en toute confiance ct sécurité elle pourra monter vers des cimes
plus hautes et de meilleures destinées.”

J. A. Lrnpsay.

Nieeforo, ALFREDO. Contributo allo studio della misura e della
diffusione della Cultura in Italia: I nuovi progetti per une
Statistica della Vita Intellettuale Italiana. Perugio, Unione
Tipografica Co-operativa, 1912.

IN the year rg1o a law was passed in Italy, in connection with the quin
uennial census, authorising the reorganisation of the Central Statistical

Office. On the invitation of the ministers concerned, Professor Niceforo

has taken part in the work of reorganisation, in particular by the

framing of several schemes for the collection and storage of statistical
data. Of these one of the most interesting is his proposal for forming

a card catalogue of all students at the universities and other institutions

for higher education, in order to investigate the diffusion of culture in

different parts of Italy and to obtain a statistical measure of the intellectual life of the country.

The secretary of each university would be required, at the beginning
of the academic year, to enter particulars concerning each student on the
face of a separate card which is divided into suitable spaces for the
various items, such as name, date, and place of birth, nationality, name
and occupation of father, place of residence of family, nature of proposed studies, and so on. To facilitate sorting, these cards have a
triangular space on the left hand upper corner tinted in different shades
to indicate the course of studies to be pursued. On the back of the card
is a list of the examinations involved in that particular course, with a
space after each in which the secretary is required to enter the student’s
degree of success. At the end of each academic year the cards, filled in
up to date, have to be sent to the Central Statistical Office to be filed and
to serve as the basis for statistical returns.
