THE MERSEYSIDE SURVEY"
By ‘“ ADMINISTRATOR”

been made of the social and economic

conditions in several of the large
towns of Great Britain. Mr. Caradog Jones,
Director of the Merseyside Survey, in his
introductory note to the Report asks the very
pertinent question : ‘‘ What purpose do such
surveys serve? ”’ His reply that they constitute the first step towards social reform in
giving some idea of the problems to be solved
is so modest that most persons will readily
agree with him.

But the man of practical affairs will doubtless press for a reply to the more definite
question : “ Can it be shown that the actions
of any political party or local authority have
been based upon the results of any of these
surveys?’ The cynic will affirm that group
or mass actions are never based upon what is
known but upon what is desired. He will go
farther and state that all political and social
propaganda are merely the rationalizations
of individual ambitions. For instance, imperialism, on the one hand, is simply an
endeavour on the part of those who have
power and wealth to hold fast by what they
have and if possible to add to it ; reforms of
society and industry, on the other hand, are
advocated by those who have nothing to lose
and much to gain by any form of change.
The statistics of any social survey, however
formidable and convincing, will not affect in
the least the attitude of the men and women
of public affairs. They will scan the reports
to find items that support or appear to
support their political point of view. Against
all unpalatable data they are well fortified
beforehand by the principles of their political
party. Thus saith the cynic.

The time of the readers of this REVIEW
is much too valuable to justify any attempt
to refute such reasoning. The cynic, who

1) URING the last decade surveys have

* The Social Survey of Merseyside. Edited by D.
Caradog Jones. University Press of Liverpool. Hodder
& Stoughton Ltd., London, 1934. Vol. I, 15s., Vol. II,
21s., Vol. III, 25s., set of three volumes, 45s.

generally is not without some insight into his
own mental state, will admit that he argues
not from facts but upon a prior: grounds.
We may console ourselves with the thought
that what little truth there is in this argument is to be attributed to a highly selective
study of the past and may have very little
bearing upon the future.

SOME CHECKS ON IMPARTIALITY

What are the distinctive features of the
scientific approach to social and economic
problems? Mr. Caradog Jones states that
“the survey claims to be scientific in the
sense that observations are made in an
impartial spirit.”” The psycho-analyst will
not regard ¢his as a modest claim. He would
say that impartiality is not a human but a
superhuman attribute. When we attempt to
avoid allowing conscious desires to prejudice
our judgment, we simply become the victims
of our unconscious and more instinctive
desires. When the psycho-analyst has completed his examination of the works of poets
he will probably turn his attention to those
of the scientist and even those of the statistician ; and he will doubtless unmask many
pretensions to impartiality.

To those who have not specialized in
psycho-analytic criticism the standpoint of
the- Director of this survey appears most
reasonable, especially when he adds that

“the whole object has been to arrive at
and present the true facts.” Although the
scientist has to have his starting-point or
hypothesis, he regards it as his function to
test it and not to prove that any particular
hypothesis is right. This objective standpoint can do much to present our social and
economic problems in the light that will
enable our legislators to see more clearly the
right line of action.

The encouragement given to the social
surveys that have been undertaken in recent
years goes far to prove that this scientific

199
200

attitude is being adopted more and more in
regard to social problems. Not only university teachers, but the men and women who
have to deal with practical administrative
problems co-operate most heartily in these
surveys. They realize that many of the
problems cannot be solved by the empirical
methods of the party politician, but that
they must be tackled by the methods adopted
by the mathematician, biologist, physicist,
and other scientific investigators.

THE GROUND COVERED

The Merseyside Survey was undertaken by
the School of Social Science and Administration of the University of Liverpool and was
made possible by a generous grant from
the Rockefeller Foundation. Mr. D. Caradog
Jones was appointed Director, and he had the
assistance of four colleagues. The area surveyed included the four county boroughs of
Liverpool, Bootle, Birkenhead, and Wallasey, together with a part of the adjacent
urban districts. The survey included a number of special inquiries of specific problems ;
but one of these, referred to as a ‘‘ household
sample,’’ was more general and comprehensive than the rest and it enabled norms and
standards of various conditions to be established. The Director and his colleagues made
full use of the mass of statistics published in
the reports of various departments of the
local authorities and of voluntary bodies
operating in the area.

The work of the reviewer of this Report is
much simplified by the outline of the survey
which is given at the beginning of each of the
three volumes, and a few quotations from this
outline will give the clearest conception of
the range of problems discussed in this
Report.

“ The first volume opens with the history
of the development of the area and the contribution of different nationalities to the
population. The existing inhabitants are
analysed as to age, sex and marital condition.
Discussion centres on problems of overcrowding and poverty, and the evolution of municipal housing in Liverpool is traced. .. .
Unemployment emerges as a factor peculiarly
responsible for the present-day poverty.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

“In the second volume, therefore, a detailed examination is made of the industrial
character of the Merseyside. ... An estimate is attempted of the present and prospective surplus of labour in the area.

“ In the third volume attention is directed
to other aspects of life no less important,
including the use of leisure and church
attendance. Selected normal groups of the
population pass in review: infants, schoolchildren, adolescents, families without a male
head, pensioners, various subnormal types
such as the deaf and dumb, the blind, the
mentally deficient, the physically defective
and the destitute. Since the majority of these
(subnormal) classes are dependent generally
upon others for support, their study is prefaced by a brief account of public administration and certain typical social services and a
discussion of the extent to which they overlap. In the course of the survey cumulative
evidence is presented of the marked differential class fertility and its bearing on the
quality of the future population is indicated.”

The Report covers such a wide range of
subjects that one person cannot be expected
to write an authoritative review on all of
them. Only a team of experts on the various
subjects dealt with in the Survey could do it
justice. In this article attention will be
restricted to those matters (mostly in the
third volume), which are likely to be of
the greatest interest to the readers of the
EUGENICS REVIEW.

PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICES

The second chapter of the third volume
gives a most helpful survey of the reorganized
public health services. Recent legislation
allows the local authorities so much scope in
the organization of these services that much
care is required when comparing the reports
of various authorities. Those interested in
public health work will welcome the lucid
though brief account given in this chapter of
the public health services in the Merseyside
area.

Some of the outstanding statistical data
relating to the ‘‘ personal” as distinct from
the ‘‘ environmental ” public health services
are discussed in this chapter. The data in the
THE MERSEYSIDE SURVEY

section relating to maternity and child
welfare are of special interest. The pre-natal
and post-natal clinics seem to be well
patronized. In no fewer than 68 per cent. of
the total births in Liverpool during the year
1931 the mothers had attended the pre-natal
clinics ; and in the Birkenhead area 59 per
cent. of the mothers had attended the postnatal clinics.* Since these clinics have been
functioning actively only during the last few
decades, the decline of infantile mortality
during this period may reasonably be
attributed to some extent to the services the
clinics have rendered. But it should be noted
that the decline has been greatest in the better
residential area of Wallasey where the clinics
are least patronized. In the Liverpool district
during the quinquennium 1906-10 the deathrate of infants per 1,000 live births was 147,
whereas for that of 1927-1930 the numbers
fell to 94; but even this figure is still considerably higher than the mean figure of 69
for England and Wales.t The maternal mortality rate for the Merseyside compares
more favourably with that for the whole
country. Mr. Caradog Jones rightly warns his
readers not to attach much significance to the
apparent large variations from year to year
of this rate, because the number of deaths
in childbirth in any one year is very small in
comparison with the total number of births.

GAPS IN THE EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM

Of all modern institutions none has a
greater, if indeed as much, influence in
determining the welfare of the next generation as the school. Two chapters, one on
elementary education and the other on social
factors in secondary education, deal with the
functions of the schools in the Merseyside
area. Educationists will find much food for
thought in these two chapters. We will
restrict our observations to the table} which
gives the proportions of various age groups
under nineteen years of age attending the
schools in Liverpool (1931). This table shows
that the provision for the education of
children between the ages of five and thirteen
is almost complete; 95 per cent. of the

* Volume III, p. 32. ¢t Volume p. ITT, 35.
t Volume ITI, p. 64.

20I

children of these ages receive full-time education in public elementary schools. Children
under five years of age on the other hand have
not been well provided for; only 1-6 per
cent. of these children receive full-time education. Similarly in regard to the children
between the ages of fourteen and eighteen ;
only 10-9 per cent. of these attend schools.
These latter figures afford a good example of
statistics elucidating in a clear manner what
most of us thought we already knew but in
fact did not fully appreciate. Much is written
and said about the disappointing results of
public elementary and secondary education.
The figures just quoted go far to explain the
failure. The system is most incomplete ; it is
merely a half measure. For go per cent. of
the children education begins too late and
ceases too soon. Educationists are much
concerned at present about the proper
preparation of youth for the right use of the

- leisure they will have when they become

adults. Would not closing up the two important gaps of the education system for children
under five and those between the ages of
fourteen and eighteen be the best prophylactic measure ? Large numbers of children
acquire physical and mental habits (during
these neglected periods) that render them
incapable of pursuing healthy and cultured
leisure-time interests when they reach the
adult stage.

PUBLIC ASSISTANCE SERVICES

The fact that since 1930 Liverpool has
figured consistently as one of the four or five
districts in the country with the highest ratio
of poor relief to total population must of
itself make the section on public assistance
services as one of the most valuable parts
of the Report. It is impossible to read this
section without feeling that the duties imposed upon the public assistance committees
are far too onerous. Although much is heard
of the break-up of the poor-lawsystem in this
country, large and important social services
are, for some reason which is not clear to
most people, still administered by a system
originally designed to deal merely with
destitute persons. To what bodies many of
the duties of the public assistance committees
202

should be delegated is clearly indicated by
the classification of persons in receipt of
indoor and outdoor relief.

INFANT MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY

The chapter on infant welfare gives the
results of a well-devised special inquiry to
ascertain the health and progress of a random
sample of infants. The sample was comprised of 717 births registered in Liverpool
during the first fourteen days of February
1930. For a period of two years visits by
statutory and voluntary workers were made
to 576 of these infants and careful records
were kept of their progress.

The following are some of the chief deductions Mr. Caradog Jones and his colleagues
make from their data. Male children are
much more likely than female to feel the
effects of a poor environment, the disparity
between the male and female infant mortality
being greatest in those parts of the city with
the highest proportion of persons living below
the poverty line and with the highest proportion of overcrowded homes. The fact that a
child is born in a good type of artisan family
seems to double its chance of progressing well
and to divide by four its chance of dying, as
compared with the child in the poorest type
of family. Again, the records of illnesses
show that children in the poorer homes often
die or suffer permanently impaired health by
such illnesses as pneumonia and bronchitis—
and these are illnesses which could be prevented if the children received more efficient
care and a healthier environment.

THE DEAF AND BLIND

The student of genetics will naturally be
much attracted to the chapters dealing with
the subnormal types in the population—the
deaf, the blind, the physical and mental
defectives, the chronically unemployed and
various other groups of social failures. Much
of the data relating to these subnormal types
are obtained from the statutory or voluntary
bodies dealing with them ; but the Director
and his staff have supplemented these by a
series of special investigations which have
yielded results of the greatest interest.

The data relating to the deaf and the blind

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

present a contrast in several respects. For
example, congenital deafness was more
prevalent than the acquired disability in the
proportion of 53 to 47 per cent., whereas the
ratio of acquired to congenital blindness was
69 to 31. Again, acquired deafness occurs
most frequently in early childhood, whereas
acquired blindness comes comparatively late
in life. These and other contrasting features
explain to some extent how it is that the deaf
and the blind present very different problems
to the doctor, teacher and employer.

SURVEY OF MENTAL DEFECTIVES

The chapter on the mentally defective type
deserves to be studied carefully, chiefly
because the Director and his staff have shown
much ingenuity in collecting the data and in
presenting the results. A comparison is made
of two groups of defectives: (x) an S.S.
Group, comprising children aged five to
fifteen in special schools for mental defectives
(most of these would be of the feeble-minded
grade and educable); (2) an M.W. group,
comprising mentally defective persons under
the supervision of the West Lancashire
Association of Mental Welfare (a large
proportion of these would be imbeciles or
idiots and therefore ineducable).

On examining the family records of these
two groups of defectives it became evident
that there was a considerably higher proportion of mental defect among the relatives of
the S.S. than among those of the M.W. group.
This result lends support to the view put
forward by previous investigators that the
severer forms of mental defect are in many
cases sporadic and not familial in character.
Another conclusion akin to this is in connection with social status. The M.W. group of
families was fairly representative of the
general population, whereas an unduly large
proportion (60 per cent.) of the S.S. families
were of the unskilled labouring class.

FERTILITY OF DEFECTIVE FAMILIES

The following table* gives the comparative
fertility of the parents of defective children
and of the parents belonging to a control group

* Volume III, p. qo.
THE MERSEYSIDE SURVEY

consisting of normal working-class families.
The defective families were those containing
one or more mentally defective persons (aged
five to twenty-two) who were either in the
special class or under guardianship or supervision.

Mean Number of Children
Group of | Number per Family
Families | Sampled
Alive Dead Born
Defective...| 1,115 4°69 2°47 7°16
Normal 4,379 2°97 0°95 3°92

The figures in this table show clearly how
much more fertile are the parents of the
defective persons than those of the normal
group. The text does not state whether the
control group contained any families with no
children. If so these figures exaggerate the
disparity somewhat but would by no means
account completely for the difference. The
high proportion of dead children in the
defective families is also worth noting.

One of the specific problems calling for
intensive study in the near future is that
presented by families with two or more
mentally defective sibs, especially if these are
low-grade. Such a study will doubtless throw
much light upon the relative importance
of heredity and environment in producing
certain types of mental defect. The Director
in this Report has given some illuminating
preliminary data in regard to such families
and these will serve as a good starting-point
for some intensive studies in the future.

COEXISTENCE OF DEFECTS

_ The chapter on the “Coexistence of
Different Defects and Disabilities ’’ is much
too brief to do justice to this important but
difficult subject, and the data are more
suggestive than conclusive. The value of
such data depends to a great extent upon the
degree of their completeness. Presumably
when clearly defined conditions such as deafness and blindness exist it is relatively easy
to ascertain all the members of the family
afflicted with these conditions. But everyone
who has experience of ascertaining members

203

of a family who are mentally defective or
insane knows how difficult it is to get a complete and reliable record. We can be sure that
the data presented in this chapter are an
underestimate of the amount of coexistence
that prevails especially in regard to abnormal
mental conditions. Moreover, in order to
interpret such data we need some standard or
norm of the incidence of the condition in a
random sample of the population.

DISTRIBUTION OF DEFECTIVENESS

In his researches on the “ Localization of
Defect ’’ Mr. Caradog Jones set out to test
the validity of one of the conclusions of the
Wood Committee on Mental Deficiency. This
committee, it will be recalled, stated that
there were special areas or “‘ pockets ’’ where
the incidence of mental defect was decidedly
greater than in the community generally. In
the Merseyside Survey, however, the data
related not only to mental deficiency but to
other defects such as blindness, deafness,
tuberculosis, and physical deformities. The
results give much support to the contention
of the Wood Committee. They also show
that what is true of feeble-mindedness is also
true of other defects. None of these defects
is uniformly spread over the City of Liverpool, but there is a decided concentration of
cases in all the congested inner areas, and the
concentration is still further limited to certain streets in these areas. Whether we
believe that these defects are mainly inherited or mainly due to environmental
conditions, the fact that they are concentrated
in a comparatively small section of the community should improve considerably the
prospect of practical preventive and ameliorative measures being supplied.

The next step should be the intensive study
of these foci of social diseases. From the
standpoint of economy alone, it would well
repay local authorities to employ students of
social science to investigate these foci which
absorb so much of the money and energy
spent upon our social services. The “ black ”’
streets in our large cities may be regarded as
laboratories already well equipped with all
the necessary human material for the investigation and solution of the problem of the
204

relative importance of heredity and environment in the production of social failure.

DIFFERENTIAL FERTILITY

The Report comes to a climax with its
chapter on differential fertility and the future
trend of population. Comparison of the
birth-rates and death-rates for quinquennial
periods from 1881 to 1930 suggests that the
population of the Merseyside, like that of the
whole country, is fast approaching a stage
when it will become stationary, and if
the present trend continues much longer the
population will progressively decline. The
fall in the birth-rate is most conspicuous in
the residential areas of Liverpool, whereas
the improvement in the death-rate has been
most marked in its industrial areas, where
naturally there was most room for improvement. The only districts where a natural
increase in the population has been maintained are those in which the Roman Catholics form a good proportion of the residents.

The differential fertility of various occupational classes was ascertained by a special
infant welfare inquiry. The data thus
obtained are compared with those of the
main survey of a random sample of 7,000
ordinary working-class families.

There is a decided increase in the size of
family as we pass down the occupational
scale. Nearly two more children are born in
the family of the unskilled working class as
compared with that of the “ black-coated ”
class. The balance is retrieved to some extent
by the higher proportion of deaths in the
lower occupational classes. Again, the size of
family definitely increases as the chances of
employment become more precarious. An
analysis of the houses in which births
occurred during a selected fortnight shows
that, while families of poorer social classes
represent just over half of the total sample,
the children born in them make up 63 per

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

cent. of the total births. The death-rate is
still higher in this class, being 74 per cent. of
the total, with the result that the net contribution in living children is reduced to 61 per
cent. of the total of the sample. Most
of these families, it should be remembered,
are existing on unemployment benefit or
public assistance.

SUMMARY

In this review of the Report we have
drawn attention to a few of its most striking
features, and in doing so have run some risk
of giving the reader an unbalanced conception of the results of the survey which it
records. Conclusions have been quoted out
of their context ; and whenever this has been
done the reader should be cautious in his
interpretation of them. It is hoped that this
review will not be regarded as a summary,
because in the limited space available it
would have been absurd to attempt to give
a comprehensive idea of the contents of three
large volumes. If the reader is not led to
study the Report for himself these observations will have failed in their chief purpose.

The Merseyside Survey will undoubtedly
occupy an honourable place amongst the
most important surveys made during the last
half-century. Mr. Caradog Jones and his
colleagues are to be heartily congratulated
upon the completion of their formidable task,
and upon the presentation of the data in a
manner that will appeal to a wide circle of
scientific readers. The data have been interpreted cautiously but also clearly: the
reader is left in no doubt about how the
investigators think the data should be interpreted. Students seeking problems for future
research will find innumerable suggestions in
these volumes, and they will do well to emulate the methods adopted in the Merseyside
Survey in securing the data and in presenting
the results.

\ =O

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 3,
