CORRESPONDENCE

The Eugenics Society is not responsible for opinions expressed by correspondents

CORRECTION
Internal Factors in Evolution by L. L. Whyte

Mr. Whyte twice misquoted his reviewer in
the letter which was printed in these columns in
December (1965, 57, 208-9): “‘or of sickle trait”
should read “or for the sickle-cell trait’. “‘It
would have been better if this book had never
been published’”’ should read “It would have
been better if this book had not been published”’.
The reviewer does not maintain that the book
would never have been useful in the past, only
that is not useful at the present time.

It is much regretted that these misquotations
were not corrected before Mr. Whyte’s letter was
printed EDITOR

THE POPULATION EXPLOSION

To the Editor, The Eugenics Review

Sir,—Under the general heading of ““The Population Explosion” two articles by Professor
Richard Titmuss appeared in The Times last
October. The first was entitled ““Child Endowment Reappraisal?” and the second “Plan for
Children in Poverty’. Professor Titmuss, a
member of the Eugenics Society’s Council, had
two theses of much interest to eugenists. One
thesis, that of the second article, was the need
for further help for children in low income
families. He wrote:

Quantitatively, the underprivileged family
of to-day is predominantly the family of three,
four or five children. The primary cause of
their hardships is to found in low earnings.
A secondary cause of child poverty is due to
the absence of a father, or to the fact that the
father or mother is disabled, seriously handicapped, or chronically ill.

and went on to propose that:

One possible answer might be to reduce tax
allowances by stages and to increase family
allowances. But could the latter be raised to
levels adequate for poorer families without
the cost to the Exchequer becoming prohibitive? An alternative approach is to extend the
benefit of the tax allowance to those below
the tax-paying level, and to accompany this
measure with a series of other changes in the
structure of benefits and subsidies.

Almost all members of the Society will agree
with this thesis and welcome Professor Titmuss’s
initiative. The correct principle is that once a
child is born the community must do its best
to minimize any medical, social or educational
handicaps to which the child is prone because
of either genes or family environment.

Professor Titmuss’s second and more controversial thesis, mainly set out in the first
article, is that the present system of tax allowances for children is not in the public interest.
It encourages those with larger incomes to have

_larger families and this is undesirable at a time

53

when Britian is experiencing a western-type population explosion. Such families tend to set the
fashion. He wrote:

All the evidence points in fact to a rise in
the average ultimate family-size of women
married at all ages under forty-five. What may
also be significant is that fertility rates have
increased most sharply in the more middleclass, non-manual regions of the country,
and among women married over the age of
twenty-five. In the taxable income range of
£5,000 and over in 1962-63 about 22 per cent
of all children for whom tax allowances were
claimed were in families of four or more.
Nearly half were in families of three or more.
On the face of it, these seem high proportions
for the upper-income classes. They are
probably surprising figures to those who, in
the 1940s and early 1950s were deploring the
decline in family size among these classes.

In consequence the projected increase in population for the next thirty-six years was two-anda-half times as large as in the last thirty-six years.
He continues:

For this to happen in one of the most
densely-populated and congested countries of
the world could present any government with
appalling problems of urban planning and
renewal, land use, housing and traffic management, to say nothing of the difficulties of
staffing the schools, the hospitals and many
other services. The physical and psychological
disciplines required to maintain any semblance
of environmental and social order might well
diminish the applicability of market principles
in various sectors of the economy. There can
therefore be few thoughtful observers pre