TWINS*
By J. A. FRASER ROBERTS, M.A,, D.se., F.R.S.E.

Galton, was the first person to point

out the importance of systematic
observations on twins, especially in regard to
the problem of Nature and Nurture. Since
the publication of his work an enormous
amount of research has been carried out on
twins and twinning. The subject is so varied
that all I can attempt to do is to, present a
bird’s-eye view. You must forgive me if I
deal very briefly with some topics and if
some are omitted altogether.

We all know that there are two sorts of
twins. First of all there are the twins that
resemble each other no more than do ordinary
brothers and sisters. They may be of the
same or of different sex. Such twins are
called fraternal. In the second place there are
identical twins which are always of the same
sex and which resemble each other to a
notable extent. The resemblance may be so
close that even parents may make mistakes.

FRATERNAL TWINNING

The causation of fraternal twinning is very
simple. The human species is one that usually
produces one offspring at a birth. In a
proportion of cases, however, two are born,
or occasionally three or more. This may be
regarded as an ordinary biological variation,
for no species has the number at a birth
absolutely fixed. Fraternal twins are born
because at ovulation two Graafian follicles
have matured simultaneously and two ova
have been shed.

One of the most interesting things about
fraternal twins is the close connection with
fertility. It has been shown in animals, such
as the sheep, which usually produces one or
two offspring at a time, that a stock that is
producing a high proportion of twins and
triplets shows 2 low proportion of sterility.
The occurrence of fraternal twinning may

| ‘HE founder of our S$ ociety, Sir Francis

* A lecture delivered before the Eugenics Society on
January 15th, 1935.

therefore be regarded as one index of the
fertility of the stock. .

In the sheep and in man, fraternal twinning must depend entirely or almost entirely
upon the female. The male can produce no
direct effect. But it has been amply demonstrated, notably by Heape, that the male of
fertile stock can transmit hereditary factors
for fertility to his daughters. It has been
shown by Heape, Marshall, Hammond and
others that the hereditary element in the
sheep is a large one. In one case a sheep
breeder increased the fertility of his stock
from about 140 lambs per 100 females to over
200, simply by selecting over a period of
years rams that were themselves one of twins
or triplets.

It is not perhaps likely in the human that
hereditary influences are relatively so important, but nevertheless there is little doubt
that they are considerable. Pedigrees are
found in the literature that show a concentration of fraternal twinning. It is the hereditary aspect of fertility that is associated with
fraternal twinning.

Members of the Eugenics Society will be
familiar with the recent work of Professor
Fisher, which shows the immense importance
of natural fertility, and the results of selection in this respect. It is clear that under
present social and economic conditions infertility is rewarded—with a profoundly dygenic
effect. The study of fraternal twins is thus
closely linked up with that of differential
fertility, which is one of the most important .
of eugenic problems.

IDENTICAL TWINNING

The causation of identical twinning is
totally different. In this case the zygote at
an early stage of its development divides into
two. Identical twins therefore are persons
who once were a single individual and necessarily commenced their life with an identical
hereditary constitution.

25
26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Identical twinning as anything more than
an excessively rare occurrence is only found
in three species—in man, and in two species
of armadillo. Needless to say a phenomenon
of such biological interest has been studied
by many workers in very great detail. In
spite of this, however, we still are not certain
why the zygote should split in this fashion.
Newman,* Stockardt and others have put
forward an essentially physiological explanation. They consider that when identical
twinning occurs this is due to an arrest of
development, probably caused by a deficient
oxygen supply to the zygote. This hypothesis was undoubtedly suggested because,
in the species of armadillo in which identical
twinning occurs, a resting phase can be
demonstrated. Further, it has been possible
under experimental conditions in other
species of animals to produce double monsters
by interference with the developing zygote.

Recently, however, there has been grave
doubt as to whether this hypothesis is a
likely or even a tenable one. Fischer{ and
Hamlett§ among others have expressed the
most vigorous doubts. I have only time to
refer to some of the considerations that seem
to make a physiological hypothesis unlikely.
It is now known that in some other species,
for example the badger, precisely the same
type of arrest occurs that should produce
twins if the physiological theory is correct.
In this species, however, identical twins are
unknown. Moreover, in the armadillo itself
during the phase of quiescence, cell division
does not take place. In the nine-banded
species the number of young produced from
a single fertilized ovum is almost invariably
four, litters of three or five being extremely
rare. In the other species the number is
variable and may be anything from seven to
twelve. It is difficult to see why the same
physiological process should show a constant

* Newman, H. H., “‘ The Biology - on
and “ The Physiology of Twinning,”

¢ Stockard, C. R., “A probable "expianation of
polyembryony in the Armadillo,” Amer. Naturalist,
1921, LV.

{ Fischer, E., Verh. d. Anat. Ges.,
zum Anat, 1931, LXXII.

§ Hamlett, G. W. D., “‘ Polyembryony in the Armadillo,” Quart. Rev. of Biol., 1933, VIII.

*” 1917 ;

Erganzungscheft

result in the one case and a variable result in
the other. These and other considerations
would seem to point to the conclusion that
identical twinning occurs because of the
genetic constitution of the zygote, and the
constant process in one species of armadillo,
the variable one in the other, and the occasional one in man are likely to be due to
genetic constitutions of the appropriate sort.

Hamlett suggests that double monsters are
due to an entirely different process, which is
very likely physiological, as has been shown
experimentally. Of course we know, too,
that all grades of union can be found in the
human from a vestigial remnant of one twin
to Siamese twins, and finally twins that are
joined together by a small area of skin. If the
genetic hypothesis is accepted we should have
to assume that in certain cases a totally
different mechanism was operating to produce
essentially the same result. This offends
against the principle of economy of hypothesis. It must be pointed out, however, that
in the armadillo double monsters do not
occur, so that this difficulty may not be such
a serious one.

To sum up, it is impossible to pronounce a
final judgment at the present time, but on the
whole the genetic hypothesis would seem to
fit the facts much better than the physiological, although there are some difficulties
about its acceptance.

It is clear that the occurrence of identical
twinning cannot have the same relation to
the fertility of the stock as has fraternal
twinning. The stock that is producing. a
relatively high proportion of identical twins
is only increased thereby by half the number
of these twins. Identical twinning is not
related to fertility in any general sense.
Further, identical twinning depends upon the
constitution of the zygote and not of the
mother, and to the extent that it is genetic,
the male and the female are both contributing. This is the explanation of many
pedigrees that show direct influence of the
male.

A ‘‘ CONTROLLED EXPERIMENT ”’

The study of twins is of particular interest
to the biologist and most essential to the
TWINS 27

student of genetics. Nature has provided the
biologist with a controlled experiment. This
experiment is so well controlled that for
many purposes it would be difficult to equal
it under laboratory conditions and to equal
it in man would be fantastically impossible.
The intensive study of pairs of twins has
therefore been a feature of much biological
research in varied fields.

Before turning to the subjects that I should
like to mention in more detail, some reference
must be made to the light that twins have
shed on the subject of sex determination and
sex differentiation. As regards sex determination the evidence from the human and
the armadillo is sufficient to show that sex
in the higher forms is determined at the time
of fertilization and cannot be affected in any
ordinary case by anything that happens
subsequently. :

As regards sex differentiation we may consider very briefly another twinning phenomenon, that of the freemartin. When twins
occur in cattle they are of the fraternal type
and can therefore be of unlike sex. It has
long been known that when male and female
twin calves are born the female is abnormal
and sterile seven times out of eight. The
reason is that seven times out of eight on the
average the foetal circulations of the twin
calves fuse. Hormones are elaborated by the
male and circulate in the body of the female
entirely upsetting and altering its sexual
development. While the external genitalia
of this abnormal female—the freemartin—
are not conspicuously abnormal, the internal
arrangement is far more of the male type,
and in the typical case the gonads are male.
The study of the freemartin has therefore
been of great value in elucidating the
important part played by hormones in sex
development.

COMPARISON OF IDENTICAL AND
FRATERNAL TWINS

The study of twins is probably of most
importance to the geneticist and the eugenist
because of the light it can throw on the respective contributions of heredity and environment with reference to human characteristics
both physical and mental. Before dealing

with some of the results that have been
obtained, it is necessary to study in some
detail precisely what differences there are
between ordinary brothers and sisters, and
fraternal and identical twins respectively.

We know that identical twins have an
identical genetic constitution and that fraternal twins differ in hereditary constitution
owing to mendelian segregation, and therefore fraternal twins have only some of the
same genes in common. The difference
between fraternal twins and sibs is much less
profound. As regards their hereditary makeup both classes will show on the average the
same variability, but it might be expected
that fraternal twins would be somewhat more
alike because there is no age difference. The
maternal age is the same—to the extent that
this factor is important—and it will be
expected that children of the same age will
recelve more similar treatment in the family
than would children of different ages.

MIRROR-IMAGES

It is much more important, however, to
consider if we are justified in saying that
the difference between fraternal and identical twins is wholly genetic. Newman* has
drawn attention to the fact that a proportion of identical twins are mirror-images.
This is not true in the case of identical twins
that are extremely alike. The kind of twins
about whom their parents frequently make
mistakes are not mirror-images. In such a
case we may suppose that division took place
very early in development, so early that
right and left sides had not been established.
Identical twins, however, are not always as
alike as this, and it is frequently noticed that
one is right-handed and the other left-handed.
The whorl of hair on the crown of the head is
clockwise in the one and anti-clockwise in the
other. If their faces are asymmetrical as is the
case in most human beings, a deviation of
the nose, for example, to the left in one will
be mirrored by a deviation to the right in
the other.

We can safely say that the fact that the
twins are mirror-images is due to the division

* Newman, H. H., Numerous papers in the Journal
of Heredity, etc.
28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

into two having taken place later during
development and the later this process takes
place the more pronounced will be the mirrorimaging. It has been observed that the more
marked this phenomenon the more unlike are
the twins, and it is also a remarkable fact
that the right-handed twin is slightly
superior both physically and mentally to the
left-handed twin.

GENETIC AND NON-GENETIC FACTORS

There has been some discussion on how
the differences that have been produced in
this way should be regarded. They are certainly not genetic, but on the other hand they
are not environmental in any ordinary sense.
We shall avoid this difficulty if we consider as
genetic everything that depends directly on
the genes present in the fertilized ovum.
This will also exclude the mutation of genes
during development. Non-genetic influences
will also include any differences in the host of
chemical and other stimuli operating before
birth and finally all those infinitely varied
influences that operate afterwards. It is
much safer to use the word non-genetic
rather than environmental. For the word
environmental has a popular meaning and
would only be used popularly to describe
some of the influences that operate after
birth.

Defining therefore the word genetic in this
sense we see that the difference between
fraternal and identical twins is not wholly
genetic. The mirror-imaging phenomenon
will introduce some non-genetic variability
and this will of comtse tend to make identical twins less alike. If therefore we use
the difference as an index of the importance
of heredity we shall slightly underestimate it.

On the other hand, there may be nongenetic influences that tend to make identical
twins more alike. For example, it is
often contended that identical twins, owing
to the peculiar psychological relationship
that exists between them, tend to choose a
more similar environment than do fraternal
twins, who often show the same incompatibilities as do ordinary brothers and
sisters. I am doubtful, however, if this
consideration amounts to much. To a large

extent the living organism chooses its
environment for genetic reasons.

I think we can fairly sum up by saying that
if we use the increased resemblance between
identical twins as against that of fraternal
twins as an index of the importance of
heredity, we shall somewhat underestimate
rather than overestimate the genetic fraction.

CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF TWIN
STUDIES

It is impossible to do more than give a few
examples of the human problems that have
been clarified by studying pairs of twins.

For example, physicians often ascribe
mental deficiency associated with paralysis
to secondary causes. It has been found, however, that while both members of a fraternal
pair are seldom affected, both members of an
identical pair usually are. This is just what is
found in ordinary low-grade amentia. It can
be concluded therefore that secondary causation is not likely to be more common in
mental deficiency associated with paralysis
than it is in ordinary mental deficiency.

Identical twins always belong to the same
blood group, fraternal twins differ in more
than a third of cases. Here, then, is an
example of a characteristic that is effectively
determined solely by heredity. As a contrast,
in schizophrenia both members of an identical
pair are usually affected, though according to
some authorities in not more than 75 per
cent. of cases. In fraternal twins it is very
rare to find both members affected. While
therefore hereditary constitution is important, non-genetic influences are effective to
some extent in determining whether a person
is affected or not.

In tuberculosis one series of figures gives
70 per cent. for identical twins and 25 per
cent. for fraternals. Hereditary constitution
is therefore still important but relatively less
so. Finally some figures for pneumonia give
25 per cent. for identicals and 18 per cent. for
fraternals. This points to the fact that nongenetic influences are likely to be much more
effectively important in this disease.

I will just refer to one more instance of this
kind. Two Japanese workers have recently
described a case in which the twins were
TWINS 29

almost certainly identical. They showed,
however, very different growth-rates. The
smaller twin suffered from diabetes insipidus,
and X-ray pictures of the skulls showed that
his pituitary was smaller than that of his
brother. Here, then, is an example of a profound endocrine difference associated with a
condition that is often hereditary. In this
case, however, if the twins are definitely
identical, the phenomenon is non-genetic.

GENETIC AND NON-GENETIC
INFLUENCES ON I.Q.

The subject of this paper is so wide that
one must select certain special problems. A
problem that I am anxious to discuss in
rather more detail is the use of twin studies
in estimating the relative contributions of
genetic and non-genetic influences to mentality, as estimated by the intelligence
quotient or mental ratio. In the I.Q. we
possess an objective measure of abilities that
are held to be closely related to intelligence.
If we test a large number of children we find
that their I.Q.s tend to be normally distributed, and the variability can be expressed
in terms of the usual statistical constants.
Perhaps the simplest way to regard the variaability is to think of it as the average difference between pairs of individuals. We
may find for example that in our group the
average difference between pairs of individuals selected at random is 20 points. Ina
normal population this difference is proportional to the standard deviation. The
standard deviation is not, however, itself a
direct measure of variability. The correct
measure is the square of the standard
deviation, that is the variance. Why we
should use the variance and not the standard
deviation is a point to which I shall return in
a few minutes. In our example, therefore,
the variability is proportional to the square
of the average difference between pairs, that
is, it may be represented by the figure 4oo0.

If we now select our pairs not at random
but take brothers and sisters, we shall find
that the average difference between pairs is
smaller. Let us suppose that it is found to be
17 points. The variability has now been
reduced to seventeen squared. This is 289.

The reduction from 400 to 289 represents the
increased likeness of brothers and sisters as
compared with the average differences found
between random unrelated persons. The
reduction of variability will be due partly to
genetic causes, for brothers and sisters tend
to share the same genes. It will be partly due
to non-genetic causes because the nongenetic influences that undoubtedly effect
mentality tend to be similar for brothers and
sisters. If we now measure the average differences between fraternal twins instead of
ordinary brothers and sisters we shall find
that the variability may be slightly more
reduced. This is clearly due to non-genetic
causes such as the more constant pre-natal
and post-natal conditions that twins tend to
share as compared with ordinary brothers
and sisters.

Finally, we may measure the differences
between identical twins. We shall now find
a further considerable reduction. Let us
suppose we find that the average difference
is now Io points. The variability may be
represented by 100. There is no doubt that
the greater part of this further reduction
must be due to genetic causes. Some nongenetic influences that may operate in the
case of identical against fraternal twins have
already been mentioned. The asymmetry
mechanism which is peculiar to identical
twins will tend to make them less alike, so
that the importance of heredity will be
underestimated if we use the reduction in
variability as the measure. On the other
hand, it may be that in certain cases identical twins tend to have a more constant
environment than do fraternal twins. This
point has already been discussed. To the
extent that it operates it will mean that part
of the reduction in variability is due to nongenetic causes. In view, however, of Newman’s results in regard to the importance of
the asymmetry mechanism, it is likely that
we shall actually underestimate the contribution of heredity if we ascribe to genetic
causes all the reduction in variability in
identical as compared with fraternal twins.

There is a remarkable constancy in the
findings of various workers as regards the
reduction in variability as we proceed from
30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

one variety of pairs to another. One of the
latest results is that of Dr. Louis Herrman and
Professor Lancelot Hogben* who have studied
brothers and sisters and twins at the London
schools. Their results are as follows. They
found that the average differences between
sibs that did not differ much in age was 16:8
points, between fraternal twins of like sex
17-7 points, and between identical twins 9-2
points. If we use the reduction in variability
shown by identicals as compared with
fraternals as an approximate measure of the
contribution of heredity we are very unlikely
to overestimate it. This is in fact what Dr.
Herrman and Professor Hogben have done in
their paper. It must be pointed out, however, that they adopt this criterion tentatively, and somewhat reluctantly, for purposes of argument.

They sum up their results as follows.
“Contrary to the widespread belief which
attributes difference in 1.Q. predominately to
genetic differences it is extremely unlikely
that genetic differences account for more than
one-half the mean differences among offspring of the same parent, having the same
birth rank and brought up together in the
same family environment.’’ A hasty reading
of this conclusion might lead one to suppose
that 1.Q.’s are determined in about equal
measure by genetic and non-genetic causes.
Actually it means nothing of the kind. The
true measure of variability is not the difference, but the difference squared. Thus,
17°7 units of average difference may be
represented by a total variability of 313;
9-2 units of difference means that in identical
twins the variability has been reduced to
85 points, that is s'7.of what it was before.
We can say, therefore, that on these figures
heredity is nearly three times as important
as environment.

MEASUREMENT OF VARIABILITY
That the true method of measuring variability is to consider the squares of the differences, and not the differences themselves,
may be illustrated by seeing what would
* Herrman, L., and Hogben, L., ‘‘ The Intellectual

Resemblance of Twins,’”’ Proc. Roy. Soc. Edin., 1933,
LIII, 105.

happen if the reverse procedure could be
adopted. If it were possible to leave the
genetic variability of fraternal twins just as
it is and to eliminate all non-genetic differences as between members of our pairs,
we should find that the average difference
was reduced not from 17:7 to 17°7—9°2=
8-5 but only to 15-1. This is a reduction of
about one-seventh. If, therefore, we make
our genetic constitution constant, as we did
when we selected identical pairs, and find
that the average difference is reduced to
about half, we must not say that heredity
and environment are in this group of about
equal importance, because we should have to
use just the same argument as regards the
reverse case. If genetic differences are left as
they are and non-genetic differences, to
which must be added errors of observation,
are eliminated, the average difference is
reduced to one-seventh. But if we had drawn
the erroneous conclusion that I mentioned a
moment ago as regards the evidence from
identical twins, we should have to say on the
very same material that heredity was six
times as important as environment.*

Actually, of course, if it is realized that the
variability is measured not by the differences
but by their squares, either way by performing the experiment would yield the same
result, namely, on the figures given by Dr.
Herrman and Professor Hogben and adopting
their criterion, heredity is nearly three times
as important as environment.

We must realize, however, that there is
another source of variability which this calculation ignores or rather puts into the
environmental side of the scale. This is the
variability due to errors of observation. If
it were possible to examine the same child,
using the same test, on consecutive days, and
if the result of the first test did not affect the
second test, the two results would not be
exactly the same. Differences in the response
of the individual must exist. It has been
found that with appropriate intelligence
tests the variation is not very great, though
compared with the small variability of
identical twins it may be considerable. Dr.

* In a word variances can be added and subtracted,
but differences cannot.
TWINS 31

Herrman and Professor Hogben have not
determined the errors of observation from
their own material. They quote the results
of an American worker, who found the very
close correlation of 0-97 between repeated
tests on the Otis scale, which is the one they
used. They concluded that this contribution
to variability was so small that it could be
neglected.

This assumption is unjustified. First of all
the very high correlation of 0-97 might very
well not be realized if the experiment were
repeated. Further, if age corrections are
introduced, as in the case of these twins, this
source of variability is considerably increased, especially as the published tables of
norms for the Otis test appear to be very
inaccurate. The errors of observation would
affect the identical pairs proportionately
much more heavily. It is quite possible
therefore than an appreciable part of the
variability still remaining when identical
twins are considered is due to errors of
observation. In the calculations of Dr. Herman and Professor Hogben, this contribution
to variability is automatically included with
environmental influences. The figure of 3: 1
for the relative importance of heredity and
environment would undoubtedly be raised if
these errors could be estimated and eliminated. It is not inconceivable that half the
variability shown by the identical pairs is due
to this cause. If so, the relative contributions
of heredity and environment would be as six
or seven to one.

It can be concluded that for a population
such as that of London school children, as in
most populations that have been studied, an
examination of twins indicates that heredity
is considerably more important than environment in determining the I.Q.—that is to say,
it is not less than three times as important
and may be considerably more.

It should be noted that the contribution of
heredity to level of I.Q. is not as great as it is
in the case of many physical characteristics
such as stature. Twin studies as well as other
lines of research indicate that in an ordinary
population the contribution of environment
to many physical differences is relatively
small,

It should also be noted that all the calculations refer to the population as it is. If
environmental conditions were radically
altered the relative importance of heredity
and environment might be changed. In
general, however, this can be expressed quite
simply. If environmental conditions are
made much more variable, and that in practice would almost always mean making them
worse on the average, total variability would
be increased and also the relative importance
of environment. If these conditions are made
more uniform, which again in practice means
making them better, total variability is
reduced and the contribution of heredity
becomes relatively more important.

ESTIMATING ENVIRONMENTAL
INFLUENCES

Identical twins can be used for another
type of experiment. This is to see how far
environmental differences can produce different results in the two members of a pair.
In animals it has been increasingly realized
how valuable it is—in, say, a nutrition
experiment—to start with individuals that
are genetically identical or very alike. Many
years of patient work have produced the
Wistar stock of albino rats in which genetic
variability has been almost eliminated. In
the case of man the very same thing is even
better done for us by Nature. The biologist,
the psychologist and the physician, by using
identical twins, can test the effect of differences of all kinds in persons who are genetically identical. That man should be one of
the few species that produce an abundant
supply of identical twins is so fortunate that
it might be regarded as a direct intervention
of Providence!

A certain amount of very careful work has
been done on identical twins reared apart,
especially by Newman.* As yet not many
cases have been collected, not enough to
permit general conclusions being drawn. The
cases described are, however, extraordinarily

interesting. It seems clear that differences in

* Newman, H. H., Numerous papers in the Journal
of Heredity.
32 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

home surroundings and education may sometimes produce remarkable differences in persons who start life with identical genes. Newman goes so far as to suggest that the effects
of different environment on the same heredity
may be as great as the effect of the same
environment on different heredity. He
makes it clear, however, that far too few
cases have been studied as yet for any conclusion to be stated. The differences between
these pairs may be exaggerated because they
are adults, and the higher ranges of the Binet
scale applied to adults do not give very
reliable results. Average differences between
adults cannot easily be compared with
differences found in children.

A number of psychologists, for example
Gesell,* have already used identical twins for
most fascinating studies on the effects of
training. Different types of training can be
given to each member of a pair of identical
infants, or the same training given at
different ages. There can be no doubt that
big advances in psychology will be made along
these lines, especially as regards the intricate
relationship of training to inborn potentialities. Gesell has devised an extremely complete scale of physiological and psychological
points, against which the development of the
child almost from birth can be compared.
He has already made detailed observations
on pairs of twins.

NEED FOR ACCURATE RECORDS

In twins of both types we possess experimental material of incomparable value. I
have only been able to mention in this paper
a few of the lessons that can be learnt from
them. It is safe to say that even more vital
information will be obtained in the future.
If, however, this is to be done it will need the

* Gesell, A., article on ‘‘ Twins
Child Psychology, 1931.

” in A Handbook of

active co-operation of the parents of twins,
of twins themselves and of physicians. I have
not mentioned one important aspect of twin
studies. This is how to decide with certainty
which twins are identical and which fraternal.
While in the majority of cases it is not a very
difficult matter to come to a decision, a proportion of cases remain in which it is not
easy. The work of Dr. Stocks* on fingerprints, and other studies, are of great value,
but still a proportion of cases usually remain
that are not free from all doubt. I will not
stress the point that the existence of doubtful
cases obscures experimental results and
makes their interpretation more difficult.
The person who can give help here is the
physician who witnesses the birth. If, in the
case of a twin birth, the nature of the membranes could be placed on record, twin
material would become even more valuable
than it is.

Another point in this connection is the
fact that twins are subject to a higher mortality at birth than single children. Further,
if a condition is being investigated that
shortens life, one member of the pair may
have died and so that pair will not come into
the survey at all. This will upset to some
extent many calculations of the kind we
have been considering. The ideal would be a
complete register of all twin births with some
account of their subsequent history.

Human biology will progress more rapidly
if the importance of full and accurate records
of twin births is realized; if the details of
such births are recorded ; if records are kept
of the subsequent history of twins; and if
twins and their parents realize how much
they can do by co-operating in research to
help the advance of knowledge and so to
perform a real public service.

* Stocks, P., ‘‘ A Biometric Investigation of Twins
and their Brothers and Sisters,’ Annals of Eugenics,
1930, IV

—aaS ey

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVII, No. 1.
