REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS 409

Leach, R. A., Barrister-at-Law (with an introduction and annotations by).
The Mental Defictency Bill. London. The Local Government
Press, 1912; price 6d. net.
THIs little pamphlet is a reprint of the Mental Deficiency Bill, as introduced by the Government, in a convenient form, and the copious annotations and references to such reports and existing statutes as bear upon
the different clauses will probably be found of use by official and other.
persons concerned with the mentally defective. In our opinion it is
marred by the introduction, which not only reveals a curiously medizval
state of mind in regard to scientific and social progress, decidedly out
of place in a lawyer, but which also suggests that Mr. Leach’s practical
experiences of aments is somewhat limited. As an example we may
quote his statement that “the greater misery to mental defectives is to be
under detention in an institution away from their homes.” We wonder
how many superintendents of institutions would endorse this view. Again
he says, “if there be any hurt in the Bill, the labouring classes are the
classes that would be hurt most.” He is evidently unaware of the almost
daily requests made by members of the labouring class to have their
unfortunate children admitted into homes which do not now exist, and
most people who know will consider that the labouring class is not going
to be hurt, but to be helped most. A. F. TREDGOLD.

Pearson, Karl, F.R.S. Eugenics and Public Health. (Questions of
the Day and of the Fray, No. 6.) London, 1912. Dulau and
Co.; pp. 34; price 1s.

Pearson, Kart, F.R.S. Social Problems: Their Treatment, Past
Present, and Future. (Date of publication and price as above.)

(1.) Is a reprint of Professor Pearson’s address delivered at the York
Congress of the Royal Sanitary Institute this summer. Attention is
directed to the necessity of caution in interpreting the evidence relied
upon by medical officers of health; some instances of defective reasonin
are examined, and one or two aspects of infant mortality are discussed.
Professor Pearson, in the course of a criticism of the paper by Dr. R.
J. Ewart, recently published in this review, uses the phrase, “I cite from
the statement of a medical officer of health published by the London
Eugenics Education Society, a society which professes to help forward
the cause of Eugenics” (p. 13). It is perhaps desirable to remark that,
although the publication of a paper in this review indicates that the
editorial committee believe the paper to contain matter of interest to
students of eugenics, no responsibility is or can be assumed by the council
of the society for the correctness of the conclusions expressed or the
validity of the data used.

(2.) Contains the substance of a lecture delivered at the Galton Laboratory in March, and once more emphasises the difficulty of interpreting
the semi-official statistics which are now accumulating at a rapid rate
and are generally thought to prove the all-sufficiency of environmental
reforms in ameliorating racial and social defects. M. G.

Pearson, KARL, F.R.S. Tuberculosis, Heredity and Environment.
(Eugenics Laboratory Lecture Series, VIII.) Dulau and Co.;
pp. 46; price Is.

Pearson, Kart, F.R.S. Darwinism, Medical Progress and Eugenics.
(Eugenics Laboratory Lecture Series, IX.) Dulau and Co.;
p. 29, with seven plates; price 1s. ;

 (1.) The first of these lectures is a trenchant criticism of the evidence

upon which popular medical authorities found statements which lead

the general public to suppose that the “ conquest ” of consumption is to
