Educability and Inheritance.”
/ By A. F. Trepcotp, M.D., F.R.S., Edin.

i
f
/ When the brain of the new-born child is examined under the
microscope it is seen to be in a very undeveloped condition. Many
of its cells still retain their embryonic form and cell processes are
simple and few in number. At this stage Mind is practically nonexistent. Gradually, and with the lapse of years, the mental functions
come into being. The development of the sensory functions, whereby
the child is put into communication with the outside world, makes
perception possible; this process, in conjunction with association and
memory, gives rise to the capacity to form mental images, to compare,
to think, to imagine, to invent, to judge, and to reason. The linking
up of these higher mental processes with his motor pathways makes
possible the manifestations of will and desire, as seen in speech and
those intelligent adaptations of the individual to his present and
future needs which we designate conduct and behaviour.

Between birth and the age of 21 years the weight of the brain
increases from an average of 300 grammes to one of nearly 1,400
grammes, or more than fourfold. During the same period the circumference of the cranium increases from 14 to 214 inches. Theie is
reason to think, however, that all the component functions of mind
have attained their maximum development by about the sixteenth
year and that after this age increase of mental capacity is more a
matter of increased knowledge and complexity of association than of the
coming into being of any new function.

The development of the mina thus takes place part passu with the
development of the brain, and is the resultant of two factors; (1) an
inherent tendency on the part of the brain cells to develop; (2) the
stimulation of these cells by impressions and vibrations from without.
Much of the external stimulation to which the brain of the child is
subject is necessarily haphazard and fortuitous, but much is also
deliberate and systematic. This latter, associated as it is with the imparting of definite facts and items of knowledge, constitutes what is
known as Education, and the term ‘‘Educability’’ is often restricted
to the capacity of the child to respond to this organised system of training and instruction. It seems desirable, however, that we should use
it in a wider sense, and for the present purpose I shall use it as meaning
the general capacity of the child for mental development, that is, his
capacity to respond not merely to the graduated and organised methods
of development known as education, but also to those haphazard and

*Paper read at the International Eugenics Congress, 1921.
EDUCABILITY AND INHERITANCE. 165

unorganized factors which are inseparable from his environment.

By Educability, then, I mean the capacity possessed by the child
for mental development; and by mental development I mean the
growth of those functions of mind which are normal in his race and
nation. It is obvious that this question of educability is not merely
one of pedagogic, but one of the utmost social importance; for the
presence in a community of any considerable number of individuals
who fall markedly short of the average standard must seriously diminish
the efficiency and lead to the decline, and even decay, of that community ; whilst it i, to the presence of an increased capacity for mental
development that we must look for racial progress.

Now it is obvious that the development actually achieved varies
very greatly in different individuals, and the question which arises is—
Are these differences due to inequalities in the methods of education
anu faults in the environment, in other words are they due to inequality
of opportunity ; ox are they the result of innate differences in individual
capacity for development?

It is quite clear, and will be admitted by everyone, that the
child whose educational advantages have been poor cannot attain the
same degree of intellectual development as a child of similar innate
capacity who has been more favourably situated—a child who has had
no opportunity of learning the French language cannot be expected to
talk French. On this point I may say that there is every reason for
thinking that any extensive withholding of impressions from without,
either as a result of disease of several organs of special sense, or of
long continued seclusion, will so interfere with mental development as
to give rise to a state amounting to mental deficiency; as witness the
cases of Laura Bridgman and Kaspar Hauser. Further, there is no
doubt that the development of the brain cells may be impeded by faulty
hygienic surroundings and conditions of ill-health. For instance I
have no doubt that the child who suffers from insufficient food, exhausting physical strain, defective sleep, as well as more definite
disease, may thereby be considerably handicapped in his mental
development. In a few cases the handicap may be so great that the
alrears are never made up; generally, however, it is of a temporary
nature only, and disappears when the cause is removed.

On the other hand we have to remember that good educational
facilities now exist in most civilized countries ; in England, for instance,
education has been compulsory for two generations, and yet, as every
teacher knows, the capacity for response and the result achieved differ
enormously even amongst children having exactly the same opportunities and coming from an identical environment. Some children, for
example, will make rapid progress in art, music or languages with very
little instruction, others will completely fail to master these subjects
although they may be supplied with every facility and encouragement.
The study of biographies shows that not a few persons have acquired
considerable intellectual attainments and have even risen to a position
of eminence, with very meagre educational advantages; and this has
sometimes taken place amid wretched hygienic surroundings and under
conditions of ill-health. These differences extend into the moral
sphere, and there is a large and very important group of children known
166 EUGENICS REVIEW.

as moral imbeciles, who are characterized, amongst other defects, by a
complete and incurable lack. of the sense of social obligation or of the
difference between right and wrong, although they may have been
brought up with the utmost care and subject to the best example, the
wisest precepts, and even punishment. Differences like these I have
mentioned, ana I might specify many others, occur amongst children
attending the same school and living in the same street, and are not
peculiar to any particular class or section of society.

It is quite clear from these and similar facts that although the
nature of the environment play; a part in the result attained, inasmuch
as it may favour or handicap development, it does not under ordinary
conditions play the essential part. The chief factor which determines
the extent and the nature of the child’s mental development is his
intrinsic and inborn potentiality for such development. In fact, I
think we need have no hesitation in saying that just as every child is
born with certain potentialities for bodily growth, in virtue of which
he gradually develops the physical configuration of his race and stock,
so is he born with certain potentialities for mental development, both
as to their nature and degree. The nature of the child’s early experiences may of course mould his thoughts and shape his future life, but
the total mental development to which he will attain, and the nature
of his aptitudes, must, at the bottom, be dependent more upon his
innate potentiality for such development than upon his environment,
unless this is markedly abnormal.

Further, enquiries show that whilst in some cases these variations
in educability occur sporadically, that is to say that one member of a
family may differ very considerably either in an upward or downward direction from his parents and brothers and sisters, yet on
the whole they show a strong tendency to be hereditary and to have a
familial character.

With regard to endowments, the fact of the inheritance of general
ability was first demonstrated statistically by the late Sir Francis
Galton, the father of Eugenics. Galton selected one thousand men,
each of whom was sufficiently eminent to rank as one man in four
thousand, and comprising judges, generals, statesmen, poets, painters,
scientists and divines. He then examined the careers of their relatives ’
and amongst these he found 89 eminent fathers, 114 eminent brothers,
and 129 eminent sons; in all 832 immediate relatives of the same degree
of eminertce as those who were the subjects of his enquiry. Investigations into the next degree of kin showed the presence of another 200
men of the same eminence.

Galton showed from his researches that the chance of a son of an
eminent man showing eminent ability himself was about 500 times as
great as that of a son of a man taken at random. I may remark that
Galton’s own genealogical tree is itself a very apt and striking confirmation of the facts which he demonstrated ; for including the allied
families of Darwin and Wedgwood there have been no less than 16 men
of the highest scientific note, of whom 9 are Fellows of the Royal
Society. Galton’s conclusions have been confirmed in more recent
years by the enquiries of Karl Pearson and W. C. D. Whetham.

The above mentioned researches refer more particularly to the
EDUCABILITY AND INHERITANCE. 167

inheritance of general ability; there is evidence that ability in a
specific direction may be similarly inherited. We see this in regard to
Art in the case of some of the great Italian painters. For example,
Jacopo Bellini and his two sons Gentile and Giovanni; Antonio Viva rini and his younger brother Bartolommeo, together with the two
Luigis, also members of the same family ; Ludovico Carraci and his two
cousins Agostino and Annibale; Lippo Lippi and his son Filippino;
Gaddo Gaddi, his son Taddeo and his two grandsons Agnolo and
Giovanni. Doubtless in many of these instances the individuals
were brought up in an atmosphere favourable to the development of
their talent; but as all those Ihave mentioned were not merely local
celebrities, but were painters of European fame whose works now adorn
the leading galleries of the Continent, it is evident that they must have
been possessed of conspicuous natural ability—this is particularly
evident when we bear in mind the hopeless failure which often results
in the case of individuals who spend almost endless time and money
upon tuition but who have no natural aptitude.

_ Music also furnishes examples of the inheritance of special ability,
and perhaps the most remarkable is that of the Bach family, to which I
may briefly refer. The earliest musician in this family appears to have
been Veit Bach, born in 1550, a miller and baker by trade, but witha
great fondness for playing the flute in his leisure hours: his sons Hans,
a carpet weaver by trade, acquired a considerable local reputation as a
violin player: Hans’ son Heinrich was the organist at Arnstadt, whilst
several other sons possessed great musical talent. In the next generation three members, Christopher, Michael and Ambrosius, were professional and distinguished musicians. In the next generation we
have the two brothers, John Christopher and the most celebrated member of the family, John Sebastian. John Sebastian Bach (born 1685,
died 1750) is a striking instance of the inheritance of musical talent
revealing itself at a very early age. He was never afforded any
special advantages, because his elder brother John Christopher, in
whose care he was left from the age of ten owing to the death of his
parents, appears to have been so jealous of his gifts as to have refused
him access to some sources of musical education which were available.
John Sebastian married twice and had a family of 11 sons and 9
daughters. All the 11 sons were musicians of marked excellence, but
four of them stand out conspicuously, namely, Wilhelm Friedemann,
Master of the chapel of Hesse-Darmstadt; Karl Philip Emmanuel,
Director of the Orchestra, Hamburg; John Christopher Frederick,
Master of the Chapel at Buckeburg; and John Christian who went to
London, where he acquired great reputation as a composer. To summarise, I may say that in the four generations of this family no less than
50 members were professional musicians of marked ability, and several
of them of such excellence as to rank amongst the immortals.

The same hereditary tendency is seen with regard to diminished
developmental potentiality. I have known several families of which
many members found difficulty in spelling, others which found arithmetic a stumbling block, and others which showed a pronounced
inability to acquire school knowledge, although they were sharp
enough in looking after their interests and successful in life. It is well
168 EUGENICS REVIEW.

known that a large proportion of disorders and diseases of the mind and
nervous system are the result of a particular family tendency, and I
showed many years ago that that serious imperfection of mental
development which constitutes mental deficiency, or feeble-mindedness, is strongly hereditary.

These differences of innate developmental potentiality, however,
are not merely familial; there would appear to be differences with
regard to social class and race. I have no knowledge of other countries,
but in England I do not think there is any doubt that, taken in the
mass, the children of the professional classes show a relatively higher
degree of educability than do those of the lower labouring classes.
With regard to race I think it is also a fact that certain sections of the
yellow and black races compare unfavourably with whites. It is also
affirmed that in schools in America where black and white children
are educated together, the blacks keep pace with the whites up to.
about the age of puberty, but subsequently show a definite inferiority,
having apparently reached the limit of their educational potentiality .

There is, however, nothing surprising in the fact that differences in
educability should be inherited. Since we have seen that educability
is largely a matter of innate potentiality it follows that it is germinal in
origin, and its hereditary transmission ensues as a matter of course.
At this point, however, we have to carry the matter a little further;
inheritance is simply the mechanism of transmission, can we say how
these differences arose in the first instance?

It is quite true that this is a problem of not merely academic, but
of great practical importance: it is, however, one of very great. difficulty, for it must be confessed that our knowledge of the causation of
germina! variations—which is what the question comes to—is still very
imperfect.

In considering this point I shall exclude minor differences of
potentiality ; these are probably but manifestations of the tendency to
vary within narrow limits which is normal and universal in life, and I
shall confine myself to a consideration of those larger differences of
increased or diminished capacity for development which we have seen
to characterize different families, social grades, and races.

At this point it is desirable to emphasize the relationship which
exists between educabilitv and brain structure and function. It is
true that our methods of microscopical examination may not at present
be sufficiently delicate to enable us to demonstrate this in the majority
of cases; nevertheless it has been shown that in mental deficiency
there are definite changes, namely, a numerical shortage of the cells and.
processes of the brain cortex, together with an irregularity in their
arrangement and an imperfection of their development. It has also
been shown that in conditions of chronic mental decay there is a
degeneration of these same cells; whilst it was pointed out by Kaes that
certain layers of cortical fibres which are associative in function undergo
a gradual increase with normal mental development. From these
findings I think we are justified in concluding that differences either in
the structure or chemical constitution of the nerve cells, or in the
functional contractility of the processes of these cells, constitute the
material basis of the varying differences in educability. Good general
EDUCABILITY AND INHERITANCE. 169

ability is dependent upon keen and accurate perception, good powers
of attention, memory, visualisation, comparison and judgment, and
well-coordinated motor response, and these qualities I regard as. the
natural and norma! result of the healthy physiological functioning of a
well and harmoniously developed brain. In marked inferiority, on
the other hand, some or all of these qualities are defective, and it is
justifiable to conclude that this is due to some defect of brain structure
or function.

Let us first of all consider those cases in which mental! development
falls markedly below the normal average of the race and class to which
the individual belongs. It has been suggested that the various races of
mankind were not evolved from a single pair of ancestors, or even from
the same pre-human species, but that they are the descendants of
different, although closely related species, which possessed fundamentally different potentiality for development. It is argued that
these fundamental differences account not only for the differences in
educability in regard to race, but that the mixture of these different
races to form the nations which exist to-day accounts for the variations
in educability amongst members of the same nation. In other words
that defective mental development is either the expression of a defective
potentiality which has existed ab initio or is due to atavism, or a harking back to a former condition. It is undoubtedly true that most
nations are a blend of several different racial types, and this is certainly
the case in the British and American nations; further, the phenomenon
of atavism is well established; so that if we grant the hypothesis of
inherent racial differences of potentiality it is quite possible that some
cases of defective educability might be thus explained as a throw back.:
It is to be remarked, however, that this is an hypothesis only ; we have
to remember that the black and yellow races are for the most part the
descendants of peoples who have for many generations lived in surround ings little cultivated to favour intellectual development; where the
opposite conditions have prevailed, as for instance in the Chinese
and Japanese, the degree of educability would not appear to be inferior
to that of civilized whites. I shall refer to this matter again presently,
but it is not improbable that these racial differences in educability are
due to the continued lack of stimulus in the past rather than to any
inherent germinal defect of developmental potentiality.

It seems to me that in the majoirty of cases in which there is a
marked failure to attain the degree of mental development which is
normal to the class to which the individual belongs we have, not a
condition of atavism, but one which is pathological , and due to germinal
potentiality having in some way been impaired. In my opinion there
is not the slightest doubt that this may actually take place. My
enquiries into the causation of mental deficiency have led me to the
conclusion that certain diseases of the individual (i.e., alcoholism,
tuberculosis and syphilis) may »o devitalize and impair the potentiality
of his, or her, germ plasm as to prevent the norma] development of the
offspring. The effect of these deleterious agencies would naturally be
greatest upon that ‘‘determinant’’ of the germ plasm which represented the most delicate and most recent evolutionary achievement,
namely, the germinal representative of the biain. As a result of a
170 EUGENICS REVIEW.

comparatively slight devitalisation of the germ the offspring is born
with an increased instability and diminished powe: of resistance of the
nervous system, and this condition may be manifest as hysteria,
epilepsy, neurasthenia, insanity, and a defective capacity to develop
the acquirements which are necessary for successful social adaptation,
in other words a defective educability. With a more pronounced
degree of germinal impairment there is an actual imperfection of
structure, giving rise to the various grades of mental deficiency.

The number of persons who are actually mentally defective, that

is to say who are so defective as to be unable to maintain their existence
without some form of supervision or assistance, is very considerable.
I estimate that in the United Kingdom there are at least four such
persons per 1000 of the total population. There are, however, a still
larger number of persons who, although not defective to this extent, are
yet subnormal, inasmuch as they are defective in the power of developing the higher mental qualities to the average extent. I think that a
very large proportion of these owe their conditions to a germinal! impairment, and that they are not the descendants of a race which has
never evolved, but that they represent a definite retrogression, being
in fact manifestations of degeneracy. It is important to note that a
defect of this kind is transmissible, and that the propagation of these
persons may in course of time produce a very serious depreciation in the
aggregate efficiency and capacity of the nation.
- At this point there arises a very interesting and important question, namely, if the developmental potentiality of the germ plasm may
be diminished, may it not also be augmented? Or, to put the question
specifically with regard to educability —Is it possible as a result of the
stimulus afforded by the process of education and the subsequent
exercise of mind, continued generation after generation, so to augment
the germ potentiality for mental development that the educability of
the race may be increased ?

This question is obviously one of supreme importance both to the
educationalist and the sociologist; there is, however, probably no
problem in the whole of biology which has been, and still is, more
keenly discussed, and regarding which opinions are more widely
divergent—for it is the old question of the transmissibility of acquired
characters.

Lamarck, in 1809, answered it in the affirmative and both Darwin
and Herbert Spencer supported this view; indeed until the last 40 or 50
years it was accepted without question. It was then »hown by Weismann that the germ plasm was not, as was formerly thought, manufactured anew by each individual, but that it was developed by direct
continuity, and from this there arose the theory that it was unalterable.
In consequence there appeared a school of Neo-Daswinians, which not
only denied the fact of the transmissibility of characters acquired by
the individual, but which affirmed such to be impossible.

Space will not allow me to enter into the pros and cons of this
‘controversy; there are distinguished biologists upon both sides, and
although the question must still be regarded as sub judice, I must
confess that there are many facts which seem to me to justify Lamarck ’s
view, and which are only explicable on the assumption that certain
EDUCABILITY AND INHERITANCE, 171

qualities acquired by the individual may bring about such a change in
his germ plasm as to produce an increased tendency to the development
of those qualities in his descendants. Charles Darwin supposed that
the gecm plasm was made up of ‘‘gemmules’’ derived from the various
organs of the body, and that it might consequently be thus influenced
by changes in those organs. This explanation has now bee. disproved,
and the opponents of the inheritance of acquirements base much of their
argument upon the assumption that not only does no mechanism for
such inheritance exist, but that it is impossible to conceive of any such
mechanism. More recent researches, however, have thrown a new
light upon this problem, and tend to show that although Darwin was
wrong as to the actual details he was probably right as to the principle.

This question is of such interest and importance that it may not be
out of place if I shortly allude to it. In the human body there are
certain glands, namely, the thyroid, thymus, suprarenal, etc., whose
function, owing to the fact that they are not provided with excretory
ducts, was formerly a complete enigma. But it is now knowa that
these glands furnish an ‘‘internal’’ secretion pa.sing directly into the
blood stream, and which has a most remarkable action upon the
development and function of certain bodily organs. For instance, a
deficiency of thyroid secretion during the early sears of life causes an
arrest of development of the cells of the brain, so that a variety of
idiocy known as cretinism results. A deficiency of this same secretion
after full development has been attained produces a condition of marked
hebetude of mind. On the other hand, an excess of this secretion produces tremors and other marked disturbances of the nervous system.
The other glanus I have mentioned exercise a simila« profound influence upon development and metabolism ; so much so that their removal
or disease may be followed by death. Further, there is now good reason
for thinking that not only these glands, but many of the organs and
tissues of the body, such as the brain and muscles, each produce their
own specific secretion, which is essential to the well-being of the
organism,

Now there is not the slightest doubt that the germ plasm contains
within it in some form or other representatives of all the organs and
tissues to which it will give rise when fertilized; and these representa tives are known as ‘‘determinants.’’ May it not be then that the
specific secretion produced by each organ of the individual may have a
selective action upon the corresponding determinant within his germ
plasm, and by its nature or amount tend to increase the developmental
potentiality of that determinant? To put the case in more concrete
form may we not imagine that an increased development and activity
of brain may be accompanied by an increased brain secretion, which
will so stimulate the corresponding germinal determinant, as to increase
its potentiality for growth?

This, of course, is at present mere conjecture, but it does not seem
altogether unreasonable. However this may be, Iam strongly disposed
to think that there is evidence to the effect that qualities acquired by
the individual which are the result of increased development may, in
course of time, lead to a heightened capacity for such development in
his offspring; indeed I regard this as one of the means by which pro172 EUGENICS REVIEW.

gressive evolution has been brought about. I see no reason why the
development of mental capacity produced in the individual by the
stimulus of education and exercise of mind, continued generation after
generation, should be any exception.

The social grades in democratic countries are not separated by any
rigid barriers, they are connected by almost insensible gradations;
nevertheless there are many individuals who are the descendants of
stocks who have for generations worked with the heads, and there are
other stocks who have for generations worked with their hands and
toiled with the sweat of their brow in a simple capacity. I think
there is no doubt that the educability of the former is distinctly higher
than is that of the latter. May this difference be explained in the
manner I have just described? May the same explanation account for
the differences existing between different races? I think it is not impossible.

It is to be remarked however, that if an augmentation of this kind
takes place, it is certainly extremely slow: there is no question of quick
returns, and it is practically certain that many generations must elapse
before any change could be perceived. Further, for such progressive
evolution to take place, not only must the necessary stimulus be continued over a long period, but the germ plasm must be healthy and of
unimpaired power of response. Given these conditions, then I think
that a high degree of educability and good mental capacity are the
natural and normal sequence. And when we look back upon the
course of evolution, and note the enormous development in capacity
which has gradually been brought about in the nervous system and
sphere of mind, one might even haza:d the thought that man, as he
exists to-day, can hardly be the culmination of such a momentous
process.

We may now briefly consider the origin of ‘Genius’ since I think
that this stands upon a different footing to general ability. Genius
has been defined as an ‘infinite capacity for taking pains’; there never
was a more inappropriate definition, for this is just what genius 1s not.
The real genius, from the psychological aspect, is totally different to
the man of marked ability. This latter owes his condition primarily
to a healthy brain of high developmental potentiality, but the full
realization of this potentiality necessitates good educational facilities
and sustained application; in other words marked ability is the result
of the two factors, high potentiality and optimum environment. In
genius, on the other hand, the developmental potentiality is usually in
one particular direction only, outside this the genius is often a complete fool, but this potentiality is so great that whilst other persons,
even of considerable ability, are mastering the subject at the expense
of great pains, the real genius grasps it almost intuitively, and he
develops without effort and often in the teeth of the most adverse
environment. The characteristic of genius, in fact, is that it is a
one-sided development, and I am disposed to think that it is often
pathological and the result of an acquired germinal instability. Some
confirmation of this view is afforded by the fact that the genius is often
sterile and that a disproportionate number of his relations are cranks,
mentally unsound, or mentally defective. This connection has so far
EDUCABILITY AND INHERITANCE. 173

been recognised that an argument not infrequently brought forward
against any attempt to limit the propagations of the neuropathic is
that we might by so doing deprive the world of a genius. But I think
this is a fallacy, for the birth of a real genius is very exceptional and I
believe that the good he doesmight be morethan outweighed by the harm
and interference with racial progress resulting from the presence of his
degenerate relations.

To summarise the chief points regarding educability we may say :—
(1) The degree of educability varies in different individuals,
being determined by an innate potentiality for mental development
which cannot be exceeded; this applies equally to what is known as
general ability and to special aptitudes. The full realisation of this
potentiality necessitates an optimum environment, under which term is
included the stimulus of education. Since the environment never is
perfect, it is doubtful whether any individual attains the full development of which he is inhevently capable.

(2) Minor variations in educability are of little significance,
being merely manifestations of a universal tendency to vary within
norma! limits.

(3) A marked diminution in educability occurs in two forms.
In one, occurring in inferior races and section» of society , it is probably
due to non-evolution owing to lack of intellectual stimulus continued
for many past generations, and is not pathological. In the other,
occurring in families and stocks not confined to any special social
stratum, it is probably pathological, and the result of aa impairment
of germinal potentiality brought about by devitalizing agencies.

(4) There is reason to think that, provided the germ plasm is
healthy, the stimulus of education and the exercise of mind, continued
generation after generation, may gradually increase educability.
Cases of defective educability due to non-evolution are therefore improvable with the lapse of time.

(5) Defective educability due to germinal impairment 1s pro
bably unimprovable, and the perpetuation of stocks so affected may
have a serious result in causing racial decline and decay.
_ (6) Every individual! in a community should be afforded opportunity for the realisation of his innate potentiality, but the failure to
recognize variations in capacity, and particularly defective capacity,
is a source of great waste of time, labour, and money. What is wanted
is not ‘‘equality of opportunity,’’ but an education adapted to the
capacity of the individual, as determined by periodical! scholastic and
psychological examinations.
