EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE
COLWYN REPORT*

By ELpon Moore.

Of greatest eugenic interest in this Report are the comparisons
made between the economic conditions of the country at various
periods. The table set out below is copied from page 236,
excepting the bottom line, which gives the figures for 1923, and the
extreme right-hand column, giving the index figures for income per
head after the deduction of the debt charge. These aie roughly
calculated from information supplied elsewhere in the Report, in
order to make the table complete.

The table only confirms and gives accuracy to the belief that conditions of life in England have enormously and steadily improved during

 

   
     

          

      

  
       

 
 

   

   

    
 

   

   

 

    

 

  

 

 

 

 

© . . fe 8 re - on
e. | 2 : 3 5 8 | « |ssa|ses|s3¢
9 — . _ . z ~ So & om ao GEo
ae} 42) 22 | ge) < | 8, | 2 | = |Es|Beulbege
gn ea a Bs Rey 3 5 |fal | 2a0|S8sa
a2 | 83) Ss |4e| 3 cof | 2 | 2 (nga! se segs
8 S a ag g oo & % 108 | ooo] SHVe
aa 3 Ow ° 2 g & |38h|ssrisgns
3 ma. A mea 8 <A ie g |fe~| &aa1 sas
a £98 £s.d % 4 = Bray
238 11) 1:18 8 100
27 8 O19 186
36 7 274
42 2 425
50 2 430
80 17 377

N.B.—1818 In there was no external debt; but in 1923 interest, management, and
repayment of the external debt amounted to £47-31 millions p.a.—a burden of
£1 per head of the population.

* Report of the Committee on National Debt and Tazation (Cd. 2800). London,
1927. H.M. Stationery Office. Price 7%s.6d. Pp. 448.
EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE COLWYN REPORT. 39

the last hundred years—not quite four generations. This confirmation
was scarcely needed in view of other facts already known—e.g., the
equally steady fall, from 1851 onwards, in the number of persons per
house, the constantly increasing amounts spent upon social services,
and finally the declining death-rate and the increasing population.

The table, in fact, understates the rise in the general standard of
living; for in 1818 the taxation necessary to pay the debt charge was
levied indiscriminately and fell with great weight upon the poorest
classes—i.e., the bulk of the nation. The first two (and possibly the
third) lines in the penultimate and last columns therefore show the
general position fairly accurately. But the lower lines, and particularly the last (for 1923) are misleading; for of late years (especially
during and since the war) a constantly increasing amount of the
National Debt has been held by small investors. On the other hand,
the money is no longer raised by indirect taxation from the nation as a
whole, but by direct taxation from a small proportion—roughly 24
millions. Making the generous allowance of a wife and-two children
for each taxpayer, we find that 10 millions, or between 20 and 25 per
cent. of the population, pay, in direct taxation alone, 50 per cent. of
the Budget (both Majority and Minority Reports, incidentally, comment on the curious and baseless superstition that direct and indirect
taxation should be roughly equal).

This way of putting it is, obviously, misleading. The following
table will give some idea of the real burden borne by the direct taxpayers and of their contribution to Governmental services :

   
   
   
   

Tota] Revenue
available for other
rposes

 
    
 
      
  
  

Loss or Gain by

direct Taxpayers n

     

Budget Receipts|/Direct Taxation] Debt Service

    

 

Y . ebt.
car millions) (£ millions) (£ millions) Per head
(£millions| Per head | (£t™il- jof popula 1818 82-5 416-5) — £1-97.
1918-14 —63-3 149-14 £8-22.

1923-24

_ In 1818, therefore, rich and poor alike were taxed to provide thé
holders of Government securities (a small proportion of the population)
with £16°5 millions. But by 1913-14 the position had been reversed,
the direct taxpayers alone contributing a substantial amount to the
country’s expenditure upon Defence, Social Services, etc. In 1923
they contributed an amount absolutely much larger, though smaller
relative to the totals of direct taxation and of the Budget. This,
however, is to be expected; for it would be impossible to raise over
£400 millions from 24 million people whilst returning only 28 per cent.
of it. The fact remains that in 1923 the direct taxpayers contributed
enough to pay not only the total cost of the Defence Services, £105°8
millions, but also 75 per cent. of the Parliamentary expenditure on
Education, £41.43 millions (‘‘Drage’’ Report. )

It should also be remembered that direct taxpayers contribute more
than their due in indirect taxation as well. The Report, unfortunate40 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ly, does not supply enough information to reckon out their total contribution by this method. But the illuminating table on pp. 945shows the total taxation, direct and indirect, upon specimen incomes.
in different years. I give an extract from it:

(YEARS 1928-24).

 

     
    

Specimen Total Per cent.
Income. Taxation. of Income.
£s.d.

  
    
  
 
   

  

14 1 9 14-1

  

 

 

100 |
| 2003 8 ~~ 13-5
2811 9 - 11:8
+ 3916 9 8-0
| oir 9 | wa |

Above the £1,000 mark the taxation and percentages rise rapidly.
The incomes are assumed to be wholly earned, and the taxpaver to
have three children under the age of 16. The last assumption is
unjustified, in view of the facts (1) that a larger proportion of Incometaxpayers than of the non-Income-taxpayers are unmarried and (2)
the number of children per family above the £200 mark is nearer 1
than 8. In practice, that is, taxation rises more rapidly than appears.
among these lower incomes and the percentages do not therefore start
with so big a drop. One would like a table in which no children are
attributed to the taxpayer.

_ .Whatever his income, no man can consume more than a strictly
limited quantity of sugar, tea, tobacco, etc. ; the indirect taxation on
these articles, therefore, weighs, proportionately, the most heavily
upon the smallest incomes—hence the regression in taxation percentages on incomes from £100 to £500. Progression thereafter is due
to the graduated Income-tax and Super-tax. The signatories of
the Minority Report, however, who positively splutter at the existing
inequalities of wealth, are reduced by this regression to the emphasis
of italics. . They consider—quite regardless of their own figures—
that ‘‘a considerable part of the wage-earning population must be
seriously over-taxed,’’ to provide bond-holders with interest; and
they recommend that indirect taxation, which thus hits the poorest,
on articles of common use should be avoided. Even the signatories
of the Majority Report seem to be guiltily uneasy at the limited capacity of the human body to absorb more than a certain quantity of
sugar—though they do not object to the taxes on the working-man’s
tobacco and beer. Both Reports, in short, are obsessed by various
ill-formulated ideas of ‘equity’—‘‘It’s unfair that the poor should be
taxed, ” ete.

These ideas are out of place. Justice and equity are man-made
conceptions, and vary, therefore, with every individual. It might
equally well be urged that it is unfair for those of high-earning capacity
to be forced to support those of low-earning capacity; and that £14 a
year is not much to pay for the finest Defence, Police, Sanitation,
EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE COLWYN REPORT. AL

Education, etc. in the world—not to speak of the ultimate security of
the Poor Law. The business of such a Committee is to consider, not
disputable questions of equity, but the yield and consequences of
taxation, past, present, and future. This it does—to some extent.
But whilst considering the effect upon the revenue of our diminishing
natural increase every year, it utterly fails to conceive of the effect of
taxation upon that natural increase.

Careful consideration is given to the possible effects of Incometax upon a man’s ability and willingness to work and save; but no
thought at all is given to its effect upon the size of his family.

The whole Report, in short, is utterly non-eugenic; though there
was nothing in the terms of reference to preclude eugenic considerations. Eugenists may be startled to find themselves on the side of
the Minority Report in recommending the Capital Levy as a means of
reducing debt. Certainly the continued high—and possibly higher—
Income-tax recommended by the Majority Report is dysgenic in its
effects. But the sudden sharp axe of the Capital Levy could have none
—provided of course, there was no fear of its repetition. Moreover,
it would affect but few of the middle and lower-middle classes (being
levied on nothing under £5000); and in reducing the scale of living of
the wealthy, it might reduce the standard of living desired by the less
wealthy—and so encourage larger families.

The various Death-Duty schemes considered seem more ingenious
than sound. Scant attention is paid to Inheritance Duties which, with
but little trouble and at small cost to the State, might be given a greater
eugenic twist than at present—i.e., the estate of £10,000 might be
mulcted of £5,000 on passing to one son, but of nothing on passing to
ten. But in any case the possessors of large fortunes are so few as to
be of little account statistically in a population of 47 millions, whatever they may represent biologically.

Mr. C. R. V. Coutts pointed out in a letter to The Times (March
19th), ** ‘National Debt’ itself is a misleading label... Tf these
loans had been labelled ‘National Savings Investments’ the expansion
of them might be regarded with satisfaction as evidence of national
thrift.”’

The National Debt, in short, being owed by the country to itself,
is not an entity, but an unreal abstraction. To attempt to lighten the
weight of this imaginary burden, therefore, at the very real cost of the
Income-taxpayers would be dysgenic madness. It is true that a very
large proportion of them would benefit by that repayment—only to
re-invest their savings in other securities. Redemption would not
enhance either their ability or willingness to rear larger families. But
taxation undoubtedly reduces both. It is surely better to bestow
upon posterity more tax-payers than lower taxes.

Too much weight, however, can easily be attached to Income-tax
as a factor in the differential birth-rate. In 1904, for instance, it
was only £17 5s. 10d. on an earned income of £500 p.a. (married man
with 3 children). This could scarcely have affected his ability to
rear children. It fell to £13 5s. in 1913-14, rose to the considerable
figure of £35 just during the War, but had fallen again to £10 3s. 4d.
in 1925-26. It is highly doubtful, too, whether it could at all affect
his willingness, as distinct from his ability, to support a large family.

 
A2 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Income-tax was first levied in 1842, at the rate of 7d. in the £.
Its history, unfortunately, is not given in the Report, but the burden
could have varied very little during the seventy-two succeeding years,
being lid. in the £. in 1903-04 and 1s. 2d. in 1913-14—in the last
year, too, those with incomes between £200 and £500, a considerable
class, were receiving abatements for children. Yet those were the
years when the birth-rate rose to its maximum and started on the
decline. The year 1877 actually marked the turning-point, and Income-tax certainly did not rise noticeably then nor in the preceding
years.

This does not imply that it is necessary to resort to biological
mysticism, and ascribe the fall in the birth-rate to some ineluctable
“‘wave of infertility.’’ The causes—which now exist and are more
effective—were probably economic, but more widespread and less
direct than the Income-tax, with more subtle psychological repercussions. Just about that time education began to replace ostentation as the grand snobbery of the upper classes. They were getting
accustomed, too, to a fast rising standard of living and—possibly the
most important factor of all—pressure of population first began then
to make itself felt. |The decade 1871-80 was the only one between
1851 and 1921 when the builders failed to keep pace with the babies,
and the number of persons per house rose from 5.33 to 5.88. A minute
rise and more than rectified by 1891; but it may have had a disproportionately large psychological effect. It added to the growing feeling
of lack of ‘elbow-room’ in a country rapidly filling up—a feeling which
would have had its first effect upon the most far-seeing. As the difficulty of getting started in life began to grow among the professional
classes, one can well imagine young married couples wondering about
the possible future of children as yet unconceived. The possible
dysgenic effect of over-population in civilised human communities calls
for more detailed study than it has hitherto received. The effects of
over-population are, of course, highly eugenic among animals, who
do not suffer from prevision and other psychological complications.

Considering that £264 10s. is the total direct taxation levied today on an income of £2,000 it is obvious that no rebates can have
much effect upon ability to rear children. Were the whole allowed to
a man with that income, it would not compensate him for the cost of
educating even one of his three sons! The possible moral effect upon
the willingness to reduce the standard of living in order to rear a
family, deserves more consideration, however, especially if accompanied by proper education and propaganda. |

Returning to the first point in this article, the Report shows
beyond shadow of doubt that conditions of life, particularly of the
poorest classes, enormously improved between 1818 and 1914. The
signatories also think, on balance, that conditions continued to
improve between 1914 and 1926—for over and above the more or less
stationary figures of real wages, account must be taken of the immeasurable benefits of improved social services and a shorter working day.
The final conclusion is that there has been a real, if small, advance,
one greater among the unskilled labourers than among the skilled.

It has yet to be shown that this century of ‘‘progress’’ has resulted
in a people of better quality—the evidence points in the other direction.
