AMENTIA IN THE EAST AFRICAN’
By H. L. GORDON, ™D.(eEpm,)

reporting aimed at estimating how far

amentia in East African natives might
be a factor to be reckoned with in the problem
of “‘ backwardness.”’¢ It was soon found to involve the task of obtaining some knowledge of
the normal mind and brain of the native, and
from this part of the inquiry emerged the
few results I desire to bring before you.

Many of the obstacles to the ascertainment of amentia in Kenya are due to the
youth of the colony. For example, we have
no registration of native births and deaths ;
family, personal and medical histories, as
well as actual ages, are almost never obtainable; and science has not yet given us
any anthropological or anthropometric East
African standards. You may nevertheless
envy our scientific liberty in having no legal
and educational definitions of amentia to
contend with.

The problem of native amentia forced
itself upon me early in the process of my own
self-adjustment to the native environment in
Kenya.{ An adult houseboy, despite instructions, placed my hot bottle, night after night,
not in my bed but on the floor under it.
Exasperation dissolved in the question:
When is a native an ament? Four years
followed of fruitless effort to solve the question as one had learned to solve the corresponding question in England. In that period
I made bold to draw public attention in
Kenya to the social need for scientific research
into native ‘‘ mentality’; and I wish to

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on November 7th, 1933.

¢ I use the word “‘ amentia’”’ to mean mental deficiency and the word ‘“‘ ament’’ to mean a mentally
deficient , whether idiot, imbecile, or feebleminded. tia has hitherto not been looked for in
East Africa, and concerning the normal mind of the
East African native we are no less ignorant ; uncertainty
and controversy on these subjects darken understanding
and hinder native progress.

tH. L. Gordon: Note on diagnosis of Amentia in
Africans. East African Medical Journal, November
1930.

| inquiry I have the privilege of

express gratitude for the support this
proposal received from all schools of thought
in the colony, from the Press, and in particular from our Governor, Sir Edward Grigg.
Encouragement came, too, from Sir Herbert
Bond, who affirmed the advantage to be
gained for all humanity from organised
research—carried out before the entry of
civilization complicated the situation—into
the normal and abnormal brain and mind of
a simple race. Finally, in 1928, Professor
Berry republished his biologically based
method for the diagnosis of amentia in the
European, and this seemed suitable for
application under the conditions encountered
in East Africa.*

The first step, made possible by official
courtesy, was the examination of 219 male
juveniles in the Nairobi Reformatory.f The
offences of these inmates included theft,
burglary, sex offences, manslaughter, and
murder. Berry’s method was used with
necessary variation in the mental tests employed. The results of this method, taken as
a whole, are held to be indicative of the state
of development of the cerebrum, and are
compared with percentile tables showing the
approximate normal and abnormal for the
individual’s age and sex in the attributes
examined. The percentile system happily
requires no explanation here, for we owe it
to the great founder of this Society, Sir
Francis Galton.

The Reformatory survey found 86 per cent.
of those examined to be aments. The 14
cent. of normals could not be fitted into
European ideas of normality without creation of two low classes—a low-grade normal
and, lower still, a border-line normal. It was
clear that a considerable proportion of this
alarming result came from the use of European standards on another race. East African

*R. J. A. Berry: Brain and Mind. 1928.
+ H. L. Gordon: A Survey of the inmates of Kabete
Reformatory. 1930.

223
224

standards for the diagnosis of East African
amentia were n . The survey suggested also that the secret of some racial
differences between European and East
African might, indeed, be largely in the grey
matter or cortex of the East African brain.

The next step was therefore twofold: (1)
To seek opportunity for the task of establishing East African percentile standards. (2)
To seek expert co-operation for inquiry into
the quantitative and qualitative values of
the East African brain by the methods
initiated by Mott, Watson, Shaw Bolton,
Von Economo, and other distinguished
pioneers. For the inquiry on the living I had
the assistance of a capable youth of mixed
blood from the Coast. The brain inquiry was
carried out by my able colleague Dr. F. W.
Vint, pathologist to the Kenya Government.
We arranged together beforehand the lines
for Dr. Vint’s research ; otherwise our parallel inquiries were carried out independently
until each of us had reached and prepared
his results.* We desire to emphasize at once
that in our opinion we have only touched the
fringe of a big unknown territory.

For the inquiry on the living an unselected
series of males of all available ages was
examined at the Native Labour Registration
Office, Nairobi, by leave of the Chief Native
Commissioner. It was estimated that about
half of these were “‘ raw’ natives, the other
half having some education or previous contact with civilization. The term “‘ educated ”’
cannot yet be applied to an East African in
more than a spirit of encouragement. We had
only one objector. An “ educated ” Kikuyu
protested that the examination must be a
preliminary to a new kind of taxation.

The immediate object was to obtain data
for tables of percentiles in all the attributes
examined by Berry’s method, namely cubic
capacity of brain estimated by head measurements; bodily weight, and standing and
sitting height; right and left grips; and
vital capacity. The question of mental tests
will be referred to later.

The first 200 natives were used to train my

 

* Dr. Vint’s preliminary report was published in the
East African Medical Journal for May 1932.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

assistant. When the total number placed on
record had reached 3,444, unforeseen persona]
circumstances made this the final number of
the series. Actual ages being rarely obtainable, each individual was given his estimated
year and the results were grouped. The few
under 9 were not included. All those of 20
and over were classed as adults. In our
judgment, and great care was exercised in
this age estimation, very few were over the
age of 30.

Fig. 1. RacE DISTRIBUTION

AgeGroup/9-10-11/12—13|14—15|/16—17|18—19|Adult| Total

 

This table follows the racial classification
of Professor Seligman.* We have some forty
tribes, but none are true Negroes. Each of
these racial classes of the tribes shows more >
or less mixture with what is said to be blood
of the remote Hamites who invaded East
Africa from the north and were an early
offshoot of the Caucasoid stem. It should be
observed that the Eastern Bantu were predominant in the series; 2,049 of the 2,991
were of the Kikuyu tribe, whose beautiful
reserve is in the highlands near Nairobi. Of
the Nilotes, 400 were Jaluo from the neighbourhood of Lake Victoria, twenty-one were
Sudanese foreigners. Only two of the HalfHamites were from the leading tribe, the
Masai. The few Hamites were Nubians, also
foreigners. The Mixed were from the Coast
near Mombasa, telling the tale of different
foreign invasions by sea. Local opinion
credits all the four latter classes of the table
with physical and mental superiority over
our Eastern Bantu.

The smallness of the numbers for all except
the Bantu made separate racial computations
and comparisons unprofitable. Consequently
the percentile tables obtained from the 3,444

 

* C. G. Seligman: Races of Africa. 1930.
AMENTIA IN THE EAST AFRICAN

of all these races for all the attributes
already named were adopted as provisional
standards for general use pending a more
comprehensive inquiry.*

Fig. 2. PERCENTILES OF BRAIN CAPACITY
3,444 MALES OF ALL RACES
(Unselected series)

1,444 | 1,462

This table is the one for cubic capacity of
brain. It shows the range of cubic capacity for
each age-group. Taking the adult group, the
lowest capacity in our series of 1,290 adults
was 1,064 cubic centimetres, the highest 1,670.
The 50 percentile represents the mean cubic
capacity for each age-group; and the gradual
rise of the mean from the lowest to the highest
age-group helps to lessen doubt present in
all African inquiries in which age estimation
is a factor. The same gradual rise is seen in
the tables for all the other attributes examined. A further point here is that Professor
Berry overcomes the difficulty—met in
statistical as in other sciencest—of differentiating the normal from the abnormal with
precision enough for .practical guidance, by
using the standard deviation as approximate
guide. By this means he found the e of
normality to be from about the 20 to about
the 80 percentile. Any individual with a
cubic capacity about or below the 20, or
about or above the 80 percentile, may be
suspected as potentially abnormal. Using

* It is not ible to show all the results in one short
paper, but the percentile tables and many more of
the results will, it is hoped, be published later.

t Mumford and Young ysical Measurements
and Vital Capacity.” Biometrica Vol. XV.

 

225

the standard deviation in the same way as
Professor Berry, I obtained from the tables
the same result for the East African. Observe further that the mean or average
brain capacity of the 1,290 East African male
adults was 1,316 cubic centimetres, or 165
cubic centimetres less than the capacity given
by authority for the European. I may say
that Dr. Vint has found the average weight
of 389 adult male East African brains to be
1,276 grammes, or 152 grammes less than the
weight given by authority for the European.

Fig. 3. AVERAGE BRAIN CAPACITY OF ADULTS

Ban Race Number Average in c.c.
tu :
Kikuyu... 740 1,313
Others «> 379 1,119 1,311 1,312
Nilote :
aluo «- 142 1,335
udanese ... 14 156 1,414 1,345
+ Hamite 1316
6 1,312
Hamite
5: 1,415
Mixed
1,376

Average brain capacity of nitele Europeans (Berry)1,481

Here, for what they are worth, are the
racial differences in brain capacity amongst
the same 1,290 adults. The average separately obtained for the Bantu is just 4 cubic
centimetres less than the average of 1,316cubic
centimetres obtained for all races, not a significant difference by any means. Such figures,
of course, are not advanced as accurate predictions, for reasons well known to you.
Berry’s method, as used by the inquiry,
employs Lee’s formula for the calculation of
brain capacity from the head measurements.
This formula deducts 11 millimetres from
each measurement to allow for the thickness
of the scalp and skull. Vint and I have found
by post-mortem observations that 11 millimetres is too small a deduction in the East
African, not because the East African skull
is thicker than the European—as popularly
believed—but because there seems to be
greater thickness of the soft tissues. Here
again, then, the method used by the inquiry
over-estimates rather than under-estimates
226

the actual brain capacity in the average
Kenya native.

Fig. 4. AVERAGE WEIGHT OF THE NATIVE
BRAIN IN AGE GROUPS

(Post-mortem Records)

 

It is common belief that the native begins
to decay early and ends in the years called in
ourselves middle age. I have examined some
thousands with this in mind and have had
reason to think the belief well founded. In
my experience the lean pantaloon is rare,
second childishness does not exist. Dr. Vint
and I have learnt to expect senility any year
after 35, and in 2,000 post-mortem examinations have never estimated an age as over 60.
This table seems to support the belief in early
decay. It suggests that the native brain
weight reaches its maximum before the age
of 18 and decreases gradually afterwards.

We come now to the results of submitting
to statistical scrutiny the percentile tables
for all the attributes examined in the series
of 3,444 of allraces. The scrutiny was made
with the invaluable expert guidance of Mr.
A. Walter, Statistician to the Conference
of East African Governors.

Here I would draw attention first to comparison of the native and European curves of
“‘actual’’ brain capacity as obtained by Berry
for the European and by this inquiry for the
East African, from the corresponding racial
percentile tables.* Unfortunately the inquiry
is unable to say anything as yet about
natives under the age of 10. The comparison
therefore begins at that age and is at once
striking. The European curve of “ actual ”’
capacity begins, at the age of 10, almost
where the native curve ends at the age of 20.

Again, the steep ascent of the European curve

* The word “actual” is not to be taken literally.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

from about the age of 14 makes a striking cop.
trast to the flat native curve. The curve
show that between ages 10 and 20 the Euro
pean average yearly growth of brain is 17-,

Fig. 5. CURVES OF “ ACTUAL” CAPACITY
AND PERCENTAGE VOLUME INCREASE

NATIVES.

    
   

Be A

z
BRAIN CAPACITY IN C.C.

PERCENT OF TOTAL CROWTH
k

VEARS OF ACE

   

=x
—wes . 1 EUROPEANS.
2"
x ow! ©
oO '2
Zn! >
- le
eal 8
14a
ot So

J
aa
wl wer! <
« '&
dal i
G ez, 1

YEARS OF ACE

cubic centimetres ; the native yearly average
is only 8-5 cubic centimetres.

Turning now to the curves of percentage
volume increase we see that at the age of 10
the brain of the native is already 92-8 per
cent. of its total volume, while at the same
age the European brain is only 87-7 per cent.
of its total volume. Once more we see how
different in character are these two curves.

Here we have the native and E
curves of brain capacity brought together
to show how the difference is largely in the
steep ascent of the European curve after
puberty—indicating, we think, rapid cerebral
development as compared with the poor
AMENTIA IN THE EAST AFRICAN

development shown by the flat curve of the
native. This touches upon a matter of

Fig. 6. RELATIONSHIP OF CURVES
1500

 
   

IN CC.

140

BRAIN CAPACITY

10 15 20--
YEARS OF ACE.

importance socially. There is agreement
amongst all classes of E in East
Africa that the native lad or ¢oto, up to the
age of puberty, is a bright, malleable, nice
little fellow, often—as one says—quick in
the uptake; but that after puberty he
almost invariably falls away from promise,
and disappoints our hopes by lack of development in the very period when the average
European adolescent generally justifies hopes
by rapid development. The same social
observation is recorded, I believe of other socalled “‘ backward ”’ races, and this difference
seems to be predicted by the difference
between these curves (Figures 7 and 8), in
which is shown such a marked contrast
between the native and the European after
puberty, |
Now, bearing in our minds the different
characters of these two curves of brain
capacity, let us glance at the corresponding
curves for all the other attributes examined
by Berry’s method. You will agree that the
family likeness in each curve is remarkable ;
and also you will observe a new feature. As
before, the native curve is flat throughout,
and the European curve runs steeply up after

227

puberty ; but in all these attributes the
curves so contrasted show that the native éofo
actually excels the E boy consistently up to puberty. This juvenile native
superiority is, to my mind, an encouraging
fact for the future. I am open to correction
by authority, but these facts as they stand
seem to suggest that by ascertaining why the
native does not develop after puberty as the
European develops—if science can ascertain
that: and why not ?—we shall be a definite

ep nearer to discovering the causes of racial
‘* backwardness.”

Our next consideration is of such applications of our provisional East African standards as time and circumstances allowed, and
refers to four series of adult males examined
by Berry’s method and the new standards.
The series made up as follows: (1) 51 ‘“‘ educated ’” natives; (2) 46 who were mentally
disordered ; (3) 46 who were mentally
deficient ; and (4) 22 criminals. The numbers
in these series are small, nevertheless, as the
curves from them show, the results
offer interesting features. Taking again as
example the curves of brain capacity, the
chief point of interest must be in their relation to the average curve for the normal
native. Considering the matter beforehand
it seemed that if Berry’s method was as
valuable an indication of cerebral development as it appeared to be there was only one
relative arrangement of the curves of the
four special series possible. Taking the curve
for the 1,290 adults as representing the
average normal, the curve for the ‘‘ educated ”’
series should run clear above it; the curve
for the mentally disordered should run close
to it and probably in and out of it ; that for
the criminals should hover below it; and
that for the aments should be definitely and
constantly below this average normal curve.
Moreover, the curve for the Euro
average normal should run well above all
these native curves.

The statistical plotting of these curves was
awaited with some anxiety.

This chart shows how the anticipated placings occurred. I should add that the same
placings—with, of course, individual variations—are seen in the charts for all the other
228

SITTING HEICHT IN MMs.

RICHT CRIP IN Kegs.

   

 

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Figs. 7 and 8. RELATIONSHIP OF CURVES

STANDING HEICHT IN IMs.

8 oe
YEARS OF ACE. VEARS OF ACE

WEICHT WN Koo.

 

YEARS

LEFT CRIP IN Koos

 

YEARS OF ACE

VITAL CAPACITY IN C.C.

 
AMENTIA IN THE EAST AFRICAN

attributes. I venture to affirm that my
statistical guide, Mr. Walter, and I had quite
a good day ; although Professor Berry might
say we backed a certainty.

How may the constant relative positions

229

of the pick of Kenya natives. They had been
selected for education and special employment by a careful filtering process through
Mission Schools, District Commissioners, and
employers. This points to inherent cerebral

Fig. 9. COMPARATIVE CURVES

° t

3 ee I

z pativ Lif,
ped.

. eave eT,’

— —— -*

& pis — eS

<« _— -~*

o ica ; ming a

= _— —_ss

Zs ere

«£ @

rd
3 J o
&
2e8
* a °

PERCENTILES.

of these curves be explained? I suggest that
our knowledge of the human brain allows us
to believe that the constant inferiority of the
ament curve is based upon inherent cerebral
deficiency. It is consistent with knowledge and with this explanation that the
curves for the mentally disordered and for
the criminals are as we found them, and
that the curve for the ‘‘ educated ” series is
constantly superior to the native average.
The question arises—why in the charts for all
the attributes is the curve for the ‘“‘educated”’
East African constantly and markedly inferior to the average European curve ?

A plausible answer is that even the best
of the natives are on a lower biological level
than the average European. There may be
much to support that.view, but the answer
may be too glib, because it does not allow for
the importance of environmental influences.
There are some environmental facts about
this “‘ educated ” series which may help us.
Firstly, the individuals of the series were out

superiority standing the test of superior
environment as the average native might not.
Secondly, this table (Fig. 10) seems to be
instructive.

We see that the racial distribution of the
aments corresponds to that of the 1,290
adults from whom the average native curve
was obtained, i.e. the majority of them were
Bantu ; over 80 per cent. The distribution in
the ‘‘ educated ”’ series is very different ;
57 per cent. were from tribes commonly
credited with inborn superiority to the
Eastern Bantu and of these 48 per cent. were
very superior Sudanese foreigners.

At this stage, then, we may fairly say that
the constant relative positions of the curves

inherent differences of cerebral
development, but that more knowledge is
required. We shall see presently what Dr.
Vint’s research has to say on this vital
question. Meanwhile let us avoid the error of
thinking that the “ educated ”’ series proved
superior in all attributes, including the size
230

Fig. 10. 51 EDUCATED and 46 AMENTS

(51 EDUCATED) MALE ADULTS OF ALL RACES

Race Number Mean Brain
Bantu capacity in c.c.
Kikoye tr Vag 408) gy
Nilote
ndanese 1, } 27 rai f 1398
4 Hamite 1,410
Masai I 1,426
Hamite — —
Mixed
I 1,567

Mean Brain capaci

of all Races inunselected series 1,316.

of their brains and height of their bodies, just
because they had been through some European scholastic education. Environmental
influences are of vast importance; but we
must not imperil the future of the native
by a too easy solution of the difficulties his
condition presents us with. We should
all rejoice if we could raise the native mentally and physically, as we all wish to raise
him, simply by liberal doses of Kings and
Queens of England and quadratic equations.
If the problem is more complicated our task
is more inspiring.

A further statistical effort was the ascer
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

46 AMENTS (MALE ADULTS OF ALL RACES)

Race Number Mean Brain
capacity in c.c.
Kika 3 8
i 1,25
Others 30 } 38 1,273 f **27°
Nilote
Jaluo 3 1,288
4+ Hamite 1,228 > 1,295
Nandi I
Hamite
Somali I 1,296
Mixed
3 1,328

for Male Adults

   

tainment of frequency distributions. Fig. 11
shows the marked abscissa shift from 1,275
cubic centimetres for the aments to 1,425
cubic centimetres for the ‘‘ educated ’—a
difference of 150 cubic centimetres in brain
capacity. The value of 1,275 cubic centimetres was possessed by 32-5 per cent. of the
aments, the value of 1,425 cubic centimetres
by 29-4 per cent. of the “ educated.”

Here we have a statistical concentration of
the facts about these two series. Examined
with the percentile tables for East Africans
the means here for all attributes support the
principles laid down by the distinguished

Fig. 11. FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION

FREQUENCY

DISTRIBUTION

BY

. BRAIN CAPACITY

FREQUENCY

1200

 

1400 1900 1690

BRAIN CAPACITY IN C.C.
AMENTIA IN THE EAST AFRICAN

founder of the Stoke Park School in Mental
Deficiency.* Briefly, the means of the ‘‘ educated ” series in all attributes fall well above
the average normal mean ; one in the 60 percentiles for normal adults, two in the 70 per
Fig. 12. STANDARD DEVIATIONS

51 EDUCATED True P.E. Standard P.E.

Mean Deviation

Brain capacity 1,410c.cm. + 8:66 91°70 + 6-12
Standing height 1,704mm. + 6:74 71°40 + 4°77
Sitting height 844mm. + 3°41 36°10 + 2°41
Weight 59°5 kgm. + 0°64 6°75 + 0°45
Right grip 37°9 kgm. + 0°57 6-05 + 0°40
Left grip 35'tkgm. + 0°57 6:02 + 0-40
Vital capacity 3,354 C.cm. +51°30 542°80 + 36-20
46 AMENTS —

Brain capacity 1,275c.cm. + 7°78 75°20 + 5°50
Standing height 1,619mm. + 9:04 87-40 + 6:40
Sitting height 802 mm. + 4:00 38:70 + 2°83
Weight | 49°3 kgm. + 0:83 8-10 + 0°59
Right grip 26-7 kgm. + 0°59 5°70 + 0°42
Left grip | 24°3 kgm. + 0°72 7°00 + 0°51
Vital capacity 2,392 c.cm. +63-°70 615-00 +45-09

centiles, and four in the 80 percentiles. The
means for the aments tell another story. Two
fall in the 30 percentiles, therefore in the
lowest grade of the normal range, two in the
10 percentiles, and three below the 10 percentiles : i.e. five out of seven fall well within
the regions of abnormality, judged by the
provisional standards for the East African
obtained by this inquiry.

The last statistical point to which I would
draw attention is something of a sideline, but
seems to be of interest. Throughout the
inquiry the obvious difference of head size
between native and European appeared due
to inferiority of the native head in height
rather than to inferiority in length and
breadth. In lateral view the native head
(unlike the European’s) showed a flattened
rather than a convex outline, and a smaller
and receding forehead. These features are
seen also in a number of unselected skulls I
brought from Kenya to Sir Arthur Keith ;
and again in the brain itself, which has a
flattened superior outline and a deficient
frontal region.

Now, the auricular measurement of head
_height used in this inquiry is regarded by

 

* Mental Deficiency, Stoke Park Studies. First Series.
1933.

231

an logists as a measurement of the
height of the cerebrum.* The facts I have
given suggested that height of head so
measured might be by itself some clue to
cerebral development, always excluding the
factor of disease: i.e. height of head might
be a less untrustworthy guide than size of
head to what is inside. The matter seemed
worth inquiring into by means of correlations
and ratios. These proved significant, and the
significance was increased by these curves
for each measurement of the 1,290 average
normal natives, the 51 ‘‘ educated,” and the
46 aments (Fig. 13).

In breadth the three curves run closely
together ; in length there is a little separation ; but in height there is really significant
separation of the ament curve from the others.
It should be added that Dr. Vint—without,
as I have said, any knowledge of what I was
doing in the matter—came to a similar conclusion from his observations on the brain,
but, of course, for other reasons. In his forthcoming paper he says: ‘‘ The reduction in
size of the native brain seems to be accounted
for mainly by a failure in development of
height.’’ I do not regard our observations as
the last word on this point, but if they are
confirmed a scientific halo may yet adorn the
so-called “‘ highbrow.”

THE BRAIN

Dr. Vint’s report on his naked-eye and
microscopic examination of one hundred
brains of normal male adults is to be published shortly in the Journal of Anatomy ;
but in order that we may have a little more
light on the question of whether the East
African cerebrum is, on the average, on a
lower biological level than the European
cerebrum, I may mention these facts :

In the areas of the cortex examined, Dr.
Vint found a total inferiority in quantity, as
compared with the European, of 14-8 per
cent. His naked-eye examination revealed a
significant simplicity of convolutional pattern and many features generally called
primitive ; e.g. the lunate sulcus, described
by Professor Elliot Smith, was present in

* E.P. Stibbe: Introduction to Physical Anthropology.
1930.
232

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Fig. 13. CuRVES OF HEAD MEASUREMENTS

HEAO LENGTA Of MMs.

  

PERCENTILES

@ S@ 6e 76 Ge 80 100

   

    

  

© te 30 @ 8 6 To G8 00 We
PERCENTILES

20 30 40 SO 60 70 Go 00 100
PERCENTULES

seventy of the one hundred brains. The
microscopic examination showed the important supragranular layer of the cortex to
be deficient in all the six areas that Von
Economo examined, and the cells of these
areas to be deficient very markedly in size,
arrangement and in differentiation.

These, I think, are enough of Dr. Vint’s
new facts to make us feel that the deficiencies
found in examination of the living are indeed
associated with suggestive deficiency in the
native cerebrum ; that we are in fact confronted in the East African with a brain on a
lower biological level. This, I submit, is a
matter requiring investigation by the highest
expert skill into the question of heredity or
environment or both.

I would again stress the importance of
examining possible physical and environmental influences. There is, for example, the
well-known hypothesis of Sir Arthur Keith
connecting incretion with racial differentiation. There is the influence of malaria; and
of calcium and other deficiencies in diet.
There is the possible influence throughout
the ages of the high incidence of syphilis and
yaws in Kenya. East Africa offers a welter of

material for investigation before civilization
increases the difficulties.
“STIGMATA ”

Amongst our tribes the so-called stigmata
of amentia abound, and I am not satisfied
that they are confined to the ament types.
In particular, those associated in Europe
with the type called Mongolian by that great
contributor to knowledge of amentia, Dr.
Langdon-Down—such anomalies as the short
incurved little finger and the wide space
between the first and second toes—are so
common that I regard them at present as
racial characteristics. I will not detain you
with this subject, much in need of precise
observation ; but I may mention that I have
found gynecomastia (female breasts in the
male) to be common, and also a marked
general feminoid tendency in the males of
our tribes. A curious condition which I found
first amongst aments and then in apparently
normal men is what appears to be a bilateral
hyperplasia of the parotids giving a permanent ap ce of mumps. So far I have
found this condition only amongst the Jaluo
tribe.
AMENTIA IN THE EAST AFRICAN

«¢ INTELLIGENCE ” TESTS

Intelligence, I understand, is a quality of
man requiring a multitude of definitions out
of every nation; the number having been

increased since I left England nine years ago.
In these circumstances I need hardly ask

on for my ignorance, or for erring to
call ‘“‘ intelligence tests,” with Professor
Berry, tests of “‘ mental reaction,’’ and to
think of them, with Professor Hogben, as
“objective descriptions of how human
beings react to certain situations.’’*

Efforts over some years to devise tests
suitable to the East African, “raw” and
‘educated ”’ led me to the conclusion that
the task awaits the expert. I found the Binet

of test, as you may imagine, quite unsuitable. The Porteous maze test I found
both suitable and to native liking.t Except in
experiment I applied it to only forty of the
“educated ’”’ series of male adults; they
answered with a mean age-score of 10°5
years. My experiments ended with halfhearted choice of three performance tests
from Pinter and Paterson’s Scale. I applied
these as you see here (Fig. 14). Here, again,

Fig. 14. PERFORMANCES OF MALE ADULTS

   

 

 

 

 

Five Figure Triangle |Cubes
Board
| Time
Errors} in | Errors] Score
70 | | '
Unselected Ave 10 130 | 14
4x |
Educated ” 7 86 6
27
Aments » |D.N.C.| D.N.C. | D.N.C. | D.N.C. 2
European
normal age
14 (Pp. & P.) ,, 59 | 3 | 39 6 8
|

 

 

D.N.C. == Did not complete.

the numbers are too small for definite conclusions, but the relative results are such as
were to be expected from the curves already

*L. Hogben: Genettc Principles in. Medicine and
Social Science. 1931.

tS. D. Porteus: The Psychology of a Primitive
People. 1931.

233

seen. The E are also in the
expected places, but are added here with a
caution. I find, on coming out of the darkness and confusion of Africa into the clear
and tranquil air of European psychological
thought and practice, that mental tests and
mental ages by themselves are largely depended upon for the diagnosis of amentia.
I venture to say only this: In my experience
of many thousands of natives, intelligence in
Its ordinary connotation is present amongst
them often to an enviable degree ; nevertheiess, I believe we may do the native injustice
and even injury if we are content to estimate
his ‘‘intelligence’’ only in terms of his
apparent ability to cope with the exactions
of European scholastic education. Moreover,
in the present state of psychological knowledge it seems to me that any use of mental
tests as a means of comparison between
European and African—races of widely
different physical and social heritage and
environment—carries the risk of misleading
African education and legislative policy. The
field for research by the trained psychologist
of broad outlook is enormous in East Africa ;
his presence would be welcome.

THE SOCIAL CRITERION

I should like to consider for a moment the
question of the social criterion of amentia.
Viewed from the equator through past experience and modern text-books, European
thought—f I may say so—appears to be overinfluenced by the old dictum of Professor
Karl Pearson that social inefficiency is the
big problem. No doubt it is, but social
inefficiency is only a symptom; the social
criterion may be a tardy contribution to prevention of anti-social behaviour. In Kenya
the goal for science and society stands out—
determination of the causes of amentia and
of how to prevent it. The problem of racial
“* backwardness ’’ awaits investigation. The
relative contributions to “ backwardness ”’ of
nature and nurture must be ascertained as
far as science can ascertain them, if we are to
do our best for the native. A primary part
of the problem of “ backwardness ’’ is the
problem of endogenous amentia.

In Kenya we have three main races:
234

Europeans (20,000), Asiatics (50,000), Africans (3,000,000), with three main standards
of social behaviour and efficiency. The relativity of the social criterion is therefore
another of our perplexities. A native socially
efficient in his own simple environment may
—without change in him—prove inefficient
and even dangerous in the complex environment of a higher social organisation. Judged
thus he may be considered normal at home,
abnormal abroad.

Dr. Tredgold’s term,* ‘ social adaptiveness,’’ and Adler’s words, “‘ the capacity for
developing a social feeling is absent only
in the feeble-minded ’’t—these words suggest
biological variations, but the social criterion
everywhere seems to pay little attention to
biology. The gropings of this inquiry led me
to this far-reaching question: Shall the members of an “‘uncivilized”’ race be judged by
the standards of the civilization into which
they are inuited, or by standards of their own
vace found for it by the civilization? The
question is not to be left unanswered where
“ civilized”’ and “‘ uncivilized ”’ must live side
by side in close association. The question
seems a challenge to our ignorance of the
genetic basis of racial differences and of social
behaviour.

A SPECULATION

Finally, the inquiry has impressed me with
the existence of a large class of natives, not
feeble-minded as Europe conceives the condition, to whom the term “ naturals’ might
be applied provisionally in a sense less disparaging than the old sense. Allow me a
light speculation. Amongst our tribes the
idiot and the lowest types of imbecile are
rarely seen. The reason appears to be that
the social criterion of family or clan supported by witchcraft, decided against the
survival of these well-marked t because
their manifest disabilities would make them a
burden to the commune. The “ right to live ”’
is not a content of native ethics.{ Infanticide
is widely recorded in Africa ; even twins are

* A. F. Tredgold: Mental Deficiency.

¢ A. Adler: Character and Personality. "Vol. I, No. 4,
June 1933.

¢L. T. Hobhouse: Morals in Evolution. 1915.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

said to be regarded by some tribes as abnor.
malities to be put away at once.

The case with the high-grade ament (or
feeble-minded) is different. His state is not
manifest to the tribe. He escapes scrutiny
and lives a life of little social strain, wholly
devoid, be it remembered, of economic
pressure and competition. He has not to
earn a living and the right to marry, as we
insist on doing. The commune sees to all
that. The picture of him and his women goes
into a quatrain :

“Here with a bowl of maize beneath the
bough |
A gourd of beer and thou and thou and
thou
Working to keep me in the rich Reserve,
And rich Reserve’s environment enow.”

That the picture is changing in many
districts is not our present interest. What of
the past? I fear mathematical symbolism
does not help us there, but a little courage
stimulates imagination. No doubt lethal
diseases eliminated indiscriminately ; not so
the constant tribal warfare; not so the
constant conflict with lion, leopard and
buffalo ; those took the best, the brainy, in
those days the leaders—not unimportant if
it is true that a race advances less because of
its average than because of its exceptional
men. Then there was never elimination of
the weak-minded through economic stress
and competitive strain. Crude as it may
seem it is not an unreasonable hypothesis to
the mere clinician, little versed in questions
of heredity, that the general tendency was
towards propagation of a type from which
the feeble-minded and natural of to-day are
common derivatives.

CONCLUSION

Dr. Vint and I have only cleared a little
bush, picked up a few samples, and brought
them for the opinion of authority. Through
the bush we thought we spied a possible path
to the greatest of all objects in Africa—to
a determination of the major causes of the
present low biological level of the native
commonly called “‘ backwardness,”’ and to a
discovery of remedies for those causes. We
AMENTIA IN THE EAST AFRICAN 235

submit that the only conclusion from our not now beyond the range of practical
venture is that wide collaborative team- politics. With great respect I urge that
EE by many sciences is a pressing scientific assistance to colonial stat
ecessity. might well become incorporated amongst
"Cerebral deficiency affecting a population the noble national ideals which distinguish
under British tutelage and not restricted to British trusteeship for weaker peoples.*
the types known in Europe as amentia—such
deficiency has medical, legal, educational, and
social aspects of Imperial importance. * eowards the of the inquiry on the living

: : : ;. . . a grant was recei from the British
A conception of scientific colonization is tion and is gratefully acknowledged.

  

THE WISTAR INSTITUTE BIBLIOGRAPHIC SERVICE

AUTHORS’ ABSTRAC

TS
sccuracy, advance information, and a sa of time and costs. Sines the: beginning of The Wistar Institute B
Service in 1917, each contributor to the journals in this service eubhehing se comnplete article. Subscribers

Sabecribers to the service thus

        
    
  
      
         
     

CT SHEETS
ten or more abstracts without bi hic references, are sent for the t to members of the American Association of
Anatomists, to members of the American y of Zodlogists and to Members of the American Institute of Nutrition, without cost,
and sold to others at $3.00 annutn forall sbetract sheets iarued. This is a convenient means of selecting such articles as may be
desired in reprint form. of reprints are given on each Advance Abstract Sheet.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC SERVICE CARDS
authors’ abstracts with tt EE ————————_e
cooperating, $5.00 per yur.
Abstract cards may be obtained from the of the series, June x, 1917.
Each abstract in neue to subscribers. before complete paper appears in a journal.
Abstracts with Oe roe analytical Ibject indices brought together periodically in book form. Volumes 1 to 6 covering the
au su in are y in I
abstracts issued from June 1, 1917, to December 31, 1931, $5.00 each. Liberal discount to subscribers to the Bibliographic Service

The Wistar Institute Bibliographic Service covers the publications listed below :

            
 
       

Physiological ZoGlogy (Chicago,

In addition to the above, bibliographic reference cards, without abstracts, may be secured for articles which have appeared in the
journal of Morphology, from vol. 1 (1887) to June x, 19 IF cnvcnserveseanneauee sensed sass seeseeaseseses 380 titles
J ve Neurology, from vol. 1

    
          
       
   

ournal of Comparati 1891) tO JUME 1, IQTT ....ccccecccccesecscoeee 450 nn
The American cureal of Anatomy, vol. ¢ (290%) to WMG X, IQ ceccscscrcsscscccncesecsscencccsseee 344
The Ana Record, vol. 1 (1906) to JUME 1, L917 .....-ccccrsceccecersscsserceessceecerceseasseseees 464 oss
The Journal of val Zschoey, wok 7 E (1904) tO JUME I, IGT .....:ccrsvcccsrevcvacccscsceeees a8
Ae cmnteining full ElbBngsan kee wesnensserveepeqsonsngtbissUie sUsCUETARa es ad CReTENEER Fa RTeSE ROE LEREORTTES
fainting to reterences, enable « eubeciber to have a couplets record of authors ahd titles with their
catject beelings acne wena have aypourel in the above journals from their beginning to current issues.

The price for these Bibliographic Reference Cards is two cents for the first card of each title. Additional cards for each title may
be had at one-half cent per card when ordered at the same time.

THE WISTAR INSTITUTE OF ANATOMY AND BIOLOGY, Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.A.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 4.
