MEMORANDUM ON THE EVIDENCE PROPOSED TO BE GIVEN BEFORE THE ROYAL
COMMISSION ON THE INCOME TAX.

BY MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN,
President, Eugenics Education Soctety.

GENERAL AIM TO (1.) The reform with reference to the Income
LESSEN STRAIN Tax which is advocated by the Eugenics Education
OF PARENTHOOD. Society, of which I am the President, is that this

tax should be assessed in a manner dependent on
the number of persons in the family to a far greater extent than at
present. The Council also urge that the same principle should be held
in view in all future reforms of the death duties. In strongly supporting these proposals I am, however, only giving the facts and arguments
which have had weight with me personally.

THE FAMILY INCOME (2.) Without adopting the plan I am about
SHOULD COUNT AS to advocate, the burden of parenthood could be
SEVERAL SEPARATE lessened by increasing the deductions allowINCOMES. able from the assessment of Income Tax on

account of children, by allowing the cost of
education and maternity expenses also to be deducted, and by other
similar methods. These would, however, be but palliatives, the just
reform being, in our opinion, to make the total income of the family
count as a number of separate incomes, the number being equal to or
dependent on the number in the family. Each such income should be
taxed according to the same rules in all cases.

PRINCIPLE JUSTIFIED (3.) This latter principle can be defended
BY UNAVOIDABLE COST on several grounds. Taxation should be proOF PARENTHOOD. portionate to the ability to bear the strain.

If the wife is not to earn an independent
livelihood, which is often impossible and more often objectionable,
marriage must frequently diminish the joint income. The more the attention devoted to the education, training, and health of the children, the
greater is likely to be the cost involved in their upbringing, and the more
value will the children be when grown up to the nation of the future.
The capital of a country does not consist merely in money and goods,
but also largely in the capabilities of its citizens, and national wealth
benefits all classes, Parenthood, therefore, as a rule results in an
increase in the national capital, and it always increases the difficulty of
meeting the expenditure necessarily incurred; and for both these reasons the taxation on parents should be lower than that on the childless.
As it is, the family man is more heavily taxed than the bachelor,
214 EUGENICS REVIEW.

because of the greater consumption of taxed articles by his family.
The unavoidable increase of expenditure consequent on marriage
bears some relationship to the number in the family, and that same
relationship should influence the scale of taxation if the system is to be
equitable.

THE REVENUE MORE (4.) The suggested reform would make it
EASILY RAISED. easier not harder to raise a given revenue; just

as a burden will be carried with least suffering if
it be distributed amongst the carriers in proportion to their strengths.
With the present high rate of taxation, this has become a serious consideration in regard to the Income Tax. To relatively increase the
taxation on the childless would relatively decrease their normal expenditure ; and this would be economic in its results; because reckless or
useless expenditure is more often indulged in by the unmarried man
than by the married. Again, to increase the birth rate amongst those
inheriting wealth would produce a more uniform distribution of both
wealth and knowledge.

OBJECT TO PREVENT (5.) The foregoing arguments in favour of
UNDESIRABLE Income Tax reform, though important, are not
CHECKS ON THE those which I am here to plead. Our object is
BIRTH-RATE. to prevent any check on the output of children

; when such an output would have beneficial
racial effects. Limitation in the size of families is now widely practised,
doubtless in great measure with the object of avoiding the financial
burdens of parenthood. To lessen this financial strain would, therefore,
inevitably increase the birth-rate. Though we advocate a relative
diminution in the amount paid by parents, to diminish the total amount
raised by taxation is not our object. All taxation produces harmful
effects, but, granted the necessity of raising the present revenue, the
lightening of the burden on parents which we desire must carry with
it an increase in the taxation on the childless.

A RELATIVE LESSENING (6.) It may be urged that a decrease in
OF BURDEN ON PARENTS the taxation on any group would only
ADVOCATED. produce a transient effect on its birth-rate;

for when a state of equilibrium was reached,
and when the extra taxation came to be regarded as normal and
inevitable, it is disputable what would be the effect on fertility
of this acquiesced-in diminution of wealth. It might, however,
take a very long time before such a state of equilibrium was
reached. Moreover as family limitation is practised in order to make it
easier to live up to the social standard of the group to which the
individual considers himself to belong, and as the unmarried and the
childless are those who find it easiest to set the pace in useless expenditure, it follows that to relatively diminish the powers of expenditure
of non-parents by taxing them relatively more heavily, would make it
easier for parents to live up to the standard set by their companions.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON THE INCOME TAX. 215

For this reason the fertility of parents in any economic stratum would
be permanently increased by a relative decrease in the burden of
taxation falling on them, whether it were an actwal decrease or not.

THE REFORM NEED (7.) Looking to each economic stratum
AFFECT NO OTHER separately, it is obviously possible, without
ECONOMIC STRATUM. affecting the total revenue, to make the

increase in taxation on the unmarried and the
childless exactly balance the decrease in taxation on parents. Consequently to adopt such a reform in any one economic stratum need
neither increase nor decrease the burden of taxation on any other
stratum. The claims of parents as compared with the childless can,
therefore, be considered apart from all questions concerned with the
distribution of taxation amongst the different economic strata. It is
true that the recent great increase of taxation must be expected to
produce a marked and immediate decrease in fertility, even if it be a
slowly diminishing effect; and that if the increased burden is falling
most heavily on the best stocks of the nation, it is having very serious
results. This consideration, however, opens out a different set of
problems from those now under consideration.

THE EASEMENT OF (8.) Provided that other economic strata are
PARENTS SHOULD not affected, it is right for the following reasons
BE PROPORTIONATE that any transfer of taxation from non-parents to
TO THE FAMILY parents should bear some relationship to their
INCOMES. incomes; and,.if this be so, the present limited

and flat rate system of allowances for children in
regard to assessment is faulty. If the only reform adopted were
that the present fixed allowances were made applicable to persons
with larger incomes, it would have little or no effect on fertility,
because of the insignificance of these allowances in comparison with
the expenditures of the parents; yet it is very desirable that the
fertility of those with incomes above £1,000 a year should be increased.
The expenditure on the upbringing of children certainly varies with the
income available, and if the fertility of all the economic strata of
income tax payers is to be similarly effected, the amount of the
adjustment of taxation as between parent and non-parent must beara
close relationship to their incomes. The larger expenditure on the
education and training of children incurred by the more wealthy is
nationally advantageous and should be encouraged by proportionately
large allowances, that is, by allowances varying with the income.

WHY THE REFORM (9.) To establish our case it is necessary
WOULD BE RACIALLY to prove that the reform suggested would be
BENEFICIAL, racially beneficial. If the object were merely

to induce bachelors and spinsters to marry, the
racial benefits would be questionable; for it may be urged that those
who now remain unmarried are likely on the average to be somewhat
inferior to the married, as not having been subject to the same selective
216 EUGENICS REVIEW.

process, and consequently that no racial gain would result from their
marriage. Though the encouragement of marriage is desirable for
many reasons, yet our main aim is, therefore, to induce those who now
marry to have larger families than at present, provided that they come
of good stock. The qualities of grown men and women depend both
on their up-bringing or environment and on their constitutions or
heredity ; and both these factors—nurture and nature—must, therefore,
have some influence when any selection is taking place by means of
which human beings are being transferred from one group to another.
The economic strata are not separate castes in this country; fortransfers
are frequently taking place between them; and from this it follows that
those winning better salaries or wages must on the average be endowed
with innate qualities somewhat different to those possessed by the
winners of smaller incomes. No doubt the ability to make a good
living is not the most important of human qualities; but it is important,
and moreover it is found to be associated with other good qualities.
The poorest economic strata must therefore contain a somewhat higher
proportion of the biologically inferior types than do the well-to-do.
The average difference between the strata may not be great and there
are certainly large numbers of marked individual exceptions; yet this
condition of affairs ought not to be neglected. The very poorest strata
are those which are multiplying most rapidly, and if they are not up to
the average of the nation in innate qualities, this fact points to national
deterioration. On the other hand the falling birth-rate amongst those
who have acquired skill in trades and professions, from the skilled
artisan to the college graduate, constitutes a national danger, which can
only be obviated by an increase in their fertility. Our objectisto bring
about this desirable result in the case of income tax payers. They owe
their position mainly to the hard work, forethought and self-restraint
of themselves and their ancestors; and these qualities will in a measure
be passed on to the coming generation by parental example and, as we
hold, by natural inheritance.

INCOME FROM INHERITED (10). As to inherited wealth, to possess
WEALTH DISTINGUISHED it does not directly indicate the possession
WITH DIFFICULTY. ofany particular qualities, good or bad. As

to the indirect influences of wealth, it may
be argued, on the one hand, that the well-to-do are subject to a less severe
selective process than are the very poor; and, on the other hand, that
wealth possessed by the young gives them a greater power of selection
in matriage. In view of these opposing considerations, the correlation
between inherited wealth and good natural qualities may be open to
argument. But those who win good salaries can and do save more than
those less constitutionally capable of effective work, and interest on invested savings should, therefore, be regarded much in the same light as
earned income. Were it possible to do so, earned income and interest
on the investments of savings should be separated in tax assessments
from incomes from inherited wealth. Possibly all that can be done is to
ROYAL COMMISSION ON THE INCOME TAX. 217

draw a distinction between earned and unearned incomes; and this
distinction is of doubtful utility, since unearned income includes the
interest on money which has been earned, saved, and not squandered
uselessly.

NECESSARY COMPROMISES IF (11.) If the family income were to
FULL REFORM IMPOSSIBLE. be made to count as several separate

incomes, it would necessitate making
considerable changes in the present gradation of taxation. It would be
practically impossible, however, to raise the rate per pound above a
certain limit. This impossibility sets an upper limit to the possible
taxation on the childless, and therefore a limit to the possible differentiation between them and parents. If the proposed method of assessment
were accepted in principle, whilst the necessity of obtaining a certain
revenue, together with the above mentioned limitation, made it now
impossible to introduce this reform to the full extent held to be
desirable, a compromise might be sought for in several directions. The
same weight might be attached to any two children as compared with
each parent; a family of two parents and one or two children being
regarded as possessing three separate incomes; if with three or four
children, as having four incomes; and so on; an arrangement which
might well be defended on the ground of the relative cost of children
and adults. An age limit for the children might be laid down,. none
over 16 years of age, for example, being allowed to count as part of the
family; a proposal which might be advocated because above that age
education might cease and wages might be earned. If sucha limitation
were adopted parents should at all events be permitted to deduct from
income tax assessment all sums actually spent on the education and
training of any child over that age. Lastly it might prove necessary to
limit the number of the separate incomes into which the family income
might be divided; for example, it might be that a family of more than
six children should not be allowed to count as if having more than five
separate incomes. Something might be said for such a restriction on
the ground that, with suitable intervals between births, there would
rarely be more than six children under sixteen in the family.

RESERVATIONS ON (12.) To avoid giving false impressions, I
CERTAIN POINTS. must be permitted to safeguard myself in certain

directions. Anindiscriminate advocacy of increased
fertility is most objectionable, for the promotion of larger families
amongst the poor would increase the existing misery. It is only to be
advocated where, as in the case of income tax payers as a rule, the
income is sufficient to make it possible to bring up a larger family in
comfort, though not necessarily in luxury. Again, whilst the transfer
of wealth from the childless to fit parents is desirable within limits, any
transfer of wealth to the innately inferior types, which would tend to
increase their fertility, would inevitably lower the qualities of the nation
in the future, a consideration far too much neglected at present. Lastly
218 EUGENICS REVIEW.

all but acknowledged paupers should knowingly contribute something
towards the revenue, and on this account it would be right that in no
case should the income tax be reduced below say three pence in the
pound.

SUMMARY. (13.) The conclusions here arrived at are as follows:—

Taxation should fall on parents and on the childless in
proportion to their ability to bear the strain. To make the incidence of
the income tax just, the amount thus now obtained from the childless
should be increased and that from parents decreased, the transfer of
wealth thus effected should bear some relationship to the incomes
taxed, and consideration should be given to the distinction between
wealth which has been won by the individual taxed and wealth which
he has inherited. Smaller incomes being less taxed, to allow the family
income to count as several separate incomes would produce the desired
differential result, though, in order not to diminish the revenue, the rate
per pound would have to be raised in all grades. If such a reform
cannot now be fully adopted, the principles involved should, we urge,
be authoritatively sanctioned, and when in the future taxation can be
lowered, it should first be materially lowered on parents before any
burden is taken off the childless. The winning of a moderate income
by their own work, the saving and conversion into capital of some of
this income, a saving needing care and self-sacrifice, the preservation of
this capital in succeeding generations in conseqnence of thrift, temper
ance, and perseverance, these have been different steps in the history
of the creation of that part of the nation which would be affected by
such areform. Where any of these conditions exist, there the stock
must generally be sound, and the nation demands a relatively more
rapid multiplication of its soundest stocks.
