POPULATION STUDIES IN
EDINBURGH.

In connection with the research work being carried on by the
Research Committee in London efforts have been made from time to
time to carry on detached work in other parts of the country on lines
similar to those adopted for the main part of the work.

These detached investigations were intended, not only to afford
information as to conditions in the areas concerned, but also to provide
a ‘‘control’’ for the general work.

In the autumn of 1925 through the generosity of the Trustees of
the Henderson Trust, work was commenced in the City of Edinburgh.
It was understood that this was to be a trial investigation for a very
brief period.

The investigation was to be comparable, as far as may be, to
that which has been carried on for so many years in London, and it
may be of interest to record the methods used and facts collected
during the short time the investigation lasted. It was desired to
find out the incidence of:

(1) Receipt of Poor Law Relief and other forms of public assistance ;

(2) Mental Deficiency ;

(3) Lunacy;

(4) Criminality ;

(5) Epilepsy

(6) Tuberculosis ;

(7) Infant Mortality;

(8) Blindness;

(9) Deafness and Dumbness;

(11) Social Position of Parents, as witnessed by payment of
Income Tax, personal achievements, etc.

(12) Superior Intelligence—scholarships, prizes, suppplementary
classes, or evening schools attendance ;

and though under the circumstances the investigation could only last
a few months, it necessitated as many preliminary steps as one spread
over as many years. All facts obtained from the families visited had
to be verified from records, and this implied obtaining from various
authorities permission to look up the written records. The Medical
Officer of Health, the Medical Officer of the Infant Welfare Department, the Chief Constable, the Chief Clerk to the Parish Council, the
various charitable organisations, all very kindly granted permission
and help was readily given in searching the records.

As it was desired that the samples studied should be taken from
the normal working-class population, we were able to use as the start228 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ing point of each family a child visited in the course of a very extended
inquiry recently made by the Child Life Committee of the Medical
Research Council, during which inquiry about one thousand families
of the working-class in Edinburgh were visited. The wage-earners of
these families were mainly semi-skilled and unskilled workers, with
wages under £3 weekly, 1 ving in the poorer and more congested quarters
of the city. The Child Life Investigation did not enter into the question of heredity at all, though details as to the health, habits and place
of birth of the parents were recorded. Permission was given to use the
books of the Child-Life Investigation and details found in them which
had any bearing on the scope of the Eugenics inquiry.

In order to take a random sample of the Edinburgh population of
this class, the 9th, 49th, 89th etc. families of the Child Life Investigation were taken, thus selecting no particular district or class of worker.
As the time at disposal was so short, families where information as to
one or both of the parents would be impossible or very difficult to
collect, were put aside. In this way we rejected five families. In two
eases the child originally visited was illegitimate and the father
unknown; in one case the mother had died and the children were all
adopted by different friends; in another both parents were Poles;
while in the fifth, the family had left Edinburgh, probably to go back
to the West of Scotland, where both parents were born.

The method employed was first to visit the family, collect as
many particulars as possible as to relatives—collaterals and ancestors.
—on both sides, then visit such of these as were resident in the city.

In all nine starting-point families were taken comprising about
700 persons. One rather striking fact is that of these 9 families only
5 were those of parents both born in Edinburgh—Leith. In one the
father came from Manchester; in the other 3 one or both parents had
migrated from the surrounding country. Particulars were given of
95 deaths in infancy or miscarriages—certainly not an overstatement.
In five of the families 27 persons had had pecuniary assistance from
various sources, in four families no record was found of assistance
through any city organisation (it was not found possible to look up
any country record of any kind). In only one family was there any
record of insanity and that only in one member; the same with blindness. Of only three families was there any police-court record, and
two of the three records were only for childish misdemeanours (football
in street, etc.) The health records showed tuberculosis in three families, but only one confirmed case in each, but of course conpulsory
notification is very recent. No cases of mental deficiency could be
found,—no children from any of the related families were in Special
Schools or under the care of the committee for such cases. On the
plus side there were at least three cases of people paying income-tax,
and over a score of people who had attended supplementary classes, or
evening school and had taken prizes. No family is without some record
of war service, and in most there 1s a very noticeable amount.

The difficulties attending such work are very great and it may be
of value to indicate what an amount (in practice) of difficult visiting
is entailed. Further in our group, which is one well above the lowest
strata it will be seen that much searching of records goes to the verifiPOPULATION STUDIES IN EDINBURGH. 229

cation of negative statements, i.e. that no criminality, no pauperism,
no mental defect exists in such and such a group.

_. Unless statements made as to age, name, name of wife, address
at different times, etc., are fairly accurate, it is almost impossible to
obtain verification by written records of pauperism or disease, and
generally several visits to any one branch of the family are necessary
before lists are complete enough to be verified. One great difficulty
was to get the exact number of the houses of relatives ; one is often told:
**I don’t remember the number, but I can go to the house.’’ In
Edinburgh where the old houses are often 7 flats high and where there
may be as many as four different one and two-roomed houses on each
flat, much time was spent inquiring for a certain family at, say No.
187, when it really lived at No. 185 or 189. Another point which
took up much time was obtaining particulars of the father’s family;
quite often,even when one paid a visit in the evening,the father was
out, while he might not have a sister in the city from whom details
could have been got. As only related families must be visited, it
follows that much time may be wasted when no one is found at home.
This was specially the case in Christmas and New Year weeks when
over 40 unavailing calls were made in all quarters of the city. Then
too as this was a “‘normal’’ sample of the population, many days were
spent in looking up records without obtaining any particulars, as
quite a large proportion of the families show no distinction on either
the plus or the minus side. |

It is impossible to speak of the ‘‘result’’ of an investigation such
as this after so brief a period of work. The sum of money available
was sufficient to provide an investigator for only a few months. During that time the foundation of the work was laid, which in itself takes
long and lays the foundation for any amount of subsequent investigation. Much useful information has been recorded and the outline of
seven promising pedigrees prepared. In none of these, however, was
it possible in the time available to prepare the work in such detail as to
warrant publication. For the same reason, and because the number
is so small, it is not possible to draw any general conclusion, except
to say this; that if this is a fair example of the Edinburgh population,
that population is much more migratory in character than is the
population of East London. An examination of the pedigrees
shows that a great deal of useful information relative to the incidence
and distribution of social failure can be obtained by the use of these
methods. _

Reference to the data now available of the ‘‘Child Life Investigation’’ (1) will indicate the type of family originally taken for that work.
Welfare centres do not touch the very lowest—they can rarely be
persuaded to come to a centre at all, and they certainly never attend
regularly. From this it emerges that this small Edinburgh group is
comparable with the London ‘‘Control Group’’ belonging to the same
parish as the pauper group, but taken at random from the normal
elementary school population. The incidence of ‘‘minus’’ social
qualities compares easily with that in East London, but the ‘‘plus’’
qualities such as unusual intellectual attainments, payment of incometax appears to be high, and it makes one very curious to learn from
230 EUGENICS REVIEW.

further work whether this indication will turn out to give aclue to the
existence of general high level of mental activity in the Scottish
artisan as against the London semi-skilled.

The small Pimlico sample published by the Save the Children
Fund was as migratory as the Edinburgh group. {2)

It would be necessary, however, in order to give to the data statistical validity adequate for comparison with other centres, to extend
the work so as to embrace at least fifty families, each studied in such
detail as to complete the information, sociological and racial, within
two degrees of kinship of the parents of the chosen child. The Research
Committee estimate that such a research could be completed within
two years were funds made available for fieldwork and the supervision
provided by the Research Committee in London.

1. Special Reports, M.R.C. No. 101.
2. ‘‘Child Life in Westminster,’’ Save the Children Fund.
