SOME ASPECTS OF IMMIGRATION TO THE
UNITED STATES IN RELATION TO THE
FUTURE AMERICAN RACE.

By PROFESSOR ROBERT DE C. Warp,
Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass.

A CRISIS has been reached in the immigration policy of the
United States. The Great War, from which we have tried so
hard to keep aloof, has not only completely altered the present
conditions of immigration to our country, but will, after the
war, for generations to come, profoundly affect the character
of very large numbers of our alien immigrants, and, through
them and their offspring, the character of the future American
race. I have been asked to prepare, for the EUGENICS REVIEW,
a paper embodying my views on the probable effects of the war
on immigration to my country, and on the eugenic aspects of
this problem as they present themselves to my mind. The
subject naturally arranges itself under these three heads: (1)
the present status, and (2) the probable future character and
volume of immigration; (3) the existing immigration laws of
the United States, and the changes in them which our experience
of their workings has shown to be necessary, especially in
view of the new situations which will arise as the result of the
war.

(1) THE PRESENT STATUS OF IMMIGRATION INTO THE UNITED
STATES.—From a total annual immigration during the last few
years of nearly a million and a half, and an annual net increase
in alien population? of about 800,000, the incoming aliens during
the year ending June 3oth, 1915, fell to 434,000, with an outflow
of 384,000, leaving an increase of population of only 50,000.

In July, August and September, 1915, there was a net
decrease in our foreign-born population of a little over 5,000,
the number who left in that period exceeding the number who
arrived by that amount. The war has thus brought us,

* Deducting the numbers of those who returned to their own countries.
4 For the sake of simplicity, I give these statistics in round numbers.
264 EUGENICS REVIEW.

suddenly and unexpectedly, face to face with a great experiment
in restriction—an experiment of a far more drastic sort than has
been suggested by any but the most radical ‘‘ restrictionists.”’
Furthermore, the war has brought, temporarily, an interesting,
and to many of us a welcome, change in the racial character of
our immigrants. The majority of those coming in 1914-15
have been from northern and western Europe, whereas, under
normal conditions, nearly three-quarters of our immigration is
from southern and eastern Europe. England, Holland,
Denmark, and the Scandinavian countries, from which there is
a fairly regular steamship service, have been sending us about.
their usual quota. Of those aliens who have returned home
for military duty, the majority have been from southern and
eastern Europe. Those of us who have had much to do with
our recent immigrants, and who realise what great undigested,
unassimilated lumps in our body politic millions of these aliens
are, and must long remain, cannot but welcome this temporary
breathing-space, when a week may bring us 3,000 immigrants
instead of a day bringing us 5,000, as has often happened in
the past. We observe, with satisfaction, that there is little
unemployment, even in our great eastern cities, and we realise,
what we have always maintained, that reducing the inflow of
unskilled labour must simplify and lighten all our burdens of
public and private charity. We observe also that there is no
lack of labour in any of our great industries, and herein
again the predictions of those who have advocated some reasonable measure of immigration restriction have been verified.
The ‘‘ liberal immigrationists’? always maintain that any
curtailment of the numbers of alien immigrants is sure to lead
to a widespread labour shortage. Such is not the case, at any
rate not at the time of writing.

(2) THE PROBABLE FUTURE CHARACTER AND VOLUME OF IMMIGRATION.—No one who has at heart the future of the American
race can fail to view with concern the probable effects of the war
upon the mental and physical conditions of our immigration.
For the United States, the war will have a far-reaching racial
significance which few persons realise to-day. There will
inevitably result a widespread demoralisation among the
SOME ASPECTS OF IMMIGRATION TO THE UNITED STATES. 265

peoples now engaged in conflict; a moral degeneration arising
from life in the army, from the breaking up and destruction of
family ties and responsibilities; from the restlessness and
unwillingness to settle down after the fighting is over; from the
craving for freedom and liberty when military discipline is
relaxed. These disturbed, restless, often irresponsible millions,
will surely contribute very largely to our future immigration.
They will bring to us a body of men with a lessened regard for
law and order; less disposed to adapt themselves to our conditions of life; with everything to gain and nothing to lose by a
change of residence—an immigration whose coming may well
make us pause and consider very seriously the magnitude of
the problem of control and of assimiliation which will here be
presented to us. Another aspect of the question concerns the
serious interruption of education, in the case of millions of the
youths of Europe. Many, probably the majority, of those who
survive the war will never return to school, or university, but
will go forth into the industrial world, insufficiently, unsatisfactorily prepared for the business of life. Thus, for years to
come, immigration to the United States is certain to include
large numbers of youths, and of men, whose standards of
education will be lower than would have been the case had there
been no war.

On the physical side we may see the immediate effects of
the war upon the present generation of men and women who
will come to America, and the more remote effects, upon future
generations, upon the children who will be born in Europe and
the children who will be born in America of persons now living
in the war countries. The introduction of the pestilential war
diseases, such as cholera and typhus is not greatly to be feared,
although some of our far-seeing medical men are already rightly
viewing this problem with grave concern. On the other hand,
however, the more subtle and less easily detected venereal
diseases, which are always rampant in great armies in war time,
and the mental breakdowns, of which there are so many
thousands of cases among the soldiers at the front, present
another aspect of the health problem which is far more serious.
Great numbers of soldiers, although not actually afflicted with
266 EUGENICS REVIEW.

any specific disease, will eventually come to the United States
crippled, wounded, enfeebled, or mentally unstable. The
fittest, physically and mentally, those who in the past have had
the initiative and the courage to emigrate, will be dead, or will
be needed at home to carry on the work of the rebuilding and of
the reorganisation of industry. The least fit are most likely to
leave their homes. Many of those who, because of physical or
mental disability will find themselves unable to earn a living
at home, will be likely to be ‘‘ assisted ’’ by relatives and friends
in the United States to ‘‘ come to America.’’ There is reason,
then, for expecting with reasonable certainty, that our immigration in the next few decades after the war will be of a lower
mental, physical and moral standard than it has been in the
past.

And what of the more distant future? For our answer to
this question we naturally turn to Dr. David Starr Jordan’s
latest book, ‘‘ War and the Breed: The Relation of War to the
Downfall of Nations.’’ War, as Dr. Jordan strikingly puts
it, “‘ impoverishes the breed.’’ The strongest and best men are
the ones who are killed or injured; and who leave few or no
children. The weaklings live, marry and continue the race.
The result is an inevitable impoverishment of the stock. Dr.
Jordan notes the reduction in the required height of French
soldiers as the result of the Napoleonic wars and the killing off
and wounding of the taller men. The French and German
babies of 1870-71, who came to be mustered as soldiers twenty
years later, were found to be an inferior lot of men. And, more
recently, as noted by Dr. Jordan in Science (New York), a
similar condition has occurred in Japan. The Japanese children
born at the time of the war between China and Japan, twenty
years ago, became conscripts in 1915. According to the Asaht
of Tokyo, as translated in the fapan Chronicle, the number of
conscripts in Tokyo decreased over 16 per cent. For Japan,
as a whole, there was an increase of conscripts in 1915, but the
rate of increase was only 30 to 50 per cent. of the normal.
Furthermore, a lowering in the quality of the new soldiers is
distinctly observable. The Asahi says that ‘‘ most of those who
underwent conscript examinations this year were born during
SOME ASPECTS OF IMMIGRATION TO THE UNITED STATES. 267

the war, and, therefore, are sons of those too old or too weak
to go to the front, and so it 1s no surprising thing if the conscripts of 1915 are of exceptionally delicate constitution.’’ This
‘* impoverishment of the breed ’’ is an inevitable result of war.
The longer the conflict continues, the more serious will be the
effects upon future generations. The weakling fathers—too
young, too old, or too feeble to fight—and the improperly
nourished, overworked and harassed mothers of Europe are
handing on to their children who are now being born an
inheritance of physical and mental unfitness which will mark
not only this generation but future generations stretching down
the long vista of the time to come. An increase in the number
of defective children, now and hereafter, is a condition which
Europe must face, and which, because it will affect the character
of our immigrants, vitally concerns the United States. Dr.
Ales Hrdlicka, of the Smithsonian Institution, one of our
leading anthropologists, contributes to Dr Jordan’s book an
opinion as to the probable effects of heavy artillery firing on
the nervous systems of soldiers in the war. He believes that
subjection to the constant roar of the firing will ‘‘ result in a
more or less defective mental or nervous state in the progeny of
such individuals’ . . . ‘‘ All such conditions will leave lasting
marks on the organism. They will produce a large class of
invalids, and these invalids, at best, will not be able to give the
proper care to their progeny; but in most cases they will,
doubtless, not be able to transmit to their progeny a ‘ healthy
mind and a healthy body.’ ”’

From the foregoing considerations, which do not seem to
me exaggerated or unduly pessimistic, it may be seen that the
effect of the Great War upon the United States, unless all signs
fail, is going to be profound and far-reaching. For it will
fundamentally affect the mental and physical characteristics of
millions of our future immigrants and of their children. The
question naturally arises: Is immigration to the United States
likely to increase or decrease after the war? If there is a considerable decrease the evils which have been mentioned are
obviously less likely to be serious. If there 1s an increase, our
problem will necessarily become one of the utmost gravity.
268 EUGENICS REVIEW.

There will be many conditions making for a greatly increased
emigration from Europe and Asia, and some which will tend to
cause a decrease. The breaking up of homes and of family
ties; the widespread demoralisation of industry; the roving
restlessness of millions of men; the desire to fly as far as
possible from the horrors of war; the greatly increased burdens
of taxation; the interruption of education; the inevitable
political and religious readjustments ; the widespread destitution,
misery, and hopelessness; the desire of people already in the
United States to bring to America their relatives and friends
who are still left abroad, and the prepayment of the passages of
the latter by their more fortunate brethren in the new land; the
return to the United States of aliens who went home to fight
and who will bring many new immigrants with them when they
come back; these, and other causes, will operate to produce a
flood of immigration which is likely to surpass anything that
we have ever known. This is not merely idle speculation.
Our statistics show that recent wars have in no case been
followed by any permanent decrease in emigration from the
countries involved, but, on the contrary, have usually resulted
in a large and almost immediate increase. Following the
Franco-Prussian war, immigration from Germany and France
increased, and reached its maximum not many years after the
war. Greek immigration increased steadily after the last TurcoGrecian war. English immigration increased after the Boer
war. The more recent Balkan war was followed by increased
immigration from the Balkan States. The numbers from
Serbia, Bulgaria, Montenegro and Greece in the year after the
war were nearly double those of the year preceding the war.
On the other hand there will be tendencies which may
operate to curtail emigration from certain European countries.
There will, inevitably, be an immense amount of constructive
work to be done everywhere, in the rebuilding of roads and
railways, of factories and dwellings, and in the general repairing and renewal of what the war will have wasted and
destroyed. Skilled labour especially, but also much unskilled
labour, will be needed for these enterprises. And wages may
rise, owing to the depletion of the ranks of the most efficient
SOME ASPECTS OF IMMIGRATION TO THE UNITED STATES. 269

workers by death, or by physical or mental incapacity. Again,
it is probable that some of the European governments will take
steps to discourage, to check—perhaps even to prohibit—emigration. Great Britain is doing this now (November, 1915) in
requiring passports in the cases of young men of military ages
who are seeking to fly to America. Balancing these reasons
for a decrease against those for an increase, and recalling the
lesson taught us by other wars in recent years, there can be
little doubt that the balance of probability is very strongly on
the side of a marked and overwhelming increase. The work of
reconstruction abroad will go on most actively and most effectively where industry is already thoroughly organised; where
the governments will have carefully planned programmes for
the rehabilitation of the state. This will be the case in the
warring countries of northern and western Europe, in Great
Britain, France, Germany, and, perhaps, in unhappy Belgium.
It is in these countries that there will be the most immediate
and best paid opportunities for the largest numbers of skilled
and also unskilled labourers. And it is, therefore, from these
same countries, from which we have received our all-round
“‘ best’? immigrants in the past, that we are likely to receive
the smaller contribution. On the other hand, in the countries
of southern and eastern Europe, from which immigration to
the United States has been on the whole less desirable, because
of the differences in race, political institutions, education, and
social habits, there will not be the same organised reconstructive work, the same wisely planned and far-reaching programme
of rehabilitation. From these countries, therefore, so largely
in the more primitive condition of agriculture, the forces tending to promote emigration will be operative to a larger extent
than in the countries of northern and western Europe. Thus
the great preponderance of southern and eastern Europeans,
already the most striking feature in the immigration of recent
years, is likely to be increased after the war is over. In my
judgment, then, the centripetal tendency, to keep people in
Europe after the war, will be greatest among the nations which
have given us—in the more distant past, as well as in more
recent years—the best that we have of Anglo-Saxon stock;
270 EUGENICS REVIEW.

while the centrifugal tendency will be strongest in the countries
of southern and eastern Europe and of western Asia. The net
result, all things considered, is certain to be a large increase in
the total volume of our immigration. There can be no question
that the most skilled and the most fit, physically and mentally,
will be the ones whom Europe will do her utmost to keep at
home. These are the labourers whom we most desire. The
unfit, the unskilled, the maimed and the wounded, the mentally
defective—these will be the least desired at home; these will be
a burden on the state; against the emigration of these
European governments are unlikely to set up any barriers;
these are the ones who will find it most difficult to secure
employment and whose coming to the United States will be the
most inevitable.’

(3) THE EXISTING IMMIGRATION LAWS OF THE UNITED STATES,
AND THE NEEDED CHANGES IN THEM.—A policy of national
eugenics, for the United States as for every other nation, means
the prevention of the breeding of the unfit native. But for us it
means far more than that. For us it means, in addition, the
prevention of the immigration of the unfit alien. And of these
two problems, the second is by far the easiest to solve. We
have an opportunity which is unique in history for the
practice of eugenic principles, immediately, and on a vastly
greater scale than is possible in the case of any other nation.
By selecting our immigrants, through proper legislation, we
can pick out the best specimens of each race to be our own
fellow-citizens and to be the parents of our future citizens. We
constantly speak of the need of more ‘‘hands’”’ to do our
labour. We forget that we are importing, not ‘‘ hands ”’ alone,
but bodies also. The vast majority of incoming alien
immigrants are potential fathers and mothers, and the character
of the race that is to be born depends upon the kind of alien
bodies which we are allowing to have landed on our shores day

t After the foregoing portion of this discussion was drafted, my attention was called to
an article entitled, ‘‘ Immigration after the War,” by Hon. F. C. Howe, the present
Commissioner of Immigration at the Port of New York, in Scribner's Magazine for
November, 1915. With most of Mr. Howe’s views I find myself in substantial agreement, but I wholly disagree with him in his view that our present immigration laws are
adequate to meet the immigration problem which we shall have to face after the war.
—THE AUTHOR
SOME ASPECTS OF IMMIGRATION TO THE UNITED STATES. 271

by day. It is just at this point that there is the contact between
immigration as an economic problem and immigration as a
racial problem, a contact which few of us are fully aware of.
Our laws at present aim to exclude some twenty-one classes
of mentally, physically, morally and economically undesirable
aliens. On paper, the list of the excluded classes is long and
formidable, and seems sufficient to safeguard the future race.
But careful and unprejudiced students of immigration agree
that we have not been keeping out the unfit sufficiently to
preserve the mental and physical status quo of our population,
to say nothing of promoting improvement. The Committee on
Immigration of the Eugenics Section of the American Breeders’
Association, in its last Annual Report, summed up the situation
as follows: ‘‘ Not only (1) are the immigration laws inadequate
to effect the exclusion of the unfit, but (2) the inspection is not
as thorough as it ought to be, owing to inadequate facilities, an
insufficient number of inspectors, and the frequent arrival of
very large numbers of aliens at one time, and (3) in some cases
the law has actually been violated, both in the spirit and in the
letter.’” The experience of years has brought certain defects to
light. Competent officials have pointed them out. Disinterested
citizens, and economists, and medical men, and social workers,
have studied our laws, and have shown us where they fail to
accomplish their purposes. There is need of more excluded
classes, and there is need of better administrative machinery.
From the eugenic point of view, we shall all agree with
former Commissioner Williams when he says that there is no
phase of the sifting of immigration ‘‘ quite as important as that
which concerns the detection of idiocy, insanity, imbecility and
feeble-mindedness.’’ In the group of the (1) mentally unfit
whom we have, by the Act of February 20th, 1907, excluded,
are the following: (a) Idiots; (b) imbeciles; (c) feeble-minded
persons ; (d) insane persons; (e) persons who have been insane
within five years previously; (f) persons who have had one or
more attacks of insanity at any time previously; (g) persons
certified by the examining surgeon as being otherwise mentally
defective in such a way that their ability to earn a living is
affected. Under the law, also, in order to save the hardships
272 EUGENICS REVIEW.

of deportation so far as possible, a fine of $100 is imposed upon
the steamship company in case any idiot, imbecile, or feebleminded person is brought to this country whose condition might
have been detected by a competent medical examination before
embarkation. There is no fine for bringing any insane
alien. Our situation as regards the exclusion of mentall
defective aliens is this: In spite of our existing laws, large
numbers of insane and mentally defective aliens obtain entrance
to the United States every year, to the burdening of the public
treasury, and to the detriment of the public health and of
the eugenic future of our race. The prevalence of insanity
and mental defectiveness already constitutes a very serious
national problem, taxing the resources of the States to provide
adequately for those in institutions, and involving grave
dangers in the case of those remaining in the communities.
But the admission of insane and mentally defective aliens
greatly increases the difficulty of dealing with this serious
problem, and renders ineffective those measures of prevention
which are being inaugurated in many of our States. The burden
upon the taxpayers is bad enough. But by far the most serious
aspect of this whole question is the fact that these alien insane
and mental defectives, except in the relatively few cases where
they are segregated for life, or at least during their reproductive period, are breeding, becoming the progenitors of hundreds
and thousands of human beings, many of whom are absolutely
certain to be criminals, or insane, or feeble-minded. In New
York State, not less than 30 per cent. of the feeble-minded in
the population are traceable to bad alien blood; and over 8,000
insane aliens are being cared for who ought never to have been
landed. New York’s foreign-born population is less than 30
per cent. of the total, but the foreign-born inmates of the State
insane hospitals reach over 40 per cent. and are 65 per cent. in
New York City. The New York State Hospital Commission
has estimated that the total cost of the aliens now in the hospitals
of New York will be approximately $10,000,000 if these patients
live out their expected terms of life.

The alien feeble-minded are even a greater menace to the
public health than the alien insane. The latter are to a conSOME ASPECTS OF IMMIGRATION TO THE UNITED STATES. 273

siderable extent segregated, and thus prevented from breeding,
but the former are far oftener at liberty, and are thus usually
free to breed as they will. Futhermore, it is a well-known fact
that feeble-minded persons are very prolific, and also have large
numbers of illegitimate children. Commissioner Williams well
said in his Annual Report for 1911: ‘‘ At a time when the
subject of feeble-mindedness is becoming more and more
important in civilised countries, and the nature and bearings of
this taint are being carefully studied by scientists, the Government would seem called upon to make far greater efforts than
it does to prevent the landing of feeble-minded immigrants.’’
The one great undeniable fact 1s that in spite of our Federal
Immigration Law prohibiting the admission of insane and
mentally defective aliens, our institutions have been filling
up with just these people. In making this statement we
need not enter into any discussion of the question whether
our immigrants as a whole, or whether certain classes or
nationalities of these immigrants contribute disproportionately to our insane and mentally defective groups. We
need not maintain that there is any greater tendency to insanity
or to feeble-mindedness among our alien population than among
our own people. But we do maintain that if we have a more
effective exclusion of insane and of mentally defective aliens,
the future prevalence of mental diseases and defects in this
country must thereby be lessened. There is no denying that
fact. It will never help to reduce the numbers of our native
defectives if we admit alien defectives. Dr. E. K. Sprague, of
the United States Public Health Service, has estimated that
we have been admitting about 3,000 mental defectives annually,
and an equal number who are or will become insane.

What has been the matter? Why have we been admitting
insane, feeble-minded, imbecile and other undeniably undesirable aliens, as the Immigration Commission pointed out, when
we have, by law, distinctly excluded them? It was the intention
of the present law, by specifying the classes of mental defectives
whom we do not want imported into the United States, and by
imposing a fine of $100 upon steamship companies in cases
where such aliens are brought here whose condition might have
274 EUGENICS REVIEW.

been detected by a competent medical examination before
embarkation, to bring about the exclusion of these persons
before they were allowed to sail from their foreign port. This
is, obviously, the humane way to deal with such cases. Now
the difficulty is that there is no fine whatever in cases of
insane persons who are brought here, and that the $100 fine
in the case of idiots, imbeciles, etc., is too small to be effective.
The steamship companies conduct a wholly inadequate medical
examination at the ports of embarkation. They take their
chances of having the aliens slip by our medical inspectors, as
a great many do. Moreover, the possible loss involved in the
payment of a few fines is insignificant in comparison with the
vast profits which come from the steerage passenger traffic.
The steamship companies claim (naturally!) that it is impossible for them to pick out mentally defective aliens at the ports
of embarkation, and that it is unfair for us to expect them to
do so. But we know better. We know that these same
steamship people can, if they will, detect many, and probably
most of these cases before sailing, for our own medical examination here shows that many whom we detect ‘‘ could have been
detected by the most casual medical examination on the other
side if there had been any real desire on the part of the transportation companies to prevent the importation of such persons
into this country.’’ This is the opinion of Dr. George B.
Campbell, the expert alienist formerly in charge of the Bureau
of Deportation of the New York State Hospital Commission
(Annual Report, 1912).

One of the things for us to do is to impose a fine in all
cases where an insane alien is brought here whose condition
might have been detected at the port of embarkation. This fine
should be at least $200, and the present fine of $100 in the case
of idiots, imbeciles, and feeble-minded persons should be
increased to $200. By imposing a fine for insane cases, and
increasing the fine in the other cases, we can force the steamship companies to make a medical examination before embarkation which will be something more than a farce. It would, for
some reasons, be desirable for us to make our own medical
examination at the ports of embarkation, but international
SOME ASPECTS OF IMMIGRATION TO THE UNITED STATES. 275

difficulties have stood in the way of such a plan. The only
immediate practicable way is to force the steamship companies
to make the examination. Moreover, no examination even by
our own surgeons at the ports of embarkation, would be able
to detect as many insane and mentally defective aliens as we
can detect here, where our facilities for detection and examination, poor as they now are, are inevitably much better than
could be provided at a dozen or more foreign ports from which
the aliens sail.

Another important step concerns the better inspection of
the mental condition of the aliens after they have landed at our
immigration stations. The task of sifting out the mentally
defective from the great stream of aliens which pours into New
York is a tremendously difficult one. It requires time, skilled
medical inspectors, and adequate quarters for the examination
and the detention of suspicious cases. If the American race is
to be kept mentally sound, we must provide by law that a
sufficient number of commissioned medical officers of the
United States Public Health Service, with special training and
experience in the detection of insanity and mental defectiveness,
shall be detailed for duty in New York, at all times, and that
at least one such medical officer shall be detailed at every other
port of entry. Congress should also amend the immigration
law so that the medical officers engaged in the examination of
immigrants shall be provided at all times with the necessary
facilities for the detention and examination of those immigrants,
including the exclusive services of interpreters. It is a false
and absolutely indefensible economy which refuses to provide
adequate medical inspection for our incoming aliens. The
entire cost of the medical inspection of our tmmigrants has
been less than ten cents a head. It would cost a good
deal more than that to have a veterinary surgeon advise us as
to the desirability, for breeding purposes, of a horse or of a
dog. Yet we have been giving the fathers and mothers of future
American children only ten cents’ worth of medical inspection
apiece.

Dr. T. W. Salmon, of the National Committee for Mental
Hygiene, has very clearly summed up the whole situation as
276 EUGENICS REVIEW.

regards the admission of mentally undesirable aliens as follows:
‘“’There is no reason for the acceptance of a single insane or
mentally undesirable alien except inability to determine his
condition. This does not require restriction of immigration,
but a sensible selection of individual immigrants, in the interest
of our own country and wholly without reference to the interests
of foreign countries or of foreign steamship companies.’’ Dr.
E. K. Sprague, of the United States Public Health Service, has
stated his opinion that ‘‘ Only about 5 per cent. of the mental
defectives are (now) being detected, and about 25 per cent. of
the estimated possibility among the insane is being attained.”

The law says that an alien who becomes a public charge
‘*from causes existing prior to landing’’ may be deported
within three years from the date of his or her entry. In spite
of everything we can do, some insane and mentally defective
aliens will always escape the notice of our medical examiners,
and will be admitted. Many, probably most, of these become
public charges, and their presence in our midst is eugenically
highly dangerous. Now it is the conviction of all the
unprejudiced experts who have studied this matter that this
time limit should be extended to five years. Furthermore,
instead of having the burden of proof upon the United States
to show that the cause existed prior to landing, the law should
be changed so as to put the burden of proof upon the alien to
show that the cause arose subsequent to landing. The Government, as Commissioner Williams pointed out, ‘‘is usually
without means of hearing about his (i.e., the alien’s) mental
condition abroad, or his heredity, and it may have arrayed
against it relatives and friends who are desirous that he
remain in the United States—as a burden upon the State, of
course, not upon them.’’ The great economic advantages of
having the period within which deportation may take place
extended to five years is apparent from the figures for New York
State, given by Dr. Campbell three years ago. When (under
the old law) the period of deportation was two years, the
maximum number deported from New York State hospitals in
one year was 222. Under the three-year period for deportation it was 399. In 1912, if the period had been five years, the
SOME ASPECTS OF IMMIGRATION TO THE UNITED STATES. 277

number deported would have been 606. In the year 1912, 571
of the 752 insane aliens who were returned at the expense of
the State, or of friends, became public charges after the
three-year period, but within the five-year period after their
entry. If the five-year period had been a matter of law,
these 571 could have been deported at the expense of the steamship companies on Federal warrants. Dr. Campbell also points
out that a saving of $40,000 would be effected to the State of
New York during the first year of a law establishing a five-year
deportation period, ‘‘ but the chief advantage would be the
permanent removal from the country every year of 200 insane
persons, most of them in early life, and many of whom might
become the parents of defective or mentally unstable children.”’

In discussing the present situation regarding the admission
of ‘‘ mentally undesirable ’’ aliens I have suggested (1) certain
necessary changes in the Immigration Act; and (2) the need of
more adequate facilities for the enforcement of the law. The
remedies here suggested have been approved by competent and
unprejudiced persons who have studied the problem. They
were endorsed at a conference, held in New York City,
November 15th, 1912, at which the most important scientific
bodies in the United States which deal with the treatment and
prevention of insanity were represented.’ Furthermore, most
of those recommendations were included in the Report of the
United States Immigration Commission, which studied the
whole immigration question for over three years.

The addition to our list of excluded classes of ‘‘ persons
afflicted with chronic alcoholism,’’ and of persons who are found
to be ‘‘ mentally inferior or unstable,’’ would make it possible
for us to debar a good many highly undesirable immigrants
whom we cannot, under the law as it now stands, prevent from
landing. Chronic alcoholics are often discovered by the
examining surgeons, but the law does not state specifically that
they shall be excluded. And many persons not properly
certified as ‘‘insane,’? but who would, in many cases become

% American Medico-Psychological Association; National Committee for Mental
Hygiene ; New York Psychiatrical Society ; New York State Charities Aid Association ;
Committee of One Hundred on National Health ; New York State Hospital Commission ;
Immigration Committee of the Eugenics Section of the American Breeders’ Association.
278 EUGENICS REVIEW.

insane soon after arrival, could be kept out if ‘‘ mentally inferior
or unstable ’’ aliens were excludable.

The group of the ‘‘ mentally unfit’’ is, eugenically, the
most important single group of the excluded classes. For that
reason I have devoted most of my attention to it. Yet the
changes in the law which I have suggested would be no less
helpful in enabling us to detect and to exclude many other
undesirable aliens who are classified under the head of (2)
‘“ physically,’’ (3) ‘‘ morally,’? and (4) ‘‘ economically ’’ unfit,
and whose exclusion is clearly most essential. In the group of
‘‘physically unfit’? we have (1) epileptics; (2) tuberculous
persons; (3) persons afflicted with a loathsome or dangerous
contagious disease; (4) persons certified by the examining
surgeon as being otherwise physically defective in such a way
that their ability to earn a living is affected. This last is the
so-called ‘‘ poor physique’”’ clause. All of the classes in this
group are undesirable. From a eugenic viewpoint the danger
from classifiable defectives, great as this is, is probably, on
the whole, less than the danger from the much larger class of
aliens who are below the mental and physical average of their
own countries, and cannot fail to lower the average here. We
ought to exclude more aliens of such low vitality and poor
physique that they are eugenically undesirable for parenthood.
The ‘‘ poor physique clause’’ has been found to be far less
effective than it was intended to be because (1) it has been taken
to be an economic test and not a physical one, and it is difficult
for the immigration authorities to establish the fact that the
physical or mental defect will make the alien a public charge;
because (2) of the provision which makes it possible to admit
on bonds aliens who fall into the group here named ; and because
(3) the present force of medical examiners is wholly inadequate
to pick out the aliens who come within the clause. Aliens of
such low vitality, poor physique, or suffering from such mental
and physical defect that their ability to earn a living is thereby
interfered with are, in the majority of cases, undesirable persons.
They are not only themselves weaklings and unlikely to resist
disease, but they are likely to have defective and degenerate
offspring. It is very difficult to suggest any practicable clause,
SOME ASPECTS OF IMMIGRATION TO THE UNITED STATES. 279

for insertion in the Act, which would give us the physical test
that is so much needed. But the existing evil can be corrected
to a large extent by the assignment of more surgeons to the
examination of immigrants, and by abandoning the practice. of
admitting aliens on bonds except in very exceptional cases.
The present bonds are worthless. They do not protect our
communities against the expense of supporting aliens who
become public charges after being landed on a bond. And, what
is far more serious, no bond ever prevented any physically
or menially unfit alien from breeding. When bonds are
accepted, in unusually worthy cases, authority should be given
to call for surety company bonds.

A recent report of a Committee of Inquiry in New
York City estimates that in one year Bellevue Hospital
receives somewhat over 1,000 alien patients whose exclusion
from the United States is mandatory under existing laws,
and that the total number of patients in a year because
of disabilities which existed prior to their landing is over
2,200. During our present slack time of immigration, the
medical inspection is naturally more effective, and the percentage of defects noted among the arriving aliens has more
than doubled. This shows the great importance of a much
larger body of medical inspectors to cope with the new situation
which will arise when the war is over and the flood of arriving
aliens again increases.

The group of ‘‘ morally unfit ’’ includes (1) prostitutes; (2)
procurers or persons attempting to bring in women or girls
for immoral purposes; (3) polygamists; (4) anarchists; (5)
convicts and self-confessed criminals. All these classes are
obviously unfit and undesirable. Most of them are probably
mentally defective, and would be discovered by a more adequate
medical examination. Yet many of the aliens who belong to
this group are among the most difficult to detect, and so far no
feasible means have been discovered for making it possible to
increase largely the number of the ‘‘ morally unfit’? who are
debarred. |

The last group, the ‘‘economically unfit,’? includes (1)
paupers; (2) persons likely to become a public charge; (3) pro280 EUGENICS REVIEW.

fessional beggars; (4) contract labourers; (5) persons deported
within a year previously as being contract labourers; (6) assisted
immigrants, unless on special inquiry they are found not to
belong to any other excluded class; (7) children under 16 years
of age, unless accompanied by at least one parent. With this
group, per se, the eugenist has little specifically to do, except
in so far as a contract labourer, or a child under 16, or a person
liable to become a public charge, happens to be physically or
mentally undesirable.

This brings up one final point, and that is the attitude which
those who are most interested in the health aspects of alien
immigration should take in regard to any proposal for a further
restriction of immigration by means of such very mild requirement as the ‘‘ reading test,’’ embodied in the Immigration Bill
which was vetoed by President Wilson... When a further
restriction of immigration is recommended because ‘‘ demanded
by economic, moral and social considerations,’’ by a competent
body of experts like the United States Immigration Commission,
then it behoves all those who have the best interests of the
country at heart to favour such a plan. We ought to remember
that any measures which will diminish the volume of immigration must tend to improve its quality, because a decrease in
numbers gives more time and better opportunity for inspection.
Furthermore, a decrease in numbers, especially of those aliens
who are unskilled labourers, and who are the most ignorant,
will have a very important and beneficial result in relieving the
congestion in our over-crowded cities; in diminishing economic
stress, and, therefore, in improving the mental and physical
conditions of the aliens who come to us. The more skilled and
the more intelligent the alien, the less he tends to crowd into our
cities ; the less liable he is to become insane or mentally unstable
from the strain and stress of the life in our congested city
districts. Dr. T. W. Salmon has hit the nail on the head when
he says: ‘‘ More will be accomplished in the exclusion of insane
immigrants, and of those destined to become insane a short time
after their arrival, by measures which broadly restrict immigra
1 The reading test, with its many exceptions in favour of parents, grandparents, all
females, minor children, etc., is an extremely mild restrictive measure.
SOME ASPECTS OF IMMIGRATION TO THE UNITED STATES. 281

tion than by any measures, however effective, which are directed
specifically against insane immigrants, for any measure which
will check the flow of immigration in general must necessarily
result in the admission of fewer undesirable immigrants.’’ The
““cheap labour ’’ element is one which all of us ought to unite
in restricting. Those of us who are particularly interested in
the eugenic aspects of our immigration problem have every
possible reason for joining hands with those who have the
economic aspects of it most at heart, in the campaign for the
better regulation of alien immigration to our shores.

To our own very heavy burden of the defective and the
degenerate we are adding every year, by immigration, thousands
of aliens whose presence here will result, because of their own
defects and those of their offspring, in lowering the physical,
mental and moral standards of the American race. We have
much still to learn about heredity. But we know enough to be
sure that if the quality of our race is to be preserved there must
be a far more careful selection of our immigrants than we have
ever attempted to make. The need is, indeed, imperative for
applying eugenic principles in much of our legislation. But
the greatest, the most logical, the most effective step that we can
take is to begin with the proper eugenic selection of the incoming
alien millions. We should see to it that we are protected, not
merely from the burden of supporting alien defectives, but from
that ‘‘ watering of the Nation’s life-blood *’ which results from
their reproducing their kind after admission. As Professor
Karl Pearson puts it: ‘‘ You cannot change the leopard’s spots,
and you cannot change bad stock to good. You may dilute it,
possibly spread it over a wide area, spoiling good stock, but
until it ceases to multiply it will not cease to be.’’ Every
Senator and every Congressman of the United States should
have brought home to him the truth of Lord Beaconsfield’s
words: “‘ The public health is the foundation on which reposes
the happiness of the people and the power of a country. The
care of the public health is the first duty of a statesman.”’

The conservation of our national resources. How much we
hear about that in the United States! Conservation of American
forests is important. So is conservation of American coal, and
282 EUGENICS REVIEW.

of American oil, and of American natural gas, and of American
water supplies, and of American fisheries. But the conservation
and improvement of the American race is vastly more important
than all other conservation. The real wealth of a nation is the
quality of its people. Of what value are endless acres of
forests, millions of tons of coal, and billions of gallons of water,
if our race is not virile, and sane, and sound ?
