Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The dynamics of genetic counseling
Robert L. Tips , Donald L. Meyer & Audree L. Perkins
To cite this article: Robert L. Tips , Donald L. Meyer & Audree L. Perkins (1962) The dynamics of genetic counseling, Eugenics Quarterly, 9:4, 237-240, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1962.9987531 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1962.9987531
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

Genetic Counseling

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

The Dynamics of Genetic Counseling*

GENETIC COUNSELING is an integral part of the over-all management o£ families with members affected with genetic diseases. This presentation formalizes the procedures required for effective results as they relate to the correlation of basic genetic principles and modern clinical practice. It describes three family situations which illustrate certain fundamental aspects of the underlying dynamics of counseling. The methods stem from our experience in the application of current research data in selected family units.
Effective counseling is a specialized consultative procedure which requires the full cooperation of the referring physician in order to yield the optimal benefits to the patient and his family. Such benefits have been evaluated in terms of the facilitation of medical management of the affected family member, the emotional readjustment in the family milieu, and the analysis of reproductive performances of kindred members with respect to the number of conceptions per 1000 potentially fertilizable ovulatory cycles which occur prior to the birth of the propositi and before and after counseling (Tips et al., 1962).
COUNSELING PROCEDURE
The counseling procedures require adherence to protocol. Cases are selected primarily on the basis of the referring physician's interest and the willingness of the family to make application. Re-
* A portion of this paper was presented to the Oregon State Medical Society on September 26, 1962. The counseling procedure was described in detail at the meeting of the American Society of Human Genetics in Corvallis, Oregon, on August 30, 1962.

ceipt of past medical records and pertinent laboratory data help immeasurably in predetermining the needs of the referred family.
To begin the initial consultation visit, a conference is held with the family in order to outline the purposes and procedures. During the conference, which includes the patient and his parents and siblings, observations accumulate relative to the group psychodynamics, emphasizing modes of interrelationships and individual identification.
Next, the mother and patient are interviewed to review in detail the clinical manifestations of the disease. Physical examinations of both mother and patient emphasize the immediacy of the condition in question so that a pattern of clinical inquiry is developed for later use. The patient is then dismissed and the mother's pregnancy record is sensitively explored in chronological sequence and with reference to paternity. At this point, the mother's interview is interrupted for clinical evaluation of the patient's siblings.
The father's interview is initiated by his physical examination. Confidential and careful interrogation with respect to previous marriages and extramarital children is explored first. Then, an outline of the family pedigree is constructed utilizing his knowledge of surnames and maiden names, marriages and paternities, birth dates and places, and health and death data of the kindred.
The family pedigree is privately reviewed next with the mother, during which the details of pregnancy and offspring records of all kindred members are emphasized. Through recall of the

237

238 Genetic Counseling

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

patterned medical inquiry, developed during her initial interview, the mother releases information spontaneously as each kindred member is discussed and thus provides clues to unsuspected, misdiagnosed, and subclinical cases. Other hereditary diseases are noted also.
Follow-up visits with the patient and his mother are planned as indicated. The medical management is reviewed first. Then further discussion with the mother is reoriented to consider reproductive records of kindred members, especially in terms of menstrual and sexual histories. Sometimes these histories reveal additional pregnancies, extramarital paternities, and marital problems. Such discussion stimulates the mother's interests and inspires intelligent inquiry into genetic considerations, once guilt and doubt are relieved and attention is focused on tangible problems.
As the mother approaches a plateau of mature comprehension of the genetic implications, she is instructed in simple principles of gene combinations in fertilization as they are applicable to her family situation. The proficiently instructed mother, recognizing her own genetic potential, begins to envision the genetic status of other kindred members. Through her own experiences, she aids immeasurably not only in providing information to the family but also in solving the subtle problems that arise as psychological ramifications of the genetic situation.
CASE EXAMPLES
Family 1. A two-year-old Caucasian male was diagnosed as adreno-genital syndrome of the salt-losing variety. His mother, 26 years of age, had four previous pregnancies, 3 of which were normal children by her husband and one of which resulted from a consanguineous

union (first cousins) prior to marriage. The premarital child died with overt evidence of the syndrome, at which time a physician had warned the family of the possible risks of consanguineous marriages.
The reoccurrence of the disease in the family resulted in the maternal relatives believing that all of the mother's pregnancies were extramarital and consanguineous. Later, blood group studies excluded this possibility. The family attitude complicated marital problems and increased the emotional burden of the mother. Hostility was then directed toward the husband. A negligent attitude toward the normal children developed. Severe apprehension led to overprotection of the affected child to the extent that it interfered with his medical management.
Through counseling, the mother developed insight into the pathogenesis of the disease and its genetic implications as pertaining to the family milieu. She became aware of the basis for her family's belief concerning consanguinity. This stimulated her to recognize immediate family problems and to participate actively in their solution. Her redirected attention promoted a rapid readjustment in intrafamily relations. Proper medical management of the patient resulted.
Family 2. A low phenylalanine diet was prescribed for a six-month-old male with phenylketonuria. The anxious young mother tried conscientiously to continue the diet, as she was repeatedly assured of its efficacy. However, despite concentrated efforts and rehospitalizations, the nutritional status of the child progressively deteriorated.
During the next four months, severe marital problems ensued and culminated in the husband's desertion, leaving the

Genetic Counseling

239

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

wife with another pregnancy. The three older normal children became unmanageable and caused disturbances in the neighborhood.
In the counseling session, the mother related her previous experiences and expressed overt condemnation first toward the paternal family and then toward her own family. She believed that the phenylketonuria resulted from "bad blood" in the family.
Through counseling, the mother gained insight into the pathogenesis of the disease and into the true significance of the hereditary influence. Her anxiety concerning the affected child lessened to such a degree that medical management and a dietary control were readily instituted. Improvement in the patient's condition inspired the mother to effect realistic adjustments in the attendant family problems. The existing pregnancy gave issue to another phenylketonuric child, who was readily managed on the appropriate diet.
Family 3. A six-year-old Caucasian male with cystic fibrosis was stable medically for several years. Two older siblings were in fair health, except for frequent upper respiratory infections, and did well in school. Due to the desire to increase the family unit, the parents sought advice relative to disease risks in the subsequent pregnancies. They appeared satisfied to learn of the one-in-four chances of reoccurrence.
On the evening after this consultation, the mother frantically summoned the family physician to see the patient. He was unable to detect any significant change in the patient's chronic condition. These episodes of maternal anxiety and the physician's visits were repeated at nightly intervals until the patient was finally rehospitalized to calm the house-

hold. During this time, the parents began to express feelings of extreme interpersonal hostility, and the normal siblings developed behavior and school problems.
Genetic counseling was sought, as it was believed that additional children in the family would alleviate the anxious orientation of the parents toward the patient's illness. During the counseling procedure, the parents revealed that the expressed anxiety had actually stemmed from information given concerning the genetic probability risks in subsequent children.
When the pathogenesis and the genetic nature of the disease in their family was clearly recognized by the parents during genetic counseling, the mother's introspective attitude was amended so that hostility problems of the siblings disappeared. Further pregnancies were no longer planned, even though the patient returned to the home and was managed with facility until his death about one year later.
COMMENT
Genetic counseling consists of clinical procedures whereby the patient with genetic disease is evaluated in terms of his relationships and management in the scope of his family environment (Kailman, 1952, 1956; Tips et al., 1962). The opportunity for such family units to participate in a therapeutic program, which creates an atmosphere conducive to the exploration of over-all family problems, distinguishes this from the traditional, stereotyped, mathematical probability approach (Herndon, 1955; Reed, 1955, 1957; Hammons, 1959).
Empathetic communication with the family is established through interviews and physical examinations of pertinent kindred. Oriented initially to pathologi-

240 Genetic Counseling

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

cal manifestations of the disease, the procedure is directed next toward investigations of reproductive records of family members. In the cases described herein, the concern about chronic illness is reflected in apprehension and overprotectiveness of the patient, neglect of the normal siblings, marital problems of the parents, and overt hostility with the kindred. In the structured counseling atmosphere, elucidation of these problems forms the subjects for communications.
The exploration of the family pedigree in detail with the father and its review with the mother, coupled with the clinical assessment of each member through the patterned medical inquiries and with an evaluation of the reproductive performances, promoted an oral catharsis from each parent which eased the barrier of defense mechanisms such as projection, rationalization, repression, and feelings of misdirected guilt and hostility.
The catharsis produced the clue for the detection of the key issue, which led to the successful solution of the problem as noted in the misinformation concerning consanguinity in the first family, the misunderstanding of "bad blood" in the second family, and the misinterpretation of genetic probabilities in the third family. The use of mathematical probabilities as indicators for genetic morbidity risks was related to severe reactions and marital incompatibility tensions which were expressed in the form of extreme anxiety concerning the patient.
Since the counseling procedure is directed toward unveiling the over-all family situation as well as the extreme anxieties which envelop and encumber parents, the genetic counselor must maintain a realistic perspective of family dy-

namics. Impetus is given to family readjustments which redirect energies into constructive channels so that the patient's medical management, as prescribed by the referring physician, is enhanced.
SUMMARY
The positive effects of genetic counseling on three families, each of whom had a child with a recessive disease, are discussed. The benefits derived are those expected from a counseling philosophy and procedure which includes the family as a unit.
ROBERT L. TIPS, DONALD L.
MEYER, and AUDREE L. PERKINS
Department of Pediatrics University of Oregon Medical School
Portland, Oregon, and Department of Genetics Oregon Regional Primate Research Center, Beaverton, Oregon
REFERENCES
1. HAMMONS, H. G., 1959. Heredity Counseling. Paul B. Hoeber Inc., New York.
2. HERNDON, C. N., 1955. Heredity counseling. Eugenics Quart., 2 : 83-89.
3. KALLMAN, F. J., 1952. Human genetics as a science, as a profession, and as a social minded trend of orientation. Am. J. Human Genet., 4 : 237-245.
4. KALLMAN, F. J., 1956. Psychiatric aspects of genetic counseling. Am. J. Human Genet., 8 : 97-101.
5. REED, S. C., 1955. Counseling in Medical Genetics. W. B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia.
6. REED, S. C., 1957. Counseling in medical genetics. Acta Genet., 7: 473-480.
7. TIPS, R. L., D. L. MEYER, A. L. PERKINS and
F. S. SHININCER, 1962. Heredity counseling in pediatrics. A review of 300 families. Presented Am. Soc. Human Genet., A.I.B.S. meeting, August 30, Corvallis, Oregon.
8. TIPS, R. L., D. L. MEYER and A. L. PERKINS,
1962. Clinical counseling in human genetics. Presented at the State Medical Association, September 26, Portland, Oregon.
9. TIPS, R. L., and H. T. LYNCH, 1962. The
impact of genetic counseling upon the family milieu. In preparation.

