Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Transitory "positive" selection for colorblindness?
James V. Neel & Richard H. Post
To cite this article: James V. Neel & Richard H. Post (1963) Transitory "positive" selection for colorblindness?, Eugenics Quarterly, 10:1, 33-35, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1963.9987539 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1963.9987539
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 5 View related articles Citing articles: 11 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

Brief Reports and Communications Brief Reports

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

TRANSITORY "POSITIVE" SELECTION FOR COLORBLINDNESS?
JAMES V. N E E L and RICHARD H. POST
Department of Human Genetics University of Michigan Medical School
Ann Arbor, Michigan

In a recent paper in this journal, Post (1962) drew attention to the much lower frequency of defective color vision in primitive than in civilized peoples and raised the possibility that this was due, at least in part, to a relaxation of selection against defective color vision in agricultural as contrasted with hunting-andgathering ways of life. It was pointed out that if it were assumed that in all the populations concerned the introduction of domestic animals and agriculture occurred some 4,000 years ago, and that all selection against the alleles for protanopia, protanomaly, deuteranopia, and deuteranomaly ceased at that time, then, if mutation pressure alone were responsible for the change in gene frequency, the rate of origin of the protan gene(s) through mutation would have to be set at approximately 1x 10-4/locus/generation, and of the deuteran gene(s) at approximately 3 x 10-yiocus/generation. These are, of course, extremely high mutation rates, for which there is little precedence in human genetics (review in Neel, 1962).
Since that paper was published, a supplementary explanation for the increase in defective color vision has come to mind. If it is postulated that individ-

uals with defective color vision make poor hunters and gatherers, then it seems possible that with the introduction of agriculture, pastoralism, and various domestic industries, a type of self-selection occurred, in that colorblind individuals, rather than be stigmatized as poor hunters, were, during the transitional period, among the first to turn to pursuits in which they were relatively more successful. Insofar as these pursuits were less hazardous than hunting, the net result in transitional cultures which contained a mixture of hunters and nonhunters would be a positive selection for the mutant gene.
The crux of this argument is the assumption that a colorblind individual would be handicapped in hunting and so be motivated, probably unconsciously, to seek other pursuits. In an effort to judge the reasonableness of this assumption, we have undertaken a review of the literature on the handicaps of the colorblind today.
Numerous papers (cf. Berens and Sheppard, 1953) recommend that any type or degree of color vision defect should bar the aviation candidate, as it does the applicant to Annapolis or West Point. Color vision is essential for recog-

33

34 Brief Reports

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

nizing night signal* _.. aircraft and land stations, for map reading, and even for efficient and rapid reading of the instrument panel, particularly when under the stress of fatigue or of high altitude. Pilots are particularly handicapped by color vision defects in landing on improvised or unimproved fields or selecting an emergency landing place. These handicaps are intensified when brightness cues fail, such as in dim light and fog or mist, and in spotting points on the horizon while flying over deserts or large bodies of water. To the extent of their color vision deficiency, pilots must rely on brightness differences. Candidates with mild degrees of defect but still able to pass a screening test are apt to take more time to recognize color variations than normals, to tire more rapidly from color vision testing, and to retain negative afterimages for longer periods of time.
While the impression seems widespread that certain 'colorblind' observers proved superior to normals in recognizing camouflage during both world wars, at least under certain special conditions, not one empirical study has been found on this point. Judd (1943) has indicated that under certain conditions of lighting, glare, and natural coloration, some observers with color vision defect might recognize camouflage more efficiently than normals with the naked eye, but no better than normals equipped with a proper selective spectral filter, as they usually are. Deuterans or protans might detect a gross blunder in camouflage better than normals if the light-dark contrast between the camouflaged object and its background were too great, or if the contrasts in blue coloration were too great. The same 'colorblind' observers would be at a disadvantage most of the time, however.
Although statistics are not lacking on

the higher rates of automobile accidents by 'colorblind' drivers, only one paper has been found concerning shooting accidents while hunting in natural surroundings. Of major shooting accidents in Minnesota during 1953 in which hunters were mistaken for deer, 60 per cent were attributed to 'colorblind' gunners. Incidentally, all of the victims wore red clothing, and % of the 'colorblind' gunners were unaware of their defect (Foltz, 1962).
An interesting paper on the occupational limits of 'colorblind' men may be relevant. The list is longer than might be supposed, including not only such obvious occupations as photography, geology, chemistry, and medicine, but also agriculture (during plants' growth and in marketing, to distinguish maturity, quality, blight, etc.) and electrical engineering (color codes of wire, dirt, quality of materials) (Wright, 1953).
Finally, it is noted that hereditary color vision defect cannot be overcome or repaired by any amount of training or therapy. It is true that performances in screening tests may be improved by practice, but there is no evidence that such practice has any genuine effect on color vision (Chapanis, 1949).
The transfer value of all these observations to the actual biological handicap of colorblindness under primitive conditions is, of course, dubious and beyond quantitation. However, the possibility of a significant handicap cannot be dismissed. The suggestion can be in part tested. There exist populations in which hunting still provides an important means of livelihood but in which there is also limited agriculture, pastoralism, and other domestic industries which are open to males. It would be instructive to attempt to evaluate the precise position in such groups of the colorblind

"Positive" Selection

35

individual. If the postulated process has extended over many generations and is coupled with mutation resulting in the genes in question, then the magnitude of the type of 'positive' selection envisaged might be so small as to render its detection impractical. If, on the other hand, the positive selection occurs primarily during a critical period of transition from hunting to nonhunting, which offers an escape from the former into the latter, it might be possible to detect some evidences of it.
Should the hypothesis be validated, it would provide concrete evidence for a type of positive selection which has hitherto been largely ignored in discussions of factors to be considered in human evolution. Since colorblindness now provides the only clear example of a simply inherited defect whose frequency

has significantly increased with the advent of civilization, a considerable effort directed toward exploring the correctness of this and other possible hypotheses would seem justified.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BERENS, CONRAD, and L. B. SHEPPARD, 1953. Ab-
stracts on Military and Aviation Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences. The Biological Sciences Foundation. CHAPANIS, A., 1949. The stability of "improvement" in color vision due to training. Am. J. Optom., 26:251-259. FOLTZ, D. E., 1962. Boobs in the woods. Sat. Evening Post, Oct. 13, p. 8. JUDD, D. B., 1943. Colorblindness and the detection of camouflage. Science, 9 7 : 544-546. NEEL, J. V., 1962. Mutations in the human population. In: Methodology in Human Genetics, W. J. Burdette, ed., Holden-Day, Inc. pp. 203-224. POST, R. H., 1962. Population differences in red and green color vision deficiency: a review, and a query on selection relaxation. Eugenics Quart., 9: 131-146. WRIGHT, W. D., 1953. Defective colour vision. Brit. Med. Bull., 9: 36.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

