Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
V. Twin studies
Luigi Gedda
To cite this article: Luigi Gedda (1954) V. Twin studies, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:3, 171-175, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987188 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987188
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

V. TWIN STUDIES

LUIGI GEDDA
Director of G. Mendel Institute Rome

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Modern science is interested in human twins for two fundamental reasons. First, twinning represents a biological phenomenon which is exceptional for the human species and is interesting in itself from several points of view: its frequency; its causes; the manner in which it occurs (embriogenesis) ; its characteristics (relative prematurity, anatomical similarity, etc.) ; its anomalies (double monstrosity, teratoma.)
As a biological phenomenon, the study of twins is pertinent to population problems in regard to the frequency and causes of twinning.
When this phenomenon is examined statistically, it is obvious that its frequency differs according to countries (see Table 1). The study of the frequency of twin

births in countries where different races live together in the same environment has, furthermore, demonstrated that the phenomenon is substantially related to races (see Table 2).
With regard to the frequency of various types of twin births in a population, the socalled Law of Hellin may be recalled, which relates the frequency of higher twin births (triplets, quadruplets, quintuplets) to simple births. Hellin stated his law in the following way: "The higher the number of infants in a birth, the lower is the frequency of such births. If, on the average, a twin delivery in the human species occurs once for every 89 normal single deliveries, it is approximately true that a triplet delivery occurs once for every (89)2 single deliveries, and quadruplet deliveries once for

TABLE 1*

Denmark Finland Sweden Italy Scotland Germany Bulgaria United States Hungary France Australia Uruguay Spain
*Intérnational Institute of Statistics. L'Aja.

1 twin delivery to each 61.7 single deliveries

1

67.9 'i

it

1 69.0

I 76.7 ·

1 78.0 '

1 81.6

1 84.7

1 84.0 '

1 86.9 ·

1 91.8 '

1 92.0 '

1

101.8 ·t

i.

1

m.o ·1

it

TABLE 2

COMPARISON OF THE FREQUENCY OF DELIVERIES IN WHITES AND IN NEGROES IN THE
U. S. PER 100,000 BIRTHS

Single births Total of plural births Twin births Births of triplets

Whites
98,984.8 1,015.2 1,005.7 9.2

Negroes
98,729.8 1,270.2 1,250.8 19.2

'Vital Statistics, 1947, modified.

every (89) *; hence it can be said that in general, and within the limits of probability, multiple deliveries of order x twins occurs in the ratio of 1 to (89) "-1 single deliveries."
With regard to the cause of twin births, many research studies indicate that it is hereditary in nature. Table 3 reports the results of Gedda's and Capelli's studies of the families of 110 pairs of twins from

171

172 Eugenics Quarterly TABLE 3*

RESEARCH ON PRESENCE OF OTHER T W I N BIRTHS IN SEBSBIPS OF II© PAIRS OF TWINS FROM ROME

Presence of

Cases of twin other cases of Negative or births investi- twin births in uncertain

gated

sibship

results

Cases of twftn

Case* of twin Cases of twiie birth» in ma»- Cases of twin

births in nta- births in pai- ternal and Births with

ternal pedigree ternal pedi- paternal

unknown

only gree only pedigrees parentage

No. No. %

No. % No. % No. %

Nöi. %· Kat %

MZ DZ Total

51 41 80.4 10 19.6 18 <f$3 15 31.7; 8 I&5> Z 4.87 59 44 74.57 15 25.42 25 56Ä 9 20.45"- a H.38Ï 5 11.36 110 85 77.27 25 22.72 43 50.5S 22 25.88; 13; 15.29» 7 8.23

·Gedda and Capelli.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Rome, both identical (monozygotic, MZ) many pedigrees», aamd) Úte a m e is true of

and non-identical (dizygotic, DZ). As a twin and higher' ocdeir multiçife; births. (See-

check, the families of 100 unselected school

Î and 2)

children from Rome were studied. Whereas

in the first series there were 77 (27 per

cent) pairs of twins among the siblings,

they were represented in the second case

by a frequency of 23 per cent. This is a significant difference

,, which

¿r£ dtr £ cifcr§ ôgrdtr ¿r

demonstrates that a familial phenomenon

is involved, that is, an hereditary character-

istic. There are many hypotheses about the

mechanism of the heredity concerned, and

the problem must be regarded as unsolved.

Therefore, we will limit our discussion to

the one hypothesis, that of the "twinning

Fie. 1--Family tree with two

factor" or the "factor G," which is held re-

u '3 pairs of twins and one triplet

sponsible for the hereditary predisposition

to twin procreation. This does not prevent

environmental factors from acting as a

cause. With respect to the frequency of

twin deliveries in families, it must be re-

membered that in a positive sense the fre-

quency is ultimately influenced by a high

family birth rate; in a negative sense by

birth control and also by the fact that dizy-

gotic twin pregnancies are more frequent

in the second half of a woman's reproduc-

tive period.

Evidence that the "twinning factor" may play a qualitative as well as a quantitative role is found in the fact that both MZ twin births and DZ twin births can be found in

Fie. 2--Family tree with MZ and DZ pairs of twins

173

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

II The second fundamental motive that urges science to concern itself with human twins is based on the fact that the study oE twins represents an excellent method for solving problems pertaining not only to twins but also to the single-born and, consequently, to the whole human species. This second motive depends on the fact that MZ twins are considered equal from the hereditary point of view, and DZ twins can be considered equal from an environmental point of view, for they are unique in having a common residence in the maternal environment. For these reasons, twins offer an exceptional possibility for differential studies, based on intra-pair comparisons (between partners of the same pair) and on inter-pair comparisons (between groups MZ and DZ twins).
Hence, the twin research method can contribute to population studies dealing with those somatic and psychological traits which characterize a given population.
As far as somatic characteristics are concerned, the study of twins is applicable to normal as well as to pathological traits. The study of normal traits can be accomplished by intra-pair and inter-pair comparisons, and also by the use of MZ twins reared apart, or by the method of co-twin control, which subjects only one member of a pair to particular environmental changes and holds the other twin as a standard of comparison. In this way it can bé determined to what degree heredity exerts an influence and to what degree environment does.
With regard to pathological traits, or diseases, that occur in a population under study, twin research offers many possibilities, such as the following:
1. Discovery and confirmation of the hereditary nature of diseases that repeat themselves in the same pedigrees. Here research work is usually carried out by intra-pair comparisons in a series of MZ twins and a series of unselected DZ twins, and by inter-pair comparisons of the re-

sults gathered in the two series; since hereditary traits are to a high degree concordant in pairs of MZ twins and relatively less concordant in DZ pairs, a statistically useful coefficient of concordance can be derived. This coefficient applies to dominant conditions and also to recessive (homozygous) conditions which are detectable in the heterozygous state.
2. Discovery or confirmation of hereditary characteristics related to susceptibility or abnormal responses to exogenous diseases (microbic, parasitic, occupational, traumatic, etc.). Therefore, in terms of the anatomical localization of a disease, the twin study method can be applied also in the study of exogenous pathology. The basis of evaluation is analogous to that indicated in (1) ; it consists in studying the characteristics that make for susceptibility (frequency of morbidity and mortality,
serological and histological evidence of immunity, etc.), or for reactivity (clinical symptoms, course of the disease, response to therapy, type of outcome, etc.) to find out whether these characteristics are concordant or discordant in the two types of {wins.
3. Analysis of hereditary diseases by means of Kallmann's "twin family method," which provides more information on the relationship between hereditary and non-hereditary components in a particular syndrome. This analysis involves the comparison of .concordance with respect to these characteristics in a series of decreasing biological relationships consisting of the following combinations: (a) between MZ twins; (b) between DZ twins; (c) between single-born siblings; (d) between single-born half-siblings; (e) between persons coming from different parents but living in the same environment (stepbrothers, those of the same age and living together, etc.).
4. Study of the expression of a hereditary disease. In case of weak penetrance of the morbid genotype, the coefficient of con-

174 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

cordance described in (1) cannot be de- offers interesting possibilities in the follow-

pended upon entirely, because a high de- ing directions:

degree of discordance can manifest itself 1. Identification and study of instinc-

even among MZ twins. If, however, the tive tendencies and hereditary components

hereditary nature of such a disease is de- pf the mental functions by applying the

termined in another way, a low rate of method of intra-pair and inter-pair com-

concordance in MZ twins can serve to es- parisons and the "twin-family method" to

tablish an important fact about gene ex- the research that experimental psychology

pression, namely, incomplete penetrance of has carried out with regard to behavior,

the disease in question. The twin method introspection, and projective tests. In this

can also be used in studying the alter- direction interesting qualitative orienta-

native precipitating causes of a disease in tions can be obtained by studying twins

MZ twins who live in obviously different that have been raised separately and by

environments. Gedda holds that, ceteris studying the life histories of adult twins.

paribus, a significant difference in the expression of a hereditary disease between jnembers of an MZ pair is evidence for incomplete penetrance of the morbid genoíype.

2. Study of educability (phenomena depending on the availability and methods of instruction; perception, association, memory, representation, attention, mental age, attitudes, etc.) by the Co-twin control

5. Study of the variability of a heredi- method of Arnold Gesell, which gives one

tary disease. The variability of a disease member of an MZ pair instruction and

prevalent in a population can also be watches the co-twin simultaneously as a

studied in terms of the reported degree of standard of comparison. In evaluating psy-

severity, or the different expressions of a chological findings, one must beware of

disease as seen in the members of an MZ erroneous conclusions based upon observa-

pair (for example, one twin may have a tions of behavior (e.g. left-handedness in

cleft lip and palate and the co-twin a sim- one twin only).

ple dental anomaly).

3. Identification and study of psycho-

6. Improvement of nosological classifi- somatic phenomena on a hereditary basis

cation in so far as different symptom com- (environmental characteristics, morbid re-

plexes in MZ co-twins can be considered. actions, necessity for emotional response)

(This is true in the case of one twin with by the method of intra-pair and inter-pair

hay fever and the other with a rash from comparisons.

sulfonamide drugs.) On the other hand, those diseases can be regarded as genotypically different which, though having some features in common, can never be found in the same pair of MZ twins, that is, one symptom in one twin, and the other in the second twin. (This is the case with manicdepressive psychosis and schizophrenia, which must be considered clearly distinct from each other because they have never been found in one MZ pair.)

IV
The kind of twin research referred to here must be conducted on a wide scale if it is to have a significance beyond that of individual case reports, and if it is to be applied in the systematic study of population phenomena.
A complete program should be planned so as to include the following:
1. A twin registry based upon lists kept in the offices where births are recorded;

2. A special noting of individual twins Ill in the records of hospitals, institutions, in-

As far as psychological characteristics of surance companies, doctors' offices, etc.,

a population are concerned, twin research with special indexing of twins in the cata-

175

logues of cases gathered; 3. Office and clinical facilities permit-
ting medical examination of large numbers of twin pairs by standard and efficient methods. Probably also twin study deparments in institutes of human genetics and heredity clinics;
4. Establishment of twin study sections in schools of education and psychology in order to study the mental behavior of twins in relation to personality and educability of the population;

5. Initiation of social measures to favor twins, such as colonies for twins on the sea or in the mountains, social services, movies or theatrical performances especially reserved for twins, twin clubs where the wellto-do help the needy, libraries for twins, etc. In Italy several of these social measures have been promoted, and they have been found very useful in obtaining the cooperation of twins in medical and psychological studies.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

