Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Heredity counseling: The obstetrician and congenital malformations in brothers and sisters
Douglas P. Murphy M.D.
To cite this article: Douglas P. Murphy M.D. (1956) Heredity counseling: The obstetrician and congenital malformations in brothers and sisters, Eugenics Quarterly, 3:3, 161-163, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1956.9987287 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1956.9987287
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

HEREDITY COUNSELING Family Life Division
The Obstetrician and Congenital Malformations in Brothers and Sisters
DOUGLAS P. MURPHY, M.D.
Associate Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology School of Medicine
University of Pennsylvania

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

W HEN A CONGENITALLY malformed infant is born, the parents usually ask their obstetrician what their chances are of having another defective child. This is a' natural question, since brothers and sisters frequently resemble each other.
Obstetricians are likely to be at a loss to answer this question for a number of reasons. Congenital defects are of relatively infrequent occurrence. Text-books of obstetrics do not discuss the familial occurrence of congenital defects. The information that is available upon the subject is

scattered widely throughout the literature. Two books: Medical Genetics by Arnold Sorsby andHuman Genetics by R. Ruggles Gates contain a considerable amount of information dealing with congenital defects, but even these volumes may not supply the information desired by the obstetrician for the defect in question.
Data useful to the obstetrician on the likelihood of recurrence of certain congenital malformations in siblings has been summarized recently by Anderson (Table I ) . He stated that his figures were based upon

TABLE I

RISK FIGURES FOR LATER SIBLINGS

All malformations

,

Central nervous system malformations (35%)

Anencephalus

Spina bifida

Hydrocephalus

Mongolism

Muscular-skeletal malformations (25%)

Harelip with or without cleft palate

Cleft palate alone · ·

-

Polydactylia

,

Syndactylia

'

Clubfoot

'/..

Malformed arms, hands

Achondroplasia

Congenital hip dislocation

Cardiovascular malformations (20%)

All congenital hearts

Patent ductus

Genitourinary malformations (6%)

Hypospadias

·

Polycystic kidney (infant)

Gastrointestinal malformations (3%)

Exomphalos

Diaphragmatic hernia

Tracheo-esophageal fistula

Atresia ani

Mnkmle malformations (11%)

Miscellaneous

Pyloric stenosis

Incidence in Population
1 in 65

Risk Figures for Later Siblings 1 in 20

1 in 4501
1 in 375V1 in 200 1 in 550 J
1 in 600

1 in 501
I in 25 \ 1 in 22 1 in 60 J
1 in 20

1 in 1 in 1 in 1 in 1 in 1 in 1 in 1 in

1000 2500 1200 2000 1000 5000 7000 1500

1 in 7 1 in 7 1 in 2 1 in 2 1 in 30
1 in 20

1 in 150 1 in 2500

1 in 50* I in 50

1 in 1000 1 in 15000

1 in 50(?) 1 in 4

1 in 4000 1 in 10000 1 in 6000 1 in 5000

less than 1 in 100 --
less than 1 in 100 less than 1 in 100

1 in 350

1 in 17

·For any type of heart defect to recur. Courtesy of R. C. Anderson andS. C. Reed, Journal-ZMncet (Minn.) 74:175, 1954.

161

162 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

a large number of reports and emphasized the fact that they were only approximate. It is assumed that all of the conditions which he studied arise from hereditary factors.
On the basis of the data assembled by Anderson, there would seem to be but little doubt that the congenital defects which he studied are quite likely to be observed in a second sibling, provided as has been said that the cause of the defect in the first child was on an hereditary basis. The chance That any of these hereditary defects will reappear in a subsequent sibling seems to be extremely great. It would follow from this that the parents of a malformed child exhibiting the malformation reported by Anderson would be taking a considerable risk by having more children.
The chance that a defect will appear in a sibling depends upon a number of factors.
In order to supply the parents with the best possible information, the cause of the defect should be determined first of all. If the malformation resulted from some influence which was not hereditary, such as maternal pelvic irradiation or German measles, no subsequent child should be abnormally developed, provided the same cause does not operate again.
If no known cause was responsible for the malformation, then it is very likely to be the result of hereditary influences. In such a case, a human geneticist should study the distribution of the defect among the blood relatives of the infant in question. Unfortunately, there are very few geneticists in this country to offer family counseling. If a geneticist cannot study the family, it may fall to the obstetrician to advise the family. Even if information is not available upon the hereditary character of the defect in question, it is possible to tell the family how hereditary defects, in general, behave with respect to their recurrence in brothers and sisters.
One study of a large series of families ^1), into each of which a seriously defective child was born, and in which there

was no evidence to implicate a known cause, has supplied some observations bearing upon the frequency with which serious congenital malformations appear in subsequent siblings. That study led to the following observations:
1. The parents had another congenitally defective child more often than would have been expected by chance.
2. The subsequent defective child had the same defect as the one observed in its earlier born sibling more often than would have been expected by chance, i.e., in approximately 50 per cent of cases.
3. The second malformed child was more likely to be born next but one to the first defective child, than it was to be the next child after the birth of the first defective sibling.
4. The congenital defects appeared with increasing frequency after the mothers had passed 30 years of age.
On the assumption that the above observations are true, and if the family cannot be studied by a geneticist, what can the obstetrician say to the parents of the congenitally malformed child regarding having more offspring? He should give them all available facts. They should be the ones to make the final decision, as to whether they will attempt to have any more children.
The obstetrician's advice will have to depend upon: (1) Knowledge regarding the biology of congenital malformations as a group, and (2) the conditions peculiar to the family.
Certain serious malformations terminate the life of the afflicted individual relatively shortly after birth. If such a defect occurs, it is solely a problem of the parents, and may not even be a problem to them for a very long time. If the defect does not influence life expectancy, the malformation will be a problem, not only for the parents, but also for the affected individual.
The study mentioned above indicated that if two siblings carry a malformation,

163

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

the defect in the second sibling is quite likely to be the same as the one observed in the previously born defective brother or sister. If the defect seen in the first child accounted for its death shortly after birth, the parents may be willing to take the chance of having another child knowing that if it is defective, it is likely to have the same defect as the first child, and therefore it also is not likely to live very long.
The parental urge to possess at least one normal child is too well known to be mentioned. If the parents have at least one healthy offspring, this may be sufficient to satisfy the parental urge. In such a case, it might be best if they refrain from taking any further chances. On the other hand, if they have no living offspring, there might be more reason for them to accept the risk that another child will be affected, hoping that it will be normal.
The ages of the parents should be taken into consideration by the obstetrician in giving them advice. If they are under 30 years of age, there is less chance that they will have another defective child, than if one or the other parent is well over 30 years of age. After that time, there appears to be a steadily increasing chance that another child will be defective. However, regardless of the ages of the parents, they are still more likely to have another malformed child than would be expected by chance.
Although there appears to be a tendency for the malformation rate to increase with parental age, at the same time there is a small amount of evidence to suggest that the child born next after the defective sibling is less likely to be defective than is the child who is next but one to the first defective brother or sister.
On the basis of what is known regarding malformations in general, and without the benefit of a study of the family by a ge-

neticist, what general advice can the obstetrician give to the family in question?
His first statement should be that the couple has a greater chance of having another congenitally malformed child than would be expected by chance. The study forming the basis for this statement indicated that the chance of the first child being defective was 1 in 200, whereas the chance that a sibling would also be defective was 1 in 8. In other words, the chance that another sibling would be defective was 25 times greater than the chance that the first one would be defective. These data might also be stated differently by saying that the couple still has 7 chances in 8 of having a normally developed child. This is a more optimistic way of looking at the situation.
If the couple has at least one normal child, it would seem best that they do not tempt fate by continuing to increase the size of their family. If either husband or wife is late in his or her reproductive life, this would be another reason why it would again seem best not to tempt fate by having more children.
If the couple has no living offspring, and both husband and wife are under 30 years of age, they might be advised to have another child. If the next child is normal, it would seem best not to tempt fate again by trying to have a third child. If the second child is defective, again it would seem best to end the family at that point. There is evidence to indicate that the risk of having a third malformed child is even greater than the risk of having a second malformed child.
REFERENCES
1. MURPHY, D. P. Congenital Malformations. A Study of Parental Characteristics with Special Reference to the Reproductive Process. 2nd. ed. J. B. Lippincott. Phila. 1947.
2. ANDERSON, R. C. and S. C. REED. The likeli-
hood of recurrence of congenital malformations, Journal-Lancet (Minn.) 74:175, 1954.

