Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Research session: I. The influence of heredity on the health of the family
Barton Childs M.D.
To cite this article: Barton Childs M.D. (1955) Research session: I. The influence of heredity on the health of the family, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:2, 68-77, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987227 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987227
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

HEALTH AND THE FAMILY
Annual Meeting, American Eugenics Society, April 22, 1955 Held in Philadelphia, Penn. in conjunction with the
Annual Groves Conference on Marriage and the Family
Research Session
I. T H E INFLUENCE OF HEREDITY ON THE HEALTH OF THE FAMILY
Chairman: Frederick Osborn Discussants: Gordon Allen, M.D.; Stanley Gartler
General Session
II. T H E MAKE-UP OF THE HEALTHY FAMILY III. HEREDITY COUNSELING
Chairman: Franz J. Kallmann, M.D. Discussants: Robert C. Cook, Frank Lorimer, Emily Mudd

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

I. THE INFLUENCE OF HEREDITY ON THE HEALTH OF THE FAMILY

BARTON CHILDS, M.D.
Department of Pediatrics The Johns Hopkins Medical School and
The Johns Hopkins Hospital

IN A TIME WHEN medicine has become so
diversified that ever-increasing specialization of personnel is occurring, many medical educators are emphasizing the importance of generalization. In some medical schools emphasis is being given to integration of patient material into teaching of the preclinical sciences so as to cause the student to see the importance of physiology, anatomy and biochemistry in disease. In addition the importance of the relationship of the patient and his disease to the health and welfare of his family and the community is being stressed, so that the student may see the impact of disease upon, not only the physical and emotional health, but also the social and economic health of individuals and groups of individuals. In some schools, students are as-

signed to one or more families, very early in their career, and are thenceforth responsible, under guidance, for the health of such families. In this way the student sees the many factors which are compounded to make for health or disease, and the relationship of these factors in the patient or potential patient to his environment.
Not least among such components is the genetic constitution with which the individual confronts his environment, and much of the variation in the clinical picture of a particular disease is certainly due to the constitutional background upon which the pathological changes are superimposed. These inherited qualities are in part shared by the members of a family, so that patterns of behavior in health and disease are more likely to be similar within

68

69

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

families than between unrelated individuals. Yet because of the particulate nature of the inherited genes, variation within families can still be large, and one may find widely divergent characteristics among brothers and sisters. Thus the medical student in studying the health of his families will see certain similarities in characteristics within each family as well as dissimilarities, many of which are inherited, though variable through modification by age and the special experiences of the individual, as well as by other inherited traits. An important part of the problem posed the medical student then, and indeed every doctor whether specialist or general practitioner, is the assessment of the expression of heritable capacities of the members of a family in the environment in which they live. This is not always simple, since we know so little about the mode of action of genes or the influence of the environment on their expression. In many instances we do not know the mode of inheritance of particular traits, or how many genes may be involved. But the expression of genes is not unmodifiable and an expansion of our knowledge of human genetics can lead to therapy where appropriate, and more importantly to prevention which is certainly the goal of medicine.
We do not know with much precision the way in which genes operate to control the balance of physiological and chemical mechanisms which we call health. A great deal of research has been devoted to the study of the nature of gene action, and it appears that what genes do is to control biochemical functions. Each step in the synthesis or breakdown of chemical substances or in those processes involving utilization or conservation of energy is mediated by one or more enzyme catalysts. There is a very close relationship between genes and enzymes, and particular genes appear to control in some way the functions of particular enzymes. Thus the genetic constitution exerts an ultimate control over the

growth, development, integration, and adaptation of the individual through its influence on the chemical structure and function of the body, and this influence is operative at conception and ceases only with death. All the genes in the population which control a particular function are not identical, and some must differ slightly in that function in a quantitative way though not qualitatively, so that it is probable that more than one, possibly many, variants exist of each gene. Because of the nature of chromosomal inheritance no individual may hold more than two genes for a particular function, but if there are several variants or alleles, a number of pair combinations may exist in different persons. Various combinations of alleles are part of the reason why individuals differ one from another. An additional cause of variation is found in the fact that genes in other parts of the same or other chromosomes have effects which may modify the expression of a particular gene. Finally the external environment may modify in various ways the expression of gene action. Indeed we know of biochemical systems under genie control which are activated only in certain environmental states. Such systems might easily never be called into play; yet the potential exists and is inherited.
Given a large body of knowledge about the sources of variation, based mostly on investigations of animals, insects, plants, and micro-organisms, the question might reasonably be asked, why do we know so little about the genetic origin of human variation? We cannot do breeding or other experiments on humans, and so are left with the technique of observation of characteristics which can be detected and measured. This is most easily done with characteristics which present sharp discontinuities. That is, the individual either has the characteristic or he does not, and we can then separate people into discrete classes. We can do this in the case of blood groups, where an individual has red blood cells which contain on their surfaces certain:

70 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

specific antigens whose appearance is due to single gene effects. The presence or absence of these blood-group substances is not modifiable by the environment, and the variation between individuals can always be assigned to the presence or absence in their genotypes of specific genes. Unfortunately, the bulk of non-pathological human variation is not so simple. When we come to measure normal morphological and physiological variation, we usually find a quantitative spectrum. That is, the variation is due to numbers of genes, each exerting its specific effect, and producing a characteristic which is the result of the cumulative effects of such genes, and which is what we observe and measure. There is no question, for instance, that stature and intelligence are in large part genetically determined, but so many are the components and so complex the mechanisms which make up the final, measurable characteristic that one is at a loss to separate and discover the single gene effects which must play a part. In general, therefore, we may say that the more immediate the measurable effect to the action of the gene, the more likely we are to be able to detect its association with the gene and to determine its mode of action and to be able to characterize its mode of inheritance, and in addition the less likely is the effect to be subject to modification by external influences. All this is not to say that we shall never know much about the inheritance of non-pathological characteristics. If one assumes that each gene has an effect, as methods of measurement become more refined it may be possible to detect and characterize their functions.
It is in disease states that we have a better chance to observe gene action, since affected individuals are so obviously different from normals. Here we are much more likely to be able to observe and measure some characteristic of a chemical nature which is closely related to the fundamental gene action. In such cases we are measuring the action of altered or mutant

genes, and we usually find that the effects of such genes is not the creation of something new but the failure to perform adequately some chemical process. For instance, hemophilia is well recognized as a genetically determined disease. In hemophiliacs, the abnormal gene has not performed a new process but has failed in its normal function of producing a protein substance which is an important component of the blood-clotting mechanism. It is through the study of such pathological states that light is thrown on normal mechanisms, and through the study of mutant genes that we learn of the functions of normal ones.
It might be of interest at this point to examine some diseases in whose pathogenesis the inherited constitution plays a part to see the interrelationships of inherited capacities and the environment in family health.
Let us first consider rheumatic fever, a condition which looms large these days as a cause of morbidity and death in young people. It is clear that more than one member of a family is often affected, suggesting some heritable factor. Principal among studies suggesting this are those of Wilson and her associates (1954). They were able to study the incidence of the disease among offspring and other relatives of patients followed in their cardiac clinic over a period of many years. Assuming that an affected individual receives from each parent a single gene predisposing to the disease, they calculated the expectation of rheumatics in families in which one or both parents were affected, one or both parents had affected relatives, or one or neither had any history of the disease in the family. These expected numbers agreed rather well with the numbers of rheumatic patients observed, suggesting that a single gene substitution was responsible, and that the affected person carried two such genes. Other workers have not found the problem so straightforward and have had to say only that there is a strong hereditary pre-

71

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

disposition (Stevenson and Cheeseman, the virulence or avirulence of the organisms

1953). We do not know the precise involved, itself a genetic factor, but of the

nature of this predisposing factor, but it is invader not the host. In part, the resistance

important to think of it as susceptibility or susceptibility may be due to the function

since we know that whether or not a per- of a number of mechanisms present in the

son develops the disease depends in part body to combat infection. Genetic control

upon his environment. Certainly the re- of variations in these mechanisms of re-

lationship of streptococcal infections to sistance and immunity is very difficult to

rheumatic fever is very clear, and we know establish, but animal experimentation im-

that the condition is not common in warm plies very strongly that it exists. Animals

dry climates. It is also less common in per- have been infected with various organisms

sons living in homes with adequate sanita- and the survivors bred (Gowan 1952, Web-

tion and space and where good nutrition ster 1937). By continuous inbreeding of

prevails. Thus genetic susceptibles un- survivors for many generations, strains of

doubtedly escape because of control of the animals have been produced which are 95

environment. The usefulness of this knowl- per cent resistant. These strains are re-

edge in medicine is clear. The presence in sistant only to the organisms originally

the family of an affected individual suggests used and others closely related but not to

that other members may be susceptible, and organisms taxonomically distant. This sug-

such a family is then marked for special gests what one might expect; that very

attention. Initial attacks of rheumatic many genes are involved in the control of

fever can be prevented by immediate and what we label broadly as resistance, and

sustained treatment of streptococcal infec- that each one has a specific function, medi-

tions with penicillin. In addition very early ating the response to specific stimuli.

treatment of active rheumatic fever and prophylactic use of antibiotics to prevent recurrent attacks will enable the patient to avoid the permanent damage to the heart which leads to disability and death. Finally measures could be taken to improve the living conditions of susceptible families. Thus by control of the environment, the ravages of a disease to which some members of families are innately predisposed may be avoided. The next important step is to learn the precise nature of the predisposition. If this were known, susceptible individuals could be found without reference to an affected relative.

As if to contradict this thesis, an interesting condition has recently been described among humans in which the normal mechanisms for the production of all antibodies against bacterial and viral antigens is absent. Such individuals suffer repeated and often intractable infections with a variety of bacteria and viruses (Bruton 1952, Janeway, Apt and Gitlin 1953). The blood proteins of these individuals have been found to lack the gamma globulin fraction, the fraction wherein most antibodies are found. There is evidence that the periodic administration of gamma globulin is helpful, as is the use of antibiotics. Other

Rheumatic fever follows steroptococcal mechanisms of resistance are intact. The

infections, but relatively few individuals number of cases reported is small, but one

who suffer such infections develop rheu- clinically homogeneous group consists of

matic fever. Doubtless this is a reflection boys only, and sometimes more than one per

of susceptibility or lack thereof to the family, suggesting that the defect is due to

disease. On the other hand people vary in a single gene, possibly sex-linked. If this

their resistance or susceptibility to strepto- is in fact a genetic entity, we appear to

coccal or other infections. This is in part have a single gene which controls the pro-

due to housing, sanitation, nutrition or duction of most if not all antibodies. On

other features of environment, as well as the other hand the animal work just cited

72 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

indicates many genes involved in specific relationship of the stresses of living in these

resistance to specific organisms.

times and high blood pressure. It is inter-

A mechanism of resistance of viral in- esting to observe that here too there is a

fections which is genetically controlled has constitutional factor which appears to dis-

been reported by Sabin (1954). A strain of pose certain individuals to the development

mice was found to be resistant to a par- of hypertension and coronary artery disease.

ticular strain of yellow fever virus and a Elevation in blood pressure is not itself a

few allied viruses. This resistance was disease, but is a sign of disease, and one

achieved through the ability of the host must first distinguish that which can be

to depress the multiplication of the viruses assigned to certain well-defined causes and

within the cells, and this ability is a that in which the cause is ill defined and

property of the cells themselves, and not which is therefore called essential hyper-

due to the production of antibody or any tension. It is in this latter group that

other of the usual mechanisms. It is inter- familial aggregations of hypertensives are

esting that the effect did not obtain when found. It is not surprising that we do not

the mice were exposed to viruses other than know the precise genetic basis for essential

that of yellow fever and a few related ones. hypertension. This is certainly a condition

About the nature of genie control of re- in which the inter-relationships of genetic,

sistance to viruses in humans we know very metabolic, and psychologic factors make

little. Observations have been made, how- the task of elucidating the role of each very

ever, which do suggest familial suscepti- difficult. Perhaps the best way to study this

bility to poliomyelitis (Herndon and Jen- disease is to determine the characteristics of

nings 1951).

people who may one day become hyper-

The health of the entire family is affected by the degree of susceptibility or resistance of its members. The careful physician who knows the family well will take this matter into account and undertake measures of prophylaxis or prevention of infection accordingly. Here again, since we do not know the precise chemical or immunologic nature of variations in resistance, our efforts are directed primarily toward control of the environment. Even here we are met by obstacles in the form of hereditary variations in the microorganisms which cause infections. It is well known that mutant strains of many bacterial organisms exist which are resistant to the effects of antibiotics. Ordinarily these are but a small fraction of a population of organisms. But when the susceptibles are destroyed by the antiobiotic, the mutant resistant bacteria increase freely. Fortunately we can usually switch the treatment to another drug to which the mutant is sensitive.
We read a great deal in the popular press and elsewhere about the cause and effect

tensive. This is the approach taken by Thomas and her associates, (1951, 1952), who are studying certain physiologic, metabolic, and psychological functions of medical students at the Johns Hopkins University Medical School. Measurements are made of functions referable to the heart and vascular system under resting conditions and after various stimuli. This information is then reviewed in the light of the presence or lack of hypertension in parents and grandparents. It is apparent in these studies that circulatory lability is more often found in students who are the offspring of hypertensives than in those whose parents have normal blood pressure. Studies are also being carried out to assess the psychological make-up and adaptibility of the students, and these have shown differences between subjects with positive family history and those with negative history of parental hypertension or coronary artery disease. Many other characteristics show similar correlations, and the problem of the extent of participation of genetic factors as opposed to

73

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

environmentally conditioned similarities in ly small caloric intake in a sedentary

behavior patterns (which in themselves individual. Overeating may be habitual

doubtless have a genetic component), is a because of lifelong exposure to an abun-

very difficult one to resolve. Still, if po- dance of food, or may in some, provide a

tential hypertensives or potential victims of form of satisfaction which is a substitute

coronary occlusion can be ascertained by for other gratifications denied the indi-

the family patterns, much can be done to vidual. Sedentary habits may be due to

contribute to a more healthy future for illness or disability which prevent much

such persons. An interesting study on muscular activity, or to conditions of

hypertension has been made by physicians temperament or psychological adaptation.

employed by the Du Pont Company Conversely, of course, leanness may appear

(D'Alonzo, Fleming and Gehrman, 1955). in highly active or tense, overanxious peo-

They found an increased incidence of ple, who but for this could be obese. Many

hypertension among employees who had studies attempting to sort out these factors

one or two hypertensive parents. They re- and show a genetic propensity for obesity

gard this as significant and of value in job have been done. (For reviews of the sub-

placement or assessment of future physical ject see Mayer, 1953, and Childs, 1954).

capacity of employees, and such informa- These have shown a greater likelihood of

tion will help to direct their efforts toward obesity in parents, sibs, and offspring of

modification or prevention of disease. obese persons than persons of normal

Hypertension and coronary artery disease weight. Twin studies of Newman and as-

are conditions of middle age primarily, and sociates and of Von Verschuer have shown

disability or loss of the family breadwinner high correlation coefficients for identical

or mother are serious blows to the health twins, while those of fraternal twins and

and welfare of a family unit, quite apart sibs were lower and about equal. Identical

from the suffering and disability of suscepti- twin pairs reared separately showed coef-

ble persons within the family.

ficients which were lower than those reared

There are many other pathological states together, yet higher than those of fraternal

in humans in which there appears to be a twins and sibs. These data do indicate a

genetic contribution, but in which our genetic factor but leave us in the dark as to

methods of measurement are not sufficient- mechanisms, and in particular families the

ly refined to assign the extent or even physician often finds it difficult to know the

quality of that contribution. A good ex- extent to which habit, lack of exercise,

ample of this is obesity. Obesity is perhaps temperament, psychological adjustment or

not a disease, but it may be considered in the genotype is responsible, or the inter-

many cases to be pathological. Obese per- relationships of any or all of the above.

sons do not live so long as normal weight What we need to find are physiological or

or lean individuals, and there is a strong biochemical patterns typical of the various

positive correlation with hypertension and kinds of obesity which can be studied in

coronary artery disease. It is certainly the families. This is being done in animal

experience of everyone to know families in genetics. Mayer has studied an example of

which obesity is a characteristic feature. In obesity in mice who show a fundamental

this sense it is certainly familial, and doubt- alteration of carbohydrate metabolism, and

less there is some constitutional element which appropriate breeding experiments

in it. But all obesity is not due to the same have shown to (be due to a single gene

cause. It is due to a caloric intake which is inherited as a Mendelian recessive. These

in excess of the energy and growth require- mice are very inactive, but when forced to

ments of the individual. This may result exercise they lose weight rapidly, but gain

equally from overeating, or from a relative- again when allowed to be inactive. But if

74 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

a gene causing mice to indulge in a ment is available, and in still others,

peculiar "waltzing" behavior is introduced though treatment may help, some damage

into the genotype of the hereditarily obese may have been done which cannot be re-

mice, they are no longer obese, due to their paired. Thus in varying degree, patients

increased activity. These experiments illus- with many of the hereditary diseases have

trate the action of the environment on problems which, during childhood at least,

genetically determined characteristics, and must be solved by the responsible members

the interaction of genes within the geno- of the family. In addition, once parents are

type, and highlight the unsolved problems shown to be carriers of deleterious genes,

in human obesity where we have much less there is the problem of risk of subsequent

information and are not free to perform pregnancies producing additional defective

experiments at will.

offspring. Thus such families must accept

So far I have said nothing about defects which may be directly traceable to single gene substitutions and their impact on family health. In this area we are confronted with more discrete, sharply dis-

burdens which other families do not have. Such problems are often a financial drain, requiring considerable outlays for hospitalization, medications and physicians. There are difficulties too in rearing children who

continuous characteristics whose apparent are not perfectly healthy, and this may

genetic determination may be more clearly strain the emotional and intellectual re-

seen. In some of these conditions we are sources of the members of the family. In

able to track down the basic biochemical this sense, then, the healthy outlook and

aberration and substitution therapy may prospects of the whole family may be taxed.

be suggested. This is to say that the effects of the gene are more closely related to the observable and measurable characteristic in the individual than in the conditions previously discussed, and some at least of such effects are less modifiable by exogenous influences as well as by other genes in the genotype. Such defects are doubtless very numerous and involve every chemical and morphological system in the body. One might predict that whenever an enzyme presides over a chemical process there is a potential source of inborn error. Many would doubtless be lethal, perhaps during embryonic life and thus resist discovery, but new ones are being described all the time, and an ever-increasing amount of research is being devoted to the detection and elucidation of such diseases.

There are, for example, a number of genetically determined conditions resulting in mental defect, often severe. Institutional facilities are inadequate to care for all such children and the family must find ways to care for them. This problem often creates difficulties in the home. It is a serious blow to parental pride, and defective children do not always find the acceptance that healthy ones do. One often finds obscure feelings of guilt in the parents, and sometimes there is discord over the methods to be used to care for the child. In addition a retarded child certainly requires more attention than a normal one, and in some instances the healthy children are neglected in favor of the retarded one, and, as brothers and sisters grow older, the presence of a de-

Some of the morphological defects are fective child in the home may prove a

amenable to definitive surgical treatment, source of embarassment to them. Finally

but many genetically determined conditions looming over all is the threat that sub-

are errors for which, if any treatment is sequent children may be equally affected.

available, some form of substitution therapy This in itself may create a special problem

is required. In this sense the patient never since sometimes one parent is anxious to

outlives his disease and must consider it accept the risk and the other hangs back.

in all aspects of life. In others no treat- In these ways is the well-being and unity

75

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

of a family strained when faced with a Play and school are constantly interrupted

retarded or defective child. Much patience, by thirst and the need to void, and neither

tact, and acceptance are required of each child has ever slept for eight consecutive

member, and not all families are equal to the task.
Other types of defect pose similar as well as diverse problems. We have had the opportunity to follow for a number of years a family in which among seven sibs are

hours in his life. Partly because of the problems created by these children the mother has been left by three husbands, but has found a satisfactory solution to her needs in a fourth, who is a good provider and fond of the boys.

four boys who suffer from an unusual form This illness has been disastrous for two

of diabetes insipidus for which there is no children in this family, has seriously re-

treatment. The defect in this disease is duced the potentialities of two more, and

one of nearly complete lack of ability to made a normal, healthy family life im-

concentrate solid waste materials in the possible. Other families might cope with

urine. The urine is therefore very dilute, the problem more constructively, or had

which means a very large volume is ex- the disease been milder less dislocation

creted. This in turn requires a very large would have resulted, but as in all such con-

intake of water, a need which is so vital ditions, the real answer is some form of

that deprivation for more than several treatment.

hours may result in collapse and death. For example, as infants these children required about one pint of fluid per pound of body weight per day, and those who survived, now at ages 10 and 12 years, ingest about two gallons each per day. This family is made up of two unaffected girls, one unaffected boy, and four affected boys, of which only two now survive. The fact that only boys are affected in this and other families suggests that the presumed gene is inherited as a sex-linked recessive, though we have recently found a family of two affected boys in which the mother also has the disease. Both boys are small for their age, and both are somewhat slow mentally and rather overactive, though they are pleasant and appealing children. They have lived with constant thirst, which as infants had to be satisfied by feedings every hour or two, day and night. This need had to be attended to, until the children could serve themselves, by the mother, to whom fatigue was a constant companion. As the children grew older each minor illness or respiratory infection, which in a normal child might be treated with an aspirin tablet and a day in bed, became a serious threat, often requiring hospitalization, with its attendant financial losses.

Another condition which exhibits some interesting features from the genetic point of view is virilizing adrenal hyperplasia. In this condition there is a partial block in the synthesis by the adrenal gland of compound F, a substance with important metabolic functions which are essential for life. In order to induce secretion of amounts of this hormone needed to maintain the body in efficient balance, the pituitary gland, which exerts quantitative control over the secretions of the adrenal, overstimulates the latter. This brings about a material increase in the size of the adrenal glands, and the release into the blood of large amounts of male sex hormones which these glands normally secrete in small quantity (Wilkins 1952). The effect of this is very rapid somatic growth and virilization. Children of a few years of age appear several years older and show development of secondary sex characteristics very early in life. The disease occurs in both males and females, and masculinization occurs equally in the latter with masculine distribution of body hair necessitating shaving and even, in older women, baldness. In such individuals, all female sex characteristics are suppressed.

In 1950 it was discovered by Wilkins that

76 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

cortisone could be administered to substitute for the natural adrenal hormone, thereby reducing the pituitary stimulation and therefore the oversecretion of masculinizing hormone. Under treatment growth slows down to normal rates and virilization is prevented. In older girls and adult women, female sex characteristics then appear.
The disease often appears in more than one sib, though not in related individuals of different generations. We were recently able to study the genetics of this condition in 76 individuals from 56 families, all patients from the endocrine clinic of Dr. Lawson Wilkins. The evidence suggests very strongly that it is due to a single gene substitution, manifesting as a Mendelian recessive. The disease is, therefore, another genetically determined inborn error of metabolism, and the problems posed in the family are similar to those created by other genetic aberrations.
There is another aspect of this disease of important biological and cultural significance, and one which raises difficult questions for the family. Since the condition is an inborn metabolic error, evidences of it are often present at birth. In girls, the most conspicuous evidence of the disease is in the external genitalia. These organs look ambiguous so that one cannot be sure whether the baby is a boy or a girl, though the internal sexual organs are entirely female. Some such girls have been mistaken for males and have been raised as boys, a role in life which in many cases they have assumed with ease and without question. Some have functioned as males all their lives and have been as virile and masculine in their orientation as any male. Others have been raised as girls, though with masculine body build and hair, and masculine-appearing genitalia. In these latter cases psychological orientation is feminine, though such individuals are often deeply confused by their own masculine appearance. The psychological aspects of this disease and others which show anatomical contradictions of the genetic sex

have been extensively studied by Money, Hampson and Hampson (1955). They have found that the gender role which a child establishes depends upon the orientation given the child by his family and the world at large, and upon the child's own observations of anatomical differences between the two sexes. Thus a female with male-like genitalia will be confused by her anatomical similarity to males, when her family regard her and bring her up as female. Similarly confusion results when a female who has been reared as a boy is converted to a girl upon discovery of her genetic sex. The psychosexual pattern of the individual becomes indelibly imprinted very early in life, apparently during the second year, and Money, Hampson and Hampson have found that change of rearing after 18 months is likely to result in serious disturbance to the patient. Fortunately, so far as patients with virilizing adrenal hyperplasia are concerned, early recognition of genital anomalies and treatment with cortisone prevents masculinization of females and the unhappy confusion is avoided. Plastic surgery will rectify the genital abnormalities, and such individuals may take their places as normal, healthy females, provided, of course, that they continue the treatment for the duration of life. The implication is that the gender role is established in close conformity with the appearance of the individual and the relationship established with other persons, most notably the family. The genetic sex makes very little difference. These general conclusions have been reached through study of a variety of types of ambisexuality, including genetic males whose anatomical configuration is female. As a result of these studies we see evidence that the gender role is not automatically dictated by the inherited genetic material but is extremely responsive to post-natal environment and social milieu.
Conclusion:
One could cite many more examples of

77

the influence of heredity on health and to these problems lies in the discovery of

disease, but perhaps these discussed will the mechanisms of gene action, so that the

have shown the intricacies of the expression damaging effects of deleterious genes may

of inherited potentialities in various en- be prevented or if this is not possible an

vironments which form the individual who appropriate treatment may be devised. It

experiences health and disease. This is the is encouraging toknow that these problems

stuff of which variation is made, no less in are being attacked with great vigor. New

disease than in health, and this the phy- and more refined methods for the measure-

sician must recognize if he would give his ment of biochemical functions are becom-

patient good care.

ing available all thetime, andthemedical

All disease is a family affair in thesense literature is filled with reports of research

that demands are made upon time, energy, illuminating the nature of the genetic as-

emotion and finances. Perhaps genetic pects of disease. One day we will have

disease is more so than most because the means of prevention and treatment which

defects are so often permanent or long will relieve a serious strain on the health

lasting, and there is the risk to runof and well-being of many families.

disease in subsequent children. The answer

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

REFERENCES

1955, in Press.

SABIN, A. B., Genetic Factors Affecting Susceptibil-

BRUTON, O. C., Agammaglobulinemia, Pediatrics,9 : ity andResistance to Virus Diseases of the Nerv-

722. 1952.

ous System, in "Genetics and the Inheritance of

CHILDS, B., "Constitutional Factors in Obesity, in Integrated Neurological and Psychiatric Pat-

Fat Metabolism," The Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1954, Najjar, V.A.,ed.

terns," Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore,1954, Hooker D.andHare C. C., ed.

D'ALONZO, C. A., FLEMING, A. J., GEHRMAN, G. H.,
J.A.M.A., 157: 631, 1955. GOWAN, J. W., "Genetics andDisease Resistance, in
Genetics in the 20th Century," MacMillan,New

STEVENSON, A. C., and CHEESEMAN, E. A., Ann.
Eugenics, 17: 177, 1953. Heredity and rheumatic fever. THOMAS, C. B., The heritage of hypertension,

York, 1952, L. C. Dunn, ed.
HERNDON, C. N., and JENNINGS, R. G., Am. J. Hum.
Genet., 3 : 17,1951. A twin-family study of sus-

Trans. Assoc. of Am. Physicians, 6 5 : 121, 1952. , Observations on some possible precur-
sors of essential hypertension and coronary artery

ceptibility to poliomyelitis.

disease. Bull. Johns Hopkins Hosp., 8 9 : 419,

JANEWAY, C. A., APT, L., and GITLIN, D., Agamma-

1951.

globulinemia, Trans. Assoc. Amer. Physicians, 6 6 : WEBSTER, L. T., Inheritance of resistance of mice to

220, 1953.

enteric bacteria and neurotropic infections. J.

MAYER, J., Genetic, traumatic, and environmental Exp. Med., 6 5 : 261, 1937.

factors in the etiology of obesity. Physiol. Rev., WILKINS, L., The diagnosis of the adrenogenital

3 3 : 472, 1953.
MONEY, J., HAMPSON, J. G., and HAMPSON, J. L.,

syndrome and its treatment with cortisone. J. Pediat., 4 1 : 860, 1952.

Hermaphroditism: Recommendations concerning WILSON, M. G., and SCHWEITZER, M., Pattern of

ing Assignment o£ Sex, Change of Sex, and Psy- hereditary susceptibility in rheumatic fever. Circhologic Management. "Psychosomatic Medicine," culation, 1 0 : 699, 1954.

