Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Key to the secrets of heredity
K. Tolkachev
To cite this article: K. Tolkachev (1966) Key to the secrets of heredity, Eugenics Quarterly, 13:4, 353-354, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1966.9987688 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1966.9987688
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:29

Brief Reports

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

KEY TO THE SECRETS OF HEREDITY*

K. TOLKACHEV
Novosti Press Agency (APN) Moscow USSR

A thematic exposition on the latest achievements of Soviet biologists in the field of genetics was recently opened in the Biology Pavilion of the USSR Exhibition of Economic Achievement.
Colorful models demonstrate the structure of a cell, of nucleic acid (which carried inheritance information), and a diagram is given of the biosynthesis of protein. Research into human genetics is widely represented.
This exposition was prepared by a group of scientists under the guidance of Lenin Prize winner N. P. Dubinin, director of the Genetics Institute of the Soviet Academy of Sciences.
Various materials illustrate inheritance mechanisms in humans at the cell level. The study of chromosomes makes it possible to diagnose under the microscope a number of complicated congenital diseases and to distinguish normal cells from malignant ones.
Elucidation of the role of chromosomes in inheritance processes opens wide prospects for the application of genetics to crop selection, livestock breeding, and bacterial cultivation and makes it possible to solve problems in combating congenital diseases in humans.
This is why the Directives of the 23rd Congress of the CPSU provide for further study of the processes occurring in living matter, and genetic laws gov-
* News release, June 17, 1966.

erning the cultivation of micro-organisms, crop-selection, and cattle breeding. The aim of these studies is to solve genetics problems connected with congenital diseases, and to obtain new highyield crops and highly productive strains of livestock.
During recent years, the method of heterosis is being more widely applied in crop selection, seed growing, and livestock breeding. This method leads to improved viability and productivity of first generation hybrids as compared ·with the parent forms. Soviet and foreign selectionists have shown that heterosis increases the yield from crop raising and cattle breeding by 25 to 30 per cent. For instance, the use of heterosis in the cultivating of rye enabled Byelorussian selectionists to obtain a new variety, "Polykrosnaya-1," which exceeds the standard variety yield by 230 kilograms per hectare. One may obtain an especially large effect from heterosis in the case of polyploid organisms, the cells of which contain an increased number of chromosomes. Thus, the local variety of polyploid sugar-beets, "Kubansky polyhybrid-9," exceeds the root-harvest of the standard variety by 3,700 kilograms per hectare, and in addition contains savings effected in growing this variety amount to more than 6 million rubles a year.
Displays at the exposition also ac-
quaint the excursionist with the method

353

354

Brief Reports

Eugen. Quart.

of selection by mutation, that is, the obtaining of stable new varieties of organisms through the action of chemical and physical agents which increase hereditary variability by hundreds and thousands of times. Here the work of the Institute of Chemical Physics and the Institute of Biophysics of the Soviet Academy of Sciences in searching for new, highly effective chemical mutagens is demonstrated. More than 200 research organizations and breeding stations throughout the country are now taking part in these studies. Recently, the State Agricultural Testing Station received five new varieties of crops obtained using ionized radiation.
In the field of animal husbandry, the exposition propagates the application of heterosis in poultry farming, and also the genetic principles of breeding new

strains of fur-bearing animals. For instance, a new breed of mink with an unusual color--smoky-beige with a noticeable light-blue tint--was evolved at the Institute of Cytology and Genetics of the Siberian Branch of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. The raising of colored minks is being successfully expanded. At mink farms, minks are now being bred in a wide variety of colors-- sapphire, winter blue, pearl, and others.
A separate display is devoted to the genetics of laboratory animals, upon which experiments are being conducted to determine the genetic effects of ionized radiation, chemicals, and viruses.
This exposition is of great interest not only to specialists, but to every visitor to the USSR Exhibition of Economic Achievement.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

