Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Selection against "colorblindness" among "primitive" populations
R. H. Post
To cite this article: R. H. Post (1965) Selection against "colorblindness" among "primitive" populations, Eugenics Quarterly, 12:1, 28-29, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1965.9987604 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1965.9987604
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

Communication

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

SELECTION AGAINST "COLORBLINDNESS" AMONG "PRIMITIVE" POPULATIONS

R. H. POST
Ann Arbor, Michigan

Three years ago a tabulation was presented in this journal of the frequencies of sex-linked color vision deficiencies among males in two classes of populations: (1) hunters and gatherers of food, in various parts of the world, and (2) Europeans (Post, 1962). Protan males averaged approximately .005 and .02, respectively; deuteran males, approximately .015 and .06. Since males are hemizygous for the mutant alleles which produce "colorblindness" at each of the loci here concerned, these frequencies are fair estimates of the corresponding gene frequencies. Under certain assumptions explained with the tabulations, it seemed plausible to let the differences between the frequencies of the two classes--viz., .015 for protans, .045 for deuterans--represent the increase in the gene frequencies for the two types of "colorblindness" among European populations since the time they relinquished their hunting and gathering cultures. This was arbitrarily taken at 150 generations ago, as a minimum.
From these figures it is possible to estimate the mutation rates at the loci for protan and deuteran mutant alleles, under the additional assumption that natural selection against them has been completely relaxed during this time. Thus, for protans, ^(o^) = .015 4-150= .0001 and for deuterans, ^(cvd»)= .045-j150=.0003. In this simple model all other forces which might influence gene

frequencies are considered absent, includ-

ing reverse mutation.

Speculating still further, an estimate

was made of the rate of natural selection

against "colorblind" males in "primitive"

cultures. For autosomal dominant genes,

under the uniformly high rates of natural

selection assumed for primitive man,

genetic deaths would have been balanced

by and thus equal the product of muta-

tion times gene frequency, or s=^q.

For sex-linked genes such as the alleles

for protans and deuterans, considering

males only, this product is multiplied

by one-third, since approximately one-

third of the population's X-chromosomes

occur among males. The corresponding

formula, ^sq=/* or s=3/*/q, is given by

Li (1955, p. 287). Substituting the values

suggested above, for protan alleles we

3 v 10-*

have teran

s(cvPi) = allel'es,

55X

10-3 v)

=.06
X

and
X

for deu-
=.06.

' 15x10-"

The selection rate at each locus is the

same.

As Neel and Post (1963) pointed out,

this rate is very high. It is difficult to

imagine six out of one hundred "color-

blind" males in hunting and collecting

societies failing to reproduce (or the

equivalent of six per cent, through larger

percentages suffering only partial reduc-

tion in reproduction) because of color

vision defect.

Two exercises are suggested which

might help to make the figure appear

28

Vol. 12, No. 1

Colorblindness

29

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

more realistic. Both are based on primitive man's dependence upon his vision to find his way about the unmarked wilderness, perhaps particularly to find his way to his camp or base when alone, under conditions of stress such as darkness or twilight, hunger or fatigue, warfare or hunting.
The first exercise, highly subjective but nevertheless impressive, is to spend a day walking through primeval "wildlands" with two companions who are unfamiliar with the area, one of whom is a protan or deuteran and the other possessed of normal color vision, both nevertheless enjoying 20/20 vision acuity or better. Ask them to help you note and memorize every possible natural landmark and vista which might be recognized and utilized for helping them find the way home at the end of the day. Discuss the visibility of each landmark in detail, as if giving instruction to Boy Scouts or guerilla warfare trainees. Before long it will be apparent that the "colorblind" companion is under a considerable handicap. This will be particularly notable towards dusk upon observing and discussing landmarks and vistas memorized earlier in the day under different conditions of light and glare. A modification of this exercise may be practised by a person of normal color vision in viewing "nature's signposts" through a variety of color filters, such as to give him a "colorblind eye" view of the world.
As another exercise one may show to an audience of "colorblind" and normal persons colored slides of selected photographs of "nature's signposts" which are distinguishable from their background by very slight differences in hue or glare. To add a more realistic touch, some of the slides may concern footprints, par-

ticularly those photographed on closely cropped grass under a light dew. By trial and error it may be possible to select certain slides which will differentiate "colorblind" persons with an accuracy considerably greater than six per cent. Indeed, some slides may be as effective as the more critical of the Ishihara plates used for diagnosis. While the scores from such testing cannot be given serious consideration, they are at least suggestive of the tests which nature imposes on "primitive" hunters.
A final consideration is that "primitive" societies frequently rewarded their more successful hunters and warriors, etc., with more wives (Neel, et al., 1964, pp. 127-128). Selection rates were thus magnified, by what might be termed "Darwinian leverage."
A frequently heard counter argument is that "colorblind primitives" would develop compensatory methods of finding their way through nature's unmarked wilderness, such as by learning to note signposts which are not distinguishable primarily by color. While this phenomenon cannot be denied, it may be pointed out in rebuttal that such compensations would be associated with experience of age, whereas it seems likely that selection would be highest among boys, particularly young and inexperienced boys.
REFERENCES
Li, C. C., 1955. Population Genetics. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
NEEL, J. V., F. M. SALZANO, P. C. JUNQUEIRA, F. KEITER, and D. MAYBURY-LEWIS, 1964.
Studies on the Xavante Indians of the Brazilian Mato Grosso. Am. J. Hum. Gen., 16: 52-140.
NEEL, J. V., and R. H. POST, 1963. Transitory
"Positive" Selection for Colorblindness? Eugen. Quart., 10: 33-35. POST, R. H., 1962. Population Differences in Red and Green Color Vision Deficiency: A Review, and a Query on Selection Relaxation. Eugen. Quart., 9: 131-146.

