Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Heredity counseling in Japan
Taku Komai
To cite this article: Taku Komai (1957) Heredity counseling in Japan, Eugenics Quarterly, 4:2, 99-103, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1957.9987314 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1957.9987314
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:24

HEREDITY COUNSELING IN JAPAN*

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

Recent Trends in Family Planning

TAKU KOMAI RESEARCH ASSOCIATE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF GENETICS
MISIMA, JAPAN

JAPAN AND THE JAPANESE PEOPLE have changed in many ways since the last war. Public opinion concerning the significance of the growth of population in this country is one of many such changes. Before and during the war many people thought that such population growth was desirable as it provided more "human resources" for the nation. But today few informed persons take such a view; they are rather of the opinion that such growth is a menace to the welfare of the nation, and that effective measures to cope with the situation should be taken without delay.
The Eugenic Protection Law, first proclaimed in July 1948 and later amended several times, was designed mainly as one of such measures. Simultaneously a semiofficial project for nationwide propaganda for family planning was planned and put into practice. The movement was reenforced by activities of private associations like the Japan Society for Propagation of Family Planning and has achieved great success, at least insofar as the people have become more conscious of fertility control. As a matter of fact the population trend of the country has changed abruptly in a short period. The practice of fertility control has become much more widespread than before. Still more striking, induced abortions have greatly increased, Government statistics show more than a million cases a year of induced abortions in recent years. If many more unreported cases are
*Contribution No. 205 from National Institute of Genetics, Misima, Japan. The author wishes to thank Dr. K. Tanaka and Mr. T. Mori for their generous and valuable help.
1See Induced Abortion in Japan by Thomas K. Burch, Eugenics Quarterly, Vol. II, No.3, 140-152.

included, the actual number may well be double.1
The Eugenic Protection Law legalizes sterilization of either husband or wife or induced abortion if (1) the person in question or the spouse has a hereditary psychopathic trait, constitutional disease or malformation; (2) any relative within the fourth order (i.e., cousin, great uncle, or aunt) of the person or spouse has hereditary psychosis, feeblemindedness, or a psychopathic trait. To offer effective eugenic protection to as many people as possible, Eugenic Protection Consultation Offices were established by law, one in each prefecture or city all over the country, and there are now about 800 of them. These offices provide anybody with information and advice on matters concerned with marriage. They also disseminate the knowledge necessary for eugenic protection and provide people with information about appropriate methods for pregnancy control. For the year 1955, a total of 151,755 consultations were offered in the Eugenic Protection Offices of the entire country (excluding those in Aomori Prefecture). These statistics are supplied by the Public Health Bureau of the Ministry of Welfare. The consultations may be broken down as follows: contraception, 105,589; induced abortion, 24,210; eugenic marriage, 7,354; unclassified, 14,602. It can be seen that eugenic marriage consultations constitute only a small fraction--less than 5 per cent --of all consultations. However, heredity counseling was probably offered not only to persons planning marriage but to people already married who felt the necessity for

99

100 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

induced abortion or contraception for some genetic reason. Statistics of the Japan Society of Propagation of Family Planning show that, of all 1,170,143 induced abortions in 1955, 1,492 were for hereditary reasons and 303 because of leprosy.
No details about the counseling in these eugenic protection consultation offices are known to the writer. It is likely, however, that information and advice are offered in accordance with the Eugenic Protection Law in which 6 mental diseases and derangements, 22 physical diseases, and 2 malformations are listed as undesirable hereditary traits for which sterilization or induced abortion is legalized. There may also be other eugenic problems on which consultant doctors formulate solutions and give advice even though their genetic knowledge of each problem may not be quite adequate.
Besides this "official" heredity counseling there is much unofficial counseling by individual geneticists who allocate special office hours for this purpose. Usually they give interviews to anybody who might come for counseling. They also answer questions on eugenic matters by mail. As one of such geneticists, the writer has had many chances to hold an interview with a stranger or a group of strangers who came with or without an introduction for eugenic information.

--perhaps the majority--especially of the country people, are still arranged in accordance with the traditional system or by a compromise between the old and new systems. The elders of the families with young members of marrying age are anxious to find a suitable mate for them and take great pains toward this end. They frequently ask their neighbors and personal friends to introduce such a person to them. When a prospective mate is suggested, the elders gather all kinds of information about the person's ability, health, personality, reputation, etc., as well as about the personality and social standing of the parents and family members. Naturally the genetic background of the family is inquired after. Available information about the ailments of the family members and relatives are obtained from various sources. Not infrequently the elders call on geneticists or physicians for consultation and incorporate their advice into the evaluation of the candidate in question. Thus, rather strangely, marriage counseling in Japan is more commonly sought by people who stick to tradition than by those who are more progressive in their matrimonial attitude. Incidentally, it is certain that this traditional marriage system is responsible in some measure for the much higher rate of consanguinity among marriages in Japan than in European countries.

The Traditional Marriage System and Its Bearing on Heredity Counseling
According to the traditional marriage system in Japan, marriages are contracted primarily for the sake of the families instead of the individuals in question. Recently things have changed a great deal, especially since the war. The New Constitution demands that marriages are to be arranged entirely at the free choice of the couple and purely for their own benefit. Thus many modern marriages are actually contracted in accordance with this new principle. However, quite a few marriages

Examples of Heredity Counseling
1. Consanguinity. Consanguinity is the most frequent question all marriage consultants are asked about. Although each case differs in details, the general tenor of the writer's advice on the question is like this: As a general rule such marriages should be avoided as far as possible. This is especially true if the family on either side has someone with a hereditary disease or abnormality, the more so if the types of ailments on both sides coincide. In a consanguineous marriage a recessive gene for abnormality may become homozygous and produce patients. The rarer such a

101

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

gene in the population, the higher is the several years in a deaf-mute school in

ratio of patients who are the progeny of Kyoto, became interested in the genetics

consanguineous matings. Even when the of deaf-mutism. He possesses a great deal

trait is dominant, consanguineous matings of information about matings among deaf-

may produce more patients with severer mutes. According to Mr. Mori, the majority

types of disease, apparently because such of deaf-mutes have a keen interest in

matings increase homozygosity of genes marriage. This is particularly true of fe-

and decrease the role of so-called genetic male deaf-mutes. Their parents want to

homeostasis.

take the first chance of marriage, presum-

The following is an'example of counsel- ably because they wish to turn over their

ing offered by the writer on the subject of handicapped children to a husband's care.

consanguineous marriages.

The matings of deaf-mutes are frequently

Lady A, member of a distinguished arranged by teachers of the school they

family, wanted to obtain as her eldest son's attended. Some of the teachers whom Mr.

bride a daughter of her sister who had Mori knows are proud of having arranged

married into another distinguished family, several of their students' matches. In many

B. The question of the proposed marriage cases the union is between deaf-mutes, but

was brought to the writer by a member of it may be with a healthy mate. This is espe-

the B family for counseling. After inquir- cially true when the deaf-mute bridegroom

ing about the pedigrees of both families, it is a son of a well-to-do family.

was ascertained that one of Lady A's three Case A. The teacher of a local middle

sons was a deaf-mute, and also that Lady school had a normal son and two deaf-

B.'s father-in-law was schizophrenic. Lady mute daughters, apparently of the con-

A attributed the deaf-mutism of the son to genital type. The elder daughter married

a babyhood accident when the nurse a man who was also a deaf-mute but of non-

dropped him. It seemed rather doubtful, congenital nature. The couple have chil-

however, that this was the cause of the boy's dren who are all normal. The younger

deafness; rather the trait was suspected to daughter chose as her husband a classmate

be congenital. On purely genetic grounds who was the offspring of a consanguineous

the writer was inclined to disapprove ar- marriage and who had a deaf-mute sister.

ranging this consanguineous marriage. Ap- Before the marriage the father of the

parently after some discussion and con- daughters came for counseling to Mr. Mori

troversy among the members of the B and was warned against a possible unhappy

family, they decided to decline Lady A's outcome of the marriage. The young

request. The prospective bride's reluctance couple did marry, neglecting this warning,

to accept marriage seemed to be primarily and have two children who are both deaf-

responsible for this decision. She had pre- mutes.

viously visited a deaf-mute school and was Case B. A tailor's son at the age of eleven

informed that a surprisingly high percent- started gradually losing his hearing, and he

age of the children in that school were the entered the deaf-mute school two years

progeny of consanguineous marriages.

later. He had become stone-deaf when he

2. Deaf-mutism. This condition is one of graduated from the school after getting

the commonest hereditary defects for which sufficient training to be a tailor. He chose

marriage counseling is sought. The case of as his fiancee a deaf-mute girl, apparently

the noble family of Lady A is one such of the congenital type who was a skillful

example.

seamstress and who had at least one deaf-

Mr. T. Mori, a graduate of Kyoto Uni- mute sib. Mr. Mori did not disapprove this versity majoring in botany who had taught match because the couple represented dif-

102 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

ferent types of deaf-mutism. The couple bore a normal child. 3. Harelip and Strabismus. Harelip is another common trait about which genetic counseling is frequently sought. It is often difficult to offer any clear-cut genetic diagnosis in each case, because certain cases of harelip apparently lack any genetic background. The majority seem to be due to a dominant gene. However, its penetrance is often imperfect, and a physically normal person may carry this gene and transmit it to the progeny in the same way as would the person afflicted with harelip.
We usually suggest that, if a relative of a person who is to marry has the deformity while the person himself is free from it, he should take a chance and marry. But if the person himself has the deformity, his relatives should be thoroughly investigated to see if any of them have the same condition. If a relative is afflicted, there is a greater possibility that the trait is of genetic origin. Then the risk would be rather high that an afflicted child would be born with the same deformity.
Cleft palate may be associated with harelip. Also cleft uvula has been suspected to be caused by the same gene as harelip. Therefore, it is safe to count these deformities in the same category as harelip.
Strabismus (squint), another common constitutional defect, is genetically similar to harelip in many respects: (1) The majority of cases seem to be of genetic origin and probably due to dominant gene; (2) The penetrance of the gene is often imperfect, and there is a rather wide range of variation in the expression of the trait; (3) There are apparently cases of nongenetic origin which are difficult to distinguish from those of genetic origin; (4) The deformity may be "cured" by an operation. Strabismus is somewhat commoner than harelip and obviously a less severe defect.
4. Manic-depressivepsychosis. In heredity counseling on mental diseases the following

case was encountered recently by the writer. A boy of marrying age had a sister who suffered from periodic attacks diagnosed by a psychiatrist as the manic-depressive type. His two aunts on his mother's side had had attacks of involutional depression. A friend of the family introduced a girl to him as a possible fiancee. Both the boy and his mother liked the girl. However, after investigating the pedigree of the girl the mother found that the girl's great aunt had suffered from mental disease after delivering a child. The mother brought the case to the writer for counseling.
The case was perplexing because there seemed to be mental disease on both sides of the families and the genes might coincide. The morbidity risk was obviously higher on the boy's side. However, neither he nor his mother (the father was deceased) had the slightest intention of rejecting love or matrimony. On the other hand the suspected case of mental disease on the girl's side was rather distant, and all other members of her large family were apparently mentally sound. So the arrangement of this marriage was not positively disapproved. 5. Hemophilia. A case concerning hemophilia was encountered by the writer recently in which no difficulty was found in answering questions from an academic standpoint but some difficulty occurred from the human relations viewpoint. One afternoon some months ago a middle-aged country woman came to the writer's office in the National Institute of Genetics and told the details of her family trouble. She was the widow of a man who had been employed in a neighboring factory and who had had a congenital ailment diagnosed as hemophilia. He suffered from swollen knees which had made it difficult for him to walk without a cane. He had died a few years previously from heart failure at the age of 51. His widow had two daughters of marrying age who knew that hemophilia was a serious hereditary disease and

103

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

were very worried about their matrimonial prospects. The daughters even condemned their mother sometimes for having married a man with such a dreadful hereditary disease. The mother wanted to make sure whether hemophilia was really a fatal hereditary disease and to ascertain the outcome of her daughters' marriages. It seemed certain the father's ailment had been hemophilia. Scattered cases of this disease are met with by local dentists in Japan. This man's hemophilia, however, was undoubtedly of a mild type since he lived to the age of 51 and had children. If the diagnosis were correct, the daughters should carry the gene and their sons, if they should bear any, would have a 50 per cent risk of being hemophilic. This information should be made available to the daughters.
A week later the same woman came in the office, accompanied this time by one of the daughters. The same story was repeated to them. We did our best to impress them with the fact that hemophilia is not the only dreadful hereditary disease and to suggest to them how to face the matter wisely and humanely. 6. Leprosy. Leprosy of course is a bacterial disease unlike any hereditary disease. However, families may occasionally be found in which more than one member is afflicted with this disease. Since the disease is a rare one, such a case might give people the wrong impression as if leprosy were a

hereditary disease. Here and there in Japan one encounters a family which is rumored to carry a hereditary leprosic trait. Although such rumor is without any foundation, yet it is nearly fatal to the family as regards the matrimonial prospects of its young members.
The writer was once visited by a wife of a farmer living in a neighboring village of Misima, who told me that her son was going to marry a daughter in a family living in a distant village. The girl seemed an acceptable fiancee for the woman's son. After inquiries into the ancestry of the girl, the woman found out that the girl's great-grandfather's brother had deserted his home after contracting a disease apt to be leprosy. The woman and her husband were greatly perplexed by this information.
We encouraged the woman to disregard such a rumor for a number of reasons. The suspected case of leprosy was too far back in the feudal period when diagnoses of diseases were anything but reliable. The old man was not the girl's direct ancestor, and leprosy is not a hereditary disease. Even if there is variation among people as to susceptibility to this disease and this difference has a genetic basis -- which has never been shown--the germ of leprosy is now so rare in countries like Japan that chances are negligible for ordinary people to come in contact with the germ sufficiently to become infected.

