Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Hurst's reply
Lewis A. Hurst
To cite this article: Lewis A. Hurst (1962) Hurst's reply, Eugenics Quarterly, 9:2, 100-102, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1962.9987512 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1962.9987512
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

100 Communications

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

major gene constellation incorporated in a polygenic system should constitute a more fruitful hypothesis than a major heterozygous constellation in the same setting is, of course, nonsense.
It is well known that many important and extensive investigations of neuropsychiatric genetics and epidemiology have been made in the Scandinavian countries, starting with Herman Lundborg's work on myoclonic epilepsy early in 1913. Significant and extensive contributions have been published by Sjogren, Dahlberg, Essen-Moller, Hallgren, Tage Larsson, and others in Sweden; by Stromgren, Fremming, Smith, Svendsen, Oster and others in Denmark; by Foiling, Gjessing, Remsum, Odegaard, Bremer, and others in Norway; and by Kaila, Borgstrom, and others in Finland. The only Scandinavian publications quoted among the references are Alstrom's investigation of epilepsy of 1950 (not of 19001) and a relatively limited and less important study by one of Professor Sjogren's students, Dr. A. Stenstedt, on manic-depressive psychoses.
Professor Hurst's understanding of clinical cytogenetics (cf. Book, 1961) is revealed by the amazing statement that chromosomes from connective tissue cultures are different from the somatic chromosomes on which Jacobs et al confirmed Lejeune's and co-workers' first discovery of trisomy 21 in mongolism.
With the present wide acceptance of medical genetics as a specialty by its own merits, one would have thought that we had seen the last of this kind of "do it yourself" job. Writings of this sort, apart from the fact that they contain neither original data nor original thinking, are certainly not contributing to the prestige and professional standards of medical genetics.
Scientific research has to be based on

mutual confidence and respect. This, the eradication of assessments of values and the use of objective and factual criticism, has made possible the enormous developments and discoveries in the natural sciences and in medicine during this century. Only rarely does one find insinuations like the one to which I have referred here. In my opinion, this sort of writing, as exemplified by Dr. Hurst's review, does not belong in a respectable scientific journal.
JAN A. B÷÷K
Uppsala, Sweden
Hurst's Reply
I value Dr. Kaplan's remarks as elaborating and highlighting portions of my review, and am grateful for the generous appreciation of the article as a whole in his first paragraph.
Turning to details, I agree that Newman's formulation as to the relative contribution of genetic constitution and the environmental factor of cultural stimulation to test-intelligence is a generalization, a statement of statistical averages, which is meaningfully amplified by Dr. Kaplan's exegesis. Furthermore, I am delighted that he so vigorously endorses my deploring the use of the "classical sagas of the Jukes and Kallikaks" in scientific genetic argument--a point of view no less vigorously implanted in me in the late twenties during my genetic tutelage under Lancelot Hogben. Dr. Kaplan's final comment relates to the explanation of the disturbed sex-ratio in the sibships of adult male homosexuals (reported independently by Kallman (1, 2), Lang (3), and Darke (4) in socio-environmental and psychological terms, as an alternative to that stressing the contribution of genetic and biological factors to the whole complex, as formulated by Kallmann and espoused by the present

Communications

101

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

writer. For the full argument the reader is referred to Kallmann's own writings already enumerated. In the space appropriate to my own reply I can only make the following points:
1. The interpretation favored by us of this sex-ratio is strengthened by being seen in the total context of Kallmann's twin and sibship study.
2. This interpretation, in the extended setting mentioned, would only fall away if the rationale of the twin-family method, as such, were discredited.
8. Kallmann himself, as will be seen from the perusal of the references, gives a restrained formulation of his conclusions, and stresses the need for further work.
In replying to Professor Book I should like to commence with a disclaimer of the alleged insinuation as to his sympathy with the sterilization policies of the Germany of the 1930's. He feels so strongly about this matter, that not only does he ventilate it in his fifth and sixth paragraphs, but he returns to it in his concluding remarks. A moment's thought should have disabused his mind of any such interpretation, as nobody who knows or knows of Professor Book would attribute such views to him, any more than they would Eliot Slater of England, whose name appears alongside his in the offending sentence. I am sincerely sorry that even on the basis of a patent misinterpretation on his part, I have given offense to so worthy a colleague.
I have enjoyed Professor Book's clarification of his own work and views, which surely only gives further substance to the thesis to which I was giving expression in my review, that there are interpretations of the genetic mechanism in schizophrenia, by leading authorities, other than that of the single recessive.

I can moreover assure Professor Book that I am fully alive to the purely relative and provisional status of the concepts of dominant, recessive, and intermediate inheritance in our present era physiological and biochemical genetics, further enlightened by recent developments in cytogenetics.
I should like to draw attention to a misapprehension in the seventh paragraph of Professor Book's letter which reads as follows: "The claim of Dr. Hurst that a homozygous major gene constellation incorporated in a polygenic system should constitute a more fruitful hypothesis than a major heterozygous constellation in the same setting is, of course, nonsense." The distinction to which I in fact drew attention, was not between homozygous and heterozygous major gene constellations in a similar polygenic setting, but the greater fruitfulness of the hypothesis of either a homozygous or heterozygous specific genetic mechanism in the setting of polygenic constitutional modifiers as set forth by Kallmann as compared with the purely non-specific polygenic mechanism postulated by Penrose. For an outline of Kallmann's hypothesis in this field the reader is referred to three of his writings, The Genetics of Schizophrenia (5), The heredo-constitutional mechanisms of predisposition and resistance to schizophrenia (6), and The genetic theory of schizophrenia (7). Recent advances in chemical genetics, including enzyme blocks, and in neuropsychopharmacology have richly borne out the promise of the greater fruitfulness of Kallman's hypothesis over that of an undifferentiated polygenic nature.
I am deeply appreciative of the heavy debt the world owes to the genetic contributions of Scandinavian workers, two

102 Communications

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

of whom in the list provided by Professor Book, I count as personal friends. It is sincerely regretted that in a review article of limited length, I was able to include two workers only, Professor Book himself and Dr. Stenstedt, as representatives of the important work that has emanated from those countries in the realm of psychiatric and neurological genetics.
Professor Book's stricture in the field of cytogenetics in his ninth paragraph is clearly based upon an etymological misunderstanding on his part. The use of the word "confirmed" surely indicates that I am assimilating and not disjoining "the chromosomes from tissue cultures" and "somatic chromosomes."
The problems mentioned in his second and third paragraphs, namely, those of diagnosis and of the status of the contingency method of statistical prediction pending improved gene identification, may be regarded as "common cause" among human geneticists, and therefore does not call for detailed analysis from me. What would remain of human genetics were this method and the findings from it to date to be rejected in the light of Professor Book's criticisms? Certainly most of the work which he himself commends in reviewing the Scandinavian contribution in his ninth paragraph would go by the board.
However, one cannot let him get away with his statement in his fourth paragraph, that "For several well known reasons the twin method has its lowest efficiency when applied to mental traits." Surely, here he could reasonably be ex-

pected to substantiate so sweeping a criticism, by chapter and verse. One rather suspects that underlying this contention there is a failure in his own mind to discriminate between graded mental traits where undifferentiated polygenic mechanisms are commonly postulated, and specific mental disease entities such as schizophrenia and manic-depressive psychosis, where specific single-factor predisposing genetic mechanisms have been demonstrated.
In conclusion, we must leave it to our readers to judge who, of Professor Book and myself, has more offended against the canons of scientific brotherhood and ordinary courtesy.
LEWIS A. HURST
Professor of Psychological Medicine University of the Witwatersrand Johannesburg
REFERENCES
1. KALLMANN, F. J., 1952. Comparative twin study on the genetic aspects of male homosexuality. J. Nervous Mental Disease, 115 (4): 283-298.
2. KALLMANN, F. J., 1952. Twin and sibship study of overt male homosexuality. Am. J. Human Genet., 4(2): 136-146.
3. LANG, T., 1936. Beitrag zur Frage nach der genetischen Bedingtheit der Homosexualit‰t. Ztschr. ges. Neurol. Psychiat., 155:702 (and other articles listed in the reference of Kallmann in current reference 1).
4. DARKE, ROY A., 1948. Heredity as an etiological factor in homosexuality. J. Nervous Mental Disease, 107(3): 251-267.
5. KALLMANN, F. J., 1938. The Genetics of Schizophrenia. New York. Augustin.
6. KALLMANN, F. J., and S. E. BARRERA, 1942.
The heredoconstitutional mechanisms of predisposition and resistance to schizophrenia. Am. J. Psychiat., 98(4): 544. 7. KALLMANN, F. J., 1946. The genetic theory of schizophrenia. An analysis of 691 schizophrenic twin index families. Am. J. Psychiat., 103(3): 309-322.

