Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Fertility control in the light of some recent catholic statements
William J. Gibbons S.J.
To cite this article: William J. Gibbons S.J. (1956) Fertility control in the light of some recent catholic statements, Eugenics Quarterly, 3:1, 9-15, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1956.9987259 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1956.9987259
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

FERTILITY CONTROL IN THE LIGHT OF SOME RECENT CATHOLIC STATEMENTS

This is Part One of a two part article

WILLIAM J. GIBBONS, S.J.
Loyola College, Baltimore

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

1 HE PAST FEW YEARS have witnessed a definite sharpening of Catholic thought on the ends of marriage, and hence indirectly on the subject of fertility regulation. This has not been accomplished without considerable discussion within the Church, as well as sharp differences between Catholic writers and those advocating contraception as an appropriate means of alleviating economic and other pressures sometimes associated with high fertility. These discussions have for the most part been fruitful, especially in bringing to the fore grave moral and social issues involved and in drawing to the attention of many, certain emergent problems whose importance might not otherwise have been so quickly perceived.
This present paper makes no pretense of reviewing all contemporary Catholic literature on sexuality and the ends of marriage, nor does it aim at placing this literature in full historical perspective. What it does is focus attention on some authoritative statements of recent years, with a view to clarifying the basic Catholic position on fertility regulation. Admittedly, not all outside the Church share in detail the convictions of the Catholic authorities and theologians on this subject. For that matter, not every Catholic appreciates fully as yet the doctrinal implications and the supporting arguments of the latest decisions and judgments.1 Nevertheless it is important that
1At times there seems to be question whether American writers on the subject of sexuality and marriage have had sufficient access to pertinent Roman documents and statements, if not in the original Latin or Italian at least in reliable translations. Gradually this problem is being resolved.

both the substantive content and the practical consequence of the teaching be properly understood. Hence a reporting paper like this one at the present time.
In the period following World War II the long-term and global consequences of accelerated rates of natural increase have been widely discussed. So too the more immediate problems arising from local and regional imbalances between population and resources, or between labor force and job opportunities. Along with increased economic activity in underdeveloped areas of growing population, on more than one occasion fertility regulation in various forms has been advocated and promoted. Now, the moral implications of such suggestions could not long escape the notice of Church authorities and theologians concerned with problems of human sex behavior. Quite apart from the merits of arguments put forth by those interpreting factual data in varying ways, it was clear a new and significant trend of thinking on human reproduction must hereafter be taken into account.
But this growing awareness of the population-resource relationship, and the problems presumably associated with it, was not the sole or even primary reason for certain of the Catholic moral judgments forthcoming on sexuality and marriage. Simultaneously with the mounting discussion of rapid population growth, other ideas, not necessarily connected with the social aspects of fertility, were being spread abroad by American and European authors. These had to do with the fundamental nature and purposes of sex and wedlock, and hence

9

10 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

over time would have profound moral re-
percussions in personal and family living.
This developing line of thought threatened,
it would appear, to subvert traditional
Christian teaching on sex and concupis-
cence and hence was not unrelated to dog-
matic beliefs on the nature of man, original
sin, and the effects of redemption. The
growing literature on sexuality placed such
emphasis on the ends of marriage other
than reproduction, that the less educated
especially might lose sight of nature's pur-
pose in giving man sex, and the objective
norms which should guide him in its use.
It is perhaps worth noting that the stress
in recent papal teaching has been placed on the finality of sex and marriage as such,2
on the proper ordering of acts which relate
to procreation, on respect for the human
Jife which comes into being with concep-
tion. The Church, moreover, in its official
pronouncements has not endeavored to re-
solve economic and social problems in their
2By the finality of sex and marriage is understood the purpose intended by nature, and hence the Author of nature, in endowing man with reproductive capacity. The Oxford English Dictionary defines finality in its philosophical meaning, as the purpose or end of the thing caused. It relates finality to final cause: the end or purpose for which a thing is done, viewed as the cause of the act. Catholic teaching, adhering in this matter to the philosophia perennis (perennial philosophy), of which Aristotle and St. Thomas are leading proponents, insists that in evaluating the ultimate morality of a human action not only must the subjective attitude (including intent) of the actor be taken into account, but also the objective finality or purpose as intended by nature for the particular faculty or capacity being used. Thus ,to eat or drink for sociability or pleasure is not wrong in itself, but can become so if these ends are pursued entirely apart from, and perhaps to the detriment of health and physical well-being, the preservation of which is nature's purpose in giving man an appetite for food and drink.
3In Quadragesimo Anno (1931) Pope Pius XI thus clarified the relationship between strictly scientific and technical knowledge in the social field, and moral teaching and practice: "It is not of course the office of the Church to lead men to transient and perishable happiness only, but to that which is eternal. Indeed 'the Church believes that it would be wrong for her to interfere without just cause in such earthly concerns' [cf. Leo XIII, Rerum Novarum, para. 13]; but she never can relinquish her God-given task of interposing her authority not indeed in technical matters for which she has neither the equipment nor the mission, but in all those that have a bearing on moral conduct. For

technical details.3 Nor has the Pope passed judgment on various demographic hypotheses and conclusions concerning the population-resource relationship in its strictly scientific aspects.4 As a religious and moral teacher, he has, however, pointed out the moral limits within which practical action must be confined. At the same time he has urged that all reasonable efforts be made to improve the temporal lot of those in need, through increased productivity and better distribution, and that unnecessary restrictions be not placed between families and the means of sustenance.5
Within the past five years there have been a number of significant statements by the Pope on the subject of marriage and
the deposit of faith entrusted to Us by God, and Our weighty office of propagating, interpreting and urging in season and out of season the entire moral law, demand that both social and economic questions be brought within Our supreme jurisdiction, in so far as they refer to moral issues." Quadragesimo Anno: Encyclical Letter of Pius XI. Washington, National Catholic Welfare Conference, 1940. p. 14. Original Latin in Acta Apostolicae Sedis, 23 (1931) 190. (The Acta Apostolicae Sedis, often abbreviated AAS, is the official commentary of the Holy See and is published periodically by the Vatican Polyglot Press. In content and form it is analogous to the Federal Register of the U. S. government.)
4Cf. Pius XII, Address to delegates to World Population Conference, September 8, 1954. English text in Catholic Mind, 53:256, April, 1955.
5Cf. Pius XII, Radio message of Pentecost, June 1, 1941. Ada Apostolicae Sedis 33 (1941) 216-227 (English version); American Ecclesiastical Review, 105:276-88, October, 1941.
6The Sacred Congregation of the Holy Office was founded by Paul III in 1542 to combat errors of doctrine. Its principal function as presently constituted is to safeguard the integrity of faith and morals by examining and evaluating ideas and statements of a religious and moral nature which are both significant and capable of propagating or leading to doctrinal error. Its Prefect or head, unlike some other Congregations, is not a Cardinal but the Pope himself. The Holy Office issues its decrees and warnings (monita)--which are far fewer than some believe--after careful study by a commission of Cardinals. It carries on its day to day operations under the direction of an Assessor, assisted by a sizable panel of consultors which includes certain Vatican officials and a number of professional theologians with varying backgrounds and specialties. In modern times especially, the Holy Office has shown great care in not going beyond the precise doctrinal point at issue, thus allowing the maximum of legitimate discussion and difference of opinion among qualified writers and theologians. When it does speak, it is with the full authority of the Holy See itself.

11

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

sexuality, as well as several pertinent decrees of the Holy Office.6 Prominent among
the papal statements were the encyclical letter on virginity,7 the address to the Italian midwives,8 and the address to the Family Front.9 The Holy Office found it
necessary to issue a warning (monitum)
concerning certain types of literature on
the sexual aspects of marriage, and espe-
cially those advocating amplexus reservatus.10 It also condemned and placed on the
Index the work of a noted French Catholic writer11 on problems of sex, presumably
because its treatment of sex morality
seemed to admit excessively subjective
norms and hence might be interpreted as tolerant of morally dangerous practices.12
Through such statements as those indi-
cated, the Holy See endeavored to correct
tendentious and erroneous views on sex
which have become common in the post-
war years. The doctrinal points made in
7 Plus XII, Encyclical "Sacra Virginitas" on Holy Virginity (unofficial translation). Rome, Vatican Polyglot Press, 1954; also, Catholic Mind, 52:491-512. Latin text in Ada Apostolicae Sedis, 46 (1954) 161-91.
8Allocation of Pope Pius XII on October 29, 1951 to convention delegates of Italian Union of Midwives. Italian text: Acta Apostolicae Sedis, 43 (1951) 835-54. A Latin translation, with informative annotations and documentary citations, of both this and the subsequent address to the Family Front, will be found in De Re Malrimoniali, by Francis Huerth, S.J. Rome, Gregorian University Press, 1955. Pertinent excerpts in English, with annotations, are in T. L. Bouscaren, Canon Law Digest. Milwaukee, Bruce. 1954. Vol. III, passim.
9Allocution of Pope Pius XII on November 26, 1951 to members of the Family Front. Italian text: Ada Apostolicae Sedis, 43 (1951) 855-60.
10Monitum of the Holy Office, June 30, 1952; Ada Apostolicae Sedis, 44 (1952) 546. English translation: Bouscaren, op. cit., III, 435.
11Marc Oraison, S.T.D., M.D., Vie chrétienne et problimes de la sexualité. Paris, J. Lithielleux, 1952.
12 Decree of the Holy Office, March 19, 1953. Ada Apostolicae Sedis, 47 (1955) 46. Publication of the decree was delayed until January 3, 1955, by which time it was evident ideas the book contained were spreading and being quoted in other French works on the subject. The author, a competent writer known for concern about doctrinal integrity, immediately indicated his submission to the decree of the Holy Office. Notification of this fact was made in Ada Apostolicae Sedis, 47:89, February 25, 1955.

these statements will be touched upon in the course of the following discussion.
I. · Empirical Science and Ethical Values Basically there should be no serious disagreement between the Church and modern science, since all truth, natural and revealed, has the same God of Truth for its author. In principle, any misunderstandings which would arise, because for example a hypothesis is asserted as a certain conclusion, can be resolved as all concerned come to realize the facts, and as theory is brought more in line with reality objectively discernible. In practice, however, the resolution of disagreements does not always proceed smoothly. It may at times be unduly retarded because some spokesman for religion fails to distinguish sharply enough between clearcut doctrinal and moral teaching, and his own personal judgments. Or it may be, and not infrequently is, because some scientist transgresses the bounds of his specialty and attempts the role of moral teacher for which he may not be particularly qualified.13
The rights and needs of scientific enquiry carried on in a manner consonant with morality, have long been recognized by the Church. In centuries past, popes and many prelates showed special interest by acting as patrons of the arts and sciences. In more recent years, outstanding scientific merit has received due recognition through the Pontifical Academy of Sciences.14 Moreover, practically every year since World War II, Pope Pius XII received one or more scientific congresses or their delegates in papal audience, usually taking the occasion to pay understanding tribute to their respective disciplines. That this solicitude of the Holy See is not confined to the
13Cf. Gibbons, W. J., "Catholic Value System in Relation to Human Fertility," in Studies in Population (ed. by George Mair). Princeton Univ. Press, 1949.
14Founded in Rome in 1603, and subsequently reorganized by Pius IX and Leo XIII, it was reconstituted in 1936 by Pius XI. A list of its officers and members appears in the Annuarío Pontificio (Rome: Vatican Polyglot Press).

12 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

natural sciences, but extends as well to the medical, psychological, and social sciences, may be inferred readily from the list of groups received and messages or addresses delivered by the Pope.15
The Pope, needless to say, cannot guarantee that the same sympathetic understanding of science will be manifest everywhere and always among Catholics. There are admittedly a number of, perhaps too many, Catholics who adopt an anti-scientific attitude and instinctively suspect the findings of empirical science. This is regrettable, and clearly out of accord with the love of truth, whatever its source, which should characterize the dedicated Christian. But it must be recognized that a human variable, not necessarily connected with religion as such, is here involved and that cultural and socio-economic background of particular Catholics may be the underlying reasons for certain of their reactions in the face of scientific fact and theory. Looking at the matter in the long view of history, science by and large has fared better in Catholic surroundings than among some other groups.
There is of course another side of the picture. Whatever the shortcomings of individual Catholics, the Church as such has the mission of safeguarding moral truth from human distortion and in line with that duty has a unique teaching authority in these matters. In carrying out this mission, conflict does not ordinarily occur when it is simply a question of reconciling revealed truths and traditional ethical teaching with ascertained facts and soundly constructed scientific theory.16 Misunderstandings between social scientists and social leaders on the one hand, and theologians and churchmen on the other, is much
15Cf. Catholic Periodical Index, under heading "Pius XII" for list of addresses and groups to which given; also, location of original and English texts.
16Cf. Encyclical Letter Humani Generis (1950) on importance of effecting an integration of revealed truth and natural knowledge. Acta Apostolicae Sedis 42 (1950) 561-78; Catholic Mind, 48:688-700, Nov., 1950.

more apt to occur when action programs are involved. Then there is a likelihood the human behavior patterns fostered or proposed may impinge directly on the moral order of which the Church by definition is custodian. In attempting to resolve the conflicting views, the official Church tries to allow the maximum of leeway to conflicting views and to varying interpretations of empirical facts as these relate to human behavior. But there comes a point at which it has no choice but to insist on basic moral principles, emphasizing that however legitimate the objectives only morally acceptable means can be used in pursuit of them. The Church of course is under no illusion that men do or will adhere universally to the norms of conduct proposed--her whole mission in the present order presupposes the reality of sin--but she must do what is in her power to see that the norms themselves are not lost sight of through confused thinking or human weakness and self-deception. II. The Ends of Marriage and Fertility
Regulation In historical perspective, it is not surprising that a developing body of thought emphasizing ends of marriage other than reproduction, should have such an impact on modern society. The industrial revolution, in the context of the larger scientific revolution of which it was a part, had paved the way for a new era as regards population growth and also popular attitudes toward family size. Especially with the advent of the nineteenth century, overall death rates declined rapidly, and with them rates of infant mortality. It was not long before spouses perceived rather generally the implications of this trend in relation to size of completed family and number of children ever born. They saw possible complications for themselves, even when not averting formally to broader social import. Other things being equal, surviving children hereafter were likely to be more numerous than in earlier times when high mortality more nearly balanced high

13

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

fertility. Finally, in the changing socio- tural preference for contraception referred

economic structure of urbanized society, to above.

large family size was coming to be regarded by many as an obstacle to the improved levels of living made possible by technological advance.

Even those whose consciences would not permit reconciliation with certain of the popularized methods, became aware of possibilities for fertility regulation through

In the concrete, then, there had emerged systematic use of the female sterile period.

strong economic and psychological pres- For the Church and its leadership, this

sures on spouses to limit offspring. This latter development posed additional prob-

intensified motivation for fertility regula- lems of a moral and pastoral nature, over

tion was accompanied by greatly increased and above those initiated by widespread accessibility to contraceptive information recourse to artificial contraception.17 Al-

and materials. Promotional movements, though differing radically from non-natural

demanding legal acceptance or at least tol- methods of forestalling conception, use of

eration of the new techniques, came into the rhythm as it came to be known, was

being. Among both theoretical writers and not unrelated to the general trend toward

social welfare leaders, there developed a separation in thought and practice of sex-

tendency of speaking about marriage in ual gratification from reproductive conse-

such a way as to encourage effective separa- quences. Evidently, then, a need had arisen

tion of reproductive function and routine for continuing clarification of Christian

sexual performance. Modern civilization thought on the whole subject of sexuality

thus becomes characterized by a pro-con- and the ends of marriage. Church author-

traceptive outlook. Nevertheless, rates of ities, it may be noted, were quick to per-

natural increase failed to decline as rapidly ceive this need, as may be gathered from

as anticipated by some, and in a number of the timely publication of the encyclical areas actually accelerated, chiefly because Casti Connubii by Pius XI in 1930.18 They

death rates declined more rapidly than did also realized the need would not be met by

fertility.

ignoring family and demographic prob-

Now the desire and effort to dissociate lems, nor by giving in to the demands of

sexual expression and childbearing, except the "new morality" as it was called by Pius

as voluntarily determined, has existed for XII in an address to the convention dele-

centuries, as such longstanding practices gates of the World Federation of Catholic

as withdrawal, abortion, and infanticide

clearly indicate. That these practices were

less common in Western civilization than in other times and places, may in large measure be attributed to the restraining influence of Christian ethical norms. To the extent such influence has been weakened by decline in religious belief and behavior, these practices have tended to spread. Yet Western man generally speaking, still regards infanticide and abortion as much more objectionable morally than other forms of fertility regulation. Consequently, there exists a psychological block against them. This fact, in combination with mounting pressures for family limitation, presumably accounts for the prevailing cul-

17 The Sacred Penitentiary (in accord with its function of handling cases of conscience) in a reply of June 16, 1880 to the question: Is it licit to use marriage only on those days when conception is less likely, indicated that spouses who acted thus were not to be disturbed in conscience, especially since this practice was morally preferable to onanistic contraception. On July 20, 1932, to a new question: "Is that practice of spouses licit, whereby for good and serious reasons wishing to avoid offspring legitimately, by mutual consent and with proper intent they abstain from the use of marriage except on those days when according to the latest theories, conception is unlikely for natural reasons," the Sacred Penitentiary replied: The question has already been handled in the reply of June 16, 1880. For Latin text, cf. Huerth, De Re Matrimoniali, p. 111.
18Acta Apostolicae Sedis, 22 (1930) 539-91. English text in Social Wellsprings, ed. by Joseph Husslein. Milwaukee, Bruce, 1942. Vol. II; Catholic Mind, 29:21-64, January 22, 1931.

14 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Young Women.19 In fact, they could not do the latter in view of their obligation to interpret the principles of objective natural law morality, as controlling and being superior to problems of personal values and the ethics of situation.20
Traditionally, the ends of marriage have been formulated as to include the procreation and education of children, and the advantages accruing to the spouses from communal bed and life. These latter are understood to embrace the alleviating (remedying) of concupiscence (sex urge), as well as what other benefits may come from dwelling under the same roof and sharing each other's burdens and difficulties. In recent years, increasing stress has been laid by some authors on the so-called psychological complementarity of the sexes, and on the personality development said to occur in conjugal living with regularized sex expression. Provided such "complementarity" is understood properly, and not as justifying a reversal of the ends of marriage as given by nature, it surely merits consideration and further study. But if it means that only thus can human personality develop satisfactorily, or that reproduction may be regarded as a secondary and incidental value in marriage, then it implies a definite departure from tradition and natural law concepts.
Catholic teaching, as expressed in the Code of Canon Law, has formulated the concept thus: "The primary end of marriage is the procreation and education of offspring; the secondary end, mutual aid and the remedying of concupiscence."21 The marriage contract, moreover, is understood
19Acta Apostolicae Sedis, 44 (1952) 413-9. English text: Irish Ecclesiastical Record, 78:137-42, August, 1952. For Italian and Latin texts, and also annotations, cf. De Conscientia Christiana atque De "Morali Nova" (Reprint from Periodica, 41 (1952) 183-249). Rome, Gregorian University Press, 1952.
20In the address referred to above, the Pope points out the problems created by, and the limitations of existentialist morality and of the "ethics of situation" when these come in conflict with the more objective norms of natural law morality.
21Codex Iuris Canonici, c. 1013, §1. Cf. Code of Canon Law; Text and Commentary, by T. L. Bouscaren and A. C. Ellis. Milwaukee, Bruce, 1946.

to be essentially monogamous (between one man and one woman) and indissoluble. This latter precludes successive marriages so long as a previous spouse remains alive. Finally, Christian marriage is necessarily a sacrament, and thus attains a special firmness or solidity.22
Throughout history the Church has found it necessary to enunciate repeatedly these ends of marriage, defending the institution against those who would disparage it or else relax its God-given norms.23 Some there have been who would restrict its use solely to the procreation of children. Others have emphasized to the point of exaggeration the secondary and subordinate ends. Both these tendencies the Church resisted, and today, while making due allowance for new insights reconcilable with the traditional moral framework, will continue to resist.
Marriage as such was disparaged by certain heretics of the early Christian era. These on occasion proposed very rigid norms, forbidding second marriage entirely, calling in question the goodness of even first marriage, or perhaps characterizing the institution as a lesser evil permitted by God but not one to be praised. Thus, varying aberrations from tradition are found among the Manicheans, the Montanists, and in the later Tertullian.24 Even certain of the Church Fathers, writing against those who equated marriage and virginity or who leaned in the direction of corrupt pagan attitudes, at times gave the impression of minimizing the basic goodness of chaste wedlock. Thus, perhaps St. Jerome in his Adversus Jovinianum. And some have interpreted Augustine as not sufficient-
22Ibid., c.1013, §2. 23On the opinions of the Fathers on marriage, as well as of early Christian writers generally, cf. F. Cayri, Manual of Patrology and History of Theology, trans. by H. Howitt. Tournai, Desclée, 1936-40. 2 vols. See also: G. H. Joyce, Christian Marriage: An Historical and Doctrinal Study, New York, Sheed & Ward, 1933. 24Cf. Tertullian, Treatises on Marriage and Remarriage, trans, by W. P. LeSaint, S.J. (Ancient Christian Writers, No. 13). Westminster, Md., The Newman Press, 1951.

15

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ly appreciative of marriage, since he too chological and physical complementarity

found it necessary to oppose the disparagers of the spouses the meaning and end of

of virginity and celibacy.25

marriage is to be found. Thus offspring

But a careful reading of Augustine will may be regarded as secondary or perhaps

dispel this impression and lead to thecon- incidental consequences of the union of

clusion he understood in an acceptable souls and bodies in the conjugal state.

manner the ends of marriage and their or- Manifestly much is yet to be said in socioldering among themselves.26 Even if at times ogical and psychological literature about

Augustine's precision of expression leaves these psycho-social aspects of marriage, and

something to be desired, it is evident he research could be done with profit. But

recognizes the use of marriage for second- there was, and apparently still is, a danger

ary ends as legitimate, and under proper that not only will terminology be cor-

circumstances praiseworthy. What he in- rupted, but thinking will become confused.

sists upon is that nature gave man sexbe- Accordingly, in 1944 the Holy Office took

cause the race needed propagating, and special cognizance of the trend and issued

that even spouses may not act as if procrea- a decree on the ends of marriage and the tion were not the first purpose of the in- interrelations between these ends.28 It stated

stitution, the one giving it justification and in substance that the traditional terminol-

finality.

ogy is to be adhered to, namely that pro-

In our day the pendulum of speculative
thought has swung in a direction contrary
to that of Augustine, at least among not a
few non-Catholic writers, and also among some who profess Catholicism.27 Not only
are the psychological values and the per-
sonality-development aspects emphasized,
but some seem to imply that in the psy-
25Before he wrote on Holy Virginity, Augustine made clear his esteem for the married state in De Bono Conjugali (The Good of Marriage). For English texts of both these writings, see Saint Augustine: Treatises on Marriage and Other Subjects, trans, by C. T. Wilcox, et al. New York, Fathers of the Church, 1955.
26Cf. De Bono Conjugali, especially ch. 17 ff. In De Sancta Virginitate he warns those consecrated to a life of virtuous continence that because their state is in itself preferable, marriage is not therefore to be considered evil (ch. 18). One of the most striking passages of Augustine on marriage is to be found in Book XIV of De Civitate Dei. Here he discusses the problem posed by passion and concupiscence, indicating that marriage existed even before the fall, for the purpose of propagating the race, and that had not man abandoned the state of original justice, he would have retained control over his reproductive organs, using them for procreation as occasion demanded, but not being motivated by the powerful force of lust (cf. ch. 22-24). Saint Augustine, The City of God; Books VIII-XVI. New York, Fathers of the Church, 1952.
27In this connection, reference is usually made to several Catholic works of the pre-war and early war period, namely Sinn und Zweck der Ehe, by Prof. Herbert Doms (Breslau, 1935) , translated into French as Du sens et de la fin du mariage (Paris, 1937), and Die Zweckfrage der Ehe in neuer Beleuchtung, by Dr. Bernardine Krempel (Zurich and Cologne, 1941). After careful examination, both these books were ordered withdrawn from

creation and education of children is the primary or basic end, and that all other ends are subordinate to this. It is therefore incorrect to assert that all ends are essentially of equal importance, or that thesubordinate ends, in the order of nature, exist independently of the primary end. Returning to the same theme in his address to the midwives (1951) Pius XII warned against the exaggeration of "personal values" to the extent that the principal purpose of marriage is lost sight of.29 He also took the occasion to condemn what he called "sexual hedonism," namely the inordinate pursuit of sexual pleasure and its exaltation to an autonomous status, often quite without regard for the reproductive aspects of married life.30
circulation. There is a brief but incisive discussion of this question in Huerth, De Re Matrimoniali, p. 117-23, where he considers the passages of Pius XII's address to the midwives which have to do with "personal values" in relation to the primary end of marriage.
28Decree of the Holy Office, April 1, 1944. Acta Apostolicae Sedis, 36 (1944) 103. English translation in Bouscaren, Canon Law Digest, III, p. 401-2.
29pius XII, Address to the Midwives, nos. 42-47. 30Ibid.,nos. 61-67. Huerth (DeRe Matrimoniali, p. 127) points out that there is a relationship between "sexual hedonism" and the advocacy of amplexus reservatus, concerning which there was issued the warning of the Holy Office on June 30, 1952. Cf. Bouscaren, op. cit., III, p.435.
(This article will be concluded in the June issue.)

