Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
General session: III. Heredity counseling
C. Nash Herndon M.D.
To cite this article: C. Nash Herndon M.D. (1955) General session: III. Heredity counseling, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:2, 83-89, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987229 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987229
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles Citing articles: 6 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

III. HEREDITY COUNSELING

C. NASH HERNDON, M.D.
Department of Medical Genetics Bowman Gray School of Medicine

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

T JLHE COUNSELING OF INDIVIDUALS OR FAMILY
groups with regard to matters of heredity may at times cover a very wide area. Questions concerning the inheritance of normal or abnormal characteristics may confront the marriage counselor, the psychiatric adviser, the family physician, public health workers--in fact anyone who is concerned with giving advice in family problems. Unfortunately, an adequate knowledge of the basic principles of genetics, upon which all heredity counseling should be based, is not available to the majority of workers in these allied fields.
Within the past fifteen years there has been a growing awareness on the part of the general public of the need for professional advice in matters of heredity. This has resulted in the establishment of counseling centers or heredity clinics in at least a dozen of our major universities and medical centers (Dice, 1952). These centers, which are also concerned with teaching and research in human genetics, are able to offer a professional consulting service of high quality. As some evidence of the public interest and timeliness of the topic, a popular article on heredity clinics by Brecher and Brecher (1955) appears in the current issue of Redbook magazine. Somewhat similar articles have recently appeared in Collier's and in other popular magazines. The nationally syndicated newspaper column on medical advice by Dr. Walter Alvarez frequently discusses problems of heredity, and Scheinfeld's popular book, You and Heredity, continues to enjoy wide circulation.,

Normal Traits It may be of some interest to examine
the types of problems that are presented to heredity counseling centers. While no two family problems are exactly alike and each problem requires individual treatment, those presented can be classified into several broad groups. Reed (1952) has listed the twenty subjects about which information is most frequently requested from the Dight Institute for Human Genetics at the University of Minnesota. While it is to be expected that the experience of different centers will vary considerably with regard to the relative frequency of questions of various types, the general categories remain much the same. It is to be expected that centers located on a large university campus would receive a high proportion of inquiries concerning the inheritance of normal characteristics, while those located in medical centers would be predominantly concerned with hereditary diseases. In the experience of the Dight Institute, questions concerning education and genealogy are the most frequent. This classification would include all questions concerning the inheritance of normal intelligence and special abilities. Questions concerning other normal characteristics that rate high on the Dight Institute list are those of the inheritance of eye color and skin color and the occurrence of twinning. Problems of this sort are less frequently encountered at the Bowman Gray School of Medicine.
It is a seeming paradox that our information concerning the inheritance of normal characteristics in man is in many instances

83

84 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

less complete than our knowledge of abnormal or disease characteristics. This is largely due to the fact that many normal characteristics represent the combined action of multiple genes or hereditary factors, often modified considerably by the environment, whereas the majority of diseases in which hereditary factors are important are conditioned by the action of a single abnormal gene. For example, the best available information concerning the inheritance of normal intellectual ability, as measured by the various intelligence tests, indicates that the genetic contribution cannot be less than 50 per cent or more than 75 per cent of the total measured variation of normal or moderately deficient intelligence (Kallmann, 1953). Environmental factors, including education, account for at least 25 per cent but not more than 50 per cent of the variation in this characteristic. Both factor analysis of intelligence and present concepts of the physiology of intellectual processes make it clear that multiple genetic factors as well as environmental factors are involved in normal intellectual ability. In contrast, Huntington's chorea, which is a severe neurologic disease characterized by uncontrollable jerky movements and by mental deterioration and disorientation, is due to a single abnormal or mutant gene with minimal modification by the environment. It is obviously easier from an investigative viewpoint to determine the genetic mechanisms involved and to develop useful predictive information in the case of an outstanding abnormality due to a single mutant or abnormal gene than to determine the effects of multiple genes influencing normal characteristics. On the other hand, the inheritance of certain normal characteristics due to single gene effects, such as the blood groups, are well understood, and these traits are useful tools for a number of purposes. Advising families concerning the inheritance of normal traits, particularly special abilities, is certainly the responsibility of the genetic counselor. While adequate answers are available

for some problems, much additional research in this line is needed.
Cousin Marriage
A second type of problem frequently encountered concerns the possible effect on children of the marriage of cousins. The marriage of closely related individuals is prohibited by law, church regulation, or social custom in many cultures. Folk tales and superstitions concerning the ill effects to be expected from close in-breeding are common. Many intelligent people therefore inquire concerning the scientific basis for these beliefs. Such requests for information usually come from the interested young people themselves or from their immediate families, usually before marriage is contracted.
The basis of the cousin marriage question lies in the frequent occurrence in normal individuals of undesirable hidden characteristics, referred to as recessive traits. The basic units of inheritance, the genes, occur in pairs in the nucleus of each cell. An abnormal or mutant gene may be weaker in its physiologic action than its normal partner, and may produce no recognizable effect on the individual possessing it. If two individuals carrying the same hidden characteristic, or recessive gene, should marry, one-fourth of the children would receive the same recessive gene from both parents. In double dose, and without a normal gene to mask its effect, the recessive gene may produce severe disability or fatal illness in the unfortunate child. There are hundreds of different recessive genes known, no one of these being particularly common, but in their aggregate amounting to a large number. Each individual probably has somewhere between 20,000 and 40,000 pairs of genes (Spuhler, 1948). Onehalf of these genes are identical in a parent and child, for a child receives half of his genes from each parent. One-eighth of all genes will be identical in two first cousins, because this is the proportion of genes derived from ancestors common to both in-

85

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

dividuals. If an individual has one or more fields of medical practice. The questions

abnormal genes, the probability that this presented to the genetic adviser by such

same gene will be present in a first cousin is families usually fall in two classes: (1) Will

therefore one in eight. On the other hand, an individual known to have a given heredi-

the probability that this same abnormal tary abnormality transmit this disability to

gene might be present in an unrelated in- his children? (2) Where one or more ab-

dividual picked at random from the general normal children have appeared in a sibship,

population might not be greater than one what is the probability of recurrence of this

in 500 or one in 1,000. The difference in condition in possible future pregnancies?

betting odds between one in eight and one In many conditions the genetic mechanism

in 500 for matching a specific undesir- is well understood, and predictions con-

able characteristic in the marriage of first cerning future children can be made with

cousins versus unrelated individuals is ob-' confidence and exactness. In many other

vious. For second cousins the risk becomes conditions the genetic factors are not so

less, as one in 32 of their genes are identical, well known, and predictions cannot be

while for third cousins the proportion of made with equal confidence. Empiric

identical genes is only one in 128.

risk figures for certain types of marriages,

It should be pointed out that the effect of cousin marriage is only to intensify or bring to light characteristics that are already present in hidden form in a given family. If the characteristics of the family are all normal, no ill effect would be anticipated. Unfortunately, none of us can know what recessive characteristics he may be carrying, and we can never be sure that any cousin marriage is free from risk. Of course any marriage carries a perceptible risk that some of the resulting children might be abnormal or handicapped in some way. The effect of cousin marriage is to increase this normal risk several-fold. As a general principle, one can state that the marriage of individuals related as closely as first cousins is always potentially dangerous and should be generally discouraged. The marriage of second cousins is less dangerous, and for third cousins the added risk becomes quite small.

based on observation of large numbers of families, are available for a number of conditions where the exact genetic mechanism remains obscure. In spite of considerable study, the mechanism of inheritance of the malformation known as harelip and cleft palate remains uncertain, and it seems possible that both environmental and genetic factors may be involved. By observation it is known that of all children having one parent with harelip (with or without cleft palate) and the other parent normal, approximately 2 per cent will have harelip. If one parent has cleft palate without harelip and the other parent is normal, 7 per cent of children will have cleft palate. In families where the parents themselves are normal, but one child with harelip has appeared, the probability that the next child will have harelip is 4 per cent. If one parent and one child have harelip, the risk the next child may also be affected is increased to 14 per cent. Similar empiric risk

Hereditary Diseases

figures are available for a number of other

The type of problem most frequently conditions.

referred to the genetic adviser concerns In order to render sound genetic advice

families in which one or more cases of an in problems involving hereditary disease,

hereditary disease have already occurred. the adviser must be in possession of the pub-

The number of disease processes in which lished information acquired by study of the

genetic factors are of considerable impor- specific condition in question and must also

tance would number several hundred, and have an adequate knowledge of the family

genetic problems are encountered in all concerned. Certain conditions may be in-

86 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

herited in different ways in different fami- predicted that the chance that the next

lies, and there is no substitute for careful, child would die of cerebral sclerosis was 25

extensive and intelligent investigtation of per cent, while the chance of a normal

the family in question by the adviser.

child was 75 per cent. Of course a normal

Adequate study of a family will usually child would have a two-thirds probability

permit the investigator to specify the prob- of being a carrier of the recessive gene.

ability for abnormality in future children. This couple was agreeably surprised to find

One can usually estimate the degree of risk that they had a 3 out of 4 chance of having

that would be involved if a given husband a normal child. They wanted children

and wife decide to have more children. It badly enough to feel that this risk was not

is the responsibility of the genetic counselor excessive.

to make available to the parents the most Interviews with the genetic counselor and

accurate risk information that can be ob- with a psychiatrist dispelled the mild guilt

tained, and to see the implications of the complex concerning the death of the first

risk assessment are understood. However, child. It is of importance to note that the

the adviser should not attempt to make a parents understood the magnitude of risk

decision for the family or urge them to involved in pregnancy and were psycholog-

adopt some particular course of action. ically prepared to accept the situation if

The question of having children is a very the second child should also die. Without

personal and individual one and will be psychological preparation for possible fail-

influenced by many considerations of re- ure, the shock of a second abnormal child

ligion, temperament, economic and other could have serious effects. A seven-year

factors. These can be evaluated best by the follow-up disclosed that this couple had two

husband and wife concerned. One may normal children, and then decided they

often encounter couples who will make had pushed their luck far enough. The re-

opposite decisions in the face of similar risk sulting family was a happy one, and in

figures. Two brief examples may demon- every way an asset to their community.

strate that such opposing decisions may be A marked contrast is provided by another

at times justified.

family seen at a time when they had four

A young couple was seen in the clinic children. The first and third children were

whose first and only child had recently died normal, while the second and fourth were

of a severe and uncommon neurologic dis-« severely ill with cystic fibrosis of the pan-

ease, infantile cerebral sclerosis (Krabbe's creas. The older of the affected children,

type). This condition is usually due to a age 5 years, had spent several months in

recessive gene. The family history suggested hospitals and could not be expected to

that the usual mechanism was operating in live long. The youngest child, less than a

this family, with both parents being carriers year old, was also in the hospital. This

of the abnormal gene. On examination, disease is ultimately fatal, but the illness is

both parents were quite healthy, above often of several years duration. The finan-

average in intelligence, and apparently cial burden of protracted hospital care for

quite stable psychologically. They had been two children was severe. Here again the

told that their child's illness was "heredi- action of a recessive gene was indicated, and

tary," and they had developed a certain the probability that the next child might

feeling of guilt, holding themselves some- also have cystic fibrosis of the pancreas was

how responsible for the death of their child. 25 per cent. This risk figure was completely

They greatly desired children of their own, unacceptable to these parents. They felt

but had assumed without justification that that they could not face the prospect of

all future children would be abnormal. another child with a prolonged and fatal

From the available information it could be illness. They also felt that the expense of

87

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

another affected child would unfairly penalize the two normal children. After deliberation of several weeks and consultation with their minister, the husband requested surgical sterilization and a vasectomy was performed.
Similar examples could be quoted involving other mechanisms of inheritance and risk figures of different levels. In situations similar to that of the second family, a risk of abnormality in the neighborhood of 5 per cent may seem too large to some couples. Each family presents a unique set of circumstances, and in each case the husband and wife concerned should make their own decision concerning future children, in the light of the best available medical, genetic, social and personal information. It is the duty of the family physician to assist the couple in carrying out any decision at which they arrive freely. Should they elect to refrain from further childbearing, adequate contraceptive advice or surgical sterilization should be made available. A more extensive discussion of the principles underlying counseling in families with hereditary abnormalities will be found in the report of a panel discussion on genetic counseling conducted by Professor L. R. Dice at the 1952 meeting of the American Society of Human Genetics (Dice, et al. 1952).
There is another side to heredity counseling in families afflicted with hereditary disease that has a brighter outlook but is not often emphasized in discussions of this topic. A surprising amount of superstition and misinformation is encountered by those doing genetic counseling. Many tragic situations are seen, such as middle-aged persons who have unnecessarily avoided marriage, and marriages that have broken up because of an unfounded fear of pregnancy. Incorrect beliefs that their children are likely to be abnormal are often met in intelligent families, and are responsible for much needless mental conflict. In any family in which one may identify individuals with a high risk for having abnormal children, one can also identify individuals

whose children will, in all likelihood, be entirely normal. Reed (1953), in an excellent discussion of the philosophy of genetic counseling, points out that the overall effect of such counseling is to encourage people to have more children than they had thought wise, as the chance of bad luck is often less than they had assumed. It is the responsibility of the genetic counselor to allay fear and counteract the effect of superstition and misinformation. Individuals whose fears are unfounded should be reassured and encouraged to live normal lives.
The marriage counselor should be alert to identify cases in which marital discord is based on fear of pregnancy secondary to a belief that children might be abnormal. The apparent problem that brings the couple to the marriage counselor will not be properly resolved unless this deeper cause is detected and brought into the open. People have a tendency to exaggerate fears of things that they do not understand. A careful genetic study, with assessment of the risks involved, can sometimes dispel a cloud that is blighting an otherwise sound marriage. Problems of this sort can sometimes become quite complex, requiring the cooperative services of the family physician, the marriage counselor, and the genetic counselor (Herndon, 1954).
Disputed Paternity
Heredity clinics can also be helpful in marital problems involving any dispute concerning the true paternity of a child. For many years, medico legal blood testing has been accepted as competent evidence by our courts in cases of disputed parentage. While such tests can never prove conclusively that a given man is, beyond question, the biologic father of a given child, they can frequently prove the reverse, showing that it would be biologically impossible for a given man to be the father of a given child. These tests are most often employed in court actions and constitute almost the only type of objective evidence that can

88 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

be produced by a man who is falsely ac- trait can be detected prior to marriage, it

cused of being the father of an illegitimate is possible that the concerned parties might

child. Proof of innocence cannot be fur- change their minds and seek other marital

nished for all men wrongly accused. Use of partners. If they did marry they might pre-

the testing sera generally available will pro- fer to adopt normal children rather than

vide exclusion in approximately one-half to run the risk of bringing severely handi-

two-thirds of such cases. The probability capped children into the world. While

of obtaining exclusion depends upon the exact information of this type is available

number of genetic tests employed, and the for only a few conditions at present, there

frequency of the genes controlling these seems to be good hope that future work in

characteristics in the population under con- this field can expand these facilities con-

sideration. Methods of estimating the siderably.

probability of excluding paternity in different racial groups and under different conditions of testing are given by Boyd (1954). It should also be obvious that blood testing procedures can frequently be used to help solve domestic problems that are not in the courts, and when the concerned parties wish to avoid the publicity of legal action. Furnishing proof to a suspicious husband that his suspected rival could not possibly be the father of the wife's child has averted divorce on several occasions in the writer's experience.

Another area of research also gives hope for prevention of certain hereditary abnormalities. In a number of conditions it has been shown that both inherited and environmental factors are necessary to produce disease. In other words, one inherits a specific susceptibility to environmental stress that would be harmless to the normal individual. For example, the susceptibility to diabetes is certainly inherited, and risk tables are available specifying the likelihood that any given relative of a known diabetic might later develop the disease

Research

(Steinberg, 1955). It also seems certain that environmental agents, harmless to the nor-

Recent developments that have pointed mal individual, are also necessary to pre-

out new avenues for research strongly sug- cipitate clinical disease in a person gene-

gest that heredity counseling may be con- tically susceptible to diabetes. Kallmann's

siderably more effective in the future than (1953) research demonstrates that a similar

it is now. One of the chief difficulties at interaction of hereditary and environ-

present, as suggested in the discussion of mental factors may be concerned in the

cousin marriage, is our inability to recog- etiology of schizophrenia and other mental

nize carriers of severe disabling recessive illnesses. Research is now being directed to-

traits before one or more abnormal chil- ward identification of the precipitating en-

dren have appeared in a family. Research vironmental factors in these and in other

directed to the problem of identifying car- conditions. If the precipitating factors can

riers of recessive genes has already pro- be adequately denned, family studies can

duced useful results and there is promise of identify the probably susceptible individ-

more to come. At present carrier states can uals, and measures can be taken to protect

be identified, with varying degrees of re- susceptible persons from precipitating con-

liability, for about 30 hereditary abnormali- ditions.

ties (Falls & Neel, 1954). These develop-

ments place within our reach a tool for Eugenic Implications

prevention of a number of hereditary dis- The counselor concerned with any prob-

eases that can be utilized in connection with lem of heredity must always bear in mind

premarital examinations. If proposed mat- the possible eugenic or dysgenic effect of

ings of two carriers of the same abnormal any advice he may give. The counselor

89
must not only be concerned with the spe- those whose offspring will be assets to socific problem in inheritance raised by a ciety and those whose offspring will be ligiven family butmust also attempt tomake abilities. In themajority of cases, however, some assay of the total genetic endowment careful study of the family should contribof thepersons in question. This is obvious- ute to a wise judgment on this point.The ly a difficult thing to do, as we have no necessity for considering each family on its exact yardstick for assaying an individual's own merits as an individual and probably genetic worth or for measuring his value unique case cannot be over-emphasized. to society. Differences of opinion are to be While the final decision concerning family expected in any area where a decision must limitation in case of severe genetic disability be based on judgment and experience should always rest with the parties conrather than actual measurement. Probably cerned, assuming their mental competence, most people would agree that a minor it should also be the responsibility ofthe genetic abnormality correctable by surgery, counselor to point out the bright side of such as having six fingers or toes, should the picture in families whose reproduction not be considered grounds for limitation of should be encouraged. It should certainly family size, particularly in a family that be theresponsibility of themarriage counhas produced individuals of outstandingin- selor, the family physician andthegenetics telligence and ability. On the other hand, counselor to encourage reproduction in most people would agree that it would be families possessed of a high order of socially advantageous for reproduction to cease in valuable characteristics. Generally, though a family producing successive crops of idiots admittedly not in all cases, advice concernand imbeciles. Between these extremes will ing heredity that issound and advantageous lie many instances in which even the most for theindividual family will also be found mature and discriminating judgment will to be sound and advantageous for society as find difficulty in drawing a line between a whole.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

REFERENCES
BOYD, W. C. 1954. Tables and nomogram for calculating chances in excluding paternity. Am. J. Human Genet. 6 : 426.433.
BRECHER, R., and BRECHER, E. 1955. How much dis-
ease can be inherited? Redbook Magazine104 (7): 26. DICE, L. R. 1952. Heredity clinics: their value for public service and research. Am. J. Human Genet. 4 :1-15.
DICE, L. R., HERNDON, C. N., WALKER, N. F., REED,
S. C, OLIVER, C. P., and NEEL, J. V. 1952. A
panel discussion: genetic counseling. Am. J. Human Genet. 4 : 332-346.
FALLS, H. F., and NEEL, J. V. 1954. The detection
of carriers of recessive genes. Eugenics Quart. 1: 166-170.

HERNDON, C.N. 1954. Medical genetics and marriage counseling. Marriage and Family Living 1 6 :
207-211.
KALLMANN, F. J. 1953. Heredity in Health and Mental Disorder. New York: W.W. Norton & Co.
REED, S.C. 1952. Heredity Counseling andResearch. Eugenical News. 3 7 :41-46.
REED, S. C. 1953.Counseling in human genetics, part III. Bull, of the Dight Institute, Univ. Minn. #8 p. 10-19.
SCHEINFELD, A. 1950. You and Heredity, 2nd Ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott.
SPUHLER, J. N. 1948. On the number of genes in man. Science, 108: 279-280.
STEINBERG, A. G. 1955. Heredity and diabetes. Eugenics Quart. 2 : 26-30.

