Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Intelligence, fertility and the future
James Maxwell
To cite this article: James Maxwell (1954) Intelligence, fertility and the future, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:4, 244-247, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987203 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987203
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles Citing articles: 5 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

INTELLIGENCE, FERTILITY AND THE FUTURE

A Report on the 1947 Scottish Mental Survey*

JAMES MAXWELL
Moray House Training College

University of Edinburgh

Procedure
IN 1932 A GROUP verbal intelligence test test, no significant change in average I.Q.

was administered to 87,498 Scottish eleven- was found. The main finding of the two year-old children; and in 1947 the same Scottish Surveys thus was, that over a per-

test was administered to the corresponding iod of fifteen years, there was no sign of a group of eleven-year-olds, numbering decline in the average measured intelli-

70,805. Each group comprised over 90 per gence of the eleven-year-old child populacent of the estimated population of eleven- tion, and some suggestion of a rise. Ex-

year-olds. In 1932, a sample of 1000 chil- planations of the increase in average group dren was given the Stanford-Binet test, test score in terms of environmental im-

and in 1947 a sample of 1215 children, se- provement and familiarity with tests are lected by date of birth, was given the possible but are unproven, and such ex-

Terman-Merrill Binet Test.

planations would require to be established

The information obtained about the by some positive evidence before being ac1947 children was considerably more ex- cepted.

tensive than that for the 1932 group. For
all the 1947 elevén-year-olds, the size of Intelligence and Fertility

family, the child's position in the family, A definite negative correspondence be-

and various matters of educational interest tween the average intelligence test scores

were recorded. For a 10 per cent sample, of the children and the size of their sibship

the children born on the first three days of was established in the 1947 Survey. The

each month, the father's occupation, the correlation coefficients are r = --0.28 for

degree of overcrowding in the home, the the group test, and r = --0.32 for the

mother's age, the child's place of birth, Binet test. The relationship between test

and the child's height and weight were also score and family size is not known for the

recorded. It was from this sample that the 1932 group, but various contemporary in-

1215 individually tested children were vestigations did reveal a similar negative

drawn; and both the 10 per cent sample correspondence, so it is not unreasonable

and the smaller sample appear to be a to assume a corresponding negative rela-

good representation of the total eleven- tionship among the 1932 children, though

year-old population of the survey.

its degree is unknown.

Comparison of Intelligence Test Scores
On the group test of 76 items, the average score of the 1947 children was 2.3 points higher than that of the 1932 group of children, the standard deviation of test score being about 16 for both groups. After calibration of the two versions of the Binet
*Presented at the World Population Conference in Rome, September 1954.

It has been suggested that the negative relationship between family size and average intelligence is a function of birth order, the later-born children in a family tending to be less intelligent than the earlier born. The data of the Scottish Survey do not allow of this hypothesis being fully examined, as the children are all from different families, and all families are not necessarily complete. The data as they stand, however, give some indication that

244

245

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

the last-born children may be slightly more intelligent than the earlier-born children, and there is no sign whatever of a negative relationship between test score and birth order. Because of the method by which the survey children were selected, i.e., all eleven-year-olds, it is impossible to make any more precise statement. On the other hand, the younger sibs of the 1215 individually tested children have also been individually tested on reaching the age of eleven. Here it is possible to compare children of different birth order within the same family. The results (as yet unpublished) show no clear correspondence between birth order and intelligence. It can safely be inferred from the Scottish results that a differential relationship between birth order and intelligence has no part in the negative correlation between intelligence and family size.
On the basis of this negative correlation between intelligence and family size, predictions of a decline in the average level of intelligence have been made; but the decline expected between 1932 and 1947 does not seem to have occurred. This is one of the paradoxes of the Scottish results, and its resolution implies either a "masked" decline, or inadequacies in the methods of predicting future trends from one set of results. The environmental influences said to be masking a real decline have been neither precisely identified nor clearly established as operating; the prediction of future trends is a question that deserves fuller consideration than can be given here.
Intelligence and Social Environment
From the information recorded for the 10 per cent sample in the Scottish survey, it has been possible to make several sociological classifications. The major classification was in terms of the father's occupation. Nine such occupational (or social) classes were distinguished; a brief definition of each is given below, together with

the average size of sibship and average

group test score of the children in each

class.

,, ., ,,

Family Test

Occupational Class

Size Score

I Professional and large

employers

2.6 51.8

II Small employers and

self-employed

3.1 42.7

III Salaried employees

2.5 47.7

IV Non-manual wage

earners

3.1 43.6

V Skilled manual wage

earners

3.6 37.2

VI Semi-skilled manual

wage earners

4.3 33.2

VII Unskilled manual

wage earners

4.6 31.1

VIII Farmers

3.9 36.2

IX Agricultural workers 4.3 32.3

All 3.8 36.8

There is here a clear differential rela-

tionship between occupational class and

family size, and between occupational class

and test score. There is also an almost per-

fectly inverse correspondence of test score

and family size between occupational

classes. These relationships suggest that

the negative correlation between fertility

and intelligence may be a function of dif-

ferences between social classes. But further

analysis of the survey data showed quite

clearly a negative correlation between

family size and intelligence test score with-

in each occupational class;and these nega-

tive correlations were only a little smaller

than that obtained for the survey popula-

tion as a whole.

Thus a third element, social class, must

be added to the fertility-intelligence dif-

ferential. Though the Scottish Survey data

do not completely represent the whole

adult population, as childless couples are

omitted and large families over-repre-

sented, it is likely that the differences be-

tween social classes revealed in the survey

are a fair enough indication of the pattern

in the whole population. This differential

relation between intelligence, social class

and fertility complicates the prediction of

future trends of intellectual level, intro-

ducing as it does two further unknowns.

246 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

The first unknown element is the stability of the observed differences in fertility and intelligence as between social classes. There are some indications that in Scotland the social class-fertility relationship is in a stage of transition from a fairly uniform distribution of largish families over the various social classes to a more uniform distribution of smaller families over the various social classes, and that this process of reducing family size is more advanced in those social groups containing the more intelligent parents and children. If this supposition is correct, then the expectation would be that the negative correlation between family size and intelligence would be reduced, and what is more important, the number of large families containing the less intelligent children would become less.
The other unknown is the trend of social mobility between classes, and its effects on the intelligence-fertility relationship. There are grounds for believing that the fertility of parents whose social level has changed is intermediate between that of the class they are in and their class of origin. In the Scottish Survey, of the 6 per cent of children with highest test scores, nearly one-third were children of skilled manual workers, about one-sixth were children of professional men and large employers, and about one-seventeenth were children of unskilled manual workers. These children are estimated to be able to attain a University standard of education, and some may move to a different social class. Some of the children may remain in the class of manual workers. On the other hand some of the less intelligent children from the professional class may also manage to remain in that class. Whether the differential fertility of social class or the differential fertility of intellectual level will prevail remains unknown, but any estimates of future trends in the population must take these possibly conflicting influences into account.

Height and Weight
The heights and weights of the children in the 10 per cent sample were recorded, as well as their intelligence test scores. The pattern of the relation of height and weight with family size, and with occupational class, resembles closely that of intelligence test score, though the correlation of height and weight with test score is only of the order of r =· -f0.20 to r = -f0.25.
Since records for height in particular are more extensive than those for intelligence, it is tempting to construct a model, using height instead of intelligence, and to test prediction from the model. The correlation of height with family size is a little smaller than that of intelligence with family size, and the differential relationship of height with social class only a little less marked than that of intelligence. What, then, is happening to the average height of the population? During the years between 1932 and 1947 the average height of Scottish children increased; and records from certain parts of Scotland show that this increase has been in progress since 1910 and is still continuing. There is evidence that a differential relationship between height and social class existed in 1910, and indirect suggestions that the differential relationship with family size also existed, though this latter cannot be established independently of social class. Children at school in 1910 are likely to be parents of children measured in later years, so it seems reasonably certain that, age for age, the children are taller than their parents. Further, the average height of the adult population does not seem to have altered to any marked degree over this century, and no evidence of a decline has been adduced. It appears possible, therefore, for a stable level of height to exist in the context of a differential corespondence between height and fertility, and height and social class. Though the environmental influences affecting height may not be the same as those affecting test score, it is not

247

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

easy to conceive of a situation where the relationship of two variables with fertility and social class are closely parallel, and yet where for one (intelligence test score) the relationship is accompanied by a decline and for the other it is not. The model for height does not, by analogy, suggest a decline in average intelligence.
Migration
For the purpose of the Survey, Scotland was divided into four types of areas, the four cities, the large towns, the small towns, and the rest of the country, this last being called the Other Areas. The cities and the Other Areas each contains about 40 per cent of the total survey population. For each child in the 10 per cent sample, there was recorded the place of birth and of present residence, both in terms of the four types of area mentioned above. About 11 per cent of the children were migrants. Those migrants were found to be a superior group, intellectually, socially, and physically. Considering the cities and Other Areas only, the average test score of children migrating from the Other Areas to the cities is 7.1 points higher than that of the children migrating in the opposite direction. The average score of all children born in the cities, whether migrating or not, is 1.5 points higher than that of all children born in Other Areas. During the eleven years of the survey children's lives, 1936 to 1947, there appears to be a definite flow of intelligent children, in smaller families, to the cities, and a corresponding flow of less intelligent children in larger families to the Other Areas. Because of the miscellaneous kinds of districts defined as Other Areas it is not possible to make anything but very rough estimates of the results of this trend, but it does seem that if the loss of intelligent children from the Other Areas had continued for any time at the rate indicated by the 1947 Survey, the difference between the average test scores of children born in cities and born in Other

Areas would be much larger than it is shown to be. The explanation may be in social terms, or it may be another apparent paradox, that the Other Areas are continuously losing a proportion of the more intelligent children to the cities and receiving a proportion of the less intelligent children, but that the average intelligence in each of the two areas appears to continue at very much the same relative level.
Conclusions
This paper has confined itself to a discussion of the results of the Scottish Mental Surveys only. The findings of the 1947 Survey on the relations of fertility, intelligence test score, social conditions and stature are in substantial agreement with the findings of other corresponding investigations and raise much the same questions. Comparisons of the intellectual level of a given population over a period of time show somewhat more conflicting results, and the non-committal conclusion that there is no evidence of a fall in average intelligence appears to be the most fitting one. The positive contribution of surveys such as the Scottish ones is to reveal the nature and extent of the problems rather than to find conclusive answers to them, and to provide a framework of reference for more limited but more intensive investigations. Such investigations could profitably be directed to the elaboration of more precise methods of handling sociological and genetic data, to the establishment in greater detail of the interaction of social and genetic factors in fertility and intelligence, and, as the Scottish Mental Survey is doing with the 1215 individually tested children, trying to ascertain the bearing of intelligence test score, family size and social conditions on the future lives of the children. The main need, however, is to establish a link between one generation and the next. Neither extensive surveys nor limited investigations are themselves alone sufficient; the two approaches are necessarily complementary to each other.

