Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Heredity and diabetes
Arthur G. Steinberg
To cite this article: Arthur G. Steinberg (1955) Heredity and diabetes, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:1, 26-30, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987216 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987216
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 5 View related articles Citing articles: 10 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

HEREDITY AND DIABETES

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ARTHUR G. STEINBERG
Children's Cancer Research Foundation Children's Medical Center Boston, Massachusetts

BY THE BEGINNING OF this century most
investigators were agreed that heredity plays a large role in the causation of diabetes mellitus. Today, no one rises to challenge Joslin's statement that, "Heredity is the basis of diabetes" (2).
The recognition that heredity is important in the causation of diabetes makes it possible to provide answers to the oftrepeated question of "How likely am I to develop diabetes?". The availability of excellent measures for the control and perhaps the prevention of diabetes makes it urgent that the question be answered.
The answer depends on many variables. This paper presents answers taking into account the variables of age and family history relative to diabetes.
Investigations based on large numbers of carefully collected histories show that diabetes is about twice as frequent among the sibs (sisters and brothers) of diabetic patients who have a diabetic parent as among the sibs of diabetic patients who do not have an affected parent. Table 1 shows the data from four recent studies, each of which examined the families of more than 1000 patients. Such data suggest recessive inheritance, and it has been shown

that such an hypothesis will explain these data (3). We may conclude, therefore, that susceptibility to diabetes is inherited via a simple recessive gene which we shall symbolize as "d". Individuals who are genetically liable to diabetes are "dd". Those not genetically liable to diabetes are "Dd" or "DD".
Estimates based on two different sets of data indicate that about 5 per cent of the population of the United States is homozygous for the gene determining susceptibility of diabetes, that is, are "dd" (4). As a consequence of the variability in age at onset and in the severity of the disease, only about 1 per cent of the population is recognized to be diabetic (2). It appears from various studies that an additional 1 per cent of the population is diabetic but not recognized to be so (7). We must conclude, therefore, that 60 to 80 per cent of those who are genetically liable to diabetes, that is, who are "dd", are not recognized by present routine methods of examination.
The following paragraphs show how these facts may be applied to estimate the probability that a relative of a diabetic individual will be genetically liable to diabetes.

TABLE 1

T H E FREQUENCY IN PER CENT OF DIABETES AMONG THE SIBS OF DIABETIC PATIENTS WITH
NEITHER PARENT OR ONE PARENT DIABETIC.

Source of Data Neither parent diabetic One parent diabetic
Number of families studied

Harris (1) 3.5 11.7
1241

Thompson & Watson (5)
7.7
15.3
1631

Steinberg & Wilder (4)
4.7 11.4
1981

von Kries (6) 3.2 8.9
1305

26

27

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

The probability that a sib of a diabetic Reference to Table 1 will show that

individual is genetically liable to diabetes. rather wide differences in frequencies of af-

A diabetic individual is, as we have seen, genetically "dd". Therefore, each of his parents must have contributed one "d" gene to his genotype (genetic make-up). Consequently, the mating which gave rise to him must have been one of the following three types, where "d" represents the gene which when present in double dose (homozygous) leads to genetic susceptibility to diabetes, and "D", the gene which when present in single or double dose leads to non-susceptibility to diabetes.

fected sibs have been reported by different investigators. There were too few patients with both parents diabetic to derive meaningful values for the frequencies of affected sibs. All these data are based on information derived by questioning the patient concerning his relatives; therefore, the frequency of affected sibs most probably is too low. Hence, it does not seem very useful to quote any frequencies for clinical use. For general survey data, values of 6, 12 and 25 per cent of affected sibs when none, one, or both parents, respectively, are diabetic

TABLE 2

seem reasonable.

Per cent of

The answer to (b) is relatively simple

"dd '." offspring and for clinical purposes the more im-

1. Dd X D d (neither parent genetical-
ly liable to diabetes) 2. Dd X d d (one parent genetically
liable to diabetes) 3. dd Xdd (both parents genetically
liable to diabetes)

25
50 100

portant. If neither parent is diabetic, about one-quarter of the patient's sibs will be genetically liable to diabetes; when one parent is diabetic about one-half of the sibs will be; and when both parents are diabetic

all the sibs will be genetically liable to

If one is concerned about the sibs of a diabetes (see Table 2).

diabetic, he must first determine if none, While it was permissible for illustrative

one, or both of the patient's parents are purposes to ignore the possibility that a

diabetic. Because diabetes may occur at non-diabetic individual may be "dd" (that

any age, parents stated to be non-diabetic is, genetically liable to diabetes), this pos-

may nevertheless develop diabetes at a later sibility must be considered when estimating

age. That is, some non-diabetic parents the probability that an individual may be

may be genetically liable to diabetes genetically liable to the disease.

("dd"). This introduces an error into our predictions. However, for the present illustrative purposes we will ignore this error.
Having determined which of the patient's parents is diabetic, we have two types of questions to answer: (a) What proportion of his sibs will be observed to be diabetic; and (b) What proportion of his sibs are genetically liable to diabetes?

Consider the case of a young couple with a five-year-old diabetic child. Neither of the parents is diabetic, but both are less than 40 years of age. If we were to conclude that neither parent is "dd" (because neither is diabetic) the probability, as we have already seen, that any other child of theirs would be "dd" is 25 per cent. However, less than 30 per cent of diabetics become

A precise answer to (a) cannot be given diabetic before 40 years of age. Therefore,

at this time. The number of observed dia- there is a considerable chance that one or

betic sibs is a function among other things both parents is "dd" even though neither is

of the age of the diabetic patient and the diabetic. Hence, a prediction based on the

method of examining the sibs. More sibs assumption that neither parent is "dd" will

will be found to be diabetic if glucose be too low.

tolerance tests are done than if individuals A better estimate of the probability that

are merely asked whether they are diabetic. other children of these parents will be "dd"

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

28 Eugenics Quarterly

may be calculated. The basic requirements lations based on these assumptions. The

are an estimate of the frequency of the gene frequencies under column (a) (assumption

"d" and an estimate of the probability that "a") are those we have already considered.

a non-diabetic parent or grandparent may The frequencies under columns (b) and

be "dd".

(c) are essentially the same; hence, for

The frequency of the gene "d" has been practical purposes if the parents are young,

estimated (4). The probability that a non- values of 35, 60 and 100 per cent may be

diabetic individual may be "dd" depends, among other things, upon the individual's age. For practical purposes, only three situations need be considered when an esti-

used when neither, one or both parents, respectively, are diabetic. The probability that a non-diabetic individual is genetically liable to diabetes.

mate is being made of the probability that The physician or geneticist is often asked

a sib of a diabetic will be diabetic.

by a non-diabetic person what are the

1. The parents are old, and therefore chances that he will become diabetic. As

there is only a small probability that non- we have seen, the answer has to be given as

diabetic parents are "dd". In this situation the probability that the individual is

it may be assumed that none of the non- genetically liable to diabetes rather than

diabetic parents or grandparents may be as the probability that he will become

"dd". This is equivalent to the situation diabetic.

we have already considered. (See Table 2). It will readily be seen that the proba-

2. The parents are less than 40, but the bility that an individual will be "dd"

grandparents are over 59. The non-diabetic (genetically liable to diabetes) depends

parents have a considerable chance of being upon which of his relatives is diabetic and

"dd", while the non-diabetic grandparents upon his age. Usually, the question is asked

have a relatively low probability of being about a young person. When this is so, the

"dd". In this situation, we shall assume parents are young and the grandparents

that the non-diabetic parents may be "dd" may be young. Hence, the usual situation

and that the non-diabetic grandparents may will be equivalent to situations 2 and

be "Dd" or "DD" but not "dd".

3 of the previous section. If the person

S. The parents and grandparents are young, and therefore the former have a high probability of being "dd" and the latter a somewhat lower but still considerable probability of being "dd". In this situation, we will assume that non-diabetic parents and grandparents may be "dd".
Table 3 shows the results of the calcu-

is older, he usually asks the question because he has a diabetic sib or parent (s). In which case, the answer can be found in the proper row of column (a) of Table 3. For example, if neither parent is diabetic but a sib is, the probability is 25 per cent that the questioner is "dd". If one parent and a sib are diabetic the proba-

Number of Diabetic parents
Neither One Both

TABLE 3

PROBABILITY IN PER CENT THAT A SIB OF A DIABETIC INDIVIDUAL WILL BE GENETICALLY LIABLE TO DIABETES.

(a)
Non-diabetic parent may not be "dd"
25 50 100

ASSUMPTIONS
(b) Non-diabetic parents may be "dd" but non-diabetic grandparents may not be "dd"
35 59 100

(c)
Non-diabetic parents and grandparents may be "dd"
37
61 100

29

bility is 50 per cent, and if both parents are diabetic the probability is 100 per cent (Table 3). If, however, only one parent is diabetic and no sib isaffected, the answer must be sought in Table 4or 5.
Detailed calculations of the probability that individuals with various combinations of affected relatives will be genetically liable to diabetes based on assumptions (b) and (c) yield similar values (Table 4). Therefore, itis not useful to consider them separately. Furthermore, the computed values are at best only approximations.

Therefore, for practical purposes the probabilities may be grouped and the detailed calculated values reserved for technical studies. The grouped values are shown in Table 5.
To use Table 5, first determine which relatives are diabetic. Itis well to remember that the more distant the relationship of the diabetic relative, the lower the probability that the individual is genetically liable to diabetes. If a first cousin or one grandparent is diabetic, the probability that an individual is "dd" is not more than 20

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

TABLE 4

PROBABILITY IN PER CENT THAT AN INDIVIDUAL WILL BE GENETICALLY LIABLE TO DIABETES I FHE HAS ONE OR MORE DIABETIC RELATIVES")-.

Diabetic Relatives
1. One grandparent 2. Two grandparents (not spouses) 3. Two grandparents (spouses)
Note this is equivalent to one parent diabetic (see 6) 4. Uncle or aunt 5. First cousin 6. One parent (see 3) 7. One parent (say father) and one grandparent (maternal) 8. One parent and a sib ofthe non-diabetic parent 9. One parent and first cousin on non-diabetic parent's side 10. One parent, and aparent and sib of the non-diabetic parent

Range of probability

Lower value*

Upper value9

11 14 35 37

18 22 9 14 69 18 22 59 61 50 61 34 42 75 80

fRelatives refer to grandparents, aunts, uncles and first cousins. Ifa sib is diabetic, use Table 3. ·Non-diabetic parents may be "dd" but non-diabetic grandparents may not be "dd". ··Non-diabetic parents and grandparents may be "dd".

TABLE 5
PROBABILITY THAT AN INDIVIDUAL WILL BE GENETICALLY LIABLE TO DIABETES IF HE HAS ONE OR MORE DIABETIC RELATTVESF.

Probability that person is genetically liable to diabetes*

Diabetic Relatives

Up to and including 20 per cent
30 to 40 per cent
50 to 80 per cent

1. First cousin 2. Uncle or aunt 3. One grandparent 4. Two grandparents (spouses)
or one affected parent 1. Two grandparents (not spouses) 2. One parent and first cousin on non-
udiiaabuetutiic. fpjaarietlnllt'sa asmidie; 1. One parent and a sib of the non-diabetic parent 2. One parent and a parent ofL tLhUCe nUoUlnl--UdititaLbJCetLilci. ppadrl Cenl ltl 3. One parent, and a sib and aa parent of the non-diabetic parent

·(·Relatives refers toparents, grandparents, aunts, uncles and first cousins. If asib is diabetic, use Table 4.
·Within each group the relatives are listed so as to yield an increasing probability that the person is "dd". Thus, an individual with only a first cousin diabetic (1 of the first group) has the lowest probability of being "dd" while a person with one parent, (3 of the last group) has the highest probability of being "dd".

30 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

per cent. If a parent and a sib of the nondiabetic parent are diabetic, the probability that an individual is "dd" is between 50 and 80 per cent.
An important use of the type of information presented in Tables 3, 4 and 5 is to estimate in what detail and how often to examine a given person for diabetes. Clearly, the greater the risk for the individual, the more rigorous the preventive measures one is willing to undertake. It is likely that everyone will agree that persons with risks of over 50 per cent should be provided with maximum preventive measures. Probably most will also agree that those with risks of 30 to 40 per cent should be closely followed. Wider divergences of opinion will be encountered when the group with less than 20 per cent risk is considered. At any rate, in each instance, the decision will have to be made by the physician in consultation with the patient.
Prediction of the age at onset of diabetes.
It has been claimed that on the average diabetes will occur in the child of a diabetic at an age 20 years lower than that at which it occurred in the parent and that the child is no longer liable to diabetes when it has passed the age at which the parent became diabetic. This phenomenon is referred to as anticipation.
About two-thirds of diabetic patients with a diabetic parent develop their diabetes at an earlier age than the parent. Analysis of such data, however, has shown that there

is no causal relationship between the age
at onset of diabetes in parent and child
(3). Hence, there is no reason to believe
that a child is no longer liable to diabetes
when he has passed the age at onset of his
diabetic parent. On the contrary, the risk
may be quite high if the parent was young
when he became diabetic.
A correlation betwen the age at onset of
diabetic sibs has been reported (1, 4). The
correlation is low, however, and there is
reason to believe it is not of clinical sig-
nificance. Hence, the age at onset of dia-
betes in a sib has no prognostic value.
We must conclude that at the present
time there is no method of predicting when
a person who is genetically liable to dia-
betes will become diabetic.
REFERENCES
1. HARRIS, H., 1950. The familial distribution of diabetes mellitus: A study of the relatives of 1241 diabetic propositi. Annals of Eugenics 15: 95-119.
2. JOSLIN, E. P., H. F. ROOT, PRISCILLA WHITE, A. MARBLE and C. C. BAILEY, 1946. "The treatment
of diabetes mellitus." Ed. 8, Philadelphia, Lea and Febiger, 861 pp.
3. STEINBERG, ARTHUR G. and RUSSELL M. WILDER,
1952. An analysis of the phenomenon of "Anticipation" in diabetes mellitus. Ann. Int. Med. 36:1285-1296.
4. STEINBERG, A. G. and R. M. WILDER, 1952. A
study of the genetics of diabetes mellitus. Am. Journ. Human Genetics 4:113-135.
5. THOMPSON, MARGARET W. and E. M. WATSON,
1952. The inheritance of diabetes mellitus. Diabetes 1:268-275. 6. VON KRIES, ILse, 1953. Beitrag zur genetik des diabetes mellitus. Z. menshl. Vererb. u. Konstitutionslehre 31:406-430.
7. WILKINSON, H. L. C. and L. P. KRALL, 1947.
Diabetes in a New England town. J.A.M.A. 135: 209-216.

