Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The myth of the melting pot
David C. Rife & Elton F. Paddock
To cite this article: David C. Rife & Elton F. Paddock (1954) The myth of the melting pot, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:4, 248-251, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987204 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987204
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

THE MYTH OF THE MELTING POT Genetic Variability and Racial Intermixture

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

DAVID C. R I F E
ELTON F. PADDOCK
Institute of Genetics The Ohio State University

M,LYTHS ARE FICTIONAL LEGENDS, but
more often than not they carry elements of truth. Popular beliefs concerning the results of racial mixture may be classed as the myth of the melting pot. According to this myth, the mixture of races is analogous to the process of manufacturing alloys. There is actually a great deal of truth in this analogy, although the true nature of alloys is frequently misunderstood.
When molten copper and zinc are thoroughly mixed in the proper proportions, brass will be produced. Brass, bronze, and other alloys are intimate mixtures of two or more pure metals. The ideal alloy is one which combines the desired qualities of two or more metals in what appears to be a homogeneous blend.
The appearance of homogeneity is superficial, however, as the alloy is essentially a physical mixture, not a chemical compound. Brass, for example, is a mixture of particles of pure copper and pure zinc, the size of the particles varying from atoms to tiny crystals. The result of a mixing of two races is analogous to the metallurgical melting pot in that the mixing does not result in the elimination of variability. It differs in that the end product in the human melting pot is a grosser mixture, the variation within mixed populations being more readily visible than in the metallic alloy. Concepts to the effect that either type of melting pot produces a new homogeneous product are purely fictitious.
The myth of the human melting pot is founded on the assumption that the hybridization of different human populations will eventually result in the elimination of

biological differences. According to this way of thinking mankind will eventually be characterized by a uniform shade of skin color, hair form, and various other physical characteristics, which now vary from one ethnic group to another.
There can be no question but that barriers between human races are rapidly being eliminated, owing to modern transportation, education, and communication. Today it is difficult to find "pure" racial groups. In most parts of the world many cultural barriers to understanding and cooperation are on the way out. But what about genetic variability? Is it tending to become less?
The answer is "no." Genes, the particles of heredity, do not lose their identities but maintain them over an indefinite number of generations, regardless of what other genes they may be associated with. This principle is the essence of the classical discoveries made by Mendel almost a century ago. Mixture of races neither increases nor decreases the total genetic variability in mankind. It brings about an increase of individual variability.
Mixtures of Negroes and Whites provide an excellent example of this principle. The first generation offspring are intermediate or mulatto. But if these mulattoes marry other mulattoes of similar origin, their offspring will exhibit subtly varying degrees of pigmentation, ranging from the dark brown of Negroes to the light pigmentation of Whites. The genes have maintained their individuality from one generation to another. The mixed population will have much greater variability with respect to

248

249

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

pigmentation and other traits than do indi- With man, it is the individual with

viduals among unmixed Whites or Negroes. whom we must deal. Yet we are able to

Also, there will be new combinations of char- characterize man in the mass by the ab-

acteristics between individuals not found stractions of statistical averages. We can

within either parent population. Some of demonstrate differences between popula-

the mixed individuals may possess light tions with this device. But the most im-

pigmentation and very curly or kinky hair, portant thing about an average is the

while others are characterized by dark pig- variation in the group of individuals from

ment and straight hair. It will be seldom which it is calculated. Particle-to-particle

indeed that the hybrid population will differences within a mixture are always

have individuals possessing all Negro char- greater than within the substances that

acteristics, or all the characteristics of entered the mixture. This is true whether

Whites.

we cannot see the particles as in an alloy

Genetic segregation for differences will or paint, or whether we have difficulty

continue from one generation to another visualizing the mass as in human popula-

within the hybrids. Thus instead of the tions. Thus mixing does not alter the origi-

human mixture combining two types into nal differences between the particles. It

one, it produces greater variability than only shifts the average and increases the

present in either of the parent populations. variation associated with said average.

The hybrid population is an obvious mix- When the relative proportions of the

ture. Unlike the metallurgical melting pot, parent populations and the mode of in-

the ingredients do not melt and fuse to the heritance of a trait are known, it is possible

degree that the product appears to be uni- to calculate the distribution of variability

form. The mixed human population like- within a hybrid population, provided that

wise differs from a mixture of different the traits in question do not play a part in

colored paints, which form one apparently the selection of mates. Suppose we assume

uniform color, the exact shade depending that 10 per cent of a hybrid population is

upon the proportions of each in the blend. of Negro descent, and the rest White, and

Rather, it is like a mixture of different that Negroes and Whites differ in four

colored marbles, each of which maintains genes with cumulative effects on pigmenta-

its color unchanged.

tion. Random mating would bring the

A bag of black marbles may be thought distribution of these genes to a stable

of as the pigment genes in one parent popu- equilibrium, which would be maintained

lation, and a bag of white marbles as those at this same level from one generation to

of the other. If the marbles from both bags another. The individuals in the hybrid

are dumped into a bowl and mixed to- population may be compared to bags each

gether, we have the same degree of varia- containing four marbles. If a bowl contains

bility within the bowl as there was between 900 white marbles and 100 black ones and

the two bags before.

they are thoroughly mixed, and the marbles

Mixtures of population shift the varia- are then placed in the bags at random, the

bility from groups to individuals, but the frequencies of bags containing all possible

total variability remains constant.

combinations of black and white may be

If one stands at a sufficient distance from easily calculated. Bags containing 4 black

the mixture of marbles, he will no longer marbles represent individuals characterized

be able to see the individual marbles. Then by "black" skin, those containing 4 white

the mixture will appear to be one uniform marbles represent those with "white" skin,

color. This is much the same as with alloys and the other three combinations represent

and paints. The point is: do we contem- intermediate shades. Approximately two-

plate the particles or the mass?

thirds of the individuals would lack Negro

250 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

genes, about 5 per cent would be mulatto or darker, whereas only 1 person in 10,000 would have only Negro genes and therefore would be as dark as their Negro grandparents. As there appears to be no dominance with respect to skin pigmentation, these proportions would be reversed if the parent populations were comprised of ninetenths Negro and one-tenth White. But hair form, skeletal dimensions, and other variations appear to be inherited independently of pigment, so the occurrence of individuals possessing all the characteristics of the parent race would be far less than for pigment alone. There would be numerous degrees of variability, and the originally sharp contrasts between the parent populations would be largely eliminated. The belief that racial mixture eliminates or even reduces genetic variability is a fictional part of the myth of the melting pot. Mixture scatters variability, but the total amount remains constant.

There is still more fiction to the myth. We shall briefly discuss two more common misconceptions, rather closely related to each other and to the first one. It is often assumed that individual variations with respect to a trait may be due to genetic makeup, whereas such differences between ethnic populations are due to cultural background. While it is unquestionably true that culture may do much to accentuate or to mask the expression of genetic differences, there is no evidence that it has any direct effect on genes. It is axiomatic that if individuals differ with respect to certain genes populations may also be expected to differ from each other with respect to the frequencies of these same genes. Such expectations are borne out by observations of the distributions of genetic traits within various populations. Table 1 shows the ABO blood group distributions in several populations.

TABLE 1

O A B AB

U. S. (Whites)

45% 41% 10% 4%

Chinese

45% 25% 25% 5%

Egyptians

32% 35% 25% 8%

Peruvian Indians 100% 0

00

Several other blood group series are known in man, each inherited independently of the others. These also occur with different frequencies among various racial groups. All other genetic variations which have been investigated in man follow the same pattern. These include fingerprints and handprints, skeletal dimensions, pigmentation, hair type, inherited abnormalities and disease susceptibilities, and numerous other conditions.
Occasionally two different ethnic groups may have similar distributions, with respect to a trait, but this is so rare that it appears to be happenstance. While two distantly related populations may happen to be similar in one trait, none have been found to be alike with respect to all genetic traits, nor will all human groups be alike with respect to the distribution of any one genetic variation.
As a matter of fact, the degrees of similarity with respect to the distribution of a number of different genetic traits provides the basis for evaluation of degrees of group relationship. The more closely two populations are related the more ancestors they have in common, and consequently the greater will be their genetic similarities. A racial group is in a very real sense a big family, the members of which are less closely related than those of more intimate family groups, but more closely related to each other than to members of other racial groups. Evidence that individual differences are due to genetic makeup may be accepted as evidence that populations also differ with respect to the distributions of the genes involved. This principle is of special concern with respect to mental and personality traits. It is frequently pointed out that comparisons of the psychological test scores of different ethnic groups mean little because such tests do not take into account the differences in cultural background.
While there is undeniably a great deal of truth in the criticism, it must be remem-

251

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

bered that evidence for individual genetic of culture need not imply that one culture

differences within a group must likewise be is superior to another. What is best in one

accepted as evidence that the groups as such environment might be worst in another.

also differ with respect to the frequency of To sum up, modern trends toward great-

genes governing these traits. This does not er racial intermixture have no effect on the

tell us what the nature of these group total amount of genetic variability within

differences is but simply indicates that they mankind. But they are rapidly shifting the

are doubtless present. There is valid distribution in such a way as to bring about

ground for debate as to the reliability of an increase of individual differences and

evidence of an hereditary basis for indi- a filling in of the differences between popu-

vidual differences in mental and personali- lations. Culture may alter the expression

ty traits. But if one accepts such evidence of individual genetic differences within

as convincing, then he is forced to conclude groups, but the genetic potentials are un-

that populations differ with respect to the changed. Finally, the ability to develop a

distributions of these same traits.

culture is conditioned by genetic endow-

The third fictional portion of the melt- ment, which leads to the conclusion that

ing pot myth has to do with the concept of racial groups most likely differ with respect

culture. The ability to develop cultures is to it.

perhaps man's most unique characteristic. Whether for good or bad, further in-

By means of language and the use of tools, crease in the degree of ethnic intermixture

he has transcended the bounds of biological appears to be inevitable. Perhaps in the

inheritance. Culture may be considered long run it may be good. Scattering of ge-

social inheritance, by means of which we netic variability and reduction of sharp

are able to profit by the cumulative knowl- differences among racial groups enable bet-

edge and experiences of the race. Culture ter acquaintance with our neighbors

is apt to be thought and spoken of as a throughout the world. But it also means

type of group environment, which in a that educators, statesmen, and social work-

sense is true. But the ability to develop a ers must pay more attention to individual

culture most certainly is genetic in origin. differences than they have in the past.

Such a change was surely a major one, and Individual differences seem bound to in-

what we know concerning the evolution of crease, not only on account of the break-

major differences leads us to believe that ing down of ethnic barriers but also due

many rather than few mutations have oc- to the fact that natural selection is becom-

curred and that they are probably still oc- ing less and less effective in eliminating the

curring with reference to this ability. One biologically unfit.

is forced to conclude that there are genetic In order to get along in our highly inte-

differences within mankind as to the types grated world, we must have some under-

of culture which various ethnic groups are standing of our fellow men. This necessi-

capable of developing. Thus it is erroneous tates greater appreciation of the biological

to conceive of culture as being solely an en- basis of human nature. In the new atomic

vironmental phenomenon. Like most hu- age we cannot afford to do otherwise. We

man variations, it is an end product of must face the challenge of facts which can-

heredity and environment. It should also not be altered by any amount of wishful

be kept in mind that differences in kinds thinking.

