Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
For down's syndrome (mongolism)
Sheldon C. Reed
To cite this article: Sheldon C. Reed (1963) For down's syndrome (mongolism), Eugenics Quarterly, 10:3, 139-142, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1963.9987558 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1963.9987558
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

Genetic Counseling
FOR DOWN'S SYNDROME (MONGOLISM)

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

It is perhaps typical of the dilatory interest in human genetics that the correct number of chromosomes in man was unknown until 1956 and the first trisomy (mongolism) was not found until 1959. This sort of cytological information had been available for 30 years in Drosophila and various weeds, such as Datura. When the chromosome breakthrough finally came for man it was explosive because of its tardiness. The effect of the chromosome breakthrough on genetic counseling is well illustrated by the first really exciting bit of information obtained, namely, that Down's syndrome (mongolism) results from the presence in the fertilized egg of an extra 21st chromosome (Lejeune et al, 1959). This trisomy for the 21st pair of chromosomes results from the failure of the egg cell to reduce its number of chromosomes to only one member of each and every chromosome pair. When both members of the 21st pair of chromosomes are still present at the entrance of a sperm with its usual single 21st chromosome a total of three members of this particular pair of chromosomes will be present, and Down's syndrome will result, even though all the other chromosomes are present in normal pairs.
It is interesting that the extra chromosome is more often marooned in the egg of an older woman than in a younger one. We do not know what causes this chromosomal lethargy in women as they grow older, but the phenomenon is thoroughly established. Indeed, if all women over 40 years of age refrained from pregnancy, the number of children

born with Down's syndrome would be decreased by one-third. The eugenic advice that women complete their reproduction before age 40 is sound, and of importance to them and to the nation. The "age of mother" effect has been known for years, but it is doubful that as many as one woman in 10,000 ceases reproduction after the age of 40 for fear of having a mongoloid child. Let us hope that eugenic education will proceed more swiftly, beginning now.
Genetic counseling before the chromosome breakthrough was based entirely on empiric risks but was decidedly successful nonetheless. The clients were usually older mothers of a child with Down's syndrome who were relieved to learn that the chances were small that they would have a repetition of their misfortune even for the older ages. To be sure, they were warned that there was a real chance, even if a small one, that they might have another child with Down's syndome, and that the "lightning never strikes in the same place twice" cliché is the worst kind of false security. The younger mothers and the occasional mother with familial mongolism were disturbing because they had many years of fertility ahead. My counseling in these rare cases was always frustrating because the same empiric risk figure of about a 3 or 4 per cent chance of a repetition of Down's syndrome at the next pregnancy had to be used for all.
The advent of chromosome study of the leucocytes and skin cells has thrown great light upon a previously dark and mysterious situation. The children with

139

140 Genetic Counseling

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Down's syndrome fall into three chromosomally very distinct groups.
The first group of children have the "free" 21st chromosome in addition to the regular pair of 21st chromosomes, which is the classical human trisomy referred to above. There will still be some uncertainty in counseling older mothers because, unless there is a history of other mongoloids or miscarriages in the family, or among close relatives, we regretfully decline to make a chromosome study. It has been estimated that the actuarial cost of making a chromosome study is about $400. Chromosome studies cannot be purchased like blood-typing work yet, because few tehnicians are competent to do them. How many clients can be accommodated depends upon the supply of technicians available. Some physicians and scientists have asked me why one should take the trouble to make a chromosome study anyway. This question always makes me shudder because it is clear that the asker has no comprehension of the agony endured by the mother of a mongoloid child. The parents of a child with Down's syndrome want very much to know what the child's chromosome picture is, and it is difficult to explain why they should be deprived of such specific information.
The second group of children with Down's syndrome are most perplexing in that some of their cells have the extra free chromosome while other cells in the same child are normal. If they were completely normal, the parents of this "mosaic" child would usually not expect any further children with Down's syndrome.
The different chromosomal picture of the third group of children with Down's syndrome is fascinating to say the least, and the counseling is agonizing for the counselor and some members of these families, but most exhilarating for some

of the others. Here we have the "familial" cases of the anomaly which result from a chromosomal translocation or fusion. In this group we find that, at some time in the ancestry of the patient with Down's syndrome, two chromosomes of unrelated pairs came in contact with each other and in some way fused together, or as we say, were translocated. If a person has two chromosomes fused together, they will be counted as one chromosome in the cytological preparation. Thus, if the two smallest chromosomes are fused, namely the 21st and 22nd, we will find one 21st chromosome, and one 22nd chromosome and a new unique chromosome composed of the fused 21/22 chromosomes. The total chromosome count will therefore be 45 instead of the normal 46. This will be crystal clear in any good preparation, particularly in women where there is no Y chromosome to clutter up the picture.
The person with a total count of 45 chromosomes, one of which is the 21/22, is called a normal carrier and has no obvious difficulty in conceiving. The results of reproduction are likely to be disasterous. It is not clear precisely what types of embryos will result from the possible products of meiosis in the carrier person. However, more than half of them will be undesirable, and therein lies the importance and gravity of the counseling situation for the third group of children with Down's syndrome. The reader is referred to the paper of Macintyre et al. (1962) for a diagram of the expected gametes produced by the normal carrier person. After fertilization has occurred, it is my assumption that about one-quarter of the eggs will be chromosomally deficient and result in miscarriage, about one-quarter will have Down's syndrome, one-quarter will be normal carriers of the translocated chromosome, and only one-quarter will be completely

Genetic Counseling

141

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

clear of the situation. Presumably, of the children coming to term, one-third would be mongoloid, one-third normal carriers, and only one-third would be absolutely normal. Thus, there will be no good news for the normal carrier of a translocated chromosome. These percentages may not be precise but they are practical.
At last we come to the specifics of the three quite different counseling situations, depending upon the type of extra 21st chromosome present.
In the first group of children, where there is a "free" third chromosome of the 21st pair, we would not expect a much greater chance of a repetition of the anomaly than in any other mother of the same age. For younger mothers the chance would be roughly 1 in 1,000 of a repetition at each subsequent pregnancy, and for older ones the risk would be in the neighborhood of 3 or 4 per cent.
The second group of mosaic children is such an irregular group that the counseling would be entirely dependent upon individual circumstances, such as the proportion of aberrant chromosome counts in each child, and the parent's chromosome picture.
The third group, where we are counseling a normal carrier, is the most threatening and is worth consideration on a casework basis. We have studied three families with fused chromosomes at the University of Minnesota. One is a 15/21 translocation and two are 21/22 translocations. An element of surprise to us was that two of the three families turned out to have the supposedly rare 21/22 translocation. We have studied less than 30 cases of young mothers with one or more mongoloid children, and have found the three translocations, which is better than 10 per cent of the group of vulnerable young mothers who turn out to have this grave problem.

It is most unlikely that there were more than 100 children born with Down's syndrome in our area during this period of time so that the frequency of translocation mongoloids among all mongoloids must be at least 3 per cent. All three of our young normal carrier mothers were residents of Minneapolis.
The 15/21 translocation normal carrier mother is a Roman Catholic, and due to circumstances of no particular biological significance, I have not seen this couple for counseling yet.
One of the two 21/22 normal carrier mothers is a 23-year-old Roman Catholic and has had two pregnancies, both resulting in children with Down's syndrome. She was referred after the birth of her first child at age 22, and was already pregnant again at referral. However, I was on an extended trip at the time and nothing was done until my return when the second affected child was born. The young couple came for counseling as soon as the mother was out of the hospital. The various categories of chromosomal possibilities were explained to them and they realized very well that there was a real chance that one or the other of them was a normal carrier of a fused chromosome. They were very much more apprehensive of this than I. Both members of the couple were from large families with no miscarriages or affected children as far as their parents were aware. After the chromosome study was completed by Dr. Jorge Yunis and Mrs. Ness, I asked the couple to return so that I might show them the pictures of their chromosomes. I thought that I did a smooth job of breaking the news that the wife was the carrier of the 21/22 translocation and could not guess why I seemed more concerned about it than they were. It soon turned out that they had decided before coming to see the chromosome pictures

142 Genetic Counseling

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

that they didn't want to take any further chances, regardless of what they were going to find out from their visit.
The discussion then turned to methods of preventing further pregnancies, religion obviously entering the picture. The wife's menstrual periods have always been regular and they think that they can win with the rhythm method. I suspect that this case will be reopened.
The final case was easier to handle, as the young mother has a brother with Down's syndrome and had produced two miscarriages and a daughter with Down's syndrome. She already knew about the chromosome translocation types from reading the newspapers. The couple assumed that she had a translocation and expected me to demonstrate it. Fortunately, I did not try too desperately to dissuade them from this idea because it turned out that she is a normal carrier of a 21/22 fusion. This 27-year-old woman has a normal brother who was shown not to be a carrier of the fused chromosome by Dr. Herbert L. Cooper of the National Institute of Dental Research. The fact that the normal brother can be freed from apprehension is one of the positive and enjoyable aspects of genetic counseling.
This couple is Protestant and desires no further pregnancies. They have applied to the appropriate agency for the privilege of adopting a child. The agency requires proof of lack of fertility before placement. I was called upon to explain what the situation was to the agency, which had had no previous experience

with translocated chromosomes. There is no question but that the two
young mothers and their husbands came to the conclusion, without any urging, that it would be unwise for them to have further pregnancies. In both cases the advantages of permanent contraception, sterilization, were pointed out and the Protestant couple has asked me for assistance in obtaining this final solution of their problems.
The cytological details of these three families are of great interest and, when other relatives have been studied, will be published elsewhere by Drs. Jorge Yunis, Herbert Cooper, and Kurt Hirschorn, and Mrs. Inez Ness. This present report merely introduces a few of the points involved in the "familial" cases where counseling is of great value both in helping the normal carrier of a translocation to understand his plight correctly, and particularly in freeing the relatives without the translocation from the apprehension which they otherwise could not escape.
SHELDON C. REED
Dight Institute for Human Genetics University of Minnesota
REFERENCES
LEJUENE, J., M. GAUTIER, et R. TURPIN, 1959. Les
chromosomes humains en culture de tissus. C. R. Acad. Sci., Paris 2 4 8 : 1721.
MACINTYRE, M. N., W. I. STAPLES, A. G. STEINBERG and J. M. HEMPEL, 1962. Familial
mongolism (Trisomy-21 Syndrome) resulting from a "15/21" chromosome translocation in more than three generations of a large kindred. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 14: 335-344.

