Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Heredity and deafness
Louise A. Hopkins
To cite this article: Louise A. Hopkins (1954) Heredity and deafness, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:3, 193-199, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987192 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987192
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 5 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

HEREDITY AND DEAFNESS

LOUISE A. HOPKINS
Research Department
Clarke School for Deaf Northampton, Mass.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

EVER SINCE MENDEL CALLED the attention very real not only to scientists but to every

of scientists to the various modes of trans- intelligent man and woman. The vital im-

mission of inherited characteristics in 1865, portance of studies in this field of human

occasional studies concerning the transmis- heredity is obvious. The physician is often

sion of deafness have been made both in at a loss to explain the single occurrence

this country and abroad. Among the most of deafness in a family in which there has

notable are those of Dr. Alexander Graham been no known history of deafness, or to

Bell and Dr. Edward Allen Fay. That Dr. account for the special predilection for in-

Bell considered the problem of the inheri- volvement of the middle ear or auditory

tance of deafness of paramount importance nerve in certain cases of measles, scarlet

is shown by the fact that the promoting of fever or other diseases of childhood. Par-

research in regard to marriages of the deaf ents and teachers are often at a loss as how

in America, was one of the points stressed to answer the queries of the deaf child when

by him when he endowed the Volta Bureau the complete realization of his deafness first

in 1887. Dr. Fay devoted himself to the comes upon him. How should he be guided

problem over a period of years.

toward a wise point of view on some of the

Now more than sixty years later, the fact remains that the problem of hereditary deafness is still far from being solved. This is partly due to the fact that deafness is not a distinct clinical or pathological entity. It is the end result of many different pathological conditions, arising from many different causes and occurring at many different points in the auditory apparatus, but all giving rise to deafness of varied degree and character. On the other hand, deafness may be the result of malformation or defective development of some part or parts of this very complicated mechanism. There are not only many different degrees of deafness, but also many different kinds or types

most important problems which he must face in adult life? What advice shall be given to a graduate of a school for the deaf who is contemplating marriage with a former deaf classmate? What can we say to the hearing brothers and sisters when they ask whether they may have deaf children if they marry? These were but a few of the perplexing problems which made it seem important that one branch of the Research Department at Clarke School be devoted to the study of the Inheritance of Deafness in the hope that some of these questions might some day be at least partially answered out of Clarke School's own experience.

of deafness, depending on the location of It would be difficult to find a richer field

the defect or damage. Therefore, we must for research along these lines than Clarke

think not of deafness in general but of the School for the Deaf. It was founded in

different types of deafness. What is back 1867 and is one of the oldest schools in the of deafness in each instance? Any study of United States where deaf children are inheritance of deafness must in reality be taught to speak and to understand speech.

a study of the different types of deafness. There are each year approximately 150

Eugenics, "the self-direction of human pupils ranging in age from four and a half

evolution," is coming to mean something to eighteen years. Those who enter at four

193

194 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

and a half usually remain over a period of ance of deafness has been to collect family

ten years until they are prepared to enter histories of present and former pupils of

high school with hearing children. The Clarke School. The family history has been

majority of the children live at the school. taken in the form of a pedigree chart, show-

We have from time to time children from ing all members and going back at least

old New England families in which there four generations whenever possible. We

have been accurate records of the occur- have tried to bring out on the charts all

rence of deafness back over many genera- possible facts regarding the transmission

tions. We have an old and very loyal alum- of deafness, the relation between deafness

ni group, a considerable number of whom, in childhood and hearing defects in early

unfortunately, have had deaf children and adult and later life, the relation between

even grandchildren to send back to Clarke deafness and many other conditions which

School. We have the complete cooperation may or may not have a bearing on the oc-

of the parents of our children, who are only currence of deafness. We have noted can-

too eager to do all in their power to help cer, tuberculosis, alcoholism, lues, epilepsy,

us in our efforts to learn more about the feeblemindedness, mental disorders, endo-

causes of deafness in childhood and the crine disturbances, such as goiter and di-

part played by heredity in the production abetes, and major organic conditions such

of deafness. And last, but by no means as heart trouble or kidney trouble, if these

least, we have the children themselves over have been predominant in the family his-

a long period of years, so that it is possible tory.

to study them from many angles, the ge-

netic, the otological and the general medical.

The greater part of the data from which the pedigrees were made was obtained through personal interviews with parents

Many of the early studies in this field and with as many other relatives of our

were made before the recent advances in children as possible. These interviews took

the science of genetics, in otology, in the place in the pupil's home or at the homes

physics of sound and in the broader under- of other relatives. Some histories represent

standing of the relation of the ear to patho- a single half-day interview, while others

logical conditions in other and sometimes represent numbers of interviews with mem-

remote parts of the body. These earlier bers from different branches of the family

studies were not based on careful audio- over a long period of time. Corroborative

metric examinations because there were no evidence was obtained from family doctors,

audiometers. They did not take into con- social workers and teachers. Other sources

sideration the different types of deafness. of information include reports from hos-

In this connection, we are studying the pitals, school records, genealogical records

hearing curves not only of each individual of certain families, information from family

child over a period of years but also of as Bibles as to births, marriages and deaths as

many members of his family as possible. well as the same type of information ob-

We are coming to believe that, in many tained from church records and records of

families in which deafness has occurred, Massachusetts towns. Finally some of the

there are not only deaf individuals and data were derived from a community study

hearing individuals but also individuals made in a small rather isolated New Eng-

with all gradations of hearing defects from land community in which a great deal of

the almost imperceptible drops in the hear- deafness had occurred. Here we were able

ing curves of some to the profound losses to interview quite a number of individuals

found in others.

between 80 and 90 years of age who were

Our first step in the study of the inherit- related to two of our present pupils. Sev-

TABLE 1
CAUSES OF DEAFNESS IN CLARKE SCHOOL POPULATION

1931-1932 No.

1941-1942 No. %

Congenital Heredity Rubella Rh Factor Birth Injury
Others

53 2 29

Probably Congenital

Acquired Deafness
Meningitis Otitis Media Scarlet Fever Mumps Measles Tuberculosis Influenza Intestinal Toxemia Virus Infection Fracture Whooping Cough
Rheumatic Fever
Cause Unknown

17 13
1 3 1 1
2
1 3

Total No. of Children

84 56%

119 80%

47

7

65
24 16%
42 28% 11 3 1 2

2% 18 12%

1

0 0% 150

8 5% 148

195
1951-1952 No. 102 74%
36 12 4 I 49
6 4% 21 15% 16 2
5% 138

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

eral of these told us many interesting stories had derived, by means of personal inter-

of the time when Dr. Bell visited this same views with many relatives of the three deaf

community and discussed with them the pupils in that family, the data used in the

deafness which was at that time very prev- rest of the seventh generation and the suc-

alent there.

ceeding generations. Another example is

It is true that many people know very little of their forebears, of the cause of death, of the defects they exhibited when alive, of the illnesses they had, but we do feel that their ability to remember whether or not their relatives were deaf, especially those deaf from childhood is reliable. Since many of the relatives of our deaf children have been educated in other special schools for the deaf, additional corroborative evidence has been obtained from the records of such schools. This material added to the

shown in two other pedigrees. Some time after the original information was obtained for one pedigree, we found that this pedigree was closely linked with a community study which we were then making. Still later we found that a much younger pupil in the second pedigree was related to the one in the first and that both were descended from a common ancestor. The family names were different; they came from different parts of the state and had never even heard of one another.

original information from members of the family has yielded data from which very extensive pedigrees could be made. For example, in one pedigree information concerning the individuals in the first six generations and those in part of the seventh was derived from vital statistics and from published records of family archives. This material was obtained some years after we

We now have somewhat over 500 pedigrees started. All are made in exactly the same way regardless of whether or not the child was born deaf. A large group of these pedigrees were published in 1949.
In order to determine the part played by inheritance in the production of any condition, an attempt must be made to determine, insofar as it is possible, the dividing

196 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

line between the part played by heredity effects of a poor environment.

and the part played by environment. Every In spite of all that has been written about

individual is the result of the interaction of congenital and hereditary defects, there is

three factors: his inheritance, his environ- still confusion in the minds of many doc-

ment and his response to each of these. His tors, otologists, and most lay people as to

inheritance is fixed even before his birth; the meaning of the two terms. The terms

his response is partially fixed by his in- congenital and hereditary are neither syn-

heritance, but it is also influenced by his onymous nor are they mutually exclusive.

environment and his environment may be Congenital conditions exist at birth. Her-

constantly changing.
To illustrate: three children may be exposed to scarlet fever, taking scarlet fever as an environmental factor. One child may not contract the infection because his system has sufficient resistance to combat it, that is, he responds adequately to this particular disease environment. The second child may develop scarlet fever but may show no ear complications. His response is not adequate for the disease environment, but he has apparently been endowed with very normal auditory apparatus which is

editary conditions are determined by factors in the germ cells. Applying these two terms to deafness, we find that though heredity accounts for a large number of the instances of congenital deafness, there are many other things which can cause congenital deafness, that is, deafness present at birth. On the other hand, hereditary deafness is by no means always present at birth. Otosclerosis, one type of hereditary deafness, seldom appears before early adult life. It might be well to discuss a little the causes of deafness as we know them.

not predisposed to the attack of toxins and Etiologically, congenital defects fall into

infections. In all probability his pedigree two main groups: first, those which are

will show few members of his family suf- genetically determined, where the fault lies

fering from ear complications after infec- in the genes themselves; second, those re-

tious diseases. The third child may con- sulting from adverse conditions affecting

tract scarlet fever and become partially or the developing ovum. It is certain that in-

profoundly deaf as a result. Your first re- heritance plays a large part in the occur-

action is that his deafness is the immediate rence of many types of deafness whether or

result of the scarlet fever, that there can be not the child is born deaf. Injury to the

no inheritance factor. However, not every germ plasm may result in complete absence

child who has scarlet fever becomes deaf. or defective development of any part or

In all likelihood the third child had in- parts of the auditory apparatus.

herited a weakened auditory apparatus which was predisposed to be affected by toxins entering the system. His pedigree is apt to show that an aunt has become partially deaf following pneumonia or a grandmother after typhoid. In some families toxins seem to have a predilection for the auditory apparatus. Just as some individuals are born with weak lungs and develop tuberculosis if their environment or their response is inadequate, so some individuals are born with an auditory apparatus which functions normally for a time but is inadequate to withstand disease and other

The external auditory canal may be closed, the tympanic cavity may be malformed, the ossicles may be lacking, defectively developed, or the stapes may be ankylosed to the oval window. The bony labyrinth may be malformed, the round window may be closed with bone, or the organ of Gorti may be entirely absent or defectively developed. There may be atrophy of both branches of the auditory nerve, or the defect may be in the auditory pathway or in the auditory centers of the brain.
Therefore, in a child born deaf you may expect to find any type or degree of deaf-

197

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ness according to the location and extent much of it is in error. As yet there is no

of the defect. However, the fact that a child definite information to explain the appear-

is born deaf does not necessarily mean that ance of deafness in children with a history

there is an inheritance factor. He may have of hemolytic disease at birth. However, we

had a normal auditory apparatus, but the do know that a test for the Rh factor should

nerve may have been injured at birth, pro- be part of the first examination of every

ducing deafness. Here there could be no expectant mother. If her blood proves neg-

question of inheritance any more than ative and her husband's positive, the doctor

when a child is made deaf through an accident in later life.
Congenital syphilis may have partially destroyed the auditory nerve before birth. Here again the child was originally endowed with a normal auditory apparatus which was injured by infection during intrauterine life.
A few years ago, following an epidemic of Rubella (German measles), it was discovered that many of the pregnant mothers who had the disease produced defective children. Deafness is one of the defects so produced. There are now recorded a num-

will want to check her "antibody level" throughout her pregnancy so that he can tell what to expect when the baby is born. He can then have available at the time of delivery a donor whose blood is Rh negative, and the minute any signs of disease appear he will start blood transfusions Many times all the blood in a baby's body is replaced by transfusion. These babies usually flourish and grow into healthy, normal children.
The environmental factors which can cause deafness can be listed under five headings:

ber of instances in which fetal defects have followed maternal disease other than Rubella. Diseases which have been mentioned in this connection are mumps, measles, influenza, and even shingles. If the mother has any of these diseases during the first three months of pregnancy, she is pretty certain to produce a defective child. The more common defects have been congenital cataracts, congenital heart defects, and deafness as well as many other defects. When the mother has the disease during the first month of pregnancy, the child may be born with several defects.
It is also possible that certain drugs, such as quinine given a mother during pregnancy may enter the fetal circulation and produce degeneration of the auditory nerve and deafness.
Very recently we have had several children whose deafness was attributed to Rh incompatibility. Comparatively little scientific data is available regarding this condition although it has received considerable publicity in the lay press. Much of this has been without scientific foundation, and

1. Climate--In deafness originating in troubles of the nose and throat, it is well known that a damp climate with sudden changes of temperature is likely to increase the hearing deficiency by aggravating the nose and throat trouble.
2. Home Conditions--Since the auditory apparatus is so easily influenced by a child's general physical condition, poor home surroundings, malnutrition, etc., are bound to affect the auditory apparatus. 3. Injuries--Deafness is occasionally the result of a birth injury but not very often. However, there is no doubt but that a fractured skull can produce deafness.
4. Occupation--Among o l d e r people there are many occupations in which the worker is subjected to almost constant noise, and deafness often follows. 5. Diseaseis the most important environmental factor which causes deafness. There are three chief ways in which disease may reach the more important parts of the auditory apparatus:
a. By direct extension from the nose and throat through the Eutachian tube to the middle ear
b. Through the bloodstream from distant points of infection

198 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

c. From the meninges and cerebro- In the past it was said that possibly half spinal fluid surrounding the brain. the children who had meningitis did not

Infection originating in the throat and recover and, that of those who did, possibly

nasopharanyx has an easy approach to the half were deafened. Now there are very middle ear through the Eustachian tube. few deaths from meningitis, but we are This is especially true in babies and young still getting about the same number of

children in whom the Eustachian tube is children deafened by it. However, this

much shorter than in the adult. Also in number is a much smaller proportion of babies the pharyngeal end of the tube is in the total number of recoveries than it used line with the hard palate and often im- to be. The new drugs not only speed the

bedded in adenoid tissue, so infection trav- recovery, but we also find that those who

els very easily from the nose and throat are deafened have in many cases far more through the short horizontal tube to the residual hearing than we ever found in the middle ear and here results in an acute past.

otitis media, or abscessed ear. If prompt In the probably congenital group we in-

attention is not given at this point many clude those cases in which the child, the

serious results may follow.

only deaf individual in the family, has

In the various infectious diseases, such as measles, mumps, scarlet fever, etc., toxins are circulating in the bloodstream and are likely to attack a point of lowered resistance. The auditory nerve seems to be such a point. There is first a toxic neuri-

never given any real evidence of hearing and in which the explanation given by the parents to explain the child's deafness seemed too inadequate. In 1931 we had twenty-four cases of this type, in 1951 only six.

tis of some or all of the fibers of the audi- We always have a very small group which

tory nerve, and later a degenerative process we call the unknown group. It has been

begins and continues until very little func- impossible to classify these cases for vari-

tion may remain. It is quite possible to ous reasons. The greatest number of them

have a middle ear infection and a toxic are adopted children. The evidence in all

neuritis affecting the auditory nerve going these cases was either so scanty or so con-

on at the same time or either process may flicting that it was not possible to even

take place separately. But when deafness guess where they belonged.

is profound enough to necessitate special In the hereditary group we include these education, the nervous mechanism has us- cases: (a) more than one deaf child in

ually been involved to a greater or less family, (b) one or both parents deaf, (c)

degree.

history of congenital deafness either in a

The third and very important way by collateral branch of the family or in one

which infection may reach the auditory ap- of the direct ascendants, (d) deaf pupil paratus is from meninges (the coverings of had married and had deaf children, (e) the brain) along the sheath of the auditory parents were related.

nerve to the inner ear. This is what hap- Our congenital group remains approxi-

pens in meningitis, which may be due to a mately the same size over the years. Each

variety of organisms.

year it includes a large group where we

Since the advent of the newer drugs, we cannot say definitely that the deafness is

are having far fewer cases of acquired deaf- inherited, but we can find no other reason

ness. Ear infections are cleared up much to account for its appearance.

more quickly than they were in the past, In trying to summarize our large collec-

and there are fewer complications. The tion of data, there are some definite con-

one exception is in the case of meningitis. clusions we may make. We have found

199

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

that deaf children were no more susceptible to middle ear infections than their hearing brothers and sisters. This casts doubt on the frequent assertions of parents that their child's deafness is due to otitis media. We have found that though some authors feel that other congenital defects have been influenced by birth order in family, deaf children tended to occur at random through the family. They were not born either first or last in any excess numbers. We have found that the mothers of our deaf children were not older than the average mother so that we feel that maternal age does not influence the production of congenital deafness, though some authors feel that it does influence the production of some other congenital defects. We have found that deaf children were not born at a time when the reproductive efficiency of the mothers was lowered, as evidenced by the number of miscarriages immediately preceding or following the birth of the deaf child. Some authors feel that such reproductive inefficiencymay be related to the occurrence of some other congenital defects. We have examined numerous extraneous factors, all of which have been invoked to explain the occurrence of other congenital defects. We do not feel that they have been a contributing factor either directly or indirectly in causing deafness. We feel that a much larger percentage of congenital deafness may have been caused by heredity than has been thought by many workers in the past. Many of the apparently sporadic cases of deafness found in our group of pedigrees may in reality be due to heredity. The basis for the appearance of deafness in this group of congenitally deaf children is a

factor for deafness which they inherit from their parents. That is, they do not inherit the factor for normal hearing, hence the lack which results in the condition which we call deafness.
We still do not have sufficient knowledge to speak dogmatically about deafness, but we do feel that it is our duty, as the opportunity arises, to give young deaf people and their families the benefit of the knowledge which we have and to help them to realize the true situation: if they marry either a deaf or a hearing individual they may have deaf children or they may have hearing children. If they have hearing children, the deafness may still appear in their grandchildren or great grandchildren, or even in a later generation. They must also realize that deafness may be transmitted through hearing as well as deaf members of the famiy. Hearing members who marry individuals with a family history of deafness are quite as likely to have deaf children as their deaf brothers or sisters. They should also be told that the fact that they may have been deafened by meningitis, for instance, does not eliminate the possibility that they may be a carrier of deafness which may be handed down to their children in the future. To many deaf people this is an entirely new idea.
The problem of hereditary deafness is still far from being solved. However, progress is being made and more and more people are becoming interested in the problem.1
1The Clarke School family histories referred to in this article are found in the following: Hopkins, L.A., & Guilder, R.D., 1949. Clarke School Studies Concerning the Heredity of Deafness, Monograph I, Northampton, Mass.: The Clarke School.

