Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Afternoon session: Heredity counseling panel (Tenminute presentations with discussion)
Chairman Bentley Glass
To cite this article: Chairman Bentley Glass (1958) Afternoon session: Heredity counseling panel (Tenminute presentations with discussion), Eugenics Quarterly, 5:1, 37-38, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1958.9987345 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1958.9987345
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:24

HEREDITY COUNSELING PANEL (Ten-minute presentations with discussion)

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

Afternoon Session Chairman: Bentley Glass

CHAIRMAN GLASS: I think the setting for the panel's consideration this afternoon has been laid very well by the program of the morning. I would like to say one thing before I ask the first person on the panel to present his opinion on the subject announced.
At Stanford this summer in an address that I was asked to give on the responsibilities of biologists, I made a rash statement to the effect that the biological discoveries of the next decade or so were likely to be as revolutionary in their impact on society as the developments of the atomic physicists during the past few decades. But I didn't go into any analysis or discussion or description or prophetic intonation to spell out what these revolutionary discoveries in biology that are just around the corner might be. The newspaper reporters, hopping on this and thinking that this would surely be news, were very much distressed that I wouldn't take on the role of a prophet.
Here, in a smaller company, where I hope no newspaper reporters are listening in, I might be somewhat more rash, because I think it's relevant to this topic of heredity counseling. I think we can't look just at the situation as it exists at the present time and at the problems that confront those who want to give advice in respect to heredity to inquirers. We have also necessarily got to look 10 or 20 years ahead, if we can with reason do that, and begin thinking about the problems that are going to face heredity counseling then, and what responsibilities will rest upon those who take on this role.
I might suggest, for instance, that the impact of effective control over conception--the development of new steroid pills which can produce

complete, temporary abeyance of menstruation --is one thing that is going to alter the picture very considerably in this and related fields of population problems. Not only is this harmless and effective contraceptive going to bring about a very radical change, but the techniques of artificial insemination which have been so well developed by the cattle breeders offer possibilities again with respect to the human population that raise legal and ethical problems that the heredity counselor is also certain to become concerned with.
I often think that it is a good thing, perhaps, that Lysenko was in power in Soviet Russia during the days of Stalin, who had a certain desire to see his own offspring live after him. The possibilities of freezing semen and using artificial insemination after considerable periods of time raise possibilities that perhaps the science fiction writer has dealt with but that we might actually have had to face up to.
And then, if there is any credence to be placed at all in the reports of artificial parthenogenesis in mammals--(I'm not referring to the discussion that took place in the newspapers in Great Britain last year but rather to the experiments of Pincus and Chang with rabbits)-- if parthenogenetic rabbits have been produced --then it would seem theoretically that there can be no reason why parthenogenesis couldn't be employed in the human species, too. This also raises questions that may lie ahead of us in the future.
This month in the proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences there is a paper on the separation by electrophoresis into maledetermining and female-determining elements in the spermatozoa of the rabbit, not with com-

37

38 Eugenics Quarterly

píete efficiency but with sufficient efficiency so that if the method can be applied to human semen it seems possible that artificial control of sex determination is not too far around the corner. What kind of advice are we going to give when we are faced with problems in this area?
And last summer there was an even more startling announcement from biologists in France, who reported that, by inoculating into the eggs of young ducklings of one genetic strains of ducks an extract of desoxyribose nucleic acid from a different strain they were able to bring about a transformation of the genetic type. This has not been confirmed yet. Whether actual transformation of genes or of the effects of genes can be brought about in this way is not clear, but with recent developments and methods of artificially synthesizing the hereditary material of bacteria it seems certain that within a few years we will have a much better knowledge than we do now of the chemical structure of the hereditary material. And if a transduction is a phenomenon that youcan find in higher animals as well as in bacteria, it seems possible that we might eventually be

substituting desirable for undesirable genes in the germ cells of certain genotypes.
These are problems that I'm sure the members of the panel are not likely to want to discuss this afternoon. I just suggest that heredity counseling is, in the next few decades, going to steer into stormy waters. If we can give some thinking to these problems in advance and clear up questions of our own ethics in relation to such things, we may be better prepared when the time comes.
The questions which have been posed to our panel this afternoon relate to the problems of heredity counseling as the problem now exists, and I feel sure that within this area we will still have quite enough to dispute about this afternoon. We should all have a sufficiently lively time.
The first speaker is Professor Lee R. Dice, who, more than any other, I think, was instrumental in the establishment of the work in human genetics that has developed to such a splendid extent at the University of Michigan. Professor Dice is going to discuss the structure of heredity counseling services.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

THE STRUCTURE OF HEREDITY COUNSELING SERVICES

LEE R. DICE Department of Zoology University of Michigan

HEN IT IS DESIRED TO ORGANIZE AN HE- family pedigrees and to ascertain, so far REDITY COUNSELING SERVICE the first ques- as may be possible, the mode of heredity tion asked is: "What facilities are needed of the trait or traits in question in each to organize such a service?" This is not an particular kindred under consideration. easy question to answer because local situ- Many of the questions asked of a counations vary greatly. As a partial answer I seling service pertain to medical traits. submit the conclusions I have reached Diagnoses of the affected members of each from my own experience in organizing an kindred must be obtained or verified. The heredity clinic at the University of Michi- presumed normal members must usually gan. be examined also in order to be certain
Personnel is the most important factor that no affected individual is mistakenly in any effective counseling service, so let classed as unaffected. These diagnoses and us first consider the staff. At least one staff examinations require the services of onemember of the service must, of course, be or more physicians, who often must be asthoroughly versed in human genetics. This sisted by clinical laboratories of various, geneticist must be competent to analyze kinds.

