Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Sterilized mental defectives look at eugenic sterilization
G. Sabagh & R. B. Edgerton
To cite this article: G. Sabagh & R. B. Edgerton (1962) Sterilized mental defectives look at eugenic sterilization, Eugenics Quarterly, 9:4, 213-222, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1962.9987527 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1962.9987527
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4
View related articles Citing articles: 4 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

STERILIZED MENTAL DEFECTIVES LOOK AT EUGENIC STERILIZATION*
G. SABAGHt and
R. B. EDGERTONI

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

TRADITIONALLY, one of the major functions of eugenic sterilization of mental defectives was considered to be that of protecting society from the proliferation and multiplication of an undesirable segment of the population. This opinion was expressed most eloquently by Justice Holmes in a Supreme Court decision on eugenic sterilization:1
"It is better for all the world, if instead of waiting to execute degenerate offspring for crime, or to let them starve for their imbecility, society can prevent those who are manifestly unfit for continuing their kind. . . . Three generations of imbeciles are enough."

Thus, it has been asserted that, at Sonoma State Hospital, "often a boy or girl would come to ask the Superintendent if it wasn't time for his or her operation." (Gamble, 1951, p. 196). That this attitude was taken for granted by the proponents of eugenic sterilization is best exemplified by the scarcity of any systematic analysis of the reactions and attitudes of sterilized defectives.
The popular assumption that mental defectives accept their sterilization found support in one study based on the opinions of social workers about the emotional reactions of sterilized patients. On the basis of this indirect evidence, it was concluded that:

In other words, eugenic sterilization was
to promote "human betterment" and the
"welfare of society." From a more hu-
manitarian standpoint, it was assumed
that eugenic sterilization would protect
the individual and promote his welfare.
The individual defective able to perceive
this aspect of sterilization would be a
willing, if not an enthusiastic, subject.
* Supported in part by the National Institute of Mental Health Grant No. 3M-9130: Population Movement of Mental Defectives and Related Physical, Behavorial, Social, and Cultural Factors, Pacific State Hospital, Pomona, California.
 University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, and Pacific State Hospital, Pomona, California.
 University of California, Los Angeles, California, and Pacific State Hospital, Pomona, California.
1 Decision of May 2, 1927, in the case of Buck vs. Bell, quoted by J. H. Landman, 1932. Human Sterilization. The MacMillan Company, New York. p. 98. This seems to have been a favorite quote of the proponents of eugenic sterilization.

"There is often a sentimental regret at the inability to have children, but in most cases in which the individual is able to understand the sitution at all, he or she feels satisfaction at the thought that there will be no further complications through the arrival of children, possibly defective and in any event beyond the capacity of the parent to care for successfully." (Popenoe, 1928, p. 284).
Subsequent studies have tended to reflect this opinion, but to the knowledge of the authors, mental defectives themselves have never been requested to express their feelings on the subject.
The objective of this paper is to challenge this popular assumption by presenting data on the reactions of sterilized mental retardates toward eugenic sterilization. The analysis is based on the attitudes expressed by patients discharged

213

214 Sabagh, Edgerton

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

from a state institution for the mentally retarded. The study of these attitudes should make it possible to trace the effect of sterilization on the lives of ex-patients. Sterilization was performed at a time when the person was considered to be incompetent; but after the patient is released from the institution, it is assumed that he becomes competent and capable of self-support. It is of theoretical importance to know how he reacts to sterilization as the one remaining and indelible mark of his previously incompetent status.
PROCEDURE
The data on sterilization were secured as part of a follow-up study of 110 mentally retarded patients who had been discharged from Pacific State Hospital, a state hospital for the mentally retarded, from June, 1949, to June, 1958. As is indicated by the data given in Table 1, the resident population of this hospital in 1960 was made up mainly of white children and young adults with IQs under 50.
The follow-up sample included: 1) all patients discharged directly from a vocational or work leave during the period June 1949-June 1958; and 2) all patients with some prior work-leave experience who were discharged during this period.2 These patients were considered to be capable of self-support and had been discharged to their own custody rather than to some other person. The field work for the follow-up period was carried out from June to December, 1960.
Percent distributions of all patients in the follow-up study by sex, age at time of interview, ethnic status, and last hos-
2 Four patients were excluded from study because their last measured IQs were near or over 100.

pital-recorded IQ are given in Table 2. The vast majority of these patients had IQs over 50 and all of them were 20 years of age or older at the time of the interview. There is some indication that, as compared to the adult resident population of the hospital, the follow-up sample represented an intramural "intellectual elite."3 It should be noted, however, that this intellectual superiority is only relative, since only one-third of these patients had IQs over 70.
Of the total sample of 110, 50 were located and interviewed extensively. Some parents or relatives of six patients were located and interviewed, but the patients could not be seen. Forty-two patients were located but for various reasons could not be interviewed (out-ofstate, in another state hospital, or in prison, refusal, or deceased). A final 12 patients could not be located. Table 1 provides information on the sex, age, ethnic, and IQ distribution of the 50 patients who were interviewed and the 60 who were not interviewed. Those who were interviewed had a somewhat higher proportion of females, of persons in ages 30 to 40, and of whites than those who were not interviewed. The differences in IQs were negligible.
The goal of this follow-up study was an intimate description of the overt and covert lives of these former patients. To achieve this description, patients were re-
3 The earliest data which could be secured on the IQ and age distribution of the resident hospital population were for June 1953, approximately at the middle of the period when the patients in the follow-up sample were discharged. Since on this date almost all of these patients were between 15 and 50 years old, the comparison was restricted to this age group. While 28% of the 1953 hospital population in ages 15 to 50 had IQs over 50, 89%, or the vast majority, of the follow-up sample had comparable IQs. It is possible, of course, that if the comparison could have been made for an earlier year, the differences in IQs between the two groups would not have been as marked.

Sterilized Mental Defectives

215

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

TABLE 1 PERCENT DISTRIBUTION OF RESIDENT PATIENT POPULATION IN PACIFIC STATE HOSPITAL, I960, BY SEX, AGE, ETHNIC
STATUS, AND IQ.

Characteristics

Resident Hospital Population

Percent Females Percent in Ages
0-9 10-19
20-29
30-39
40 +
Percent by Race White Negro Mexican Other
Percent by IQ
0-19 20-49
50-69
70 +
Number

42.1
20.1 32.3 20.0 14.7 12.8
82.7 4.6 11.1 1.5
30.3 49.6 18.1 2.0 2862

peatedly contacted, and many hours were spent with them while they conducted some of the affairs of their everyday lives. They were also nondirectively asked a number of questions from a focused interview schedule. Friends, employers, and neighbors of the former patients were also interviewed whenever possible. Many of these conversations were tape recorded.
Each patient interviewed was regularly asked whether or not he or she had been sterilized. Often this information was volunteered without direct questioning, but on many occasions direct questions about sterilization were asked. Of the 50 patients, 44 stated that they had been sterilized and 6 that they had not. A check of the hospital records revealed that, for one reason or another, two of the patients who stated that they were sterilized had not been sterilized before or during hospitalization. Since these two patients expressed a definite reaction toward sterilization, they were included in the analysis. Four other patients, even though sterilized, were unable or unwill-

TABLE 2 PERCENT DISTRIBUTION OF WORK LEAVE PATIENTS DISCHARGED FROM PACIFIC STATE HOSPITAL, 1949-1958, BY
SEX, AGE, ETHNIC STATUS, AND IQ.

Work Leave Patients Discharged from Hospital

Not Characteristics Interviewed Interviewed Total

% Females
% in ages 0.9 10-19 20-29 30-39
40 +
% in Race White Negro
Mexican Other % by IQ
0-19 20-49 50-69
70 +
Number

54.0
24.0 60.8 16.0
80.0 4.0 14.0 2.0
8.0 56.0 36.0
50

45.0 49.1
30.0 27.3 48.3 54.5 21.7 19.1
70.0 74.5 5.0 4.5 21.7 18.2
3.3 2.7
8.3 8,.2, .
60.0 58.2 31.7 33.6
60 no

ing to express any coherent views on the subject. It was abundantly clear that the remaining 40 persons were not only capable of understanding the implications of the sterilization operation but were eager to express themselves on the subject.
Hospital records indicate that 38 of the 42 patients who had been sterilized were sterilized at Pacific State Hospital between 1931 and 1951. A median number of about 10 months elapsed between the date of admission and the date when the sterilization operation was performed. But, at the time when the patient was interviewed, anywhere from 9 to 29 years had elapsed since that operation had been performed. It is, perhaps, indicative of the importance of this event that even after such a long period many patients still had a vivid recollection of this experience.
The experience of this study contradicts the assumption made by some investigators concerning the ability of men-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

216 Sabagh, Edgerton

tal retardates to understand the meaning and implication of sterilization and to discuss their reactions to it. For example, with reference to comparable mildly retarded patients,4 Popenoe (1928, p. 283) asserted that:
"We made no attempt to get direct expressions of opinion from those sterilized at the state home for the feebleminded, believing that their testimony would not be valuable, in view of their mental level."
This assumption was reiterated some years later by Woodside who, in a social and psychological study of sterilization, asserted that "the type of interview envisaged would be beyond the intellectual capacity" of mentally defective women, and, hence, decided to "transfer the field of inquiry to normal women who had undergone therapeutic sterilizations." (Woodside, 1950, p. 116). That the assumption made by Popenoe, Woodside, and others may be unwarranted is also suggested by the findings of a Norwegian follow-up study of castrated subjects (Bremer, 1959). A number of mentally retarded persons were included in this study and many of these persons were able to express their reactions to castration.
STERILIZATION AT PACIFIC STATE HOSPITAL
To place the sample studied in its proper perspective in terms of the history of sterilization at Pacific State Hospital, it should be noted that the persons in this sample were in the hospital at a time when sterilization was taken for granted and considered to be a prerequisite to

release from the institution. The form letter which was sent to parents to request their permission for the operation stated unequivocally that sterilization "will permit parole, leave of absence, and visits with less fear of undesirable complications." As late as 1951, in a review of a case for discharge, a staff member expressed the view that "he should be kept here until he is sterilized." This view was part of the culture of the hospital, and a patient who had been sterilized might expect to be released.
Within a few years, there was a basic change in attitude indicated by the following statement made in 1954 by a social worker who had the task of explaining the sterilization operation to a patient: "I reminded her that our plans for leave would go ahead regardless of whether she had the operation or not." This change in attitude is reflected in the statistics of sterilizations performed at Pacific State Hospital. From 1929 to July 1, 1951, 947 females and 889 males had been sterilized or an average of about 43 females and 40 males per year.5 By contrast, from July 1, 1951, to July 1, 1961, in spite of the marked increase in the population of the hospital, only 28 females were sterilized. There are a number of reasons for this dramatic decrease in the number of sterilizations. As a result of a change in the law in 1951, the procedure for eugenic sterilization became more complex and more subject to possible legal involvement. This change undoubtedly supported the position of those hospital staff members who were opposed to the practice of wholesale sterilization operations. The patient was in-

4 While 92% of the present follow-up sample had IQs of 50 and over, 79% of the sterilized patients referred to by Popenoe had similar IQs (Popenoe, 1927).

5 The data on the number of sterilizations were obtained from hospital records and from California, Department of Mental Hygiene, 1950. Statistical Reports, p. 239.

Sterilized Mental Defectives

217

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

creasingly viewed as having the right to refuse being subjected to such an operation.
At present, before a patient can be sterilized, the following persons have to approve of the operation or grant their permission: 1) the patient, or some person, usually a social worker, who has to sign an affidavit that he explained the meaning of the operation to the patient; 2) the father, mother, and any other guardians of the patient; 3) the superintendent of the hospital; 4) the director of the Department of Mental Hygiene. After one month, if there are no legal objections to the operation, then the director may authorize the superintendent to perform the operation.
FINDINGS OF FOLLOW-UP STUDY
1. Extent of Approval orDisapproval of Sterilization Among Discharged Patients.
The responses of the 40 patients who expressed themselves on sterilization were classified in three categories of "approval," "disapproval," and "neutral."8 There were too few cases to warrant discriminating between different degrees of approval and disapproval. As the data given in Table 3 indicate, a little over two-thirds of the patients (68%) disapproved of the sterilization operation which they had undergone. Only a small minority, about one-fifth, clearly approved of this operation, and, as will be later illustrated, even welcomed it. There is, however, a marked difference between the attitudes of men and women. While 35% of the men approved of sterilization, only 9% of the women shared this positive feeling, the majority of women expressing a negative feeling toward ster-
6 The material was separately coded by three coders with a high degree of agreement.

ilization. Marital status is also related to the likelihood of acceptance or rejection of sterilization.7 The data in Table 4 indicate that married persons are much more likely to be opposed to sterilization than those who are not married.
If one considers the interaction between marital status and sex, an interesting pattern emerges. For both males and females, the single are less likely to disapprove of sterilization than the married. But, irrespective of marital status, females are more likely than males to disapprove of sterilization. Single males are the most accepting of sterilization and married females the least accepting. Age also has an influence on attitude toward sterilization. Youth seems to incite the ardor of married females against sterilization, and that of single males in favor of it. Most of the females who are neutral or positively inclined toward sterilization are close to or past the childbearing age. An interpretation and possible explanation of the sex and marital status differences in attitudes toward sterilization is provided by a more detailed analysis of the types of responses given by discharged patients.
2. Types of Acceptance and Rejection of Sterilization.
Discharged patients varied in the lucidity and richness of their responses to questions about sterilization, and any attempts to identify types of acceptance and rejection are bound to be partly inferential. Furthermore, some ex-patients may have concealed their true feelings about the subject. Nevertheless, responses were sufficiently clear and repetitive to suggest a number of definite types of reactions toward sterilization.8 The two
7 Most of the married persons were married after discharge from the hospital.
8 For an attempt to classify the basis for objection to castration, see Bremer, 1959, p. 311.

218 Sabagh, Edgerton

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

forms of approval of sterilization are: 1) sterilization is seen as facilitating sexual freedom, and 2) the discharged patient may unwittingly agree with the eugenicist's view that sterilization is a means of preventing the birth of hapless children who could not be properly cared for by their defective parents. From the attitudes expressed by ex-patients, two major forms of disapproval could be identified: 1) the discharged patient objects to sterilization because it may prevent him from passing as normal, particularly if he or she is contemplating marriage to a normal person, and 2) sterilization is seen as preventing the expatient from assuming the normal roles of motherhood or fatherhood. These categories obviously do not exhaust the forms of approval or disapproval of sterilization. For example, one woman (not included in this study), when questioned on the subject, stated that sterilization "improved her health." One male objected to sterilization because it "makes a man weak, and what woman would want a weak man."
The various modes of acceptance or rejection of sterilization will be illustrated by typical statements made by the discharged patients.
a. Acceptance of sterilization.
Typically, it is the unmarried male who views sterilization as a way to avoid the consequences of sexual relations.

TABLE 3 DISTRIBUTION OF MALE AND FEMALE EX-PATIENTS BY THEIR EXPRESSED AT-
TITUDE TOWARD STERILIZATION

Attitude toward Sterilization

Sex Disapproval Neutral Approval Total

Male
Female Total

7 20 27

6 17 2 23 8 40

X2 = 9.3 p < .01 (by combining "Neutral" and "Approval")

Thus, one male said, "I can fool around and don't have to worry about getting into trouble." These words were echoed by another male who stated that "you know, sometimes it is not so bad to be sterilized. You can't get into trouble that way. Sometimes I think I'm lucky because I can play around when I want to." The same person added, however, that when he gets married he "would like to have kids." His response suggests that as soon as the male patient marries, his attitude toward sterilization may change radically. Indeed, if he marries a sterilized female he may begin to worry that she could "fool around" without any consequences.
A number of ex-patients may tacitly approve of sterilization on essentially eugenic grounds, although this is a kind of argument which they prefer to apply to others rather than to themselves. Thus, a married male, age 30, was willing to admit that some mental defectives should be sterilized, but, of course, he excluded himself from this category. In his words:
"I can understand why they (the hospital staff) did it as they have to have parents who will take care of their kids and sometimes these people at the hospital couldn't do that, but they should not sterilize everybody because some of us would take

TABLE 4
DISTRIBUTION OF EX-PATIENTS BY MARITAL STATUS AND EXPRESSED AT-
TITUDE TOWARD STERILIZATION

Attitude toward Sterilization
Marital Status Disapproval Neutral Approval Total

Single 7 4 4 15~

Married

20

1

4 25

Total

27

5

8 40

X2 = 4.4 p < .05 (by combining "Neutral" and "Approval")

Sterilized Mental Defectives

219

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

care of our kids and now we don't have no chance to have any."
One unmarried woman was willing, however, to apply this argument to herself by stating that:
"Well, I'm kind of glad. If anybody attacks me I'd get in the family way otherwise and I'd have to go through court and everything and also I think that the baby probably would not come out normal."
Another patient, a married man, expressed the following concern about possible offspring:
"Sometimes I figure that it's a good deal this way (being sterilized) because if you have two or three kids and something happens, you know, well maybe I start drinking again or something like that and I'd be out of a job, and I don't want to see the kids suffer."
b. Rejection of sterilization. A number of patients objected to sterilization because it made it difficult for them to "pass" as normal, that is, to present themselves as normal, nonretarded people who, especially, have never been patients in an institution for the mentally retarded. This is painfully brought out when the patient is contemplating marriage or is married to a normal person. As one 34-year-old woman expressed it:
"Naturally, when a girl comes out of the hospital and meets a guy and gets married--well, if she is sterilized then the guy wonders why she can't have no children. She's either got to tell the guy the truth or lie to him and say, 'Well, I had an accident/ or something."

The strong desire to pass leads some patients to fabricate "lies" to conceal their status. Two women patients denied being sterilized, one of them responding to the question on sterilization by saying, "Oh, no, that was never done to me." Another lied to her friends by insisting that she had a 17-year-old daughter. One male patient married to a normal wife refused to tell her or anyone else that he was sterilized. After several childless years he was feeling very guilty about it and was greatly relieved to learn that, without his knowledge, his wife had gone to a doctor and discovered that she could not have children. He has never told his wife about his own condition and he requested that the interview be terminated quickly for fear that his wife might suspect something about his past. One girl's marriage proposal failed because she did not want to admit to the parents of the prospective groom that she was sterilized. As she expressed it:
"I couldn't do it because his parents wanted us to have children. When I heard this, I said, 'No, I don't never want to get married.' I almost told her (the mother) why but I just couldn't bear to tell her."
One basis for this feeling that sterilization impedes passing as normal is that it prevents one from assuming the basic roles of father or mother. This attitude was dearly revealed in the statements made by many patients, particularly female patients. For example, a married female, age 28, stated:
"I'd like to have one or two kids but not a whole lot. I take care of everybody else's kids and everybody tells me I'm good with children and they ask me why I don't have one of my own and I just say that I can't have

220 Sabagh, Edgerton

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

one."
Another married woman felt that "It would kind of make (her) home a lot happier if (she) had at least one child in the house." A similar objection to sterilization was noted by Johnson (1946, pp. 441442), who stated that discharged patients, "far from feeling that they are free to lead a life of prostitution . . . resent the fact that they cannot have children." While Johnson does not indicate how she reached this conclusion, she suggests that discharged patients may thus merely be expressing "the desire to have something they cannot have." Some patients try to remedy this situation by adoption of a child or by trying to have the operation "undone." One patient even had a doll which she and her husband treated as if it were a child. An intense feeling of deprivation at the thought of not being able to bear children was expressed in the following lament of a woman of 31:
"When they done that to me I cried. I'm a Catholic and that's wrong. We're brought in this world to bear children. I see all my friends and they have children. I love kids. Sometimes now when I baby sit, I hold the baby up to myself and I think to myself, 'Why was I ever sterilized?' "
It is possible, of course, that the mother or father role is rejected, thus removing some of the sting from the sterilization experience. According to one woman "kids are too much bother. They tie you down." And another woman stated that she had "some sex books on how to be happy in spite of not being able to have children. You have to know how to make a marriage work."
3. Sterilization and Mortification Since the sterilization operation was

performed while the patient was still institutionalized and subject to a number of mortifying and degrading experiences (Edgerton and Sabagh, in press), it is possible that the opposition is not to sterilization per se but to the fact that it is a symbol of the "reduced" or "degraded" status of self. In retrospect, sterilization becomes a permanent mark of the mortification that the patient had to endure. As might be expected, it is difficult to find direct illustrations of this symbolic nature of sterilization, but some of the statements given by patients suggest a relationship between mortification and sterilization.
A number of patients, particularly those most strongly opposed to sterilization, associate the eugenic operation with punishment and humiliation. A woman, age 30, was very disturbed by questions pertaining to sterilization. She demanded an interview with the doctors at the hospital for discussion of what was done to her and why. She was brought to the hospital and given an explanation of the operation, and while the explanation and the kindness of the physicians pleased her, the realization of the permanency of the operation upset her. In her words:
"Gee, I sure would like to have a baby. . . . They never told me that they were going to do that surgery to me. They said they were going to remove my appendix and then they did that other. They should have explained to me. . . . After they did that surgery to me, I cried. . . . I still don't know why they did that surgery to me. The sterilization wasn't for punishment, was it? Was it because there was something wrong with my mind?"
While the inability to have a baby was

Sterilized Mental Defectives

221

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

of concern to this patient, perhaps of greater concern was the fact that sterilization was a symbol of her incompetence. The complaint of this person was echoed directly or indirectly by a number of other patients. An older woman, age 49, who did not feel that sterilization had really affected her marriage, reacted strongly at the thought that she had been duped into the operation:
"Sterilization is a terrible thing to do to a woman. They had no right to do that to me. They never ask you about it. They told me that it was just for my appendix and then they did that to me."
A similar statement was made by a married man, age 40:
"They shouldn't do that to people just because they are in that hospital. They never ask you! They just tell you after it's done."
The statements of these and other discharged patients suggest that these patients view sterilization as something that was done to them against their will.
Since sterilization used to be part of the culture of the hospital, it is unlikely that any patient about to be sterilized did not know it. The patients who learned about the nature of the operation through the patients' grapevine rather than from hospital employees may have bitterly resented it; and hence, in retrospect, may have only remembered the salient fact that no hospital employee talked to them about it before the operation was performed. Their helplessness was magnified by this lack of official communication.
4. Sterilization and Community Adjustment of DischargedPatients
One of the claims of the proponents of

sterilization is that it "assists the individual in his transition to non-institutional life" and helps him or her make a better community adjustment (Hill, 1950, p. 403). Unfortunately, the sample of nonsterilized discharged patients who were followed was too small to allow an analysis of the effect of sterilization on post-institutional adjustment.9 Windle's (1962) review and analysis of the results of the few studies on this subject suggests the incondusiveness of these results. It also suggests the likelihood that the institutional selective process both for sterilization and discharge may account for any observed relationship between sterilization and community adjustment. It is also possible that the acceptance or rejection of sterilization and the extent of mortification felt may be more important than sterilization itself in accounting for successful adjustment of discharged patients.
SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION
Data collected for a more general follow-up study of patients discharged from a hospital for the mentally retarded provided the basis for the analysis of patients' reaction to eugenic sterilization. Unlike what has been assumed in the previous literature, many of these patients were perfectly capable of expressing their reactions to sterilization, and some of these talked about this problem at length and in a heart-rending fashion.
Almost two-thirds of the discharged patients did not approve of the sterilization operation which they had to undergo. Women, particularly the married, were most likely to object to sterilization, and men, particularly the unmar-
9 As might be expected, a nonsignificant value of chi-square was obtained for the 2-by-2 table of sterilization status by evaluated over-all community adjustment.

222 Sabagh, Edgerton

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

ried, least likely. Illustrations were presented of the ma-
jor modes of acceptance or rejection of sterilization. Sterilization was accepted either because the discharged patient felt that it would prevent the birth of babies who could not be properly cared for or because it would facilitate sexual freedom. Objection to sterilization wasbased on the feeling that it made it difficult for the patient to pass as normal or that it prevented patients from fulfilling their strong desire for parenthood.
For many ex-patients sterilization may be closely identified with the mortification and degradation of institutionalization so that their objection would notbe to sterilization as such but to the whole process of mortification. Since most of them had to undergo this process, it could be argued that all of them should have objected to sterilization. The presence of a few who approved of sterilization suggests that sterilization may not always be associated in the ex-patient's mind with the humiliation and degradation of institutionalization. It is also likely that there may be ambiguities in the reactions of discharged patients toward sterilization. They may be willing toaccept the argument that sterilization is a "good thing" for them, but on anemotional basis they maystill resent sterilization and its implications. Further work is needed to probe into this and other aspects of the emotional impact of sterilization, but there can be no doubt that it is an important factor in the efforts of these people to adapt to life outside the institution.

The question of eugenic sterilization
for the mentally retarded is not simply
ethical, with the only alternative being
moral praise or moral condemnation for
the practice. It is also empirical, for if
some patients are to be rehabilitated and
returned to the community, the role of
sterilization in hindering or facilitating
their adjustment in the community must
be carefully considered and analyzed.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are indebted to Dr. George Tarjan,
Dr. Harvey F. Dingman, and Mr. Shel-
don Brown for their helpful comments
and criticism, and to Miss Cecile Mai-
resse for assistance in the analysis of the
case material.
REFERENCES
BREMER, JOHAN, 1959. Asexualization: A followup study of 244 cases. MacMillan, New York.
EDGERTON, R. B., and G. SABAGH. From mortification to aggrandizement: Changing selfconception in the careers of the mentally retarded. Psychiatry, in press.
GAMBLE, C., 1951. The prevention of mental deficiency by sterilization, 1949. Am. J. Mental Deficiency, 5 6 : 192-197.
HILL, IRVIN B., 1950. Sterilization in Oregon. Am. J. Mental Deficiency, 5 4 : 399-403.
JOHNSON, B. S., 1946. A study of cases discharged from the Laconia State School from July 1, 1924 to July 1, 1934. Am. J. Mental Deficiency, 5 0 : 437-445.
POPENOE, P., 1928. Eugenic sterilization in California, XI. Attitudes of patients toward the operation. J. Soc.Hyg., 1 4 : 280-285.
POPENOE, P., 1927. Eugenic sterilization in California, XII. The feeble-minded. J. Soc. Hyg., 1 3 : 321-330.
WINDLE, C. D., 1962. Prognosis of Mental Subnormals. Monograph supplement to Am. J. Mental Deficiency, 66.
WOODSIDE, MOYA, 1950. Sterilization in North Carolina. A Sociological and Psychological Study. The University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.

