Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Control of conception by physiologic methods
Warren Nelson
To cite this article: Warren Nelson (1956) Control of conception by physiologic methods, Eugenics Quarterly, 3:3, 139-142, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1956.9987282 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1956.9987282
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

CONTROL OF CONCEPTION

BY PHYSIOLOGIC METHODS

WARREN NELSON
Medical Director The Population Council, Inc.

IT MAY BE ASSUMED that future work will
provide improved methods of controlling conception by mechanical or chemical interference with sperm entry to the uterus. Some of the methods may prove to be more acceptable and cheaper, as well as more effective, than those now available. Nevertheless, few people would deny that the method or methods likely to receive the widest adoption would be ones that would be effective when taken orally and as infrequently as posible. Somewhat less acceptable, but still desirable, would be procedures which would involve the infrequent injection of substances having antifertility effects.
Ideally, one supposes, the contraceptive of the future would be a pill that taken once would bring to a halt the process of reproduction for weeks or months -- or even better, until another pill is administered to awaken the slumbering mechanisms. The latter may sometime be achieved, but nothing we now know about reproductive physiology, or for that matter, any physiologic process, would lead us to believe that so easy a solution is practicable. The interposition by physiologic methods of a briefer period of sterility has brighter prospects of earlier availability, but even this is beyond the range of present knowledge.
Any contraceptive procedure to achieve general acceptability must have the property of safety, i.e., it must not evoke undesirable side effects. The very fact that an oral contraceptive would be taken by mouth provides a difficulty, since once a substance is ingested it has the opportunity to affect any of the tissues of the body. There would be little difficulty in finding many substances which would have inhibit-

ing effects on one or another of the reproductive processes, but since these are basically nothing but cells or cell mechanisms the problem resolves itself into finding substances which act specifically on the tissues of the reproductive system. Substances with a specific action limited to a given tissue of any kind are rare indeed, and in securing a desired effect dependence must be placed upon significant differences in tissue sensitivity to the substance in question. Thus it is possible to produce desirable effects on one or another organs of the body by certain drugs because experience has shown that they are effected by lesser doses than produce changes, particularly undesirable changes, in other organs. Many drugs cannot be used or are used only with great caution because the difference in threshold of effects on different organs is too narrow.
In the case of drugs which would affect the reproductive processes the requirement of safety is even greater than in most circumstances since their use would be very widespread and frequently without benefit of medical supervision. Something with the order of safety of small doses of aspirin would be essential. At the present time a number of substances are at hand which have the capacity to interfere with reproduction, but none of these can be regarded as acceptable because the danger of side effects is too great.
The search for physiologic methods of controlling fertility quite logically is focused on those points in the reproductive processes which appear to be most vulnerable. These have been recited at some length in a paper prepared for the International Planned Parenthood Conference in Tokyo. At this time, rather than offering such a detailed account, the major cate-

139

140 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

gories only will be given in outline form. Thus, seven phenomena, each divisible into variable numbers of processes and involving one or both sexes, are listed below. In each instance the mechanisms involved are such that suitable interference with them would prevent conception.
1. Production of germ cells (eggs, sperm)
2. Maturation of germ cells (especially sperm)
3. Transport mechanisms (eggs in oviduct; sperm in male and in female tract)
4. Hormonal mechanisms (especially in passage of egg and preparation of uterus; but also in providing suitable environment for sperm)
5. Fertilization 6. Inplantation mechanisms 7. Early embryonic development
Of these phenomena, it would seem that the most desirable point at which to interfere would be at the stage of fertilization. Thus, for example, if we can learn how to change the egg membranes so that the sperm cannot enter, the entire problem would be solved. It would be unnecessary to alter hormonal mechanisms or metabolic phenomena associated with germ cell production and transport, processes which have interrelations with other bodily mechanisms, and there would be no need to feel concern about preventing implantation of the fertilized egg or about destroying it in early developmental stages. This process, fertilization, and its associated phenomena, is receiving an increasing amount of study and deserves as much attention as can be brought to bear upon it. Thus studies now in progress are aimed at learning the nature of the egg membranes from physical, chemical and electrical standpoints and the nature of the changes which are invoked in them when fertilization occurs. Other attention is being directed toward the nature of the environment in which fertilization occurs and the factors which seem optimal for sperm-ovum union. Once these

mechanisms are adequately understood, it may be possible to devise methods of altering them in such a way as to inhibit fertilization.
Much the same kinds of studies are being directed to varying extents at the other points in the outline. These are studies concerned with learning the nature of fundamental mechanisms and the conditions which are essential for their operation. Armed with that information, the invention of procedures designed to upset given processes becomes a reasonable possibility.
While most of the potentially significant researches are in the exploratory stage and concerned primarily with fundamental mechanisms, there are others which are being focused more directly on the problem of fertility interference. While it is not altogether realistic to draw sharp boundaries between basic and applied research in this field, for purposes of discussion three groups of studies may be placed in the latter category. These are studies on:
1. Steroidal hormones 2. Antimetabolites 3. Plant extractives
The first of these, steroidal hormones, has received considerable publicity recently as a result of reports from the Tokyo Conference. In brief, some steroidal substances have been reported as inhibiting ovulation in women as well as in laboratory animals. Such interference with fertility is a recognizably acceptable procedure if it can be done predictably and without disrupting other physiologic mechanisms. The use of some steroidal substances to change the menstrual cycle has been successful enough to encourage us to believe that ovulation may be inhibited. Indeed, certain enthusiasts have stated that such was the case in a large percentage of approximately thirty women treated with progesterone and in all of a handful of women treated with either 19-nor-ethinyl testosterone or 17ethinyl estraeneolone. The evidence presented by these investigators for the ovula-

141

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

tion-inhibiting effects of these steroidal substances was questioned in Tokyo, and recently the Population Council has initiated two programs of study which should provide more objective data in this regard. Thus the overt enthusiasm exhibited in Tokyo should be tempered with the realization that in actuality nothing significantly novel was presented there.
If we admit that existing, or anticipated, steroidal compounds will inhibit ovulation (and it seems likely that such may actually be proven in women), there remains very real problems in regard to their general use in the control of fertility. Dismissing at this time the question of cost which may be solved by mass production, there is the matter of the close interrelation between the functions of the gonads and the adrenal cortex, an organ of very great importance in many physiologic mechanisms. Without elaborating upon this point, it is significant to say that in recent months a report has been made that progesterone, when given in doses comparable to those used to inhibit ovulation, has caused serious disturbances in adrenal function.
This point is made not to suggest that the steroidal substances should have no place in our thinking about the physiologic control of conception but to caution that a very effective steroidal compound may be found to be a two-edged sword. It would not require many instances of adrenal failure to discourage the use of progesterone, for example, as an antifertility compound. And this instance serves to point up the fact that it is no easy matter to influence a reproductive process without also affecting other important physiologic mechanisms.
It is not fair to leave the question of fertility control by steroidal hormones without saying that there are many mechanisms involved in reproduction other than the inhibition of ovulation, which may be influenced by these substances. Indeed, each one of the seven major categories that have been listed falls within the scope of their influence. The problem is to discover how

we can make suitable application of this relationship.
If we now turn to the second area of research, that of the use of anti-metabolites, it will be evident that again we encounter investigations of great promise but which carry with them the red light of caution and danger.
The term "antimetabolite" is referable to any substance which interferes with metabolic processes, but it has come, in the case of antifertlity research, to be attached to those compounds that have a profound effect on the young embryo. There are several of these with very potent activity in animals, but the comparable effectiveness in human beings has been demonstrated in the case of aminopterin only. At least three other compounds probably are more effective, but because of their mode of action (destruction of the embryo) suitable trials have not as yet been undertaken.
Although these compounds appear to represent the most effective measures now available for the physiologic control of conception, it is important to note that their mode of action, viz., destruction of the embryo, places them in a category of less than universal acceptability. This objection would not apply in some cultures, but it is complicated by the fact that there is some danger of undesirable side effects on the mother and danger of inciting anomalous development in the embryo if administration of the drugs is undertaken at too late a date in pregnancy. The actual extent of these dangers are as yet unknown, but at the present time they are sufficient to warn us that their use in the control of fertility must be preceded by more extensive trials than have as yet been made.
The third group of studies listed earlier, that of plant extractives, has for some years been regarded as extremely promising. Actually this optimism has been unwarranted since the supporting information has had very scant basis in scientific evidence. The two plants which have been given more than cursory study are Lithspermum (sev-

142 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

eral species) and Pisum sativum. In neither case is the existing evidence more than mildly suggestive that these plants contain a substance which has any specific effect upon reproduction. It is true that evidence has been reported that would indicate, if it is not properly evaluated, that each of 'these plants has an adverse effect upon fertility. These studies, however, involved the feeding to laboratory animals of crude plant material in such amounts that the prerequisites of an essential diet were extremely limited. Such experiments prove nothing with regard to the existence of substances which have specific effects upon fertility.
These remarks should not be construed as damning the possibility that some plants may contain compounds with antifertility effects. Too many reports, legendary as their origins may seem, are available to ignore the possibility that some truth may exist in one or more instances. The problem continues to be one of determining how these reports can be evaluated to the best advantage. In the case of Lithospermum, approximately $200,000 has been invested in research without providing us with definitive evidence of the existence of a substance which has a specific effect upon

fertility. Perhaps another $200,000 or even $20,000 would provide an answer, but the existing evidence does not suggest that such is the case. At the present time it would seem reasonable to encourage studies in plant extractives but not to expect that they will provide compounds with magic effects.
This discussion may suggest a bleak outlook on the prospect of an early solution to the problem of controlling fertility by physiologic methods. If such is the case, this discussion has served a purpose. The problem is at least as difficult as that which confronts those who are concerned with the cause and cure of cancer. Indeed, it is in its entirety more difficult because there will be no real problem involved in applying the control of cancer. The battle will be barely more than engaged when some laboratory worker provides us with a method for the control of fertility. The chances are good that both cancer and fertility will ultimately be controlled by physiologic procedures and that the solution of either problem will have a direct bearing on the other. In each case we must look toward a far-reaching understanding of basic cellular mechanisms and the application of such knowledge to the specific problems.

