Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The paragon of animals
Frederick S. Hulse
To cite this article: Frederick S. Hulse (1964) The paragon of animals, Eugenics Quarterly, 11:1, 1-10, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1964.9987570 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1964.9987570
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

THE PARAGON OF ANIMALS

FREDERICK S. HULSE
University of Arizona Tucson, Arizona

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

What a piece of work is man! How noble in reason! How infinite in faculty! In form and moving how express and admirable! In action how like an angel! In apprehension how like a god! The beauty of the world! The Paragon of animals! So Shakespeare, through the mouth of Hamlet, described mankind more than three centuries ago, nor can we do better today. Note well that Hamlet was not speaking of Danes, nor of Europeans, nor of Caucasoids: He was speaking of Man. In all the variety which is a mark of his success, mankind shows the characteristics which have indeed made him the Paragon of animals.
We all know, of course, that our common humanity is expressed in diverse sizes, shapes, and colors. No research is needed to show us this. Such diversity, we may be sure, has arisen and persisted in response to the conditions of life under which our forefathers lived. It is not to be despised, nor thought of as a source of shame or a badge of dishonor. It is, rather, to be studied and analyzed so that we may learn how to accommodate ourselves better to the world of nature of which we form a part. Indeed, as scientists and scholars have continued their study of human biology and human culture, many new and unexpected differences between people and between peoples have been discovered. The variety or multiplicity of man, his polymorphism, is even more common than had been suspected. At the same time, the more we find out, the better assured we are of the essential humanity of the entire stock, or species.

One prime example of our essential humanity is the degree to which the human body is plastic; that is, subject to modification in shape and size during growth. We are by no means unique among animal species in the ability to respond so flexibly, but we are unique in the extent to which this ability is expressed. The development of human culture has enabled people to live under most diverse environmental conditions and has also enabled some families in every nation to become much more prosperous than others. As a result, populations which may be genetically allied to a high degree are often subjected to quite different circumstances. Migrants to America or Australia from Europe or Asia, for instance, find the climate, the food supply, and the health conditions very different from what they had been used to. Their children, as Boas (1911) was the first to recognize, may have bodily characteristics quite unlike those of their cousins in the ancestral homeland. Families in easy circumstances are able to feed their children well and give them more and better medical attention than poor parents can; the bodies of the children reflect this fact.
In Slovenia, Kralj-Cercek (1956) reports that girls of the upper classes begin to menstruate a year earlier than those in the lower class. In Andalusia I found that university students are an inch taller than conscript soldiers of the same age. Similar differences between the rich and the poor have been noted in Japan, England, and many other countries. Since among many populations

1

2

Hülse

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

stature is correlated with the length but not the breadth of the head, we may find that members of the more prosperous classes are more dolichocephalic than their less prosperous neighbors. Indeed, at one time this was taken as a proof of the racial superiority of the wealthy; nowadays it is more commonly interpreted as a sign of their better health and nutrition.
Many studies of migrants, their offspring, and their relatives who stayed at home have been made; and it must be concluded that growing up in the United States adds at least two or three inches to one's stature and often quite a few pounds to one's weight. Head shape and facial features commonly are altered as well, sometimes enough so that nineteenth-century scholars would have classified fathers and sons in different races. Growing up in the tropics, on the other hand, may lead to loss in weight.
Yet, in truth, the environment affects human characteristics within rather narrow limits; the plasticity of the human phenotype is far from broad. The second and third generation born in this country of Japanese ancestry look no more like Europeans than their grandparents or their cousins in Japan, and most of the reported differences between genetically related populations are related to size and shape. Such characteristics as blood type and eye color show no plasticity whatever. It often happens that selection, as time goes on, leads to changes of gene frequencies for these characteristics among migrant populations, but this is adaptation, not plasticity. Workman, Blumberg, and Cooper (1963) in a study of Negroes and Whites in rural Georgia have found evidence of adaptation to life in America among the Negroes there. The gene frequencies of sickle-cell and Glucose-6-Phosphate-De-

hydrogenase Deficiency, for instance, have decreased far more than can be accounted for by gene-flow from the White population: these characters are associated with certain forms of malaria absent in Georgia but endemic in West Africa. Genetic traits adaptive for West African life are not necessarily adaptive for life in other parts of the world. The widening of the marriage circle which often accompanies migration has sometimes, at least, led to hybrid vigor. Indeed, I have found evidence of this among Swiss both at home and in California (Hülse, 1958).
Persons of African Negro ancestry have retained dark skin, hair, and eyes for generation after generation even in foggy England, just as Cubans of Spanish ancestry have as high an incidence of light skin, hair, and eyes as do the Spaniards at home. It is clear that in both cases the genes have set a pattern which has not been modified in the phenotype by the environment. These are examples of true racial differences. So is the fact that when Chinese or Japanese, for environmental reasons, grow taller, they tend to become more brachycephalic (Shapiro, 1939; Lasker, 1946), while Europeans under the same circumstances become more dolichocephalic. Only genetic differences can explain this difference in the growth pattern.
Differences between populations, whether visible to the naked eye or revealed only by careful tests in the laboratory, may be due either to phenotypic plasticity or to genetic polymorphism. It is important to bear this in mind, but it is fully as important to realize that genetic differences in physiology and biochemistry are just as real as differences in exterior appearance. As an expression of good will towards groups whose members differ in appearance from us, some

Vol. 11, No. 1

Paragon of Animals

3

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

people have said that racial differences are only skin deep. This statement, of course, is metaphorical, but it is also rather misleading. It is much more accurate to say that racial differences are irrelevant to the problems of adjusting to any one particular culture. To be sure, this second statement is less dramatic and therefore less moving, but an accurate diagnosis is more helpful than a slogan as a guide to effective action. Problems of adjustment to culture are related to the efficiency of the mind, not to the bloodtype or the ability to taste certain chemicals. We lack evidence that there are genetic differences in the quality of the human mind among the living races, ethnic groups, or breeding populations. This is what matters.
It is hazardous to speak of racial differences at all unless we have good reason to believe that any differences we note are due to genetic rather than to environmental causes. The fact that two groups differ phenotypically is not enough to demonstrate that their gene frequencies also differ, as the studies of migrants, quoted above, should constantly remind us. At the same time we need not wait upon family studies which demonstrate the laws of Mendel before making up our minds. It is clear that many polymorphic characteristics such as eye color and hair color are genetic, even though we do not know the genetic mechanism responsible for their variations.
Races are breeding populations which can be readily distinguished from one another on genetic grounds alone. The genes concerned may influence the growth pattern, resistance to specific ailments--including but not restricted to infections--age changes during senility, and the biochemistry of body fluids just as they may influence details of facial ap-

pearance or bodily proportions. Races are not assemblages of individuals who resemble one another in some predetermined manner; there is no race of albinos, despite the fact that albinism is genetically determined. Some breeding populations have higher frequencies of the alíele for albinism than others; it is the populations, not individuals assembled together because they are seen to possess a trait, which may be called races. Some Hopi are albinos, just as some Swedes and some Nigerians are. But the Hopi tend to mate with one another rather than with Swedes or Nigerians, just as Swedes are unlikely to mate with Nigerians or Hopi, and Nigerians with Swedes or Hopi. It is the breeding population from which a person originated, not his personal characteristics, which determine his race. All breeding populations show polymorphism at many loci, and this is not necessarily evidence of "race-mixture" at some earlier time.
Races are temporary phenomena, evolutionär)' episodes, always subject to change, and always destined to vanish. Unlike species, they have no firmly fixed boundaries. The human species Homo sapiens forms a genetic continuum; gene flow is open and easy between its constituent populations. It has changed in nature through time by means of evolulution: an earlier form Homo erectus has become Homo sapiens. Still another species may evolve from Homo sapiens in the future, or it may instead become extinct without issue. These two ways of vanishing are open to any species. A race may vanish in either of these ways, of course; but it is much more likely to disappear by merging, through intermixture, with other races. In contrast to such social organizations as a nation, a race may remain in existence for a long time; the earliest fossil remains of hu-

4

Hülse

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

mans from America are essentially indistinguishable from the skeletons of modern American Indians living one thousand generations later. But from an evolutionary viewpoint, one thousand generations is a very short time; our species, sapiens, is at least three times, and our genus, Homo, at least thirty times as old.
When any species extends its habitat, some of its local populations are bound to be subjected to new sorts of stresses. The greater the extent of the habitat, the greater will be the variety of conditions to which these populations must adapt. Traits which are useless or even harmful in one area may be advantageous in another. Consequently, genes and combinations of genes at different loci which are subject to negative selection here often are subject to positive selection somewhere else. At the same time, most mating is likely to take place among creatures inhabiting the same area, if only because it is easier. Among creatures living in social bands, as most primates do, each social group may easily become a separate gene-pool. In combination, these factors tend to promote diversification based upon locality within any species.
There can be no doubt that human populations have inhabited almost all of the Old World for more than half a million years. Fossil remains of ancestral humans assigned by modern taxonomists to the species Homo erectus have been found as far apart as western Europe, eastern Asia, Java, northern and central Africa, and possibly even southern Africa. Tools made by such people have been found in all of these regions and in many intermediate areas as well. There can be little doubt that these populations were as similar to one another in those days as the populations inhabit-

ing the same regions are today. All the mandibles are heavy, nearly chinless, with teeth that are clearly human rather than apish. All the skulls are thick, with large browridges and low foreheads. Cranial capacity was much greater than among any apes, although not up to modern standards. Perfectly erect posture had been attained even earlier, and the evidence of the tools attests manipulative skill as great as our own and a mentality superior to that of any other animal.
Differences in anatomical detail between fossil remains from different parts of the world have been noted, of course. The mid-Pleistocene Javanese may have been taller than the Chinese and certainly had smaller brains. The Heidelberg jaw discovered near Mauer, Germany is exceptionally large, though the teeth are within the modern range. The skull cap from Olduvai Gorge in East Africa has by far the largest browridges. Weidenreich (1943) has noted more than a dozen traits shared by Sinanthropus of the middle Pleistocene in Northern China with modern Mongoloids rather than with all modern peoples. The ascending rami of the mandibles from Ternifine in northern Africa slope backward, as those from other places do not. Some differences of technology must be noted, too. The Ternifine tools are classed as Acheulian, whereas those associated with Sinanthropus are of the Chopper-Chopping Tool tradition, which is very different. Only with Sinanthropus do we have evidence of the control of fire and, indeed, cooking. Perhaps Europeans and Africans lacked this convenience for some hundreds of thousands of years after Orientals invented it. Who knows? The evidence is too scanty for us to be certain of anything except that our ancestors had

Vol. 11, No. 1

Paragon of Animals

5

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

spread to vast areas and showed signs of both biological and cultural variation by the early part of the second, or MindelRiss, interglacial period, perhaps half a million years ago.
Since that time between twenty and thirty thousand human generations have elapsed, and our species has spread to still other parts of the world. Arctic tundras, tropical islets, deserts, high plateaus, and equatorial rain forests have been occupied. These areas present diverse hazards to man's existence: the presence or absence of intense cold, scanty natural food supplies, reduced oxygen pressure, heavy humidity, continued heat, insect-borne and waterborne infections are just a few among many ways in which the natural environment varies from one region to another. Human populations have been able to survive and reproduce when subjected to all these different stresses. One might have expected that several different species of mankind would have evolved, just as we find that several species of baboon have done in a far more restricted part of the world. Yet this has not occurred. Indeed, there is no reason to believe that such a process has even begun. Men and women from all parts of the world have mated and produced offspring showing no sign whatever of reduced genetic efficiency. No two human breeding populations differ enough genetically so that they may be considered incipient species. Clearly there have been natural forces at work to maintain the unity of the human stock, and these forces have been strong enough to hold in check any tendencies to purely local adaptations.
The inborn plasticity of the human phenotype is certainly one of the factors concerned. Most of us have bodies that can adjust to a great range of conditions. We are able to live, work, and reproduce

even when fed much less than we would like to eat. Protective antibodies are formed in our blood streams when foreign proteins invade us. At high altitudes, we soon begin to produce more red blood cells. We become acclimatized to frigid as well as to torrid weather. Our musculature develops, at least during youth, if we get enough exercise. Our minds, too, are plastic and flexible. Youngsters learn English as easily as they do Chinese or Choctaw. They are capable of developing the most diverse preferences, prejudices, and perceptions, all in accordance with the social group within which they are raised and trained. Oddly enough, even when fully adult, humans can learn new things and change their values, at least to some degree. We are highly educable, and this is an important aspect of our plasticity.
Indeed, educability is probably the most vital aspect of human plasticity, for it is intimately concerned with the development of human culture, and human culture is our true ecological niche. All animal species must adapt to climate, to food supply, to disease. Animals which live in socially organized groups, like wolves or baboons, for instance, must adapt to their society as well. Our ancestors, a long while ago, began to develop culture; and having done so, they had to adapt to the new ways of life made possible by culture. This has been a universal characteristic of all mankind for as far back in time as the record shows, and it has had a universal and consequently a unifying effect upon human evolution.
The earliest evidence of cultural activities, indeed, long antedates the earliest fossil evidence of the genus Homo. Pebble tools,--crude and simple, to be sure, but clearly prepared intentionally for use,--have been found in close

6

Hülse

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

association with Zinjanthropus, an Australopithecine who lived nearly two million years ago in East Africa. Since that time technology has modified the physical environment of man to a greater and greater extent, and it is to the technologically modified environment that we have had to adapt. Both hand and brain have been subjected to new demands. Dexterity in manipulation, ability to imitate the tool-making techniques of other persons, and, even more, ability to conceive of new tool-types and new uses for tools have had a selective value among our ancestors from that day to this. Within any band or troop of protohominids, individuals deficient in these abilities would certainly have had fewer chances to reproduce and rear their offspring. In competition between bands, the use of tools in exploiting natural resources must have given a solid advantage to the bands which were more expert.
It is interesting to note in this connection that among all peoples today the use of the right hand in skilled operations is culturally preferred and is probably inherited. It is also interesting that as tools improved, teeth and jaws became smaller and the degree of prognathism--foreward projection of the jaws --decreased. The mouth had less hard work to do, and the selective value of strong jaw muscles declined. The buttressing of heavy browridges, consequently, ceased to be necessary. Early closure of the cranial sutures, which is useful if a young creature needs strong jaw muscles, was no longer advantageous. Another year or two of rapid brain growth for the child turned out to be a better investment for the species, and such continued brain growth is inconsistent with early suture closing.
Furthermore, manufacturing and using tools made it possible for our an-

cestors to shift from a vegetarian to a largely carnivorous diet in all parts of the world, and this change of dietary habit necessitated changes in social habit too. Nonhuman primates do not share their food, but animals hunting in packs, such as wolves, are likely to do so: at least food will be brought home to the young. If, as among primates, the young grow slowly and demand much care from their mothers, the latter will be less able to hunt than are the males. Bands in which the males bring meat home to be shared are bound to have a selective advantage over those in which the males neglect to do so. This activity demands psychological characteristics that people in all societies possess, and which are lacking among other primates. The sexual division of labor, like right-handedness and tool-manufacture, is one of the universals of culture. It, too, has long been an aspect of the environment to which our ancestors, of whatever race or tribe, have had to adapt. In all races and tribes, the bodily expression of sexual dimorphism follows the same lines; for example, in no human population are females, on the average, more hairy than males or more likely to become bald. These are distinctively human and universally human aspects of sexual dimorphism.
The fossil record can not give us direct information on most aspects of nonmaterial culture, but we can make a number of very reasonable estimates if we study that record closely. Language is one of the most vital of the nonmaterial aspects of culture and is a cultural universal. Indeed, some scholars deny that culture could exist without language. There can be no doubt that this faculty confers an enormous selective advantage. In early times any band of hominids who had learned to speak would certainly have

Vol. 11, No. 1

Paragon of Animals

7

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

been far more successful in any of their endeavors than a band which had not. Once it came into existence, language must have spread very rapidly throughout the entire species. When did it come into existence?
Sinanthropus, you will recall, controlled fire by the mid-Pleistocene--a complicated procedure. According to Wallace (1961), it involves keeping the fire going for indefinite periods, which cannot be done without a fuel supply. Forethought as well as cleverness is required. It involves keeping the fire where it belongs, where it will be useful rather than dangerous. Judgment and constant attention as well as cleverness are required. It involves being able to transport or kindle fire, both of which require patience and self control in addition to the mental qualities mentioned above. It requires a way of life in which fire is a useful tool--for warmth, cooking, illumination, preparing other tools, or other purposes. It implies a way of life which has become rather unlike that of any other animal. Would such a complex social existence be manageable if the members of the group could not talk to one another? I feel uncertain, but it makes me wonder.
Furthermore, at least one of the individuals whose fossil remains have been found at the Sinanthropus site appears to have been a female past the age of child bearing. The survival of the elderly is rarely observed among wild animals: they have no function. In all human societies, however, they may babysit, make or repair artifacts, and pass on vital information to the younger, more active generation. Their accumulated knowledge benefits the society to which they belong--if they can talk. Genes for longevity must have begun to possess added survival value after language be-

gan to be used. Among living populations there seem to be no genetic differences in potential longevity, although, of course, the chance of early death is much greater in societies lacking adequate nutrition or sanitation. Human culture has certainly led to the same sort of selection pressure throughout the entire species; selection pressure in favor of such previously disadvantageous traits as delay in maturity and a prolonged life span. It may have started as long ago as the time of Sinanthropus.
Even if we doubt the existence of such cultural traits as language and the care of the feeble as long ago as the second interglacial period, it is difficult to deny their presence before the end of the third, among the Neanderthaloids. Not only have such fossil remains as those of the cripple at Shanidar in the Near East described by Stewart (1959) given us proof of such care, but the Neanderthaloids buried their dead. We do not know whether earlier people did this, but this race had certainly adopted the habit. Not only were graves excavated, but grave goods often accompanied the remains. It is impossible to escape the conclusion that these people had ideas of some sort about the dead. It is futile to speculate about what these ideas were; the important thing is to recognize that people had ideas at all, and that they must have shared them with one another. The only way in which ideas can be shared is by language. Emotions may be spread from one creature to another without the use of words. Instructions may be given and understood by means of gestures and example. But rituals such as those involved in the disposal of the dead imply that beliefs and ethical judgments had begun to affect or indeed to govern some aspects of human behavior.

8

Hülse

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Among the beliefs characteristic of all known societies today is the incest tabu. Arbitrary rules concerning sexual behavior are found among all peoples, and the prohibition of incest is always one of these rules. The definition of incest varies: one may be forbidden to mate with anyone of the same clan or surname; one may be forbidden to mate with a sister-in-law or the child of a godfather. But one is always denied sexual access to persons who are thought of as the closest kinfolk. The result of these rules, whatever their details, is to reduce the extent of closely consanguinous matings. Gene flow between adjacent groups and bands is promoted, offering a far better opportunity for forming new genetic combinations than does mating between kinfolk, and increasing heterozygosity. Even more important, however, is the spread of new mutations from their point of origin to other populations.
Baboons, according to Washburn and Devore (1961) almost never shift from one troop to another. Each troop forms a gene-pool from which only rarely is there an exchange to another pool. Force of circumstances, not ideas about morality, keeps the troops separate. Chimpanzees, similarly lacking in ideas, live in much smaller bands which frequently intermingle. Gene flow from band to band is much more common among them, and it would seem that there is only one species of chimpanzee in contrast to several of baboon. Among humans the incest tabu has acted as a strong force to keep the lines of genetic communication open between adjacent groups, and gene flow has therefore been much greater, more constant, and a stronger unifying force than among other primates.
At least in all historic and late prehis-

toric times, intentional and widespread migration has also served as a force to keep the human species unified. This is another way in which culture has influenced the direction of human evolution, for migration has become easier as technology has improved. After the expansion of Homo erectus throughout the Old World, we do not know how much wandering back and forth took place. The persistent difference in tool styles between eastern Asia and the rest of the Old World suggests a minimum of population movements, although gene-flow presumably was constant. The spread of changes in tool styles from the Mediterranean area into Africa, however, suggests that migration did take place between these two regions. Archaeological evidence of extensive migrations by the Upper Palaeolithic--perhaps 30,000 years ago--becomes stronger, and indicates more and more tribal movements in each succeeding period. Since the voyages of Columbus populations of the world have been redistributed on a very large scale. New mixtures of all sorts have taken place so that genetic distinctions between the inhabitants of all parts of the world are being constantly reduced, and, at the same time, new races are being brought into existence.
Culture has so modified the way of life of our species that orthoselection to improve the capacity for culture has been the most outstanding characteristic of human evolution. The basic requirements for life on this ecological plateau are and have been essentially the same in all places and during all periods. Thus the human species has remained one throughout its history. Cultures, on the other hand, may be divisive forces. Prejudices of all sorts can be and are reinforced by the myths which people elaborate. Religious, linguistic, economic,

Vol. 11, No. 1

Paragon of Animals

9

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

and occupational barriers to gene flow are among the creations of the human mind; and they are often more difficult to surmount than mountains, deserts, or oceans. Rules concerning sexual behavior commonly proscribe, or at least discourage, mating between members of groups thought of as being different. The fact that caste endogamy is practiced in such countries as India and the United States has led to the existence of separate breeding populations which, although living side by side, retain quite different gene frequencies at various loci (Workman et al., 1963; Olivier, 1961).
But the major factor accounting for differences in gene frequencies between different populations is, as with other animals, geography. At the same time that culture has tended to equalize the circumstances of man's life, no matter where he lives, nature has tended to make those circumstances differ from one place to another. Each population has had to adapt not only to the requirements of culture, but also to purely local hazards. In some areas, endemic malaria has led to increased frequency of one or another abnormal hemoglobin (Livingston, 1961). In others, low oxygen pressure has led to an enlarged lung capacity and an increased supply of hemoglobin (Hurtado, 1932). It is adaptive, in a desert, to have a spare body-build; or, in a cloudy place, to have skin not too dark to absorb ultraviolet rays (Gam, 1961). These are a few among many of the differences noted among populations native to different regions. It should be pointed out that none of them refer to either the mental or anatomical requirements for full participation in culture. Human populations, in their separate evolutions, have come to differ in ways suitable to their natural or physical habitats. Human populations, in their joint evolu-

tion, have remained closely similar in ways suitable to their cultural habitat.
It is necessary at this point to note that the cultures of the tribes living in various regions influence the ways in which adaptation takes place. The clearings which Africans make in order to practice agriculture permit malariatransmitting mosquitoes to breed more readily. Dependence upon one-crop agriculture is likely to lead to protein deficiencyand in turn to dysentery (Scrimshaw et al., 1959), which acts as a selection force. Population increase, due to food production, leads to more rapid spread of contagious disease and the eventual selection of mutations which give immunity to one disease or another. Only such cultural devices as warm clothing and excellent hunting techniques permitted populations to occupy areas where a degree of Arctic adaptation became necessary. As cultures have changed over the centuries, the adaptations of various peoples have altered, too, making the reconstruction of racial history a dubious task, even when plenty of osteological data are available. Classifying becomes risky, even if not useless. Largely on the basis of complexion, Melanesians used to be termed "Oceanic Negroids" which led to the question: How did they get to the Pacific from Africa? We now know, on the basis of genetic data, that Melanesians don't resemble Africans so closely as the latter resemble Europeans: the migration question is no longer necessary.
For a long time scholars have attempted to classify human races in the same manner that the species and genera of animals are classified. The more we have learned about human biology, the less possible and the less reasonable such attempts have appeared. A species is a closed unit genetically, whereas a race is

10

Hülse

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

not. Consequently, a species is "pure," whereas all races are now and always have been "impure"; that is, with genes derived from various other races. Schemes have been advanced in which the species is neatly subdivided into major stocks that are in turn divided into races, in turn subdivided into subraces. Such scholars as Hooton (1946) recognized mixtures in varying degrees, but even he thought in terms of three originally "pure" and distinct stocks. More recently Coon (1962) proposed a scheme of five basic stocks, each dating back to the Lower Palaeolithic, with a minimal gene flow from one to another. Both are wrong. Far more than three or fiveregions in the Old World differ from one another enough to have led to strong local adaptations among their human inhabitants. The earliest fossil representatives of Homo sapiens show distinct signs of local differentation wherever we find them.
Racial differences in skeletal anatomy are certainly old, but this does not make them profound. Racial differences in physiological adaptation among living populations are marked, but this does not make them relèvent to psychic function. It is misleading to think in terms of constant redivisions in human stocks when rejoinings are just as constant. Racial variety evolves as needed, only to be resubmerged when no longer functional. Racial variety has been and still is biologically useful, quite without reference to the ethical standards of any particular society. Racial variety is no more of a barrier to decent human relations than is linguistic or religious variety, unless

we choose to make it so. Variety, in
truth, is a mark of mankind's success.
If we are willing to accept it, and to
make our world safe for differences, Man
can indeed become the beauty of the
world, the Paragon of Animals.
REFERENCES
BOAS, F., 1911. Changes in Bodily Form of Descendants of Immigrants. Government Printing Office, Washington.
COON, G. S., 1962. The Origin of Races. Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., New York.
GARN, S. M., 1961. Human Races. Charles C Thomas, Springfield.
HOOTON, E. A., 1946. Up from the Ape. MacMillan Company, New York.
HULSE, F. S., 1958. Exogamie et Hétérosis. Archives Suisse d'Anthropologie Generale, 22: 103-125.
HURTADO, A., 1932. Respiratory Adaptation in the Indians Native to the Peruvian Andes. Am. J. Physical Anthrop., 17: 137-165.
KRALJ-CERCEK, L,., 1956. The Influence of Food, Body Build and Social Origin on the Age at Menarche. Human Biology, 28: 154-164.
LASKER, G. W., 1946. Migration and Physical Differentiation. Am. J. Physical Anthrop., (New series) 4: 273-300.
LIVINGSTON, F. B., 1961. Balancing the Human Hemoglobin Polymorphisms. Human Biology, 33: 205-219.
OLIVIER, G., 1961. Anthropologie des Tamouls du Sud de l'Inde. Masson, Paris.
SCRIMSHAW, N. S., C. E. TAYLOR, AND J. E.
GORDON, 1959. Interaction of Nutrition and Infection. Am. J. Med. Sci., 237: 367-403. SHAPIRO, H. L., 1938. Migration and Environment. Oxford University Press, New York. STEWART, T. D., 1959. The Restored Shanidar I Skull. Smithsonian Report for 1958. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D. C., pp. 473-480. WALLACE, A. F. C., 1961. Culture and Personality. Random House, New York.
WASHBURN, S. L., AND I. DEVORE, 1961. Social Be-
havior of Baboons and Early Man. Social Life of Early Man. Viking Fund Publications in Anthropology, No. 31, New York. WEIDENREICH, F., 1943. The Skull of Sinanthropus Pekinensis. Palaeontologica Sinica, New Series D, No. 10, Pekin.
WORKMAN, P. X., B. S. BLUMBERG, AND A. J.
COOPER, 1963. Selection, Gene Migration and Polymorphic Stability in a U. S. White and Negro Population. Am. J. Human Genet., 15: 429-437.

