Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Regulation of offspring and the Roman Catholic Church
Nan Ahearn
To cite this article: Nan Ahearn (1959) Regulation of offspring and the Roman Catholic Church, Eugenics Quarterly, 6:1, 23-25, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1959.9987386 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1959.9987386
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

REGULATION OF OFFSPRING AND THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH

NAN AHEARN

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

JJuRING THE REIGN OF POPE PlUS XII,
1939-1958, world population underwent many changes, and population rapidly increased in the years following World War II. The economic and social effects societies have suffered because of this increase did not pass unnoticed before His Holiness. As the family is the basic unit in society, it was the family that was affected; and from the beginning of his reign Pope Pius seemed to have as one of his most solemn objectives the fostering of the virtues of a good family life. (1) At the outset of his reign he spoke of the "charge laid by God on parents to provide for the material and spiritual good of their offspring...." (2) In his Christmas message of 1942, the Pope urged the members of humanity to look to their mission of the perpetuation of new life and the educating of children with true religious convictions so that humanity may fortify and reconstitute "its proper economic, spiritual, moral and juridic unity." (3)
Today the Catholic Church is often accused of ignoring these social obligations by uncontrolled encouragement to young couples to have many, many children despite economic or medical reasons which may indicate that a large family would be unwise. This alleged line of thinking is not in concurrence

with the Church as evidenced by the
late Holy Father's many allusions to the
social obligations of parents:
"Do not let the family be alienated or diverted from the high purpose assigned to it by God. God wills that husband and wife, in loyal fulfillment of their duties to one another and to the family, should in the home transmit to the next generation the torch of corporal life and with it spiritual and moral life, Christian life; that within the family, under the care of their parents, there should grow up men of straight character, of upright behavior, to become valuable unspoiled members of the human race, manly in good or bad fortune, obedient to those who command them and to God." (4) In his speech to the Italian Workman's Association on the problems of workers at that time, June 1948, he lists the necessities which must urgently be provided for the family: food, clothes and housing; the children's education; wholesome recreation for soul and body. (5) And again in 1949 when Pius XII addressed an international congress of Catholic doctors on the subject of artificial insemination, he stressed that by the inalienable, nontransferable rights of parents "nature imposes on whoever gives life to a small creature the task of its preservation and education." (6)
In 1951, in the address given to the
Italian Catholic Union of Midwives,

23

24- Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

Pope Pius XII made some of his most
definitive statements on the practical
carrying out of these obligations within
the rules of the Roman Catholic Church.
He speaks and, indeed, insists upon an
intelligent approach to the conception
of children and to the duty of parents to
provide for their education, and he indi-
cates the lofty position man has as a
rational being in the procreation of the
human race:
"In matrimony, for the procreation of life, the Creator has destined human beings made of flesh and blood, endowed with minds and hearts: they are called as men, not animals without reason, to be the makers of their descendants." (7) However, in referring to the practical
applications indicated by parental duty,
the Church does not condone the use of
the sterile period, commonly known as
the "rhythm method," for purely selfish
reasons on the part of a couple who just
do not want to be bothered with chil-
dren. Pius XII states that the moral
licitness of the use of "rhythm" by
couples "would have to be approved or
denied according as to whether or not
the intention of observing those periods
constantly was based on sufficient and
secure moral grounds. The mere fact
that the couple do not offend the nature
of the act and are prepared to accept
and bring up the child which in spite of
their precautions came into the world
would not be sufficient in itself to guar-
antee the rectitude of intention and the
unobjectionable morality of the motives
themselves.
"The reason for this is that marriage obliges to a state of life which, while conferring certain rights also imposes the fulfillment of a positive work in regard to the married state itself. In such a case, one can apply the general principle that a positive fulfillment

may be omitted when serious reasons, independent from the good will of those obliged by it, show that this action is not opportune, or prove that a similar demand cannot reasonably be made of human nature.
"The marriage contract, which confers upon husband and wife the right to satisfy the inclinations of nature, sets them up in a certain state of life, the married state. But upon couples who perform the act peculiar to their state, nature and the Creator impose the function of helping the conservation of the human race. The characteristic activity which gives their state its value is the bonum prolis. The individual and society, the people and the state, the Church itself depend for their existence in the order established by God on fruitful marriage. Therefore, to embrace the married state, continuously to make use of the faculty proper to it and lawful in it alone, and on the other hand, to withdraw always and deliberately with no serious reason from its primary obligation, would be a sin against the very meaning of conjugal life.
"There are serious motives, such as those often mentioned in the so-called medical, eugenic, economic, and social 'indications,' that can exempt for a long time, perhaps even the whole duration of the marriage, from the positive and obligatory carrying out of the act. From this it follows that observing the non-fertile periods alone can be lawful only under a moral aspect. Under the conditions mentioned it really is so. But if, according to a rational and just judgment, there are no similar grave reasons of a personal nature or deriving from external circumstances, then the determination to avoid habitually the fecundity of the union while at the same time to continue fully satisfying their sensuality, can be derived only from a false appreciation of life and from reasons having nothing to do with proper ethical laws." (8) One month later, on November 26, 1951, His Holiness addressed a group in

25

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

Rome and strongly reaffirmed his earlier
position of encouragement and commen-
dation to those whoare able to have
large families and an understanding of
those for whom many children are prac-
tically impossible. He expressed the
hope that medical science would beable
to perfect a more certain method of
regulating offspring which is in accord-
ance with the teaching of the Catholic
Church:
"Since, too the primary office of matrimony is to be at the service of life, the expression of Our principal gratification and of Our paternal gratitude goes to those generous mothers and fathers who, for thelove of God andwith trust in Him, courageously raise a large family.
"On the other hand, the Church knows how to consider with sympathy and understanding thereal difficulties of the married state in our day. Therefore, in Our last allocution on conjugal morality, We affirmed thelegitimacy and, at the same time, the limits --in truth very wide--of a regulation of offspring, which, unlike so-called

'birth-control,' is compatible with the law of God. One may even hope (but in this matter the Church naturally leaves the judgment to m e d i c a l science) that science will succeed in providing this licit method with a sufficiently secure basis, and the most recent information seems to confirm such a hope." (9)

REFERENCES

1. N.Y. Times, 1940: Jan. 11, 8:3, Jan. 26, 6:2; 1941: Jan.9, 6 : 2 .

2. POPE PIUS XII,, Nov. 8, 1939. Summa Pon-
tificus. Cath Mind, 37:905.

3. , 1942. Christmas Message. , 40:55.

4. , June 1, 1941. Radio address of
Pope Pius XII. Catholic Worker Press, Chicago, Ill.

5. , June 29, 1948. Problems of

Italian Workers. Cath. Mind, 47:613.

6. , Sept. 29, 1949. To Catholic

Doctors.

, 48:253.

7. , Oct. 29, 1951. Address of Pope

Pius XII to the Italian Catholic Union of

Midwives. National Catholic Welfare Con-

ference, Wash., D. C.

8. Ibid.

9. POPE PIUS XII, Nov. 26, 1951. Address of
Pope Pius XII to the National Congress of the "Family Front" and the Association of Large Families. National Catholic Welfare Conference, Wash., D.C.

