Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Heredity counseling: Starting a heredity clinic
H. Warner Kloepfer
To cite this article: H. Warner Kloepfer (1955) Heredity counseling: Starting a heredity clinic, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:4, 234-238, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987253 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987253
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

HEREDITY COUNSELING Starting A Heredity Clinic

H. WARNER KLOEPFER
Department of Anatomy (Genetics) School of Medicine Tulane University

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

HOW CAN THE GAP be filled between the present inadequate number of heredity counseling centers in this country and the 100 needed? With proper planning, budget, and personnel, an ideal counseling clinic can be brought into existence in a very short time; even with limited funds, a counseling service may be started with the hope that it will evolve from a limited functioning level to the ideal clinic.
Need for New Centers
The experiences of the present counseling centers show the need in genetic counseling that is not being met in the many communities without such centers.
Sheldon Reed (1953), director of The Dight Institute which is one of the oldest and most experienced heredity counseling centers in America, believes that a heredity clinic should be located in each medical center, one in each of the larger cities, and at least one in each State, making a total of about 100. This same author (1949) calls attention to the fact that the counseling center in Copenhagen saw over 1,000 cases in 1947 (ten times the number seen in 1938) from a supporting population of about two million. The Copenhagen center which the writer was privileged to visit in 1953 is older and has had more experience than any of the clinics in the United States. Their services since 1947 have not only been maintained but have continued to expand.
The need and value of genetic counseling has been emphasized recently by Book (1955), Herndon (1954, 1955a), Reed (1954, 1955), Guttmacher (1954), Neel and Schull (1954), Stephens (1954) and Stone (1955).

Ruth and Edward Brecher (1955) were able to find only 14 major heredity clinics and genetic counseling centers in the United States and Canada when they made their survey this year. At least six others are known to exist according to the first and only book (Reed, 1955) published on counseling in medical genetics. This book should be in the hands of every physician, to whom it is directed, because it will not only help him to avoid many of the most serious errors that are often made in giving counseling advice but it also will acquaint him with the kind of service he can expect from a genetic counseling center.
Most physicians do not have the time or the training to prepare and to interpret a complete pedigree chart for a family. Ideally, a pedigree chart should include information not only about children and siblings of the patient but also information about all siblings and all descendants of the four grandparents, and at least the maiden names of all four great-grandmothers. It is often most rewarding to be able to trace all descendants of the siblings of grandparents, and even great-grandparents. In many cases certain medical records of deceased and living members need to be checked whether or not it is possible to examine other members of the family. Interviews with representatives of various branches of a family are often necessary. Emphasizing the limited opportunity physicians have had to learn about medical genetics, a recent survey conducted by Herndon (1955) shows that 45 per cent of the medical graduates in the United States in 1952 still received no formal training in medical genetics; and the total instruction given during the entire four years at

234

235

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

the remaining schools was usually less than five clock hours.
Requirements
The requirements for an ideal counseling clinic may be described in terms of location, space and facilities, personnel, budget, and source of funds. It should be noted that much counseling of equal quality can be done in a setting quite short of the ideal to be described, but the extent of the service and the degree of convenience enjoyed by both personnel and recipient will be determined by how well these requirements are fulfilled.
A counseling center is best located in the medical school of a university which also offers graduate work. Such a location makes it convenient to give instruction in medical genetics, to give counsel on genetic conditions presented in the various clinics, and to conduct research in human genetics. The facilities of the various laboratories of a medical school and the clinics at a large hospital are necessary for special examinations. Graduates who have learned about a counseling service while in medical school are the most important group to refer new and urgent cases to the center.
The space needed for an ideal center will include waiting room, conference room, medical examination room, facilities for blood typing, electrophoresis, chromatography, finger- and palm-printing, anthropometry, photography, offices for staff members and graduate students, and library and seminar room.
The personnel should include at least one person trained in human genetics, a physician, a biochemist, secretaries, and laboratory technicians. In addition to salaries, equipment, supplies, and telephone service including long distance, the budget should include travel funds for relatives who are asked to come for examinations and travel funds for staff members who must visit relatives in their homes.
Funds for a counseling clinic may be secured in a number of different ways.

building and facilities of the University Institute for Human Genetics in Copenhagen was made possible by a gift from the Rockefeller Foundation. The Dight Institute at the University of Minnesota was made possible by a gift from Charles Fremont Dight, a physician who taught medical students most of his life at a salary seldom exceeding $1,500 a year. Dr. Dight's frugal living and wise investment created the estate which made his generous bequest possible. Unlike the centers at the University of Copenhagen and the University of Michigan, each of which is located in its own building, the Dight Institute is housed in one of the main campus buildings. Just as a pioneer work in most types of health and educational endeavors, even elementary education, had its original support from private sources, it would seem that private gifts must continue to be of primary importance in the development of an ideal heredity clinic.
Another source of funds is proposed by Dice (1952). He suggests that the cost of providing genetic advice be borne by the State just as in other projects that affect public health. Our state agricultural experiment stations and the U. S. Department of Agriculture perform a valuable research and counseling service which is free to farmers and stock breeders. Now that responsibility for the best possible development of strains of corn, chickens, and pigs is accepted by the State, he believes the State should also provide centers where information can be secured about the probability that a given genetic condition will be repeated in the offspring of certain individuals of a family.
How One Center Started
However desirable it may be to develop an ideal heredity counseling clinic spontaneously, most new centers will probably progress only gradually into this status. The clinic may not even have a budget of its own at the start. It should be emphasized that the reason for presenting some

236 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

of the methods used to develop a functioning center at Tulane University is not because they represent the ideal way to begin in every community but rather because they reveal one way which seems to have worked successfully in this community. The comments are presented in the hope that they may be helpful in bringing other centers into existence to meet the needs of the families of the 1,000,000 Americans reported by Neel (1951) to be afflicted with some kind of clear-cut genetic disease.
Of first importance in the development of the center at Tulane University School of Medicine has been the spadework of a professor of anatomy who over the years has emphasized the role of genetics to his medical students in such a way that increasing numbers later write him for counsel when faced with genetic problems. When the demand for lectures in human genetics and requests for counsel became too great in relation to other regular duties, he paved the way for the appointment in his department of a geneticist with primary interest and a Ph.D. in human genetics. The present incumbent, the writer, has an appointment on the visiting staff of a large hospital as Scientist, Division of Pediatrics, which gives him access to the record library, the various clinics, and conferences where counseling problems arise. An appointment as Genetic Consultant provides a working relationship at another hospital. An appointment on the Graduate Faculty provides the opportunity to teach and direct graduate students.
With office and conference room, waiting room, seminar room, secretaries, record files, photographic equipment and darkroom, and certain laboratory facilities provided by the Department of Anatomy, and with the facilities of the entire University seemingly available to round out the remaining requirements, the needs are met for heredity counseling and research. Numerous examples of cooperation could be cited.

The departments of Hematology in both the Tulane and the Louisiana State University Schools of Medicine were equally anxious that their facilities be used in typing blood for ABO, MNS, Rh, P, Duffy, Kell, Kidd, Lewis, etc. In one of the hospitals a biochemist will do the electrophoretic and Chromatographie analyses on any specimens collected from families.
Although an ideal center should have a separate staff which includes a person with a Ph.D. in human genetics and a person with an M.D., one individual might combine these qualifications. The possibility of beginning with a geneticist who does not have the medical degree is emphasized here because there may be hesitation to develop a genetic counseling service without an M.D. director who has both an adequate training and a primary interest in human genetics. In medical schools and large hospitals a working relation with the widely diversified members of their staffs, who are available and willing to cooperate in the various examinations which only an M.D. can perform, would seem to make medical training for the director of the center somewhat less important.
Even when a university can provide only a salary and working facilities, the appointee can furnish his own transportation in the beginning, draw his own pedigree charts, and be his own technician and photographer. Funds secured directly for the counseling center and funds secured for special research projects in human genetics should soon parallel the ever-increasing demands for the service of the center. No attempt has been made at Tulane to publicize the free counseling service or to solicit cases, but word gets around. As noted by others, the referrals from physicians are by far the most stable and. important source of the demand for counseling service, but the response from articles in newspapers and popular magazines, such as the one by the Brechers (1955), certainly results in an increased number of requests.

237

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Aid in Diagnosis
Several examples have been published recently to illustrate how a genetic counselor can help an individual with a specific genetic disease or aid the relatives. The following case is an example of a service to an ophthalmologist who had made a complete examination of his patient but did not have time to examine any of the relatives.
A letter written by the mother-in-law of Mrs. X stated that an article about the genetic counseling service had been seen in the local newspaper. A prognosis of eventual blindness had just been given to Mrs. X, the mother of four children. The family wanted to know if the "awful blindness already present in six out of twelve siblings" of Mrs. X could possibly occur in the present or future offspring of Mrs. X. An examination of Mrs. X's hospital record and a conference with her doctor gave no more specific diagnosis than myopic retinal degeneration (a condition which may occur in some 20 different genetic diseases of the retina). A diagnosis of retinitis pigmentosa (a condition which occurs in a half dozen genetic diseases of the retina) was found on the hospital record of an older blind sibling. Finally, the medical record of the oldest blind sibling showed a diagnosis of Laurence-Moon-Biedl syndrome which has always been observed to be caused by an autosomal recessive gene. The pedigree of this family was compatible with this diagnosis. No other cases of blindness could be found in 52 relatives of these siblings, and the parents were third cousins. Although obesity and polydactyly did not happen to be present in Mrs. X, they were certainly present in some of her affected siblings. Not only was this family delighted to learn that blindness would not be expected to occur in the children of Mrs. X, but her doctor was glad to be able to make a specific diagnosis which could not be made directly from the eye examination of his patient.

Conclusions
A gap needs to be filled between the inadequate number of existing genetic counseling clinics and the number needed. The requirements for developing a new center are not beyond the reach of the many communities which have none available at the present time. These experiences at the Tulane University Center are presented to show one way of bringing a center into operation.
From the viewpoint of a University, the genetic counseling activities are a service to the community which are compatible with the best in public relations. From the standpoint of the individual (in nearly every family there is at least one gene for some undesirable condition), the service provides the best available answers to genetic problems. From the standpoint of the practicing physician, the service provides information which he does not have the time and in most cases the training to give. A donor can create a memorial in this field that will bring happiness to the present generation and elicit even greater appreciation from the generations yet to be born. From the standpoint of the geneticist, research opportunities for the pursuit of more knowledge about the genetics of various conditions go hand in hand with genetic counseling.
REFERENCES
B÷÷K, JAN A. 1955. Heredity Counseling in medical genetics and medical practice. Eugen. Quart. 2 : 174-183.
BRECHER, RUTH and EDWARD. 1955. How much
disease can be inherited? Redbook magazine, 105 (No. 1, May): 26. DICE, LEE R. 1952. Heredity clinics: their value for public service and for research. Am. J. Human Genet., 4: 1-13. GUTTMACHER, ALAN F. 1954. Heredity counseling in diabetes, pregnancy and modern medicine; a genetic misadventure. Eugen. Quart., 1: 191-192. 192. HERNDON, C. NASH. 1954. Heredity counseling. Eugen. Quart., 1: 64-66.
. 1955a. III. Heredity counseling. Eugen. Quart, 2: 83-89.
. 1955b. Genetics in the Medical School Curriculum. Presidential Address, American So-

238 Eugenics Quarterly

ciety of H u m a n Genetics, East Lansing, Michigan, September 7.
NEEL, JAMES V. 1951. Some applications of the principles of genetics to the practice of medicine. Medical Clinics North America, 3 5 : 519-533.
and WILLIAM J. SCHULL. 1954. Human
Heredity. University of Chicago Press, Ch. 18, pp. 307-317.
REED, SHELDON C. 1949. Counseling in human
genetics. The Dight Institute Bulletin Number 6, p . 9. University of Minnesota Press.
. 1953. Counseling in human genetics,

Part III. The Dight Institute Bulletin Number 8, p p . 13-14. University of Minnesota Press.
∑--. 1954. Heredity counseling. Eugen. Quart., 1: 47-51.
. 1955. Counseling in Medical Genetics. W. B. Saunders Co. 268 p p . STEPHENS, F. E. 1954. Heredity counseling in muscular dystrophy and cancer. Eugen. Quart., 1: 261-263.
STONE, ABRAHAM. 1955. Heredity counseling: eugenic aspects of the premarital consultation. Eugen. Quart., 2 : 51-52.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

