Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Comment on Gordon Allen's review of Putnam's race and reason
Henry E. Garrett
To cite this article: Henry E. Garrett (1961) Comment on Gordon Allen's review of Putnam's race and reason, Eugenics Quarterly, 8:4, 218-220, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1961.9987486 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1961.9987486
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

Brief Reports and Communications

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

COMMENT ON GORDON ALLEN'S REVIEW OF PUTNAM'S RACE AND REASON
HENRY E. GARRETT
Professor Emeritus of Psychology Columbia University

MY ATTENTION has been called to a review of Carleton Putnam's Race and Reason in your issue of June 1961. This review, by Gordon Allen, challenges my judgment, and that of three other scientists, in signing the introduction to Putnam's book. I note that Allen places our names in parentheses followed by an exclamation point, but whether this is to emphasize his astonishment at our signatures, or his courage in setting his opinion against that of Ruggles Gates, one of the world's leading geneticists, I am unable to say.
In any case, the review makes an answer both fitting and necessary, although I am unable to meet all of Allen's objections because of the generalities in which they are couched. It is impossible to reply to the allegation that "many of [Putnam's] arguments vanish into thin air when properly phrased in terms of trait frequencies," because Allen offers no proof. When Allen writes that "some inconsistencies in Putnam's argument must be passed over," the answers must be passed over, too. And when Allen remarks that "if accidents of climate and geography could be ruled out, and they cannot . . ." [without considering Putnam's careful analysis of why, in the case under debate, they can] one is compelled to say that in our opinion Allen is mistaken and that an unbiased reading

of Race and Reason will sustain this opinion.
There are only two criticisms of Putnam's book which Allen attempts to support with any argument. One of these has to do with what he alleges to be Putnam's confusion of the terms "average" and "frequency" in scientific usage. Allen relates this supposed confusion to what he calls Putnam's "failure to analyze the race problem in terms of individual human beings." However, in the context in which Putnam uses it and for the purposes of this debate, "average" need not be distinguished from "frequency." It makes no difference whether we say, on the one hand, that the frequency with which good tacklers are found on the Yale football team exceeds the frequency with which they are found on the Harvard team, or whether we say, on the other hand, that the average Yale player is a better tackier than the average Harvard player--provided we emphasize that we are not attributing exceptional ability to any individual player. Putnam is at pains throughout Race and Reason to distinguish between racial and individual traits, and it seems to me pure pedantry for Allen to assert that "a scientist uses averages in some contexts, frequency in others, and the two are rarely if ever interchangeable." The distinction is quite immaterial here.

218

Brief Reports

219

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

Of course, what Allen is actually trying to suggest is that only individuals matter in the process of racial interbreeding, that "marriages are contracted between individuals, not between races," and that in consequence only the individuals need be considered--that we need only ask, "Is this particular player a good tackier?" Allen makes the startling statement: "With respect to the sort of hereditary variations that might influence adaptation to civilization, an individual's manifest traits are the best guide to his genotype." This assertion in effect negates the influence of heredity, except as it may express itself in one individual in one generation. It assumes that the brilliant son of a stupid father may not in turn have a stupid son--a position which no trained geneticist would accept.
Perhaps Allen expects to give his assertion plausibility by his phrase "with respect to the sort of hereditary variations that might influence adaptation to civilization," but I must point out that the fissuration of the frontal lobes is just as much a matter of heredity as is skin color.
Contrary to Allen's view, I find no implication in Race and Reason that "each individual carries the genetic qualities of his entire race." Putnam infers, rather, that he carries enough of them to perpetuate a pattern, and that while this pattern may be diluted by an out-marriage, the result is dilution only, not escape. Moreover, we may well say that when blacks and whites marry in sufficient numbers the races as well as the individuals marry, and that the frequency of all Negro traits in the resultant mixture must be reckoned with. The best proof of this pudding is in the eating. Putnam's classic statement, "there has never been a case on record where a white and black civilization interbred

without deterioration of the white civilization," speaks louder than any scientific splitting of hairs.
I come now to Allen's second point. Allen feels that Putnam overemphasizes the importance of the traits which distinguish a race capable of sustaining Western civilization from a race in the Congo. Allen remarks, "an extremely small average [sic] difference between the whites and Negroes, meaning a slightly higher frequency [sic] of receptive individuals [did Allen mean to use the words interchangeably here?] would suffice to explain the northward movement of civilization, if other circumstances could not be found to account for it." Leaving aside Allen's implication that other circumstances can be found to account for it, which Putnam has disproved, we must recognize that great results often spring from small impulses, whether in an acorn or in the frequency of individual receptivity in a race. All this is to assume that Allen is correct when he states that the difference in frequency is actually slight. He does not attempt to prove it. He offers no facts to show that Putnam is wrong when he suggests that the difference between Europe and Africa is indeed a measure of the difference.
We must note also that if Allen is correct in the slightness of the difference, this fact makes all the more hazardous the interbreeding of the races. Allen, by his argument for his second point, destroys the foundation for his first point. Even a slight decrease in the frequency of receptive individuals among us in future generations may well reverse the progress from barbarism to civilization.
Allen begins his review with the statement that Race and Reason is "dangerously persuasive" and ends with the remark, "this is a book to beware of." I

220 Brief Reports

would agree that it is persuasive--and dangerously so to the equalitarian cause. But I would say that only those need beware of it who desire to continue dream-

ing in an unreal world. In my judgment it is high time that all of us aroused ourselves before our blunders at home and abroad become disastrous.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

