Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
A new study of American fertility
Charles F. Westoff , Elliot G. Mishler , Robert G. Potter Jr. & Clyde V. Riser
To cite this article: Charles F. Westoff , Elliot G. Mishler , Robert G. Potter Jr. & Clyde V. Riser (1955) A new study of American fertility, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:4, 229-233, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987252 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987252
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3
View related articles Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

Family Life Division
A NEW STUDY OFAMERICAN FERTILITY Social andPsychological Factors

CHARLES F. WESTOFF ELLIOT G. MISHLER
ROBERT G. POTTER, JR.
Office of Population Research Princeton University
CLYDE V. RISER
Milbank Memorial Fund

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Background

During the past few years, a committee1 important as they are, are nevertheless rep-

of social scientists under the guidance of resentative of conditions existing in the

the Milbank Memorial Fund has been United States during the depression dec-

working toward the development of anew ade. Much of the interest in that study

study of social and psychological factors arose from a concern about the possibility

affecting fertility. The interest of this com- that the falling birth rate might result in a

mittee is an outgrowth of the nowvirtually declining population. Since then, of course, completed Indianapolis Study2 which has the demographic situation has changed

been the only major inquiry in this coun- markedly. The last 15years has been a pe-

try into the question of why people have riod of unparalleled increase in the na-

the number of children they do. TheIn- tional birth rate. This new situation has

dianapolis Study provided a fund of val- provoked a great deal of speculation about

uable information on fertility. It alsorep- whether this change reflects a real increase

resented a radical innovation in the kinds in size of completed family.

of research undertaken by demographers in The answer to the questions of what has

attempting to go beyond the collection of happened and what is likely to happen to

descriptive population data in order to un- the birth rate in the near future will be

cover the underlying social and motiva- obtained eventually from official statistics

tional processes.

supplemented by the national sample sur-

The results of the Indianapolis Study, vey of fertility expectations and desirescur-

rently being conducted by Ronald Freed-

1A Steering Committee and its Technical Staff have carried on the work of the Study thus far.

man and P. K. Whelpton.3 However, our

Aside from the authors of this article, its members knowledge and understanding of the basic

are Frank W. Notestein (Chairman) ; Ronald Freedman; Philip M. Hauser; Frank Lorimer; Donald Marquis; Frederick Osborn; Lowell J. Reed; and

social and psychological processes that are associated with these demographic changes

P. K. Whelpton.

will remain inadequate unless these proc-

2The results of the Indianapolis Study are published in a series of four volumes with a fifth and

esses themselves become the specific objects

final volume to be published in the near future. See P. K. Whelpton and Clyde V. Kiser (Editors),

3See P. K. Whelpton, "A Study of the 'Expected'

Social and Psychological Factors Affecting Fertility Completed Fertility of a National Sample of White

(Milbank Memorial Fund, New York). The four Women," in Current Research in Human Fertility

volumes were published in 1946, 1950, 1952, and (Milbank Memorial Fund, New York, 1955), pp.

1954, respectively.

106-112.

229

230 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

of investigation. In the proposed research, primary emphasis is placed on the isolation of some of the causal connections between fertility behavior and certain cultural values, patterns of family life, personality characteristics, and a number of other social and psychological variables. Thus, the new study emphasizes "depth" rather than "range" and concentrates on basic research rather than on problems of forecasting.

tive-white women who currently reside in the 271 counties defined by the Census Bureau as in the Standard Metropolitan Areas. This comprises about 56 per cent of the total United States population. The primary criterion of the sample will be that these women have had a second child approximately six months prior to the first interview. Additional eligibility requirements that are being imposed in order to

assure sufficient homogeneity for analysis

The Study Design

are to exclude all couples who have been

To achieve our research objectives most efficiently, we have felt it necessary to restrict the sample to couples all of whom have recently had births of the same order and to follow these couples over a period of time with repeated interviews. This decision was governed by two specific considerations. First, the fact that size of completed family is the result of a complex sequence of events suggested that each stage of this sequence warranted separate study and analysis. There is some evidence for this in the Indianapolis Study. Secondly,

married more than once, wives older than 35 and husbands older than 45 years of age. Other restrictions on pregnancy histories are being imposed that will eliminate couples with histories of stillbirths, plural births, and losses of children through death. The main differences in this sample design from that of the Indianapolis Study are that couples of all religious persuasions will be included, that it will cover a more comprehensive population, and that it will be restricted to women with the same number of children.

since the Indianapolis Study was conducted The question naturally arises as to how

after the couples had largely completed their families, there has been a recurrent question about whether the relationships observed were the cause or the effect, or both cause and effect, of differences in fertility. The present study expects to overcome these difficulties by contacting a sample of couples soon after the birth of their second child and following these couples over a period of four to five years in an attempt to isolate and define the factors related to the occurrence and spacing of a third child. The interval between the second and third child has been selected for study since it represents a significant link in the changing size of completed family and is the crucial point in the difference between an ultimately increasing or decreasing population.

such a specifically defined sample can be most economically procured. Two general sources have been considered: the State Vital Statistics Offices and hospital records. The Vital Statistics Offices clearly constitute the more economical alternative. A survey of all 53 offices, conducted about a year ago, indicated that it would be mechanically feasible to draw a sample satisfying most of the criteria described previously. Our current estimates are that between 75 and 80 per cent of the final sample would be correctly classified, in terms of our eligibility criteria, on the first run. Such factors as histories of previous marriages, not recorded on the birth cards, and any errors that might have entered into the registration, coding and punching operations of the birth records, will be the

More precisely, the study plan calls for main sources of loss. Oversampling is thus

drawing a probability sample, stratified at indicated, not only for this type of loss, but

least for regional composition, of 1500 na- also to compensate for some unknown, but

231

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

probably small, proportion of couples who variation in previous contraceptive practice

cannot be traced because of changes of ad- and spacing of births.

dress during the six-month interval.

The function of the second and third in-

No attempt has yet been made to secure terviews (to be spaced approximately 18 to

the cooperation of the Vital Statistics Of- 24 months apart) will be severalfold.

fices, so we cannot say at this time what the First, we will be interested in testing the

final source of the sample will be.

accuracy of our predictions of third births

from our information on past contraceptive

The Fertility Variable and the Logic of Analysis
The study design includes a series of three interviews which will be conducted exclusively with wives, although a short questionnaire on two subjects specifically relevant for men will be left with the husbands. The first interview will be the longest (about an hour and a half) and will be devoted to obtaining several classes of data. Following a few general "ice-breaking" questions, a number of screening questions will be asked to verify the couple's eligibility for inclusion in the sample. Then data on the dependent variable of fertility will be obtained. This will include fairly elaborate information on pregnancy and contraceptive histories, as well as desires and expectations for a third child, and general attitudes toward practices of family limitation. In the latter connection, we are hoping to derive a scale (meeting the requirements of the Guttman scaling procedure) on a variable we have defined as the Psychological Availability of Contracepion. This is intended to be a measure of

practice, stated fertility desires and expectations, and the wide array of social and psychological data collected in the first interview. Secondly, we plan to collect up-todate records on income, financial perspectives, jobs, and other factors that may have changed in the interim. The ultimate function of the re-interview structure will be to improve and reformulate our hypotheses, a task that in many instances will be facilitated by more probing interviews with those couples who do not conform to expectations. The main rationale for a third interview, aside from these general objectives, is to allow a sufficient amount of time to elapse from the second child for most of the third pregnancies to occur. It is estimated that a total of around 73 per cent of fecund couples who have had two pregnancies eventually will have three or more pregnancies, that around 10 per cent of these women will already be pregnant again six months after the birth of their second child, and over 85 per cent will have become pregnant within the 4 to 5 year period covered by the Study.

the level of moral and aesthetic acceptabil- The Independent Variables

ity of the idea and techniques of family limitation. The conceptual organization of the study regards the occurrence and timing of a third birth to be a direct function of a couple's contraceptive behavior, which in turn is dependent on both the strength of a couple's desire to have or to postpone another pregnancy, and the extent to which some mode of contraception is psychologically available to the couple. Thus, the primary analytical task following the first interview will be to account for the variation of these two variables as well as the

Thus far, little has been said about the kinds of factors that we consider relevant for an analysis of fertility. To reiterate: this Study is visualized primarily as basic research into the fundamental social and psychological factors relevant to fertility. In deciding which specific variables to incorporate into the Study, two main criteria were utilized: the record of available evidence from previous studies, such as the Indianapolis Study, and those factors not previously studied in connection with fertility which appear plausible on various

232 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

theoretical grounds. A considerable num- who themselves have strong needs in this

ber of hypotheses have been elicited from direction will find parenthood a difficult

both sources. To describe in detail the ra- and uncomfortable role. The second prem-

tionales and theoretical derivations of each ise is that personal involvement in or iden-

hypothesis would consume more space than tification with an extra-familial social role

we have available. The substantive theory will tend to be incompatible with desires

underlying this Study has been described for further children. This assumes that par-

at length in a recent article.4

enthood becomes less important if other

The primary theme which runs through most of the hypotheses is that a particular pattern of fertility performance and control depends on the extent to which the third

social roles can locate satisfactorily an individual's place in his social world; it further assumes that parenthood tends to restrict participation in other social roles.

child (for couples in the present study) is The types of variables included under

compatible with other life values and in- this area are emotional stability, level of-

terests. Although at the level of a truism, economic anxiety, needs to give and receive

this assumption serves to bring into promi- affection, impulsivity, intelligence, orienta-

nence the notion that a fertility choice tion toward work, socio-economic mobility

(whether implicit or explicit) involves a aspirations for self and children, satisfac-

"cost" for the individual and the family, tion with familial roles and general affec-

that is, certain desires and interests are tive attitudes toward children.

either yielded or compromised in preference to others. (Decisions not to have children are as "costly," in a sense, as decisions to have them.)

The major theme underlying the Family Group variables concerns the extent to which the social organization of the family group will be able to absorb adequately the

The independent variables have been stresses and strains of an additional child.

organized into three major categories so as Variables such as the husband-wife division

to permit a description of the major ele- of labor, the responsibility and control over

ments of the concrete situation within family planning and child care, marital ad-

which a fertility event takes place. The justment, and the impact of previous chil-

basic principle of organization is to classify dren on family and extra-familial activities

separately those variables which refer to are to be included here.

events which are intra-indiivdual (Person variables), inter-individual or intra-group (Family Group variables), and inter-group (Social Settings variables).
Two major assumptions underlie the hypotheses organized under the Person variables. The first is that excessive and unsatisfied needs for emotional support from other persons will tend to be incompatible with desires for additional children. This hypothesis rests on the assumption that children require both affection and support from their parents, and that individuals

The third area, the Social Settings of the Family, is focused on factors operating through the direct interaction of family members with members of various social groups. The social milieu is conceived to set both the means and conditions of behavior. Three general considerations have influenced many of the specific formulations. They are (a) the relative benevolence of the environment; (b) the relative stability of the social settings with which family members are involved; and (c) the degree of control which is available to the

4Elliot G. Mishler and Charles F. Westoff, "A Proposal for Research on Social-Psychological Factors Affecting Fertility," in Current Research in Human Fertility (Milbank Memorial Fund, New York, 1955), pp. 121-150.

family over the type and extent of involvement with its various social settings. Typical of variables in this area are inter- and intra-generational mobility (occupational

233

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

and financial, as well as residential), the perceived benevolence of the environment, the stability and continuity of the social groups with which family members interact, job security, general socio-economic status, rural-urban background and religious preference.
Items on the attitudinal components of the variables in these three areas constitute the second and main section of the interview schedule. The final portion of the schedule consists of factual questions on education, occupation, income, religion and the like, as well as the more conventional background items such as duration of marriage.
The Pretesting Program
In the development of measures of these independent variables, considerable attention has been devoted to devising sets of items that can be tested for scalability. Some pretest work in this connection has been undertaken already and some is currently in process. One of the methodological innovations for this study, incidentally, is the scale analysis currently underway on eight personality characteristics measured by the sentence completion technique. It is

still too early, however, to evaluate the success of this particular work.
We anticipate that the construction of the preliminary schedule will be completed in the immediate future. Following this, a dozen or so interviews will be conducted, simply in order to examine the communicability and plausibility of the questions, as well as the schedule format. Presumably this will entail some revisions. The next step will be to draw a sample of about 100 couples that will approximate the characteristics of the final sample. This second stage of pretesting will permit an examination of the distributions of responses to the items, tests of scalability where appropriate, a test of sampling procedures, and a further evaluation of the interview schedule itself. Tor reasons of efficiency and economy we are planning to utilize the resources of one of the several survey research organizations that have had some experience in this general type of interview study.
Our current time estimates are that we should be prepared to start the major fieldwork operation within one year from now. Shortly thereafter we expect to publish at least one report that will summarize our pretest experience.

