Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Biochemical studies in schizophrenia: A review
Arnold R. Kaplan
To cite this article: Arnold R. Kaplan (1958) Biochemical studies in schizophrenia: A review, Eugenics Quarterly, 5:2, 86-94, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1958.9987356 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1958.9987356
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

BIOCHEMICAL STUDIES IN SCHIZOPHRENIA

A Review*

ARNOLD R. KAPLAN
Department of Medical Genetics New York State Psychiatric Institute

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

IN VIEW OF THE FACT that genie elements
apparently exert their effects through control of metabolism, biochemical genetics holds a key position in current research programs dealing with the etiology of schizophrenia. Experimental studies with various organisms have demonstrated that measurable biochemical differences may have genetic bases (62). The importance of genetic factors in the causation of schizophrenia seems reasonably well established (33), and various metabolic dysfunctions have been described which are somehow correlated with the given disordered behavior pattern.
The pioneer studies of Selye have demonstrated that subjection to stress may induce changes not only in the endocrine system but in the body's entire metabolism and tissue reactivity as well (55). Confirmation of this basic principle has come from a variety of investigations. For instance, direct correlations have been shown to exist between imposed psychological stress and adrenal function as measured by urinary steroid excretions (46). Also, fatiguing psychomotor activities, collegiate examinations, discrepancy between aspiration and achievement, and so forth, have demonstrable effects on the activity of the adrenal cortex and the excretion of 17-ketosteroids (10); and striking biochemical as well as psychological changes have been observed in response to changes in social status and interpersonal relationships (7).
*Grateful acknowledgment is hereby made of the helpful suggestions and criticisms rendered by Dr. Franz J. Kallmann and Dr. Bernard Holland.

Other studies have revealed that diet, emotional stress, physical activity, temperature, humidity, air pressure, posture, and experimental changes in the circulatory concentrations of hormones and other substances cause quantitative alterations in the excretory products of both plasma and urine (34).
The problem of identification of a primary vulnerability factor in the etiology of schizophrenia has yet to be solved. The difficulties encountered in interpreting the cause-and-effect relations of observed correlations have been a bottleneck in the search for constitutional factors which transform a set of "causal" or precipitating phenomena in some individuals into a set of clinical symptoms (30).
An attempt will be made here to review some of the pertinent experimental data obtained in this work.
Metabolic and Hormonal Studies
The amino acids in general have been reported by Young et al. (69) to have relatively high excretion rates in schizophrenics, with the exception of histidine which occurs at a relatively low rate. The observed decrease in histidine excretion has been ascribed either to increased excretion of some of the diazonium-coupling compounds or to the disputed occurrence of elevated histamine blood levels (8, 59). In Horwitt's opinion (30), the tendency of schizophrenics to show peculiar metabolic end products in their biological fluids reflects emotionally induced changes in their

86

87

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

metabolism, since "one of the basic characteristics of the schizophrenic patient is his peculiar emotional reaction to his environment." Adrenergic stimulation is known to have a marked effect on the levels of amino acids in the biological fluids.
In investigations of the urinary diazonium-coupling compounds, quantitative as well as qualitative differences have been found between schizophrenics and nonschizophrenics (36, 37, 69). With the biosynthesis of aromatic compounds known to be limited in man, abnormal metabolites of this kind are assumed to be derived from such dietary aromatic amino acids as phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan. A decrease in the number and amount of excreted aromatic metabolites "toward the normal and near-normal range" occurs in schizophrenics if phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan are omitted from the diet (36). The day-to-day variation in aromatic excretion patterns is so considerable in all persons, however, that it would be hazardous to regard any particular pattern as typically schizophrenic. In fact, if there are differences between schizophrenics and nonschizophrenics, they may prove to be quantitative rather than qualitative in nature and will have to be considered within the total picture of aromatic excretion patterns.
While the blood magnesium concentration is said to be normal in schizophrenic patients (5), their urinary magnesium content may be elevated under certain circumstances, possibly because of deficiencies in utilizing magnesium (69). It is conceivable that depletion in magnesium plays a role in carbohydrate metabolism (perhaps by interfering with enzymatic activity in the carbohydrate cycle), and this may explain why disturbances in sugar tolerance have been reported to be more frequent in psychiatric patients than in normal controls (5, 16). The value of this finding is reduced by the fact that the observed difference may be the result of malnutrition to some extent.
Cyclic changes have also been seen in the urinary excretion of total nitrogen and 17-

ketosteroids, apparently correlated with "changes in mental status" (18). According to Reiss and Stitch (47), there are differences in the relative excretions of some urinary 17-ketosteroids, although the total amount of 17-ketosteroids appears to be within the normal range.
The urinary outputs of 17-ketosteroids, androgen and estrogen of 29 schizophrenic males were compared by Hoskins and Pincus (31) with those of 23 normal men and 11 normal women. Despite considerable overlapping, the schizophrenic sample showed a "definite approach toward the feminine patterns although they remained more masculine than the normal women."
An enzymatic disturbance in the adrenalin cycle was assumed by Rinkel (50) to give rise to "one or more noxious metabolites which, among other factors, may well be operative in the development of psychosis." In line with this hypothesis, and partly because of structural similarities between the mescalin and adrenalin molecules, the teams of Hoffer and Osmond (28,29,42) thought the cause of disordered behavior patterns to be a toxic adrenalin metabolite. While these investigators observed marked psychological changes following the injection of adrenochrome (25-50 mg.), an oxidized derivative of adrenalin, Schwarz et al. (54) failed to confirm such effects.
Reiter's report of temporary improvements in three schizophrenic patients following exchange transfusions (48) was questioned by Pfeffer and Pescor (44) who also used blood from nonpsychotic donors in six patients (500-1000 ml. every other day over long periods), without noticing any clinical changes. On the other hand, mild schizophrenia-like symptoms were observed by Heath et al. (21) in nonpsychotic volunteers who had received a protein extract (taraxein) from the blood of schizophrenics. The same kind of extract from nonschizophrenics failed to produce similar responses in a control group.
Adrenochrome has an indole nucleus common to all other hallucinogens, includ-

88 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

ing lysergic acid diethylamide, mescaline, harmine, ibogaine, hashish--and, according to Hoffer et al. (27,29), adrenochrome could be present in humans. In schizophrenia, it is assumed that there is an abnormal diversion of adrenalin into adrenochrome or adrenolutin or some related metabolite. This hypothesis is based on the following observations:
1. Adrenochrome and adrenolutin produce both psychological and cerebral disturbances;
2. Compared with the blood specimens of normal controls, those of schizophrenics show a significantly greater proportion of high toxicity ratings in serum toxicity tests on fibroblastic cultures;
3. Urine specimens from schizophrenics contain Índoles which apparently are quantitatively and qualitatively different from those found in controls.
Other interesting theories are that noradrenalin is synthesized in nervous tissue since its precursors have been found in brain extract (63), and that there may be some antagonism between niacin and an adrenochrome-like toxin with an abnormal diversion of adrenalin into a toxic indole (29). While the given toxin is assumed to produce schizophrenic phenomena, a decrease in the secretion of adrenalin may have a beneficial effect on the course of the disease. This effect may be brought about in the following ways; (a) by removing the factors responsible for oversecretion; (b) by increasing the degree of adrenalin utilization; or (c) by blocking the conversion of nor-adrenalin to adrenalin. As nicotinic acid and its amide are methyl acceptors, any procedure that would flood the body with these nontoxic substances is expected to diminish the synthesis of adrenalin from nor-adrenalin.
On the other hand, if the basic schizophrenic disturbance is associated with an overproduction of acetylcholine, with an abnormal diversion of adrenalin into some toxic indole substance, then it is assumed

by Hoff er et al. that a reduction in the supply of methyl groups through the administration of niacin would be therapeutic. In fact, it has been reported by these investigators that repeated administrations of acetylcholine esterase produced marked improvements in chronic catatonic patients. The proposed hypothesis is that with acetylcholine esterase being strongly inhibited by granine, tryptamine, adrenochrome, LSD, bufotinine, harmine, and ibogaine, and with increased acetylcholine concentrations leading to the manifestation of schizophrenic phenomena, a reduced acetylcholine concentration may be antidotal to schizophrenia, especially since nicotinic acid tends to counteract the effect of inhibitors of acetylcholine esterase.
According to the observations of Hoffer et al., nicotinic acid (niacin) administered intravenously reverses LSD psychoses as well as "many schizophrenic illnesses." Known to accelerate the conversion of LSD to 2-oxy-LSD (which lacks the hallucinogenic properties of LSD) in vitro, it may also stimulate the liver's ability in vivo to "detoxify schizophrenic toxins." Through the release of acetylcholine, cell surface resistance to the transfer of electrolytes may be decreased to a point where an excess of DPN-ase would be able to permeate the cell membranes and interfere with the intracellular respiration. Nicotinamide is an effective inhibitor of DPN-ase, while nicotine liberates sympathin by acting on the sympathetic chains (17). In schizophrenia, overactivity in both branches of the autonomie nervous system may result from an overproduction of both acetylcholine and epinephrine (27).
Pfeiffer et al. (45) believe that certain types of schizophrenics have an underlying deficiency of acetylcholine, and they report apparent improvement in some schizophrenic patients who were given DMAE (2dimethylaminoethanol), an oral, synthesized acetylcholine precursor. Biochemical adjuvants which "apparently increase the effectiveness of DMAE are pyridoxine, vita-

89

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

min B-I2, and possibly pantothenic acid." of stress. Apart from pregnant, tonsillec-

Akerfeldt's (4) test data have also been tomized or schizophrenic persons, increased

interpreted in the sense that chemical aber- serum copper levels have been found in va-

rations may be correlated with schizophre- rious anemias, malignant tumors and neu-

nia, perhaps etiologically. This test, which rological disorders as well as in rheumatic

is nonspecific and of limited diagnostic ap- fever, rheumatoid arthritis, infectious he-

plicability, determines spectrometrically the patitis, Laennec's cirrhosis, hyperthyroid-

rate of oxidation of 1.5 ml. of a 0.1 per cent ism, and myocardial infarction (20, 56). Ob-

solution of DPP (N.N-dimethyl-p-phenyl- viously, therefore, since the concentration

enediamine) by an equal volume of centri- of ceruloplasmin fails to distinguish schizo-

fuged blood serum. The result is scored as phrenics from nonschizophrenics in a defin-

negative unless the DPP is oxidized within itive manner, neither the Akerfeldt nor the

six minutes. Many positive reactions were Abood test can at present be considered to

seen by Akerfeldt in schizophrenic and be more than a vague diagnostic guide (56).

manic-depressive patients as well as in se-

nile dementia, pregnancy, hepatitis, and Synthesis and Action of Serotonin

severe rheumatoid arthritis.

With serotonin being assumed to play an

Similar results were reported by Abood important role in the functioning of the

who used a comparable test (p-phenylenedi- autonomie and central nervous systems,

amine). Reactions were positive in over pharmacological interference with its ac-

one-half of pregnant women and schizo- tion is found to have a drastic effect on

phrenics, and in more than one-fourth of neurogenic behavior (64,66). The com-

tested mental defectives and cancer pa- pound is also the vasoconstrictor which is

tients, but in only three per cent of normal released by the blood platelets into the

control subjects (3).

serum during the clotting process, and oc-

Another interesting finding in Akerfeldt's work (4) has been that the serological capacity of normal persons for oxidizing DPP is increased by aeration, prolonged exposure to room air, and dialysis against 0.9 per cent NaCl, thus approaching the rate characteristic of the serums of his schizophrenic subjects. Being heat labile and dialyzable, the DPP-oxidizing substance may be a catalytically active protein. Differences in the DPP-oxidation reaction are

curs in such other parts of the body as spleen and visceral ganglia. In the brain, there are relatively large amounts in the older portions (i.e., midbrain and hypothalamus), while the cerebral cortex and cerebellum contain very little (22, 58). According to Woolley and Shaw and other investigators (12), stimulation of some peripheral nerves as well as administration of reserpine tends to liberate serotonin from the brain and other tissues.

probably due to several factors. One of them is the enzymatic effect of ceruloplasniin, which usually contains more than 90 per cent of the serum copper and abounds in the blood serum of schizophrenics. Another is ascorbic acid, a reducing agent that tends to occur in subnormal amounts in schizophrenics.

Although both serotonin and nicotinic acid are apparently derived from tryptophan, their synthesizing pathways differ. The disposal of serotonin takes place through deamination, the product of which is found in normal urine (i.e., 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid). Amine oxidase, which metabolizes the sympathomimetic amines,

With ceruloplasmin oxidizing such natu- also metabolizes serotinin. In large concen-

ral substrates as adrenalin and ascorbic trations, substrates of amine oxidase tend to

acid, as well as synthetic substrates like interfere with the disposition of other sub-

DPP, the ceruloplasmin level may be in- strates by competitive action, while excessive

creased in response to many different types amounts of serotonin may tie up amine oxi-

90 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

dase and force adrenalin metabolism ciency." However, the reported data are

through another pathway (28). The en- still preliminary, and various questions re-

zymes catalyzing the synthesis of serotonin garding this theory have been raised by

(i.e., 5-hydroxytrptophan decarboxylase) as Rothlin, Cerletti, and Abramson et al. (I,

well as its destruction (i.e., monamine oxi- 13,51).

dase) have been found in all animals in In line with a more recent report by

which the substance itself occurs (64).

Shaw and Woolley (57), it has been shown

The actions of serotonin include smooth by Himwich (22) that LSD can also act to

muscle stimulation of blood vessels, gastro- increase the effects of serotonin. According

intestinal tract, and bronchi. Among an- to Himwich, it is not possible at this time tagonistic drugs (67, 68) are the ergot alka- to conclude whether mental disturbances loids (lysergic acid diethylamide) and the result from an excess or from a deficiency

harmala alkaloids (including harmine and of serotonin. In fact, both theories may

yohimbine). According to experiments on be correct, "but each may apply to different rat uterus (23), LSD and mescaline are syn- kinds of abnormalities."

ergistic with serotonin, while such tranquilizers as chlorpromazine, Frenquel and re- Pharmacological Hallucinogens serpine have an antagonizing effect. An- and Tranquilizers

other anti-serotonin substance is 1-hydrazinophthalazine which may produce symptoms of mental disturbance, thus supporting the hypothesis that mental changes of this kind are due to interference with the serotonin effect on the brain. It has been hypothesized by Woolley and Shaw (67), therefore, that the schizophrenia-like symptoms provoked by LSD result from an induced serotonin deficiency in the brain.

In normal persons, transient mental disturbances resembling the symptoms of schizophrenia can be induced by various aromatic compounds. It is also well-known that one of the hallucinogens, LSD-25, antagonizes the effect of tranquilizing agents. This fact has led to the theory that schizophrenia may be associated with a metabolic error resulting in the biosynthesis of a similar hallucinogen (14, 49, 58).

Apparently, mental changes are not precipitated by every antagonist of serotonin, and some serotonin fails likewise to reach the brain when administered peripherally. Hence, Woolley (65) has searched for serotonin-like compounds capable of penetrating into the brain without much difficulty, and for appropriate means of enhancing the ability of serotonin to overcome the blood-

Since an activated aromatic ring seems to characterize the structure of both hallucinogens and tranquilizers (26), it has been assumed that "natural" hallucinogens may fall into the same category of aromatic compounds. The observed differences between the excretory patterns of schizophrenics and non-schizophrenics are compatible with this assumption.

brain barrier. A step in the right direction According to Rothlin and Cerletti (51),

may have been made by the combined use there is a quantitative difference between

of an antimetabolite (the benzyl analogue the effects of LSD and other hallucinogens.

of serotonin) and a precursor of serotonin While an effective oral dose of LSD in nor-

(5-hydroxytryptophan). While the latter mal subjects is.between 0.5 and 1.0 gamma

substance is said to increase the serotonin per kilogram body weight, "other halluci-

content peripherally as well as in the brain, nogens, such as mescaline, require doses

the antimetabolite counteracts the periph- 5,000 times greater, and more, to produce

eral effects without readily entering the psychic effects."

brain. In this manner, it may have been For various reasons, the use of LSD for

possible in a number of schizophrenic pa- producing a model psychosis has not been

tients to correct the original "serotonin defi- uncriticizable. Some investigators believe

91

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

that its effects do not differ materially from those produced by such "toxic" agents as alcohol, opiates, cannabis or cocaine. This belief is at variance with the terminology proposed by Osmond (41). In his opinion, "psychotomimetic" drugs are definable as "substances that produce changes in thought, perception, mood . . . without causing either major disturbances of the autonomie nervous system or addictive craving," and should be distinguished from other agents.
The absorption, distribution and excretion of LSD have been studied by tracing radioactive elements after the intravenous injection of LSD tagged with C14 radioactive carbon (51). While the observed distributions were normal in the liver and kidneys, two of the major routes of elimination, as well as in other organs such as spleen and adrenals, a relatively low concentration was found in the brain (11). The highest tissue concentration was reached in ten minutes and then declined rapidly. Final LSD excretion took place through the liver and bile into the intestinal tract from which it was completely eliminated (51).
Compared with the intramuscular route of administration, the onset of symptoms is less rapid when LSD is given orally, and more rapid when it is given intravenously. "Instantaneous" action on the nervous system is achieved by intraspinal application (24). Known counteractive agents include sodium amytal, pervitin, metemphetamine, chlorpromazine, and Frenquel (14, 15,23).
Demonstrable responses to hallucinogenic and tranquilizing drugs may vary from one individual to another, and in the same individual at different times. For instance, a certain amount of LSD may induce psychotic phenomena in some persons and not in others, or in one and the same subject on some occasions and not on others. The reaction is often intensified by lack of food, sleeplessness, and emotional tension (53).
Since both "basic personality structure" and external stress factors seem to be im-

portant variables in LSD responses, it is assumed that the reaction is shaped by such experimental circumstances as are related to different metabolic organizations of the persons tested. The relation between specific metabolic and personality variations has yet to be clarified. The effects of the various chemicals blocking mescaline and LSD responses seem to be nonspecific (43).
MLD-41 (1-methyl lysergic acid diethylamide) which produces essentially the same reaction as LSD-25, except for higher reaction thresholds, has been used for developing tolerance to LSD-25 in Siamese fighting fish (2). This observation might seem to indicate that the administration of comparatively nontoxic substances (MLD-41 being less toxic than LSD-25) may suffice to raise a schizophrenic's tolerance to such "endotoxins" as may be at the root of his metabolic disorder.
There is still much uncertainty regarding the manner in which the different hallucinogenic and antihallucinogenic agents produce their chemical end results. Apparently, the action of a hallucinogen-antagonist may be either specific (acting directly on the hallucinogen) or nonspecific (altering the psychological effect of the hallucinogen without acting as a biological competitor).
Liver Function Tests
Using bromsulfalein and other dyes, investigations have been made of the possible role played by abnormal liver function in the etiology of schizophrenia. In the bromsulfalein test, the dye is injected intravenously and remains in the blood stream until its gradual removal by parenchymal liver cells. Excreted into the bile, it is eliminated in the feces (19).
Except for Wachsmuth's report (61) which presented evidence of abnormal liver function in 80 per cent of 203 schizophrenics and in 53 per cent of 41 mental defectives, it has been generally indicated by liver function studies based on the ability to excrete bromsulfalein or other dyes, that the responses of schizophrenics are "normal or

92 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

occasionally retarded" (5). Although a possible relation between defective liver function and schizophrenia cannot be precluded at this time, it is not substantiated by available data.
Even if there were a clearly established correlation between the two variables involved, it would by no means be certain whether liver dysfunction increases susceptibility to schizophrenia or is a concomitant of the schizophrenic process (30). According to Altschule (5), the symptomatology of hepatic insufficiency in psychotic patients may be a result of nutritional deficiencies and, therefore, may not be pertinent to the etiology of schizophrenia.
Reticulo-Endothelial System
The reticulo-endothelial system is formed by the reticular cells of the spleen, lymph, and hemolymph glands, the Kupffer cells of the liver, the reticulo-endothelium of the bone marrow, and the clasmatocytes. Impairment in the reactive ability of this system "may be the biological basis of the heredito-constitutional inferiority" leading to a lack of resistance to schizophrenic phenomena (32). This hypothesis was formulated when significantly increased tuberculosis fatality rates were found in schizophrenic patients as well as in their nonschizophrenic children and sibs (33).
Meyer's test data (pigment elimination tests, particularly with congo red, and Kauffmann's method) gave rise to the theory of a constitutional reticulo-endothelial system inadequacy in schizophrenics, resulting in a specific type of vulnerability to toxic metabolites (38, 39,40). Hence it has been proposed to focus therapeutic measures in schizophrenia on improving the organism's disordered defense mechanisms based on the activity of the reticulo-endothelial system.
In the pigment elimination test, intravenous injection of 10.0 c.c. of a one per cent water solution of congo red is followed by measuring photometrically the pigment concentration of the serum after (a) five

and (b) 60 minutes. The relation between the two measures constitutes the congo red index. Normally lying between 50 and 70, the index may reach 100 under conditions indicative of a severe dysfunction of the reticulo-endothelial system. Of course, many other variables may be expressed by the given test results, especially the functions of liver and kidneys.
In the Kauffmann test (cantharidin blister test), cantharidin patches are placed on the skin to induce the formation of a blister, the contents of which are examined quanitatively as well as qualitatively (35). Determinations are made of the amount of exúdate, the total exúdate cell count, and especially the number of so-called histiocyte cell elements. A relatively high percentage of lymphohistiocytes is supposed to be indicative of schizophrenic illness, while a low percentage is said to be inconclusive. Meyer's data also indicate a positive correlation between the congo red index and the percentage of lymphohistiocytes (38).
Conclusions
Although many metabolic differences between schizophrenics and nonschizoprenics have been described, it is justified to conclude that the biochemical basis of schizophrenic psychoses is still unclear. Essentially, the reported differences have been quantitative in nature and do not seem to be specific. The absence of strict dietary and other controls makes questionable the value of much of the reported data.
There is some evidence for the involvement of the adrenalin cycle in the production of toxic compounds capable of inducing psychotic phenomena. It seems, however, that the primary biochemical deficiency distinguishing the metabolism of schizophrenics from that of normal controls has yet to be identified (6). Complicating factors in this work are the concomitants of prolonged hospitalization in deteriorated patients (malnutrition, infections, and so forth).
The theory ascribing schizophrenia to a

93

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

cerebral serotonin deficiency is supported 10. BERKELEY, A. W., 1952. Cortical activity and

by the observation of psychotic symptoms

the concept of stress. J. Comp. Physiol. Psych., 4 5 : 443.

in response to the effects of antimetabolites 11. BOYD, E. S., 1956. Preliminary studies onthe

of serotonin. According topreliminary and

metabolism of LSD; in Cholden, L. (Ed.),Lysergic Acid Diethylamide and Mescaline in Ex-

unconfirmed data, an increased cerebral

perimental Psychiatry: 57. Grune & Stratton,

supply of serotonin maytend to suppress

New York.

the disease in some patients. Other data

12. BRODIE, B. B., OLIN, J. S., KUNTZMAN, R. G.,
and SHORE, P. A., 1957. Possible interrelation-

support the theory that mental disurbances

ship between release of brain norepinephrine

may result from an excess of serotonin.

and serotonin by reserpine Science, 125: 1293.
13. CERLETTI, A. and ROTHLIN, E., 1955. Role of

There arecertain indications that functional inadequacies of the liver or of cellu-

5-hydroxytryptamine in mental diseases and its antagonism to lysergic acid derivatives. Nature, 176: 785.

lar elements of the reticulo-endothelial sys- 14. FABING, H. D., 1955. Newblocking agent against

tem may play a role in the etiology and

the development of LSD-25 phychosis. Science, 121: 208.

clinical course of schizophrena, possibly by 15.

, 1955. The dimensions of neurology.

reducing the elimination of toxic metabo-

Presidential address, Amer. Acad. Neurol., Houstn, Texas, April 25.

lites. While some observed correlations 16. FREEMAN, H., RODNICK, E. H., SHAKOW, D., and

seem promising and provocative, the interpretations of the given cause-and-effect re-

LEBEAUX, T., 1944. The carbohydrate tolerance of mentally disturbed soldiers. Psychosom. Med., 6 : 311.

lationships are largely speculative at this 17. GELLHORN, E., I953. Chapter II in Physiologi-

point.

cal Foundations of Neurology and Psychiatry. Univ. Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.

On thewhole, it is stated with regret at 18. GORNALL, A. G., EGLITIS, B., MILLER, A., STOKES,

this point that available data are either disputed or in need of further corroboration.

E. B., andDEWAN, J. G., 1953. Long-term clinical and metabolic observations in periodic catatonia. An application of the kinetic method

of research in three schizophrenic patients.

Am. J. Psychiat., 109: 584.

REFERENCES

19. HAM, T. H. (Ed.), 1951. A Syllabus in Labor-

atory Examinations in Clinical Diagnosis. Har-

1. ABRAMSON, H. A., SKLAROFSKY, B., BARON, M. O.,
and GETTNER, H. H., 1957. Blocking effect of brain extract on lysergic acid diethylamide in Siamese fighting fish. Science, 125: 397.

vard Univ. Press, Cambridge.
20. HARRISON, T. R., ADAMS, R. D., RESNIK, W. H.,
BEESON, P. B., THORN, G. W., and WINTROBE,
M. M., 1954. Page 442 in Vol. I, Principlesof

2. ABRAMSON, H. A., SKLAROFSKY, B., BARON, M. O.,
and FREMONT-SMITH, N., 1957. Production of tolerance to psychosis-producing doses of lysergic acid diethylamide. Ibid., 126: 1020.
3. ABOOD, L., 1957. A comparative study of various oxidases in the serum of schizophrenia and other diseases. Proceedings of the Annual Scientific Conference of the Brain Research Foundation, Chicago, Ill., January 12: 12.
4. AKERFELDT, S., 1957. Oxidation of N, N-dimethyl-paraphenylenediamine by serum from patients with mental disease. Ibid., 6. Also, Science, 125: 117.
5. ALTSCHULE, M. D., 1953. Bodily Physiology in Mental and Emotional Disorders. Grune & Stratton, New York.
6. AXELROD, J., BRADY, R. D., WITKOP, B., and
EVARTS, E. V., 1957. The distribution andmetabolism of lysergic acid diethylamide. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 6 6 : 435.
7. BASOWITZ, H., PERSKY, H., KORCHIN, S. V., and
GRINKER, R. R., 1955. Anxiety and Stress:An Interdisciplinary Study of a Life Situation. McGraw-Hill, New York.

Internal Medicine (second edition). McGrawHill, New York.
21. HEATH, R. G., MARTENS, S., LEACH, B. E., CO-
HEN, M., and ANGEL, C, 1957. Effect on behavior in humans with the administration of taraxein. Am. J. Psychiat., 114: 14.
22. HIMWICH, H. E., 1958. Psychopharmacologic drugs. Science, 127: 59.
23. , 1956. The effect of Frenquel on EEG changes produced by LSD andmescaline; in Cholden, L. (Ed.), Lysergic Acid Diethylamide and Mescaline in Experimental Psychiatry: 19. Grune &Stratton, New York.
24. HOCH, P. H.,1956. Studies in routes of administration and counteracting drugs; Ibid.: 8.
25. HOFFER, A., 1956. Studies with niacin and LSD; Ibid.:44.
26. , 1957. Biology of schizophrenia. Science, 125: 457.
27. , 1957. Epinephrine derivatives as potential schizophrenic factors. J. Clin. Exp. Psychopath & Quart. Rev. Psychiat. Neurol., 18: 27.

8. BILLIG, O. and HESSER, F. H., 1955. Histamine
content of the blood during insulin shock therapy. Arch. Neurol. and Psychiat., 5 2 : 64.
9. BERGER, F. M., CAMPBELL, G. L., HENDLEY,

28. HOFFER, A., OSMOND, H., CALLBECK, M. J., and
KAHAN, I., 1957. Treatment of schizophrenia with nicotinic acid and nicotinamide. Ibid., 18: 131.

C. D., LUDWIG, B. J., and LYNES, T. E., 1957. 29. HOFFER, A., OSMOND, H., and SMYTHIES, J.,

The action of tranquilizers on brain potentials

1954. Schizophrenia. A new approach. II. Re-

and serotonin. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 6 6 : 686. sult of a year's search. J. Ment. Sci., 100: 29.

94 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

30. HORWITT, M. K., 1956. Fact and artifact in 50. Rinkel, M., 1956. Biochemical reflections on

the biology of schizophrenia. Science,124:

the psychosis problem; in Cholden, L. (Ed.),

429. Lysergic Acid Diethylamide and Mescaline in

31. HOSKINS, R. G., and PINCUS, G., 1949. Sex-hor-

Experimental Psychiatry: 13. Grune &Strat-

mone relationships in schizophrenic men. Psy-

ton, New York.

chosom. Med., 11: 102.

51. ROTHLIN, E. and' CERLETTI, A., 1956. Pharma-

32. KALLMANN, F.J., 1938. The Genetics ofSchizo-

cology of LSD-25; Ibid.: 1.

phrenia. Augustin, N. Y.

52. ROYCE, J. R., 1957. Psychology in mid-twen-

33.

, 1953. Heredity in Health and

tieth century. Am. Scientist, 4 5 : 57.

Mental Disorder. Norton, NewYork.

53. SAVAGE, C., 1956. The LSD psychosis as a trans-

34. KAPLAN, A. R., 1956. Chromatographic Studies

action between the psychiatrist and patient;

of Genetic Aspects of Human Urinary Amino

in Cholden, L. (Ed.), Lysergic Acid Diethyl-

Acid Excretory Patterns. Doctoral dissertation,

amide andMescaline in Experimental Psychi-

Univ. Texas, Austin.

atry: 35. Grune & Stratton, New York.

35. KAUFFMANN, F., 1926. Die örtlich-enzüundliche 54. SCHWARZ, B. E., SEM-JACOBSEN, C. W., and

Reactonsform als Ausdruck allergischer Zus-

PETERSEN, M. C., 1956. Effect of mescaline,

tände. Krankheitsforsch., 2 : 372, and 3 : 263. LSD-25 and adrenochrome on depth electro-

36. MCGEER, P. L., MCGEER, E. G., and BOULDINC,
J. E., 1956. Relation of aromatic amino acids to excretory pattern of schizophrenics. Science, 123: 1078.

grams in man. A.M.A. Arch. Neurol. & Psychiat., 7 5 : 579.
55. SELYE, H., 1956. The Stress of Life. McGrawHill, New York.

37. MCGEER, P. L., MCGEER, E. G., and GIBSON,
W. C., 1956. Aromatic excretory pattern of schizophrenics. Science, 123: 1029.
38. MEYER, E., 1931. Dasreticulo-endothelialeSystem der Schizophrenen. Karger, Berlin.
39. , 1956. Die Bromsulfaleinprobe in der Psychiatrie. Der Nervenarzt, 2 7 : 512.
40. , 1956. DieBedeutung des reticuloendothelialen Systems fur diePatholgeneseund Therapie der Gekeskrankheiten. Psychiatrie, Neurologie und medizinische Psychologie, 8 : 365.
41. OSMOND, H., 1957. A review of the clinical effects of psychomimetic agents. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 6 6 : 418.
42. OSMOND, H., and SMYTHIES, J., 1952. Schizo-
phrenia: a new approach. I. J. Ment. Sci., 98: 309.
43. PENNES, H., 1956. Summary and discussion of round table proceedings; in Cholden, L. (Ed.), Lysergic Acid Diethylamide and Mescaline in Experimental Psychiatry: 60. Grune & Strat-

56. SCHEINBERG, I. H., MORELL, A. G., HARRIS, R. S.,
and BERGER, A., 1957. Concentration of ceruloplasm in plasma of schizophrenic patients. Science, 126: 925.
57. SHAW, E. and WOOLLEY, D. W., 1956. Some ser-
otonin activities of lysergic acid diethylamide. Science, 124: 121.
58. SHORE, P. A., SILVER, S. L., and BRODIE, B. B.,
1955. Interaction of reserpine, serotonin, and lysergic acid diethyamide in brain. Science, 122: 284.
59. STENGERS, T. and GOOSZEN, J. A. H., 1946-'47.
Le taux sanguin de l'histamine chez lesschizophrènes. L'Encéphale, 3 6 : 283.
60. UDENFRIEND, S., WEISSBACH, H., and BOGDANSKI,
D. F., 1957. Biochemical findings relating to the action of serotonin. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 66: 283.
61. WACHSMUTH, R., 1955. Der Bromsulfaleintest in Hepatogramm bei Geisteskranken. Nervenarzt, 2 6 : 491.

ton, New York.

62. WAGNER, R. P. and MITCHELL, H. K., 1955.

44. PFEFFER, A. Z. and PESCOR, M. J.,1944. Multi-

Genetics and Metabolism. Wiley, New York.

ple transfusions for schizophrenia. Arch: Neu- 63. WEIL-MALHERBE, H., 1957. Adrenalin in plas-

rol & Psychiat., 5 2 : 131.

ma; its flourimetric estimation and its associa-

45. PFEIFFER, C. C., GROTH, D. P., and BAIN, J. A.,
1958. Choline vs. dimethylaminoethanol as

tion with platelets. Lecture presented at N. Y. State Psychiatrie Institute, 8 April.

possible precursors of cerebral acetylcholine. 64. WEISSBACH, H., WAALKES, T. P., UDENFRIEND,

Proceedings of the Annual Scientific Confer-

S., 1957. Presence of serotonin in lung and its

ence of the Brain Research Foundation;New

implication in the anaphylactic reaction.

York, N.Y., January 25: in press.

Science, 125: 235.

46. PINCUS, G. and HOAGLAND, H., 1943. Steroid 65. WOOLLEY, D. W., 1957. Manipulation of cere-

excretion and the stress of flying. J. Aviat.

bral serotonin and its relationship to mental

Med., 14: 173.

disorders. P.N.A.S., in press.

47. Reiss, M. and STITCH, S. R., 1954. The frac- 66. WOOLLEY, D. W. and SHAW, E., 1954. Some

tionation of urinary neutral 17-ketosteroids

neurophysiological aspects of serotnin. Brit.

from chronic male schizophrenics. J. Ment.

Med. J., 2 : 122.

Sci., 100: 704.

67. , 1954. A biochmical and pharma-

48. REITER, P. J., 1938. Untersuchungen zur Be-

cological suggestion about certain mental dis-

leuchtung der Intoxikationstheorie bei der De-

orders, P.N.A.S., 4 0 : 228.

mentia praecox mit besonderer Beruchsichti- 68.

, 1957. Evidence for the participation

gung der Versuche mit Totaltransfusionen.

of serotonin in mental processes. Ann. N. Y.

Ztsch. f. d. ges. Neurol. u. Psychiat., 160:

Acad. Sci., 6 6 :649.

598. 69. YOUNG, M. K., JR, BERRY, H K., BEERSTECHER,

49. RINALDI, R., and HIMWICH, H. E., 1955. Fren-
quel corrects certain cerebral electrographic changes. Science, 122: 198.

E, JR., and BERRY, J. S., 1951. Metabolic pat-
terns of schizophrenic and control groups. Univ. of Texas Pub. No. 5109: 189.

