Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Relation of population changes to the distribution of genetic factors
N/A
To cite this article: N/A (1955) Relation of population changes to the distribution of genetic factors, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:1, 53-59, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987222 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987222
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

RELATION OF POPULATION CHANGES TO THE DISTRIBUTION OF GENETIC FACTORS
Report on Meeting 23 of the World Population Conference, Rome 1954

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Introduction
In opening Meeting 23 of the World Population Conference, Book pointed out that the most important fact we have to face in relation to all problems of human populations is the tremendous diversity of the individuals who make up these populations. Cultural diversities have long been studied. The more recent studies of genetic diversities are in the field of the rapidly growing sciences of genetics and biology. But man's diversity in regard to his genetic potentialities has such far-reaching consequences that it should not and cannot be left to the consideration of only biologists and geneticists. If there is to be a realistic science of man, individual and group genetic differences cannot be disregarded.
This meeting is concerned with human genetic differences in the larger framework of population genetics and medical genetics. The genetic base underlying individual differences in mental and emotional development is not yet well understood and is the subject of Meeting 25.
The science of population genetics is just coming of age. Its theoretical aspects were developed more than a score of years ago by Haldane, Wright and others. Its experimental work was confined chiefly to drosophila. Objective data on human beings seemed far in the future. But all this has been changed by the use made of the blood groups in the years since the war, by other means of determining genetically determined traits, and by improved methods of measuring consanguinity.
The papers presented to this session reflect this change. Sanghvi measures the genetic relationship of the different castes

in India described by Wahlund as the world's largest experimental material for the study of human genetics. Sutter and Tabah describe the breakup of isolates in France: "l'Eclatment des Isolats." Kishimoto, Matsunago, Komatu, and Furuhata describe differential survival in Japan under different types of mating and for various characteristics. Demographers, geneticists, and anthropologists in great numbers are making objective studies on the population genetics of man. As the psychologists follow suit, our understanding of the effects of migration, racial admixtures, and differential mortality and fertility should make rapid and cumulative growth.
In the medical field, human diversity expresses itself in three main directions, namely, in (1) genetic diseases or defects, caused by specific and potent gene mutations; (2) individual gene constellations which constitute a necessary prerequisite for the environmental causation of aspecific disorder; and (3) individual gene constellations which constitute an important basis of reaction types to be considered in terms of vulnerability or predisposition for disease as well as for health and in terms of individual response to therapeutic measures. The first part of the meeting was concerned with these aspects of medical genetics.
The Prevalence of Genetically Based Disease and Defect
The frequency of genetic disease and defects and of specific genetic morbid predispositions was presented by Tage Kemp, Director of the Institute for Human Genetics in Denmark. The prevalence is

S3

54 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

very high and consequently of the utmost South American or Asian countries where

importance for medical research and prac- the life expectancy is low, where neither

tice. By now there are very few medical infectious diseases nor nutritional de-

research workers who do not accept this ficiencies are under control, and a sub-

fact. On the other hand, most of them stantial part of the population is suffering

think of medical genetics as still represent- from chronic starvation, genetic disorders

ing the rather static picture of the early must be of secondary importance in regard

decades of this century, dealing mostly with to public health. Here the measures should

frequencies, pedigrees and attempts to fit be, in order of significance: (1) birth con-

the data into simple, clear-cut Mendelian trol, (2) control of infectious diseases and

schemes. Although such analyses remain a nutritional deficiencies, and (3) control of

basic framework in this field and, together genetic disorders.

�with conventional twin research, serve the But in European and North American

purpose of identifying genetically de- populations genetic disorders have a high

termined morbid conditions, their results prevalence and constitute a major cause of

now mark rather the beginning than the human disease and maladaptation. Con-

end of the inquiry.

sequently they should be a primary concern

At present more than 500 different of public health authorities and medical

genetic disorders are known in man. Many research workers.

of them are extremely rare, and others It has become increasingly apparent that

cause only moderate or light incapacity; each individual is heterozygous for a num-

but Kemp estimates that 2 to 3 per cent ber of recessive genes with undesirable

of the European or North American popu- homozygous effect. The identification of

lations are severely incapacitated at any such genes constitutes an enormous task,

given moment; and Book believes that in discussed particularly by Cook.

these populations the total morbid risk for Among one group of carriers, namely,

severe genetic disorders should be of the those who are heterozygous in regard to

magnitude of 5 to 10 per cent.

genes commonly thought of as "incomplete"

Most of the prevalence figures now availa- recessives, Falls and Neel reported that it

ble refer strictly to nothing but clinical is now possible to identify the carriers of

syndromes which on statistical evidence 29 different disorders. For the future there

have been shown to be genetically de- is the possibility of identifying individual

termined. It is an open question whether genes or constellation of genes in hetero-

or not these syndromes also constitute zygous individuals by means of biological

genetic entities. Recent investigations in stress tests designed to bring out subclinical

various fields suggest that the diversity in metabolic deficiencies, by chromatography,

regard to genetic disorders is much greater electrophoresis and by other refined tech-

than hitherto assumed. As long as the cor- niques.

relations between clinical and genetic The positive identification of healthy or

entities remains dubious, the calculations only slightly deviating carriers of genes

of gene frequencies and mutation rates will which subsequently may cause disease in

also be questionable.

the carrier himself or only after duplication

In countries which already have achieved in his children has a number of con-

a relatively high standard of living, genetic sequences. The effect of selection on genetic

disorders probably constitute the greatest disorders cannot be fully understood un-

medical problem of our time, and some of less the fitness (in terms of effective fer-

these disorders are on the increase. Among tility) of carriers is reasonably well known.

other populations the situation may be The recent discovery that, in certain

quite different. For example, in certain regions of Africa, heterozygotes of sickle-

ss

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

cell anemia display a better fitness (im- random mating

munity to malaria) than the homozygote, deserves serious attention. If such effects should not prove to be rare exceptions, they will render many conventional calculations of gene frequencies or mutation rates worthless.

2. Stable equilibrium due to (a) recurrent mutation, or (b) advantage of the heterozygote
3. Unstable equilibrium (a) in connection with disadvantage of the heterozygote and (b) in certain types of social selection.

Dr. J. Bogdan of Rumania took exception to all these conclusions. He held that progressive biology has demonstrated that the development of the individual is determined not by a hypothetical combination of genes but by the conditions of development, that the base of heredity is constituted by the type of metabolism, which in turn can be influenced by the environment, that the so-called pathological heredity determined by a morbid gene is an erroneous conception. The evidence offered for this position, particularly that concerning vegetative hybridization, was held by Lerner and other discussants to run counter to the experience of modern biology. It was felt that the free intercharge of ideas among scientists of all countries should help to clear up such misconceptions.

1. Neutral Equilibrium (a) The principle discovered in 1908, independently by Hardy and Weinberg, is the classical example of neutral equilibrium. It arises when there is random mating (panmixia) and if no genotype has any selective advantage, expressed either in terms of fecundity or in vitality, over any other genotype. Gene frequency changes which can take place by chance (drift) remain permanent. Within large groups this effect is insignificant, but differences originally produced by lack of homogeneity in small parent populations can remain for long periods. All estimates of gene frequencies made by serologists are based upon the assumption of random mating and absence of natural selection. The fact that good agreement exists between observation and theory in such calculations suggests that the genes con-

cerned are in a state not far from equi-

The Mechanism of Gene Frequency Alterations
Changes in gene frequency, both due to chance and to natural selection, are likely to be continually proceeding. The mechanism was discussed by Penrose.
It is reasonable to assume that any hereditary trait which comes under observation is due to a gene whose frequency is not changing very rapidly. Unless a gene were nearly in equilibrium, it would not have survived to be observed. Hence, in order to understand the nature of gene frequency alterations in natural populations, the conditions of genie equilibrium must be

librium.
(b) Deviations from random mating do not disturb the gene frequency provided that all genotypes are equally fit. Thus, neutral equilibrium is compatible with both assortative mating and inbreeding. These processes, so long as they last, increase the proportion of homozygotes at the expense of heterozygotes. The opposite processes of dissortation and outbreeding have the converse effect. There is outbreeding when two previously isolated populations mingle, or in cases of migration, but the gene frequency in the total human

studied.

population is unaltered. In other respects,

There are three main types of genie equilibrium which can occur. These are:
1. Neutral equilibrium (a) with random mating -- the Hardy-Weinberg principle--or (b) with deviations from

deviations from random mating have important consequences. A survey of the effects of consanguinity on stillbirths in France showed a definite positive correlation. Owing to the reduction of inbreeding

56 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

in France, as in other European communi- that the heterozygote still remains the fittest

ties, a temporary reduction in stillbirths at- of the three, a new stable frequency is

tributed to lethal recessive genes may be eventually reached. The stability of the

expected.

process makes it a powerful method of pre-

In such examples as this, genie equi- serving polymorphism in a natural popu-

librium is disturbed and there is selection lation. This can apply both to genes for

against the homozygote. The reduction of segregating traits and to genes producing

frequency of the gene concerned is very metrical variations, like stature.

slow, but it becomes more rapid if there is Inbreeding and especially assortative

inbreeding. Selection against lethal reces- mating can neutralize, or even destroy, the

sives should therefore be stronger in Japan, stability of "heterosis" equilibrium: to

and also in India where consanguineous maintain stability in such cricumstances,

unions are very frequent, than in European the advantage of heterozygote must be cor-

countries.

respondingly larger. The observed dif-

2. Stable Equilibrium In this state, if ferentials in fertility connected with in-

a chance circumstance alters the gene fre- telligence are marked enough to maintain

quency in a population, the original fre- equilibrium even in the presence of the very

quency tends to be reestablished. There high degree of assortation for this trait

are two basic types:

which occurs between husband and wife.

(a) Selection against a gene with un- 3. Unstable Equilibrium (a) The con-

favorable effects can be balanced by the verse of heterosis occurs when the hetero-

recurrence of fresh mutation. In the typical zygote is less fit than either homozygote. A

case, a rare gene with deleterious con- system of this kind occurs in connection with

sequences, diminishing fitness in certain antigenic incompatability. It produces un-

individuals, remains at the same frequency stable equilibrium at a point where the

in each generation.

antigen causing incompatibility has gene

The different gene frequencies of heredi- frequency of 50 per cent because the two

tary diseases in different parts of the world homozygotes are equally fit. In the region

may be interpreted as being due to different of this percentage, the gene frequency will

points of equilibrium between fitness and only change very slowly though the ex-

mutation.

termination of a rare antigen, if unbalanced

(b) Selection against a gene in homo- by mutation or heterosis, would be quite

zygous form can be balanced by advantage rapid. Conversely when an antigen is very

conferred when it is in heterozygous form. common, the instability is shown by its

This situation can occur as a consequence tending to become universal at the expense

of hybrid vigor, sometimes called heterosis. of its neutral allele.

Provided that it is permanent, the ad- It is interesting to note that, in Euro-

vantage of heterozygote need only be very pean populations, the gene for the D-

slight in order to preserve equilibrium in antigen and that for the A-antigen,

random mating. An increase of just over which have frequencies of about 59

1 per cent in the fertility of heterozygote per cent and 29 per cent, respectively,

above that of normal homozygote will are near enough to the point of unstable

balance a rare recessive lethal gene with 1 equilibrium, at 50 per cent, not to change

per cent gene frequency.

very rapidly even under strong selection

This equilibrium is stable because there produced by incompatibility.

would be gradual restitution of the previous Only a very slight advantage in surviving

state after a chance disturbance of gene heterozygotes is necessary to produce stable

frequency. Moreover, after an alteration conditions, which would occur, theoretical-

in fitness of one of the genotypes, provided ly, at any specified gene frequency.

57

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

The search for increased fertility of sur- quantitatively the degree of influence which

viving heterozygotes in the blood groups emigration and immigration have on the

which would keep the system in equi- distribution of genes.

librium has not yet been intensively pur- Internal migration, from rural to urban

sued, though some of the papers presented areas and in the opposite direction, and

to this meeting provide pointers. Roberts social mobility which attracts and dis-

pointed out that more is known about charges specific individuals to and from

geographical variations in the frequencies various occupations and socio-economic

of the AB and O blood-group genes in man layers are liable to form sieves through

than is known about the similar conditions which some genetic types can pass and

of any other plant or animal genes what- others are retained.

soever. The AB and O groups also confer While changes in public health measures

high selective advantages or disadvantages and medicine may lead to true changes in

quite apart from their antigen properties. the frequencies of genes, the various types

of migration at first simply change the dis-

Various Factors Which Influence Distribution of Gene Frequencies

tributions of genes. Since the patterns of reproduction of different populations,

The discussants were generally agreed on urban and rural sections, different occupa-

the following findings as summarized by tional groups and different socio-economic

Stern:

layers vary, changes in the distribution of

A prolongation of the mean expectation genes between different groups must result

of life is liable to increase the frequency in changes in over-all gene frequencies.

of certain genes in the population because Koya raised the question as to possible

of the increased proportion of older people. selective effects of the present high rate of

Medical advances often permit survival abortion in Japan.

of individuals with formerly fatal genetic Genie reproductive fitness is a relative

defects. Therefore, in modern societies, the property. In single dose many genes have

frequencies of genes for various formerly no obvious effect on the fertility of their

serious congenital abnormalities or for carriers while in double dose they may

genetically influenced diseases will probably reduce it to zero. Moreover, the rest of the

increase, though slowly.

many thousand genes which make up the

Changes in social conditions or specific genetic material of a human is important.

social trends may affect the distribution of In different "genetic backgrounds" a given

genes by selective migration between and gene may have very different fitness, and so

within larger populations. Large-scale im- manifold are the interrelations of genes in

migration or transfer of population often development, growth and reproductive fit-

will change gene frequencies in the areas ness that the opposition "single gene versus

of immigration and may do so also in the genetic background" may lose all precision.

areas of emigration provided that the emi- The human traits are the result of poly-

grating part of the population is genetical- genic systems whose components often are

ly different from those who remain. There not separable.

is little documented evidence for such Even when a meaningful definition can

selective emigration, but, as Stern pointed be given to the term reproductive fitness

out, lack of evidence does by no means for a given gene, the frequencies and dis-

signify absence of the phenomenon; it is tributions of the gene in future generations

much more likely that emigration has some cannot be predicted. Fitness depends upon

genetically selective aspects than that it the specific environment. Changes in the

lacks them. Certainly one of the important external milieu can increase the fitness of

tasks for the future should be to determine poorly fit genotypes, making them more

58 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

likely to survive and changing the fitness of better ones. Obvious examples of improved fitness pertain to sugar diabetes with the discovery of insulin or to eye defects with the invention of optical and surgical remedies. Important examples of changed fitness in a changed social environment have been adduced by Sjogren: the genetic basis for dyslexia (writing and reading difficulties) may have become subject to negative selection in literate societies while it may be neutral in illiterate ones. Similarly, certain high-grade mental deficiencies imply a rather moderate social handicap in non-industrialized communities but may become seriously disadvantageous in industrial systems. In Sjogren's striking phraseology "these forms of oligophrenia--without any genetic change or any change in the clinical picture having taken place-- have acquired an increased malignancy." Considering differential fertility, this social malignancy may actually imply increased reproductive fitness. The meeting was not charged with value judgments and hence did not express opinions on whether a relative increase in such genotypes was desirable.
Selection may be directed against or in favor of heterozygotes. Dependent on how widespread positive selection is as compared to negative selection for heterozygotes, the genetic consequences of intercrossing of formerly separated human groups will be very different.
Nachtsheim presented rates of mutation for various pathological genes, ranging from lXlO2 to 1.2X10"8- It is likely that such rates of spontaneous mutation will remain more constant than intensities of selection. This will lead to slow changes in the frequencies and distributions of genes. In particular, there will be an increase in the proportion of those genes involved in diseases and abnormalities whose origin by mutation is not sufficiently counterbalanced by selection. This increase in pathological genes is particularly likely because of the long-range effects of reduced selection due

to the saving of lives by therapeutic measures. Artificial increases of potentially unfavorable genes are also bound to occur because of the widespread use of mutagenic radiations of medicine and industry, not to speak of war.
Formerly, geographically or sociologically separated populations and subpopulations -- so-called isolates -- reproduced within themselves. They became genetically different from one another as the result of selective forces or of chance.
The break-up of isolates due to better transportation and other factors leads to a scattering of clusters of like genes over the population at large. One consequence of this is, at least temporarily, a decrease of homozygotes, thus reducing the number of individuals homozygous for deleterious recessive genes. This reduction, however, will not take place with traits which depend on recessives with relatively high frequency or on dominant genes.
The reduction in deleterious homozygotes will often shield from negative selection those genes which become carried increasingly in healthy heterozygotes. Very slowly, mutation will fill up the new population with the shielded gene until the proportion of homozygotes rises to the former level.
The loss of adaptive gene combinations by isolate breaking is difficult to evaluate. The future seems likely to bring a large scale redistribution of genes by the interbreeding of diverse populations. Our present knowledge is too incomplete to foretell the consequences of such intermingling. Many geneticists feel that the result will not be harmful. Others are hesitant to adopt such a view so long as it has no basis in objective studies. The increased independence of modern man from formerly restrictive environmental agents may often --but perhaps not always--mean that no loss of adaptiveness is involved.
The elimination of morbid mutations can be achieved more efficiently by birth selection than by death selection; and this does not necessarily imply an authoritarian

59

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

abridgement of the freedom of action of the individual. Present frequencies and distribution of human genes are the result partly of processes beyond the control of man, and partly of man's voluntary actions and inactions. In an increasing manner, future frequencies and distributions will be predictable on the basis of human activities. This will mean increased responsibility since whatever we do or omit doing has its definite inescapable consequences.
The Need For Objective Data and Critical Research
There was general agreement that the only way to follow and control and study the whole body of pathologic genes in a population, "our load of mutations," is through a permanent systematic and thorough medico-genetic registration, a recording or reporting system, comprising all the patients in the population who are afflicted with a serious hereditary condition and also their families. This view was stressed by Leon, Evang, Kemp and others.
Such an epidemiological, genetic-hygienic control can be established in districts, regions or countries where the civilization has developed to a certain stage. The public health system and social care must be well-organized. Hospitals and other institutions for diseased and defective as well as the public care system must have attained a certain standard.
By means of such a genetic-hygienic registration we can follow the hereditary diseases in a population. We can check on their behavior. We can ascertain whether they decrease or increase in frequency and form an estimate as to whether the genetichygienic measures are carried through in the right way. Ultimately we can limit their prevalence.
Thorough instruction in human genetics, especially genetic pathology, ought to be included in the drriculum of medical schools.
There is need to break down the barriers

between disciplines, as pointed out by Lacroix, Aubenque and Kirk. International action is needed to standardize or at least to clarify definitions and terms. "Psychosis" for example is, as we know, not only a medical but certainly also a social diagnosis. Confusion will undoubtely arise unless great care is taken in defining terms.
In regard to nearly every aspect of human genetics, the nature-nurture problems are with us. Their solution, specific for each trait, is of prime importance to reaching conclusions on the distribution of genes in the population. Studies of maternal age and birth order throw light on these problems, as shown by McKeown. The review of twin studies by Gedda emphasizes the importance of twins as most valuable material for the evaluation of the hereditary and environmental components of an unlimited range of traits. There should be a world-wide search for the largely untapped reservoirs of identical twins reared apart. More work should be done in co-twin control research and with the "twin-family method," as well as in studies of foster children and orphans.
These conclusions on the importance of twin studies in the field of psychogenetics and psychosomatics meet with the expectation of the animal psychologists, as reported by Scott and Fuller, that the development of methods of measuring basic emotional and physiological differences at the earliest possible point in development is basic to an understanding of present and future distributions of human genes.
If, as seems likely, knowledge of human genetics increases as rapidly in the next ten years as in the years since the war, studies in the genetic qualities of populations can be expected to play a constantly increasing role in advancing human welfare. We may close with the words of Sauvy; "The sciences of demography and human genetics share a common ground. Their union can be exceedingly fruitful for the future of the human race."

