Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Mating and fertility patterns in families with schizophrenia
Erik EssenMöller M.D.
To cite this article: Erik EssenMöller M.D. (1959) Mating and fertility patterns in families with schizophrenia, Eugenics Quarterly, 6:2, 142-147, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1959.9987406 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1959.9987406
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

MATING AND FERTILITY PATTERNS IN FAMILIES WITH SCHIZOPHRENIA
ERIK ESSEN-MÖLLER, M.D.
University of Lund

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

OCHIZOPHRENICS PROVE TO HAVE A
very different number of children in samples from different countries, from urban and rural areas, from different social groups, and at different times. This variation is apparent from a comparison and a subdivision of samples investigated by Kallmann (15), Book (3), and myself (9), coming from Berlin, North Sweden, and Bavaria, respectively. It is therefore mandatory, first, to study the reproduction of schizophrenics in relation to the population from which they originate.
There is a second requirement. Suppose there are some findings characteristic of schizophrenia in relation to the respective populations. Obviously these might have been brought about by differential fertility in its proper sense, i.e., by a different birth rate specific to age-groups and to duration of marriage. But the same effect could perhaps have been produced by some peculiarity of age-distribution, which in turn could have been due to differences in mortality or rate of migration, or simply to the distribution of age at onset of the disease. Or, finally, the distribution of marital state might have played a role. Larsson (17) pays much attention to detecting such fallacies in the study of the interaction of population changes and heredity.
It is necessary, then, for any closer study to investigate each component of reproduction separately and their interplay, the mechanism of which has been very clearly demonstrated by demog-

raphers like Dublin and Lotka (7) of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company of New York and the late Professor Wicksell (33) of the University of Lund.
Considering legitimate fertility first, a close study revealed that samples of schizophrenics exhibited the same trend in differential fertility and decline in births as generally seen in Western communities. However, it appeared that schizophrenics followed suit somewhat more slowly: thus male schizophrenics seemed to start from about the same level as the population with a high birth rate, and subsequently to lag behind in the general decline in births. Female schizophrenics apparently started from a lower level, and the further reduction in their fertility was more or less neutralized by the more rapidly declining population level. The average reproduction of both sexes shifted, as the general birth rate gradually declined, from a level lower than the population to a level slightly higher.
It is difficult to state whether this finding of a delayed decline of birth rates in schizophrenics has general validity or is typical only of the Bavarian sample investigated (9). In any case, there would be reason to assume that such phenomena are transitory. Thus in a population where birth control had been practiced for a long time, it seems reasonable to assume that the legitimate fertility of schizophrenics should be about equal to that of the population.

142

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

The same would probably be the case with illegitimate fertility.
These observations all pertain to the time prior to the first admission to a hospital. Post-psychotic fertility may be estimated, in marriages contracted before admission, at about 70 per cent of the pre-psychotic fertility, and this decrease is apparently not ascribable to hospitalization only. In marriages contracted later, there was no such demonstrable reduction.
It is possible, then, that pre- and postpsychotic fertility taken together, as judged by age-groups and duration of marriage is somewhat reduced in schizophrenics. This was also Kallmann's finding (15).
In regard to marital state, it is well known that there is a much higher proportion of unmarried people among schizophrenics than otherwise in the population. This phenomenon attracted attention long before the concept of "schizophrenia" or even of "dementia praecox" had come into use. It has been studied in many countries, not the least recently in the United States (2), (4), (5), (6), (9), (13), (15), (21), (22), (25), (29), (30), (31).
This over-representation of single persons among schizophrenics is present in all age-groups of schizophrenics as early as the time of the first admission. In fact, the marriage rate of the index cases-to-be was shown to have been constant at its low level throughout their pre-psychotic life and is therefore not a product of the manifest disease, as formerly believed. It could rather be argued that it is due to some traits of personality. A third hypothesis is that married life in itself could protect persons -from schizophrenia. There is also a fourth possibility, namely, that un-

143
married schizophrenics are taken care of by their families to a lesser extent than the married and are thus more frequently hospitalized.
Let us consider this hypothesis of excess hospitalization. In the absence of an exact measurement I once tried instead to investigate widowers and widows, since these can be expected to have the same personality as the married (9). Widowers and widows proved to have been admitted on an average twice as often as the married, and about the same proportion was present in a sample presented by Dayton (5). Accordingly, a correction was attempted in doubling the number of married, and computing the frequency of unmarried in the sample thus enlargened. The surplus of unmarried schizophrenics over the normal level is thereby noticeably reduced but still remains considerable. While the uncorrected distribution of unmarried corresponds to a specific marrying rate almost three times smaller than normal, the corrected distribution corresponds to roughly half the normal marrying rate. (Assuming a stable population, half marrying rate results in a distribution of unmarried persons where every agespecific frequency is the square-root of the normal frequency, and a marrying rate three times reduced results in cuberoot frequencies (33)).
Later I had at my disposal a sample investigated at the Riidin Institute consisting of brothers and sisters of schizophrenics who had been followed up in regard to marital state (10). Their distribution fell, as expected, between the schizophrenics and the general population. However, the sisters were so close to the corrected distribution that one might suspect the correction to have been overdone. Now the siblings included altogether 146 schizophrenics who were

144 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

identified through family investigation independently of admissions. Among these, the single were admitted, on an average, only 1.2 times (instead of twice) as frequently as the married. Possibly, then, the correction factor for hospitalization should not be greater than this.
Accordingly, the over-representation of unmarried persons at first admission is to be regarded largely as a true finding. Professor 0degaard (25), who studied very closely the over-representation of single persons, argued against the hospitalization theory. He also dismissed the hypothesis of protection by marriage as a main factor and stressed the importance of personality. Of special interest is his inquiry into the personality of married and unmarried mental patients. The traits likely to be responsible for not marrying are, as pointed out by Norris (24), about the same as those which are considered signs of a poor prognosis, and Norris showed that single schizophrenics stayed longer in hospitals than married ones.
In samples from different countries the over-all frequency of single persons among schizophrenics stays rather constant at 70 to 80 per cent in males. In females there is a variation from this level down to 40 to 50 per cent in some American samples (21), (31), and even as low as 27 per cent in a community of Northern Sweden investigated by Book (3). Similar though far more subtle differences were noted by 0degaard (25) between rural and urban areas in Norway. These authors were inclined to interpret their findings by referring to social factors and to the shortage of women in the respective districts. Female schizophrenics would thus be more susceptible to social influences than males, perhaps because of the more pas-

sive part played by them in reproduction.
After admission to hospitals, the marriage rate is still more reduced, and, as is the case with fertility, this is by no means a consequence of hospitalization exclusively. The average marriage rate after admission in my German sample amounts to something like one-sixth of the normal.
Consideration should also be given to the problem of mate selection in schizophrenics. To my knowledge there are three systematic investigations into the families of mates, two of which report a higher incidence of schizophrenia (8), (12), (18). Standard errors, however, are comparatively great, so that a deviation from normal expectancy can hardly be considered to be established. This would indicate that mate selection in schizophrenics may be reasonably normal.
To secure an expression of the total reproduction of schizophrenics in relation to the population, one should now recombine, in a standardized manner, the distributions of fertility and of marital state which so far have been studied apart. Also a certain excess mortality has to be taken into account, but its importance is not very great any more than is the reduction in fertility proper. The predominant factor here is the heavy over-representation of unmarried people. Age at onset, of course, plays a part but not so much as one might be inclined to think, because the marriage rate stays at a low level even prepsychotically and appears to do so from the very beginning of adult life.
All factors considered, using the figures from the Bavarian sample and putting the correction factor for hospitalization at 1.2, the ensuing total

145

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

number of children of schizophrenics may be estimated at about 40 per cent of that of the corresponding population. From these 40 per cent, again 30 to 40 per cent refer to children born after the onset of the disease.
This result would seem reasonable since, by applying the following procedures, we can actually check it. Putting the incidence of schizophrenia in the population at 1 per cent and in children of schizophrenics at 10 to 15 per cent, the above-mentioned reproductive rate of schizophrenic index cases amounting to 40 per cent would mean that some 8 to 12 out of a hundred schizophrenics descend from a schizophrenic parent. As for the parents themselves, 4 to 6 per cent would be schizophrenic, which is in good agreement with the majority of the findings. In Book's sample (3), where the incidence in parents is exceptionally high, there is also a higher reproduction in the index cases.
A reversal of this checking procedure was indicated by Roller (16). According to Mendelian rules, the incidence in parents of index cases with any hereditary disease, irrespective of its mode of inheritance, should be equal to the incidence in children. If, then, the incidence in children is 10 to 15 per cent and in parents only 4 to 6 per cent, the discrepancy is accounted for by assuming a reproduction reduced to 40 per cent of the normal, which is the reduction actually found in our schizophrenics.
A third possibility of checking is the following (11). Parents do not really enter into statistical observation until they become parents of the later index cases. Before this time they were subject to selection in the sense that their contemporaries who fell ill with schizo-

phrenia were excluded to a certain extent. If nobody could have a child after becoming schizophrenic, then the cases of schizophrenia which can still be found among the parents of schizophrenics must have occurred later than the birth of the index case. Therefore, obviously it would be misleading to relate schizophrenia in parents to the total period of risk covered by them from 15 years onward. Instead, the observation period should be counted from the age at birth of the later index case. In fact, in a Swedish sample of parents of schizophrenics, their observation time, when reduced according to this principle, was only one-fourth of the period usually used for calculation. A modification has to be made to allow for the fact that schizophrenics are not completely excluded from reproduction after falling ill, and to account also for their reduced reproduction before onset of the disease. With this modified correction, the incidence in parents actually becomes about the same as in children, which may be taken as an indication that the principle of correction is right. The magnitude of the correction itself corresponds to the estimated reduction in reproduction and may thus serve to check this estimate.
Throughout this study, the group of schizophrenics was treated as an entity and as though diagnosis was everywhere uniform. Some attempts at differentiation should now be mentioned. Hebephrenics and catatonics,--males at least, --were stated to have a lower frequency of marriage and apparently also a smaller number of children than paranoids (9), (15). Schizophrenics with initial symptoms like those of manic-depressive psychosis were found to have married as frequently as manic-depressives before

146 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

falling ill, but as rarely as schizophrenics in the later course of their illness (9). There was a suggested indication that schizophrenics with a "rheumatic" history, who were also preferably non-paranoid, would comparatively more often be prevented from becoming parents, especially fathers, owing to early onset of the disease (32). A subdivision in recovered and non-recovered gave contradictory results for the distribution of marital state in the two sexes (9). In marriages contracted after the onset of illness,--thus presumably in recovered patients,--there was no demonstrable reduction in fertility (9). Schizophrenics from consanguineous matings were stated to have married more rarely than other schizophrenics and to have had fewer children if married (23).
Applications of the findings should now be considered. It may be of interest to remember that the reproduction rate of schizophrenics has played a role even in the theory of psycho-dynamic causation of schizophrenics. Alanen, in his recent book (1), stressed a fact already mentioned by Penrose in quite a different context (27), namely, that mothers of schizophrenics are more often schizophrenic than are fathers--usually about twice as often--and in Alanen's sample still more frequently. Alanen felt that this discrepancy could probably only in part, be accounted for by sex differences of fertility, and so interpreted it instead in terms of a disturbed mother-child relationship. In my opinion, sex differences of reproduction would probably account for the entire discrepancy. In Book's sample (3), reproduction in males is about three times lower than in females. Even if this proportion is likely to have been less pronounced in the preceding generation, like the shortage of

women which is supposed to have been instrumental in producing it, it would probably be enough to make up for the discrepancy actually found. In my own Swedish sample of parents of schizophrenics (11), the above-mentioned reduction of the period of observation, which was seen to be an expression of the reduction in reproduction, was also three times greater in fathers than in mothers. So much for the psycho-dynamic aspect.
Turning finally to the genetic applications, I may refer to Professor Aubrey Lewis, who in last year's Gallon Lecture made an excellent survey of fertility and mental illness (19). He traced the problem as far back as a century ago and very clearly stated the changing views from the practical eugenical standpoint. Professor Lewis also demonstrated the shift toward study of theoretical problems, such as why schizophrenia remains as prevalent as ever. To answer this question, inquiries were made a long time ago into the marriage rate and fertility of relatives (9), (15), (20). No evidence emerged to support the idea that above-normal reproduction in relatives would compensate for subnormal rates in the schizophrenics themselves; the contrary was rather the case.
It was therefore only natural that, in the search for an explanation of the unchanged prevalence of schizophrenia, mutations should be investigated: estimates of their frequency were attempted, particularly by Penrose (28) and Book (3). Another line of theoretical research was a study of differences in maternal age at birth of male and female schizophrenics. This study was conducted by Goodman (14) upon a suggestion from Penrose (26) who touched upon subtle questions connected with the theory of

147

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

the evolution of dominance by natural
selection.
To conclude, the exposition here given
will have shown that with regard to both
main aspects of our problem, "facts" as
well as "applications," the trend was
from a comparatively simple and prac-
tical approach toward a more complex
and theoretical one. It can therefore be
maintained that the reproduction of
schizophrenics is today as intriguing a
problem as ever.
REFERENCES
1. ALANEN, Y. O., 1958. T h e mothers of schizophrenic patients. Acta Psychiatr. Neur. Scand. Suppl. 124 (Diss. med. Helsinki).
2. BOWMAN, K. M., and RAYMOND, A. F., 1929.
Physical findings in schizophrenia. Amer. J. Psych. 8 : 901-913. 3. BÖÖK, J. A., 1953. A genetic and neuropsychiatric investigation of a North-Swedish population with special regard to schizophrenia and mental deficiency. Acta Genet. Statist. Med. 4:1-139, 345-414 (Diss. med. Uppsala). 4. DAHLBERG, G., 1933. Die Fruchtbarkeit der Geisteskranken. Zeitschr. Neur. Psychiatr. 1 4 4 : 427-454. 5. DAYTON, N. A., 1930. Size of family and birth order in mental disease. Studies in Quantitative and Cultural Sociol. 24:123. 6. , 1940. New Facts on Mental Disorders. Baltimore.
7. DUBLIN, L. I., and LOTKA, A. J., 1925. On
the true rate of natural increase. J. Amer. Statist. Ass. 20:305-339. 8. EGGER, H., 1942. Zum Problem der Gattenwahl Schizophrener. Zeitschr. Neur. Psychiatr. 174:353-396.
9. ESSEN-MÖLLER, E., 1935. Untersuchungen über die Fruchtbarkeit gewisser Gruppen von Geisteskranken. Ada Psychiatr. Neur. Scand. Suppl. 8 (Diss. med. Lund).
10. , 1936. Die Heiratshäufigkeit der Geschwister von Schizophrenen. Arch. Rass. und Gesellschaftsbiol. 30:367-379.
11. , 1935. The calculation of morbid risk in parents of index cases, as applied to a family sample of schizophrenics. Acta Genet. Statist. Med. 5:334-342.
12. FRÜH, L., 1943. Üer die Belastung der Ehegatten Schizophrener. Zeitschr. Neur. Psychiatr. 176:695-741.
13. GIBBS, CH. E., 1924. Sex development and behaviour in female patients with dementia praecox. Arch. Neur. Psychiatr. 11:179-194. 194.

14. GOODMAN, N., 1957. Relation between maternal age at parturition and incidence of mental disorder in the offspring. Brit. J. Prev. Soc. Med. 11:203-213.
15. KALLMANN, F. J., 1938. The Genetics of Schizophrenia. New York.
16. KOLLER, S., 1939. Über den Erbgang der Schizophrenic Zeitschr. Neur. Psychiatr. 164:199-228.
17. LARSSON, T., 1956/57. T h e interaction of population changes and heredity. Ada Genet. Statist. Med. 6:333-348. (Proc. 1st Congr. Hum. Genet.) Copenhagen.
18. LEISTENSCHNEIDER, P., 1938. Beitrag zur Frage des Heiratskreises der Schizophrenen. Zeitschr. Neur. Psychiatr. 162:289-326.
19. LEWIS, A., 1958. Fertility and mental illness. Eugen. Rev. 50:91-106.
20. MERTENS, K., 1939. Untersuchungen über die Heiratshäufigkeit der Schizophrenen und der Manisch-Depressiven sowie deren Geschwister. Diss. Med. Würzburg.
21. MYERSON, A., 1917. Psychiatric family studies. Amer. J. Insan. 73:355-486.
22. NISSEN, A. J., 1932. Om de schizophrenes fruktbarhetsforhold. Nord. Med. Tidskr. 4:929-934.
23. NIXON, W. L. B., and SLATER, E., 1957. A
second investigation into the children of cousins. Acta Genet. Statist. Med. 7:513-532. 24. NORRIS, V., 1956. A statistical study of the influence of marriage in the hospital care of the mentally sick. J. Ment. Sci. 102:467486. 25. ØDEGAARD, Ø., 1946. Marriage and mental disease: A study in social psychopathology. J. Ment. Sci. 92:35-59. 26. PENROSE, L. S., 1942. Mental disease and natural selection. Amer. J. Ment. Deficiency 46:453-458. 27. , 1945. Survey of cases of familial mental illness. Digest Neur. Psychiatr. 1 3 : 644 and mimeographed ms.
28. , 1956. Estimate on the incidence of cases of schizophrenia and manic-depressive reaction due to spontaneous mutation. The hazards to man of nuclear and allied radiations. H.M.S.O. pp. 96-97.
29. POLLOCK, H. M., and FURBUSH, E. M., 1921.
Mental disease in twelve states. Ment. Hygiene 5:353-389.
30. POLLOCK, H. M., MALZBERG, B., and FULLER,
R. G., 1939. Hereditary and Environmental Factors in the Causation of Manic-Depressive Psychosis and Dementia Praecox. New York. 31. POPENOE, P., 1928. Marriage rates of the psychotic. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 68:17-27. 32. WERTHEIMER, N., 1959. Some Relationships Between Rheumatic Fever, History and Familial Psychotic Tendency in Schizophrenia. (In preparation.)
33. WICKSELL, S. D., 1931. Nuptiality, Fertility, and Reproductivity, Skandin. Aktuarietidskr. pp. 125-157.

ERRATA: In the article "Breeding Structure of Human Populations" by M. Fraccaro (Eugenics Quarterly, 6, No. 1, March 1959) Figs.2 and Bshould be interchanged.

