Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Biology, rationality, and fertility: A footnote to transition theory
Leighton van Nort
To cite this article: Leighton van Nort (1956) Biology, rationality, and fertility: A footnote to transition theory, Eugenics Quarterly, 3:3, 157-160, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1956.9987286 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1956.9987286
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

BIOLOGY, RATIONALITY, AND FERTILITY A Footnote to Transition Theory
LEIGHTON VAN N O R T
Bowdoin College

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

\T ERHAPS FEW DISCIPLINES ARE as modestly may be regarded as unfortunate, even if

conscious of their limitations while as traceable to an acute sense of the theory's

methodologically sophisticated as demog- limitations on the part of its principal exraphy in its current phase of critical self- positors.3

examination. Its most important theoreti- We may ask first of all what sort of theo-

cal statements are carefully hedged with ry we are dealing with--is it an empirical

restrictions and qualifications, and the theory, or is it a frame of reference? If it is

tentativeness with which they are offered is the former, it must account directly for the

matched by an urgency in the acquisition observed variance in mortality and fertility.

of new data and new knowledge. And yet If it is the latter, it must tell us what cate-

modesty is self-defeating if it results in an gories of variables are important, and how

avoidance of precision which makes theo- we should relate them to one another. We

ries difficult to confirm or disprove. A case can perhaps see the consequences of these

in point is the body of generalizations alternatives most clearly in the case of fer-

which has become known as the "theory of tility.

demographic transition." This statement

of the dynamic relations between declining The Fertility Transition

mortality and fertility in the process of modernization is perhaps demography's best claim to general theoretical development,1 yet the controversy over the validity of these generalizations has provided evidence that there is little agreement either on the definition of the variables, the precise nature of their dynamic relationship, or the predictions implied.2 This situation

Fertility has been a major focus of discussion. The problem of operationally defining it is discussed in a recent paper by Ryder.4 Its status as a variable remains controversial. The prospective critic of the transition theory finds himself faced with the task of resolving this question before he can even attempt a rebuttal of the theory. For example, does the theory actually pre-

dict "incipient decline" produced by fertil-

1 This is the conclusion of Rupert B. Vance in "Is Theory for Demographers?" Social Forces, 31 (October, 1952), pp. 9-13.
2See, for example, Joseph S. Davis, "Our Charged Population Outlook and Its Significance," American Economic Review, 42 (June, 1952), pp. 304-325; "Population and Resources," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 45 (September, 1950), pp. 346-349; "The Population Upsurge and the American Economy, 1945-80," Journal of Political Economy, 61 (October, 1953), pp. 369-388; Paul K. Hatt, Nellie Louise Farr, and Eugene Weinstein, "Types of Population Balance," American Sociological Review, 20 (February, 1955), pp. 14-21; Leighton van Nort and Bertram P. Karon, "Demographic Transition Re-examined," American Sociological Review, 20 (October, 1955), pp. 523-527; and Weinstein's "Comment" on the latter and "Reply" by the authors, American Sociological Review, 21 (June, 1956), pp. 369-373.

ity below replacement levels in those countries which have already passed through the stage of "transitional growth?" What are the postulates which imply this predic-
3 Notestein, for example, in his most recent published statement of the theory, writes: "At present we cannot either list all the factors involved or attach precise weights to the factors we can list." Frank W. Notestein, "The Economics of Population and Food Supplies," Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference of Agricultural Economists, London: Oxford University Press, 1953, p. 18.
4 Norman B. Ryder, "Problems of Trend Determination During a Transition in Fertility," Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, 34 (January, 1956), pp. 5-21.

157

158 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

tion? Or is "incipient decline" simply a somewhat misleading but inessential label for the "mature" balance between low fertility and low mortality?
The transition in fertility described by the theory may be interpreted in either of two ways: (1) It may be treated as a simple statement of the empirical relationship between fertility and some other essentially unitary variable such as "modernization" which might, in principle, be represented by an index number.6 Or (2) it may be regarded as a description of the relations among categoriesof variables, that is, relations among more specific bodies of theory whose parameters can be obtained from direct observation. In this case it is a frame of reference, not a simple statement of an empirical relationship.
In the first interpretation, we are dealing with a theory from which we should be able to obtain a predicted level of fertility by specifying the observed values of the parameters. A test can be straightforward and direct. For example, can the theory predict the "baby boom," or tell us just how rapidly populations in "transitional" areas will grow? On the other hand, frame of reference cannot be either confirmed or disproven from direct observation alone. Only when the subordinate postulates are operationalized does the "transition" frame of reference become accessible to test. If we adopt the second interpretation, it follows that criticism of the theory for failing to supply specific predictions is wide of the mark. We wish to suggest a formulation involving the latter interpretation.
A Possible Formulation
Our proposed formulation can be put very simply and crudely as follows: the transition from "high" to "low" levels of fertility represents, in first approximation, a transition from a biological model of fer-

tility to an economic model of fertility. By a biological model of fertility we mean the ideal-type situation in which levels of fertility are determined by the more or less direct operation of biological factors, conditioned by a set of social and psychological factors specific to a pre-industrial society. By an economic model of fertility we mean the ideal-type situation in which levels of fertility are determined by decisions based on the rational allocation of resources among competing wants of the type normally denoted economic, conditioned by a set of social and psychological factors specific to a modern industrial society. .The transition in fertility represents, in terms of this particular formulation, the gradual limiting of biological determinants of fertility by a process of rational decision-making.
This formulation is scarcely unconventional, for it leads to the sorts of questions which have characteristically been asked by "transition"-oriented demographers. These are questions such as the following:
Countries in the stage of "High Growth Potential."6 Since fertility is seldom or never observed at the biological maxima, even in pre-industrial societies, (a) what are the levels of fertility which would be expected on the basis of purely biological factors, and (b) what are the social and psychological factors which serve to reduce observed levels of fertility below these maxima? What are the magnitudes of the reductions induced by specific factors within the framework of such societies?
Countries in the stage of "Transitional Growth." To what extent can the decline in fertility in "transitional" countries be attributed to the gradual substitution of rational decision-making of the type broadly denominated "economic" for the direct operation of biological factors within mar-

5 A partial example of such an approach, apparently involving also an interpretation of the theory of demographic transition as a static typology, is to be found in Hatt, Farr, and Weinstein, op. cit.

6 The descriptive labels for the three types of countries are those employed by Notestein. See Frank W. Notestein, "The Population of the World in the Year 2000," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 45 (September, 1950), p. 335.

159

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

riage? What is the relation of improvements in the technology of fertility control to the spread of such a rational orientation?
Countries in the stage of "Incipient Decline." To what extent can fertility in highly developed industrial countries be explained and predicted in terms of purely "rational" economic decisions about childbearing, together with deviations from such decisions resulting from inefficiencies in the available technology of fertility control and its application within the family? When the variance attributable to these factors is subtracted, what is the magnitude of the residual variance which must be explained in social and psychological terms?
Some Needed Research There is nothing very new or startling
about this list of questions, except insofar as it suggests one critical gap in current work on fertility: the absence of any rigorous theorizing about the levels of fertility in the transitional and mature stages which would be implied by the operation of purely "economic" factors. To what extent does family investment in children follow the principles governing investment in other durable goods involving future costs which are relatively fixed and predictable? To what extent are children economically substitutable with such other commodities, and what sort of substitution effects result from variations in relative costs? What levels of fertility would be predicted on the basis of variations in (a) expected costs of child-maintenance, and (b) expected income? Could some portion of the post-war rise in fertility be attributed to changes in income expectations, and in the prices of commodities competitive with children? These questions are of course supplementary to the currently more prominent question of the direct costs of child-bearing, but they may be far more important than the latter.
There is ample evidence of interest in the refinement of the biological model of fertility, but notably little interest displayed in developing an adequate economic

model. Almost all the other subordinate postulates incorporated in the "transition" frame of reference have been more thoroughly explored, and some further information on several will be provided by the "New Study of American Fertility."7 Some information on the economic variables will probably also be forthcoming. Westoff, Mishler, Potter, and Kiser note in their recent article on the design of the new study that
a fertility choice (whether implicit or explicit) involves a "cost" for the individual and the family, that is, certain desires and interests are either yielded or compromised in preference to others. (Decisions not to have children are as "costly," in a sense, as decisions to have them.)8
Mishler and Westoff, in a more technical paper, indicate interest in the process of family decision-making and in gathering some economic data.9 Thus some information potentially useful for the construction of an adequate economic model probably will be collected. However, as Hauser pointed out in a discussion of the study design, relatively little attention will be given to the relation of the family decision-making process to the "general social-economic climate."10 And perhaps equally as important is the exploration of the implications of what is already known about general economic behavior for the analysis of fertility under conditions of substantially complete voluntary control.
If the foregoing comments have any validity, it follows that a great deal of theorizing about fertility remains to be done if the transition theory is to be stated in testaable or operational form. If a "transi-
7 See Charles F. Westoff, Elliot G. Mishler, Robert G. Potter, Jr., and Clyde V. Kiser, "A New Study of American Fertility--Social and Psychological Factors," Eugenics Quarterly, 2 (December, 1955), pp. 229-233.
8 Ibid., p. 232. 9 Elliot G. Mishler and Charles F. Westoff, "A Proposal for Research on Social Psychological Factors Affecting Fertility: Concepts and Hypotheses," Current Research in Human Fertility, New York: Milbank Memorial Fund, 1955, pp. 145-149. 10 Philip M. Hauser, "Some Observations on Method and Study Design," ibid., p. 155.

160 Eugenics Quarterly

tion" frame of reference cannot at present be either confirmed or disproven, it is open to criticism if it fails to provide us with relative weights for the categories of variables it relates to one another. At present, the system of ideas known as the transition theory is perhaps most accurately described as a shrewd selection of materials from

which.to construct a theory: The particular fertility formulation discussed above is one of many possible ways of relating some of these factors to one another. We may expect a variety of others, for even in its present embryonic form the transition theory is a fruitful guide for observation and analysis.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

