Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
`Colorblindness" and relaxed selection
Richard H. Post
To cite this article: Richard H. Post (1963) `Colorblindness" and relaxed selection, Eugenics Quarterly, 10:2, 84-85, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1963.9987549 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1963.9987549
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4 View related articles Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

'COLORBLINDNESS" AND RELAXED SELECTION

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

I would be obliged if you would permit me to make some corrections of errors found in my paper on "colorblindness" in the issue of September 1962 (9: 131-146).
On page 140, second half of the first column, the formula for selection against an autosomal recessive gene (s = u/q) was inadvertently used instead of that for a sex-linked recessive (s = 3u/q). Each of the four selection rates in the little table below is therefore too low by a factor of three. These rates apply to "colorblind" males in hunting cultures. This error has been kindly pointed out by Professors H. Kalmus and D. F. Roberts. I am most grateful to both. Neither, however, is responsible for the considerations which follow.
The rate of "genetic deaths" suffered by the general population (as contrasted with the male "colorblind") in hunting cultures per generation, as a result of this selection against "colorblind" males, may be estimated by multiplying each rate in the little table by three as explained above and then by the corresponding frequency of male and female "colorblind." Ignoring "colorblindness" among females, since it is comparatively rare, and estimating the female proportion of the population as one-half, we may multiply by half the male rate. This last, for a sex-linked recessive, is approximately equal to the gene frequency. The "genetic death rate" for the general population is thus approximately 3u/q X q/2 or 1.5u. Considering now only the lower of the two mutation rates, arbitrarily proposed as u = 10~s or 0.00001, the rate of "genetic deaths" in a hunting population per generation incurred by the selection at each of the two loci would be estimated as 0.000015. Summing protans and deuterans, we would have three

persons per 100,000 per generation, more or less, all of them males.
It has been pointed out by several readers that some of the populations classified in table 1-A as "hunters and gatherers" have, in fact, a history of agriculture. This is particularly true of the Kotas of India. Professor Salzano has thoughtfully contributed corrections for several American Indian populations in an accompanying communication. None of these populations is believed to have a very long history of agriculture, however, as compared with the lengths of the histories of the populations in table 1-C. To whatever degree a history of agriculture may be attributed to a population in table 1-A, the difference between the average rate of "colorblindness" in table 1-C minus the average rate of 1-A becomes a minimal estimate of the difference in rate between civilized and hunters, and the hypothesis of selection relaxation thereby fortified rather than weakened.
To the relatively small degrees that selection against sex linked "colorblindness" in primitive cultures operates against homozygous females--which must be far below the degrees of selection against hemizygous males -- the prevalence of higher coefficients of inbreeding among the smaller gene pools of primitives such as those in table 1-A must be mentioned as making some contribution, albeit very small, towards maintaining rates of "colorblindness" so markedly lower than those of the larger gene pools of civilized populations, such as those in table 1-C. For, inbreeding tends to increase the efficacy of selection against "deleterious recessive genes," insofar as it tends to increase the proportion of zygotes having double dosage. For example, if the selection rate against individual persons manifesting a certain

84

Communications

85

"deleterious autosomal recessive" (having no manifestation in the hétérozygote) were the same in two populations, and the gene frequencies also the same in these two populations, one of which had a smaller gene pool than the other, then the smaller population would be expected to have a higher coefficient of inbreeding, therefore to have a higher proportion of affected homozygotes, and thus a higher population selection rate against the "deleterious" gene. Eventually the gene frequency of the smaller popula-

tion would be expected to decrease as compared with the larger population, other conditions being equal. Again, this situation applies to a sex-linked trait only to the degree that affected females are concerned, which for low gene frequencies such as those of "colorblindness" in primitive cultures would be very slight indeed.
RICHARD H. POST
Department of Human Genetics University of Michigan Medical School
Ann Arbor, Michigan

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

