Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Prevalence of genetically based physical and mental deficiencies and the frequency of related genes: Information on Population Groups and Methods of Investigation
Tage Kemp
To cite this article: Tage Kemp (1954) Prevalence of genetically based physical and mental deficiencies and the frequency of related genes: Information on Population Groups and Methods of Investigation , Eugenics Quarterly, 1:4, 215-220, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987197 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987197
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 5
View related articles
Citing articles: 4 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

PREVALENCE OF GENETICALLY BASED PHYSICAL AND MENTAL DEFICIENCIES AND THE FREQUENCY OF RELATED GENES:
Information on Population Groups and Methods of Investigation*

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

TAGE KEMP
Professor of Human Genetics University of Copenhagen

B.>Y HEREDITARY DISEASES and genetically
based deficiencies we understand those which essentially depend on pathogenetic genes. In addition many defects and lesions occur only when a hereditary predisposition is present, but depend, to a smaller or larger extent, on environmental factors.
There is a gradual transition from minor anomalies to proper abnormalities and diseases affected by heredity, which interfere with the free development of the individual by reduced capacity to work or invalidism and a diminished chance of unchecked reproduction. Some genetically based deficiencies manifest themselves from birth; others do not give rise to symptoms till later in life. Some are stationary or progressive; some show remission or may even, apparently at least, be completely cured. Many hereditary lesions do not respond to treatment; they can be checked only by means of genetic-hygienic measures; other genetically based diseases are accessible to treatment which, however, only in some cases leads to complete restoration of health. The favorable results of treatment may, however, involve a rise in the prevalence of these diseases. Hence effective prevention is also important where these are concerned.
The hereditary diseases are constantly arising through mutation; some of them-- anomalies and less severe diseases--persist through many generations, while others, the more serious dominant defects and dis-
*Presented at World Population Conference, Rome, September 1954.

eases, disappear very fast, after one or a few generations. It is supposed that a certain equilibrium exists between the mutation rate and the elimination of the pathological gene, on the whole keeping the frequency of a hereditary disease unaltered in the population.
In this respect, however, a number of different factors are interacting. Any disease or any defect is the cooperative result of hereditary and environmental influences, and the same abnormality may be caused by one or several different genes or by nongenetic factors.
Some lesions are chiefly due to heredity, each generally caused by a single pathological gene, arisen through mutation in the past, perhaps many generations ago, perhaps more recently. The acquired diseases on the other hand are principally caused by environmental factors. Between these two extremes lie the majority of lesions, for the production of which both genotypical and paratypical factors may assert themselves; they are dependent on a hereditary predisposition.
Hereditary diseases are monomeric in many cases, though not in all, but are often also dependent on modifying genes, and always more or less dependent on the entire gene milieu. The hereditary lesions sensu striction are generally caused by what have been termed major mutant genes. Several hundred such genes have been identified in man, producing definite defects and abnormalities, of course operating on the variable background of the other genes and

215

216 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

the environments. The hereditary diseases caused by major mutant genes are as a rule rare.
Predispositions to diseases that in a greater or lesser degree are hereditary must generally be regarded as polymeric. They are graded characters dependent on many genes, which, when appearing alone, have but little effect. In some cases, probably, the so-called polygenes and supergenes are in action. Diseases of this type, as oligophrenia and cancer, may be caused by several reciprocally independent genes or by polymeric genes and by non-genetic influences. Also the possibility of phenocopies and of cytoplasmic or maternal actions and of milk factors may in some cases be considered.
The future development and genetic composition of a human population are dependent on a variety of factors, hereditary as well as environmental, endogenous as well as exogenous. A very important group of these factors which determine the fate and survival of a race or a nation is composed of the hereditary deficiencies, abnormalities and diseases occurring in the population.
This is why the study of hereditary lesions is of so great consequence for population problems, human genetics, medical statistics, public health, clinical, preventive and social medicine, sociology and politics. In democratic countries during recent years, an increasing social consciousness has been manifesting itself, a growing feeling that society must make living conditions tolerable for everybody; this has necessitated the study of the hereditary diseases, and not least of their prevalence in the population. It is of importance to governments and social authorities to know the number of people who, because of hereditary lesions, are socially incapacitated and have to be given social relief, to be treated, or to be placed in hospitals or institutions.
-Furthermore, the study of the frequency of defective traits is an essential part of

medical genetics. It is fundamental for investigations on the significance of mutation as a cause of disease and on the way hereditary lesions arise through mutation; for investigations on their mutation rate and on the manifestation, penetrance and expressivity of pathological genes; and for studies on the distribution of these genes through the generations in the various social strata and geographical localities. These processes are dependent on the effects of selection, assortative mating, intermarriage, isolates, selective emigration, immigration and deportation, race discrimination, differential fertility, genetic drift and other similar factors.
A human population is a living body, continuously changing in its composition, variable and inconstant, in progressive or retrogressive development, following the rules of natural selection and evolution, or doing away with these rules as a result of culture and civilization. Knowledge of the prevalence of conditions affected by heredity makes it possible to follow and control the development and the fluctuation of hereditary diseases in the population, and to check up on the behavior of these diseases down through the ages.
Many attempts have been made, using various methods, to estimate the prevalence and incidence of hereditary defects and diseases in various countries or groups of populations; some information concerning the prevalence of hereditary diseases was obtained centuries ago through vital and medical statistics, and health services are still collecting material elucidating this question. Direct investigations concerning the problem have been carried out for the most part during the last fifty years, originally on mental defects and diseases, but later within the whole field of medicine.
Several methods have been used to investigate the morbidity in the average population and to ascertain the amount of hereditary tainting, as, for instance, census investigations, sampling methods, morbidity and hospitalization statistics, and medi-

217

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

co-genetic registration. These methods may or submitted to special public care direct

be used in various ways.

estimation of the morbidity is, of course,

Sampling methods are often applied possible without examination of the total

combined with proband materials or pro- population. But if all cases are known of

positi investigations; and it must be con- blindness or deaf-mutism, for instance, the

sidered whether the sample is representa- difficulty consists in distinguishing between

tive of the average population and fulfills inherited and acquired cases.

certain assumptions with regard to selec- A very elaborate method for calculating

tion and composition. Census investiga- the incidence of hereditary diseases is that

tions may include greater or smaller geo- of procuring the date, by the aid of birth

graphical units, states, counties, municipali- records, of all persons born, say 60 years

ties, communities, islands, valleys and so ago, within a certain territory to get in-

on, or population groups delimited accord- formation on hereditary diseases both in

ing to sex, profession, social class, race, na- those still alive and also in those who have

tionality, etc. Various age groups may be died, and their ages at death.

examined, for instance, new-born, school- Consideration must be given to the fact

children, military conscripts or certain age that a group of hereditary diseases come on

classes; or mortality statistics may be used. only within a certain age period, the period

The "prevalence" of a disease refers to of manifestation or the risk zone (Gefähr-

the number of cases at a given time in the dungszeit) . This does not, of course, apply

population, the "incidence" of a disease to to congenital defects such as hereditary de-

the number of cases developing over a cer- formities or oligophrenia. But many heredi-

tain period of time. Thus prevalence = tary diseases, which to all appearance are

incidence X length of illness. The inci- not congenital, come on within a limited dence at birth can be estimated directly period later in life. Thus, the risk zone for

only for such hereditary diseases as are schizophrenia is generally set between 21

easily recognizable in new-born infants, and 40 (or 16 to 50) years and for manic-

e.g., grave physical defects. This is done depressive psychosis between 21 and 50 (or simply by counting the number of infants later). The great majority of the cases of

born with the defect or the disease con- Graves' disease occur between the ages of

cerned within a certain group. Conclusions 20 and 55. Genuine epilepsy usually first

cannot be drawn, however, concerning the manifests itself between 5 and 20 years. incidence of a disease in the population Regarding mental deficiency, all individ-

from the results thus obtained, because the uals who have completed their 10th year of

mortality generally is higher in affected life without displaying signs of this ab-

than in normal individuals. Harelip and normality are regarded as normal in statiscleft palate, for instance, occur in 0.15 per tical calculations of this kind.

cent of all new-born infants, whereas the By determining the number of individ-

incidence in the total population is only uals within a group presenting a hereditary

about 0.1 per cent. Within the first year of disease with a limited period of manifesta-

life alone the mortality for infants with tion, we get information on the prevalence

harelip and cleft palate is 25 per cent. of the disease in the population. As a rule

Other lesions, e.g., congenital dislocation it is, however, a matter of greater interest

of the hip, are not always recognized at to find the probability of each individual

birth. The prevalence is therefore appar- getting the disease if he lives through the

ently higher in the total population than at whole risk zone, i.e., to find the morbid risk

birth.

(or the morbidity risk or the expectancy,

For the very few hereditary diseases Krankheitserwartung) for the disease con-

where all or nearly all cases are hospitalized cerned in the population. But in calculât-

218 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ing the morbid risk, consideration must be taken both of the age at onset of the disease and the age distribution in the group examined. In the individuals who have not yet reached the risk zone, all have a full chance of getting the disease later in life. Those who are in the midst of the manifestation period have a certain, though smaller, chance of getting the disease, decreasing with increasing age; and only for those who are old enough to have passed the entire risk zone is the morbid risk nil. The morbid risk may be calculated as the cumulative incidence of the disease for all age groups until the end of the period of manifestation.
During recent years new possibilities have been created for investigations on the frequency of hereditary diseases in the population in countries or regions where a medico-genetic or genetic-hygienic registration has been established. A Medico-Genetic Registry includes a systematic registration or card-index covering all the patients in the country who are afflicted with a serious hereditary affection, and also their families. Such registers have been made in small districts in various countries. In Denmark, however, a genetic-hygienic register exists covering the whole country. It is kept in the University Institute for Human Genetics in Copenhagen.
At present about 200,000 patients and their families are registered in the registry, and every year several thousands are added. The registry forms the starting point for more thorough studies into the inheritance of the various lesions and diseases. The procedure then is as follows: The physician, who is trained as a specialist in the field concerned, makes a thorough investigation of the individual patient having the disease or lesion in question, and for the more rare diseases it is attempted as far as possible to compute all cases of the disease in ,the country; for more common lesions it is generally not possible to accomplish a complete census and then a representative sample is collected. In this way more or less

thorough information concerning the frequency of several hereditary lesions in the Danish population is obtained, and some of the results will be mentioned in the following sections.
Knowledge of the prevalence of a hereditary disease does not permit direct conclusions to be drawn concerning the frequency of the corresponding genes. But this can be calculated from the morbidity or the morbid risk if the mode of transmission of the disease is monogenic, and it is inherited according to Mendel's laws, if we know the penetrance of the gene, and on the assumption of random mating.
If we call a dominant gene D and the recessive allelomorph R, and if the gametes containing D and R, respectively, occur at the frequencies d and r (d -}- r = 1), we know the following.
Frequency of RR in per cent = r2 X
100, r = y/RR : 10
Frequency of DR in per cent = 2 dr X
100 = 20 y/RR -- 2 RR Frequency of DD in per cent = d2 X
100 = 100 -- 20 \SRR + RR The frequencies of the genes d and r can be calculated from these formulae, if we know the percentage frequency of RR or DD. Table 1 can be calculated by means of this formula. If those having the recessive character are very few, then the hétérozygotes will be proportionally very common. If the frequency of a recessive disease, for instance, is 0.1 per cent, then, as Table 1 shows, 6.12 per cent of the population must be hétérozygotes; and if the frequency is 1 per cent, 18 per cent are hétérozygotes. It appears further from Table 1 that dominant diseases nearly always occur in the heterozygous form. If the frequency of a dominant disease is 1 per cent, which is relatively high, it is present in the homozygous form in only 1 out of about 40,000 cases. In cases of rarer dominant diseases the homozygous form is still more exceptional. These calculations apply, however,

Zygotei: Frequency:

RECESSIVE HOMOZYGOTES
RR
0.01 0.1 1 10 25 99

TABLE 1
HETEROZYGOTES
DR 2 dr
1.98 6.12 18 43.2 50 1

219

DOMINANT HOMOZYGOTES
DD dt
98.01 93.78 81 46.8 25
0.000025

INDIVIDUALS WITH DOMINANT CHARACTER
RD 4- DD 1 _ r2
99?99 99.9 99 90 75
1

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

only on the assumption of random mating, which hardly ever occurs in human populations.
More than 500 hereditary defects and diseases are today known in man, and not less than 2 to 3 per cent of the population suffer from severe hereditary affections. An enormous number of publications have appeared concerning the prevalence of these deficiencies in the various countries all over the world. Summaries of reviews are given in the publications indicated in the literature list.
Some of the results concerning the prevalence of various genetically based deficiencies are mentioned below. It has to be emphasized, however, that the possibilities for comparing the various calculations and investigations are limited, owing to differences in the methods employed and the varying qualifications of the investigators; to this may be added the uncertainty of diagnosis. Furthermore the individual types of diseases are in many cases difficult to define, and often they do not constitute etiological entities.
The prevalence of deaf-mutism (congenital and early deafness) varies with time and place. It ranges from 0.04 to 0.09 per cent, slightly higher in males than in females. In England and Wales (1937) 0.08 per cent was counted, in France (1926) 0.046, in Germany (1925) 0.059 in males and 0.050 in females, in U.S.S.R. (1926) 0.083 in males and 0.074 in females, in Sweden (1930) 0.095 in males and 0.079 in females, in U.S.A. (1930) 0.047 in males and 0.046 in females, and in Denmark

(1940) 0.046 per cent in males and 0.040 per cent in females.
Statements concerning the proportion of hereditary cases differ considerably, ranging from 10 to 80 per cent. In Denmark (194045) about half the number were cases of hereditary deaf-mutism (0.02-0.03 per cent), most of them sporadic-recessive deafmutism, and only a few cases (less than 5 per cent) heredo-labyrinthic deaf-mutism. Retinitis pigmentosa occurred in about 6 per cent of deaf-mutes. The proportional frequency of endogenous deaf-mutism--the percentage of hereditary cases among the total number of deaf-mutes--must be expected to increase considerably in the future. The same holds true as regards other deficiencies, as for instance, blindness and oligophrenia. The exogenous cases are decreasing; the endogenous remain constant or are even increasing as a result of the progress of civilization.
The prevalence of blindness varies from one country to another. At present it is about 0.05-0.06 per cent in many countries; in Denmark in recent years more than half the cases are hereditary. It is particularly the exogenous blindness which varies in frequency according to time and place. The prevalence of several hereditary eye diseases has been estimated recently as follows, congenital aniridia 0.001 per cent; iridochoroidal coloboma 0.024 per cent; congenital hydrophthalmos 0.008 per cent; glaucoma 0.055 per cent; retinitis pigmentosa 0.005-0.02 per cent; partial color blindness in males 7 per cent, in females 0.4 per cent (in Eskimos in East Greenland,

220 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

1952, 2.5. per cent in males, 0.4 in females, a small sample, in West Greenland 6.8 per cent in males, 0.8 in females, in Indians 1, 1-2,4 per cent and in Chinese 5 per cent) ; total color blindness 0.0003 per cent in total population, but in a small isolate group 1 per cent.
The prevalence of congenital malformations varies somewhat from country to country. In the state of Rhode Island the incidence at birth from 1936-52 was for anencephalus 0.193 per cent; for spina bifida 0.253 per cent; for hydrocephalus 0.09 per cent. Other prevalences (partly from recent Danish investigations) are harelip 0.07 per cent (incidence at birth 0.11 per cent) ; isolated cleft palate 0.03 per cent (at birth 0.04) ; congenital dislocation of the hip 0.15 per cent; chondrodystrophy 0.002 per cent (at birth 0.01 per cent) ; osteogenesis imperfecta at birth 0.002 per cent; hypospadia in males 0.3 per cent.
As regards the prevalence of mental deficiency great variations of from 0.8 to 3 or 4 per cent appear in the results of the various investigators according to definition and methods. In Denmark (1940) the prevalence of feeble-mindedness (including idiocy, imbecility and debility (morons)) was 1.3 per cent (1.0 per cent for hereditary cases, 0.3 for non-hereditary). Idiots comprised 0.1 per cent, 0.2-0.3 per cent imbeciles; 1.7 per cent were mentally retarded. Prevalence of Mongoloid idiocy was 0.025 per cent (at birth 0.15 per cent).
For other frequencies of diseases affected by heredity (chiefly according to recent

investigations in European countries) the following may be cited: schizophrenia 0.3 per cent (morbid risk 0.9 per cent) ; manic-depressive psychosis morbid risk in males 1.0, in females 2.2 per cent (in a North-Swedish population the prevalence and the morbid risk of schizophrenia were three times as high as indicated above, and manic-depressive psychosis was extremely rare). The total psychosis expectation up to 55 years is about 3 per cent in men and 5 per cent in women; mentally abnormal evt. periodically in the age range of 10-55 years were 12 per cent. The morbid risk for epilepsy is about 0.3-0.5 per cent (or higher) . The prevalence of diabetes mellitus is 0.5-1.0 per cent, and the morbid risk in males 1-5 per cent and in females 2 to 7 per cent; the prevalence of hemophilia was 0.002 per cent in males.

In conclusion, the significance of knowledge concerning the frequency of defective traits for all studies and investigations of population problems should be emphasized.

REFERENCES

BÖÖK, J. A. Acta Genet. 2 : 289, 1951; 4 : I, 133,

345, 1953.

FREMMING, K. H. Occas. Papers Eugenics 7: 1951.

KEMP, T. Symp. Quant. Biol. 15: 129, 1951.

_____

"Genetics and Disease," Copenhagen,

1951.

_____

(as editor) Opera Dom. Biol. Hered.

Hum. 1-35; 1942-54.

LEWIS, E. O. "Report of the Mental Deficiency

Committee," 1930.

MCKEOWN, T. H. Brit. J. Social Med. 4 : 183; 5 :

254, 1949-52.

SCHULZ, B. "Method. Menschl. Erbforsch." Leipzig,

1936. SJÖGREN, J. Acta Psychiat. Supl. 5 2 : 1948. STRÖMGREN, E. Congrés International de Psychiatrie

6 : 155, 1950.

