Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
"Wanted" and "unwanted": Toward less ambiguous definition
Edward Pohlman
To cite this article: Edward Pohlman (1965) "Wanted" and "unwanted": Toward less ambiguous definition, Eugenics Quarterly, 12:1, 19-27, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1965.9987603 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1965.9987603
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles Citing articles: 7 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

Brief Report

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

"WANTED" AND "UNWANTED": TOWARD LESS AMBIGUOUS DEFINITION *

EDWARD POHLMAN
University of the Pacific Stockton, California

Definitions of "unwanted child," "wanted child," "wanting," and "not wanting" have frequently troubled those who deal with topics related to these terms. Empirical research must come to grips with the operational definition to be used, but unfortunately many writers and speakers are not forced to such precise definition. Our purpose here is not to provide definitions, but merely to list some of the difficulties with which the path toward definition is strewn.
MORE THAN ONE FAMILY MEMBER
INVOLVED
Even the simplest nuclear family usually contains two parents, who may have somewhat different feelings toward a child; in some cases one parent might even be said to "want" and the other to "unwant" a child. Siblings may have feelings toward a child which are at variance with those of one or both parents. For example, sometimes parents welcome a new baby but an older sibling, dethroned from the center of the universe, seems to want to kill the baby. In the "Indianapolis Study," Solomon, Clare, and Westoff (1956) tested the hypothesis that the desire of existing children for a sibling might be a factor affecting family size; however, such feelings were
* Preparation of this article was supported by the Social Science Committee of the Planned Parenthood Federation of America and World Population Emergency Campaign.

not demonstrated to have an influence for that sample.
Other individuals--grandparents, aunts and uncles, boarders, perhaps even neighbors--may in some cases make up the immediate group whose "wantingunwanting" feelings are crucial in the child's development. In cultures where the extended family is common, this group may be very large indeed. In the balance of this discussion we shall confine ourselves to the "wanting-unwanting" feelings of one given family member toward the child. But the problems of defining any one person's feelings, listed below, must often be multiplied by the number of significant family members who have feelings that present similar definitional problems.
CHANGES OVER TIME
A given parent has changes in feeling over time. In addition to changes that may involve repression and rationalization, there may be "real" changes, possibly brought about by changes in external circumstances. These changes may occur within a relatively short time. As an extreme hypothetical example, a newlywed mother may want a conception, regret it during pregnancy when her husband leaves her, and rejoice in the company which the baby's presence brings her. The child may be regretted when the mother loses her job and does

19

20

Brief Report

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

not know how to support him; wanted when she receives welfare help; regretted when the child becomes a juvenile delinquent; wanted in her old age when the reformed delinquent and his family become the light of her life.
The term "unwanted conception" may be made somewhat more specific than "unwanted child," if it is used to pinpoint the family's attitudes at some time before pregnancy. This usage permits recognition that the "wanted conception" may become "unwanted" later on, and vice versa. Much of the zeal of the family planning movements of the present century seems to have involved the reasonable assumption that most children unwanted at conception will be unwanted later on, while wanted conceptions will remain similarly constant (Lader, 1955). Empirical evidence for this assumption is not so plentiful as might be desired. The high divorce rate in the United States, following marriages which were generally "wanted" by both partners, is a solemn reminder that people do change their minds on questions of wanting. In the balance of this discussion, we shall confine ourselves to the feelings of a given family member at a particular period in his or her life. However, changes over time do complicate the definitional task.
WANTING A CHILD TO COME LATER
Not only does a given family member's attitude change over time, but at any given time he may feel that he does not want a child then, but wants one later on. Married college students may want to have children eventually, but a conception while the wife is working to get her husband through his education, or is seeking to reach some educational milestone herself, may be quite disturbing (Poffenberger, et al., 1952). In some cases

the parent's emotional response to a child born too soon may be much like that of a parent who wants no more children at any future time.
WANTING SOME OF THE CHILDREN
BUT NOTALL
In the 1955 Growth of American Families Study (Freedman, et al., 1959, pp. 215-237) almost all mothers claimed that they wanted at least some children. Yet 13% of the entire sample, and22% of those married 15 or more years, were classified as having excess fertility (p.83). ("Excess fertility" means that the couple's most recent pregnancy was reported as unwanted before it occurred or at some later time by the husband or the wife or both--p. 78.) The implication is that many Americans may want some of their children but not all. Perhaps the term "unwanting parent" is confusing because it does not make clear whether the parent "unwants" all of his or her children, or merely one or more selected from the total. It may be difficult for a mother to carve up her family, in her thinking, into the early and "wanted" part and the later and "unwanted" part. Perhaps she will try dutifully to love them all. And some of the psychological characteristics of an "unwanting" reaction toward one child may sometimes generalize to the whole group. Specifically, if she feels hostility over having too many, this feeling may be generalized. This is not to deny that some parents develop very specific likes and dislikes toward particular individual children.
"ACCIDENTAL," "UNPLANNED," AND
"UNWANTED"
There seems to be extensive agreement that the term "unplanned conception"

Vol. 12, No. 1

"Wanted" and "Unwanted"

21

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

does not necessarily mean that the conception was "unwanted." There seems to be a greater danger of confusion between "accidental conception" and "unwanted conception." Demographers (e.g., Freedman, et al., 1959, pp. 68-75) have used the term "accidental" to describe a conception which takes place while contraception is being practiced. According to this definition, a woman who definitely does not want a conception, but has one while not practicing contraception, has not had an "accidental" conception although she may have had an "unwanted" one. And a woman who is using contraception to postpone conception for a few more months, who wants to conceive after a few more months, may have an "accidental" conception which many would hesitate to call "unwanted." In view of this demographic usage, perhaps confusion may be avoided either by not using the term "accidental," or by using it only when the definition "conception occurring while contraception is being practiced" is clear to all readers.
FACTORS IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS
Many psychological factors affect an individual's decision about whether he or she wants a particular pregnancy to occur. Some of these tend to make a parent desire a child to be conceived, and others tend to make a parent desire that a child not be conceived. If we ignore unconscious motivations for the moment, we might organize conscious perceptions of parents into:
Perceived advantages of a child's presence (e.g., the child may love me); Perceived disadvantages of a child's presence (e.g., the child may make my house messy); Perceived advantages of the child's absence, in terms of other competing possibilities (e.g., I may be able to work

at a desired job if I do not have a birth); Perceived disadvantages of a child's absence (e.g., I may be regarded as strange if I fail to produce at least one child).
The conscious desire to have or not to have a child can be thought of as some sort of compromise between such factors as these.
Westoff, et al., (1961, p. 167) have stated a somewhat similar notion in what they call the "assumption of compatibility":
This states that a particular pattern of fertility performance and control depends on the extent to which having another child (or a certain number of children) is compatible with other life values and interests. Although at the level of a truism, this serves to bring into prominence the notion that a fertility choice (whether implicit or explicit) involves a "cost" for the individual and for the family, that is, certain desires and interests are either yielded or compromised in preference to others.
The result of various factors pulling in different directions is often ambivalence. Within some persons the legislature of various factors may be unanimous in voting a desire for a child or that a child not be born. But in many cases votes are cast in both directions, and the individual's feelings may represent a compromise, a tenuous majority which a few changed votes could throw the other way, or a deadlock between wanting and not wanting a child. Some individuals find it difficult to recognize ambivalence in themselves and are convinced that they feel unanimously for or against a child. This is similar to loving a person completely and then suddenly changing to hating him completely.
This may be illustrated in the follow-

22

Brief Report

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

ing letter from a Planned Parenthood
leader:
A patient of ours called to say that she was ten days late with her period and therefore assumed that she was pregnant. She cried and went on to say that she did not want this baby, her husband did not want it, and that she was afraid that she might have a nervous breakdown. She has two children under three. . . . This discussion occurred about 4:00 o'clock in the afternoon. That evening she and her husband had a long discussion about the possible pregnancy and came to the conclusion that they really wanted another child but that this was a little early for them to have another. However, after careful consideration she remembered how good she feels when she is pregnant. This is a time when she feels most radiant. She feels that she is fulfilled in having a baby. Therefore, she changes her mind about the "unwanted child." She and her husband called me at 10:00 p.m. to tell me of their discussion and their change in attitude.
Noting empirical evidence of ambiva-
lence in a major Puerto Rican study re-
ported by Hill, et al. (1959), Stycos
(1958, pp. 139-143) asks how we can in-
vestigate such ambivalance. His answer
to this question includes, among other
things, a discussion of differential norms
and reference groups. On a variable
such as social class or sex or age or mari-
tal status, a given individual may occupy
a particular position. In addition, he
may aspire to the norms and values of
some other position on that variable,
since that position is perceived by him
as desirable. In the United States, for ex-
ample, if the higher social classes are
perceived as having larger families, then
a lower-class person aspiring to be like
the higher class may be influenced to-
ward wanting larger families, as Westoff,
et al. (1961, pp. 237-261) suggest.
Stycos (1958, pp. 140,141) says:

The same individual may have a number of conflicting attitudes, the salience of any one at any one time depending on the situation. In the presence of a middle class interviewer the respondent may voice attitudes she feels more acceptable to that class; in the presence of her husband still another attitude might be voiced; in the presence of her peers still another.
Instead of assuming that these varying statements are merely false fronts, Stycos implies that they may be a very genuine part of the ambivalence.
REPRESSION AND UNCONSCIOUS FEELINGS
The preceding discussion presents a fairly rational or logical interpretation of whether a birth is "wanted." Human feelings and behavior are not always rational, a point which seems to be illustrated by the experience of the woman mentioned above. In trying to understand such puzzling changes of mind as hers, we may find helpful the Freudian notion of "repression" of unacceptable feelings "out of" conscious awareness and "into" the "unconscious." In general, the good parent in our culture is supposed to be one who wants children, at least a few of them. He is not supposed to kill people or even wish that they would die. A wish that one's child would be run over by a truck or die of pneumonia somehow does not fit in with the stereotype of a devoted mother, perhaps sitting in her rocking chair, silver haired, surrounded by roses, and weary from noble service to her children. For many, the wish that one's child had not been born is threateningly close to the wish that he would die, or even the wish to kill him. Thus it may be necessary to get rid of--or "repress"--the idea that the child is unwanted and decide that he is wanted after all. Parents may practice contraception and fail; they may

Vol. 12, No. 1

"Wanted" and "Unwanted"

23

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

wish for an abortion or stillbirth; but
they often convince themselves that they
really wanted the youngster, at least
eventually if not now. Thus a parent's
"conscience" may lead him to repress
several kinds of feelings:
1. Wishes, felt during pregnancy, that the child could be aborted or that he would be born dead.
2. Wishes, felt after birth, that the child would die.
3. Wishes that the child had not been conceived.
4. Wishes that a child had been of the other sex than it is (Clare and Kiser, 1951, present evidence which may be interpreted as suggesting repression of such wishes).
5. Unacceptable reasons for either wanting or not wanting children, with more acceptable reasons sometimes being substituted. Thus a husband who wanted to use children as a hostile means of chaining his wife down (Rainwater, 1960) might not be conscious of this desire and might, for example, just have "accidents."
In the Freudian view, what is re-
pressed does not leave the person's life
completely, but goes to the "uncon-
scious" where it may continue to be in-
fluential. The Freudian "unconscious"
has sometimes been misinterpreted as a
separate section of the brain, or at least
seen as a very real, distinct entity within
the personality. While such views may
be nai've, "the unconscious" may serve
as a fruitful hypothetical construct for
some purposes. Or, even if one prefers
not to think of "the unconscious," one
may think of parents as being uncon-
scious of certain motivations. Stimulus-
response learning theory has also pro-
vided evidence strongly suggesting that
behavior can be based on prior learning
(and learned drives) without always be-
ing tunneled through the conscious
awareness of the behaver. This seems to

be one example of the possible agreement between psychoanalytic and learning theory concepts. Many psychologists who are opposed to the bulk of psychoanalytic theory find the notion of unconscious motivation convenient.
The implication is that a parent may consciously "want" a child and unconsciously "not want" a child, as may have been true in the case cited above. The reverse, though perhaps less frequent, may also occur. Westoff, et al. (1961, p. 14) parody the idea of unconscious motivation: if all acts are in keeping with unconscious motivation, then there is no such thing as an accidental conception, since at the unconscious level it must have been wanted. As the authors point out, this extreme view is an unnecessary exaggeration.
FACADES ERECTED FOR OTHERS
Repression and rationalization are thought to take place within the personality, so that the "conscious" side of the individual is not aware of "unconscious" feelings. In a somewhat parallel fashion, the individual may not let other people know what he or she consciously feels. Self-deception and deception of others are often present together.
Menninger (1942, p. 221) quotes from the letter of a colleague who wanted him to see a 16-year-old girl. The letter describes the mother's experience years before:
When the mother discovered that she was pregnant with the present child, she was greatly distressed and came to me wanting an abortion. When I refused to encourage her, she reacted by a violent display of temper which she repeated toward her husband and others and continued for weeks. She made threats of suicide. . . .
I mention this because it was in such sharp contrast with the mother's be-

24

Brief Report

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

havior subsequently. She put on what seemed to me to be an exaggerated display of motherhood. . . . She fussed over the child constantly during infancy and early school days. . . . It seems to me rather clear that the mother had a prodigious hostility for this child, which the child seems to have sensed in spite of the fact that the mother tried to cover it up. We may soon have two patients on our hands.
Menninger (1942, p. 231) comments that the case of this woman, "who rebelled violently against having a child and later exhibited an exaggerated but disastrous concern for it, is a very common one in the psychiatrist's experience."
Even if the external observer suspects that the facade presented for public consumption is not the "true" picture, it may be difficult to distinguish between self-deception and deception of others, let alone to ascertain what the "true" picture is. In any case the interviewer, the questionnaire analyst, the family counselor, may be given a somewhat distorted picture.
We have noted above Stycos' (1958,pp. 140, 141) suggestion that an individual may express different views when under the influence of different reference or membership groups. He quotes Ryan's report of a Sinhalese study (1952, p. 359):
The sample of mothers . . . offered evidence that many women are torn between the community valuation of the large family and a personal desire for restricted numbers. . . . It was sharply evident to the interviewers that infinite numbers of children were an unqualified blessing in situations where several women were present.
In trying to decide whether a child was
wanted, the present writer would tend to
interpret what Ryan calls a "personal

desire" as the "true" feeling, and a conflicting publicly expressed viewpoint as a facade. However, writing with an emphasis on the factors which affect family size rather than on parents' "wantingunwanting" feelings, Stycos (1958, p. 141) says:
In the light of present knowledge, it would be fallacious to assume that a privately held attitude is more 'real' than a publicly held one. There is no reason to believe that one attitude has less consequences for behavior than the other. Indeed, since the number of one's children is a public phenomenon, it might be argued that the 'public' attitude is more significant for fertility than the 'private' one.
WANTING A CHILD FOR "UNHEALTHY"
REASONS
From a psychological perspective, all motives for "wanting" a child are rooted in the parent's own needs rather than in the needs of the child. A parent may have a genuine, "unselfish" concern for the well-being of the child and may "enjoy" and "get satisfaction from" and "find fulfillment" in helping children and making their lives rich and wonderful. But even in such altruistic motivation, the parent gets the enjoyment or satisfaction or fulfillment from the altruistic acts, however altruistic they may be.
Nevertheless, some reasons for wanting a child may be more "selfish" than others, or less desirable from the viewpoint of the mental health of the child. Foote (1956) suggests that many parents regard their children as pets, with unhealthy consequences.
A child "wanted" for "unhealthy" reasons may suffer undesirable consequences, sometimes quite similar to the consequences of being frankly "unwanted." How is such a child to be classified?

Vol. 12, No. 1

"Wanted" and "Unwanted"

25

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

THERE MAY BE NO DECISION
Terms such as "unwanted child" imply that some decision has been made. Obviously, many individuals and couples never make any clear-cut decisions one way or another. Indeed, Rainwater (1960) and others emphasize that the "natural" thing to do is not to plan births. In the natural course of events, such indecision often results in births. In some cultures the question of "wanting" a child, with all of the rational decision which this implies, may not be too prominent. Burgess, et al. (1963, p. 3) have stated as "the basic thesis" of their book that the family is in a state of transition from institution to companionship. The companionship family seems to imply some decision about whether a child's presence is wanted; in the institutional family, having children may be part of a set of duties and patterns which are never really questioned, so that whether a particular child is "wanted" may not be a meaningful question.
Even in cultures where planning is widely emphasized, many individuals never consciously decide whether a child is wanted. Westoff, et al. (1961, pp. 212, 229, 230) repeatedly imply that the rise in births in recent America may be due, not only or primarily to "wanting" more children, but to the lessening of the acuteness of "unwanting" them. In other words, if the negative "costs" of children are less severe, children may more easily be allowed to "just happen." These writers use such expressions as a lessening of contraceptive vigilance or proneness to contraceptive risk-taking, and imply a lessened emphasis on hard-and-fast commitments to some decision about a next child. They further note (Westoff, et al., 1961, p. 230) that an "accidental" pregnancy occurring while officially con-

tracepting but really taking chances "could be regarded as the unconscious solution to the uncomfortable alternative of having to make a deliberate decision to have another child." Rainwater (1960) titles an early chapter in his study of working-class Americans, "Doing nothing is the easiest way out." After the birth occurs, many of the advantages and disadvantages of a child's presence come into play, but they may never be marshalled for an over-all decision about whether the child is wanted.
IMPLICATIONS
A few implications for research might be spelled out.
1. Decisions must be made about whether "wanting-unwanting" is to be defined in terms of "unconscious" feelings, unpublished conscious feelings, or published statements to others.
2. If the latter, it may be important to decide which others; interviewers of different social classes or sex or age groups might get different replies. Stycos (1958, pp. 141, 142) has made a number of helpful suggestions in this connection.
3. If we are trying to shoot for "deep" or "true" feelings, the practice of asking parents whether they now want their children, how many children they wanted at some former time, whether a given conception was wanted, or even whether contraception was used or interrupted at the time of a particular conception, may present problems.
4. Projective techniques, "expert" clinical judgments, and other indirect approaches to parents' feelings may have value in some studies in trying to compare "wanted" and "unwanted" children.
5. But it is patently hard to measure, or prove the presence of, repressed and unconscious motives. This often boils down to the opinion of an expert as ver-

26

Brief Report

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

sus the opinion of the parent, or even the opinion of one expert against another. Even in a longitudinal study of family development, it is impossible to discriminate with precision between "real" changes in parents' feelings about children after they come along, and rationalization.
Much may be gained by studying the actual questions, and the implicit or explicit operational definitions, used in relation to "wanting" and "unwanting" in the major studies of factors affecting fertility made to date. The 1955 Growth of American Families Study (Freedman, et al., 1959) incorporated some of the procedures of earlier studies (Flanagan, 1942; Whelpton and Kiser, 1946-1958). Also instructive are the procedures of the "Princeton Study" (Westoff, et al., 1961, 1963).
SUMMARY
Some problems involved in defining "wanted child" and "unwanted child" have been discussed:
1. Usually there are two or more family members whose feelings towards the child are important and may be in disagreement.
2. Any given individual may experience changes in feeling over time.
3. At any given time an individual may have a child whom he does not want at that time but whom he believes he would have wanted at a later time.
4. A parent may have wanted some children, especially those born first, but not all; in some cases feelings toward an unwanted "extra child" may generalize to other children.
5. The term "accidental conception" has developed a specialized meaning and probably should not be used interchangeably with "unwanted conception."
6. Any individual is influenced by

many factors, some of which may tend to make him "want," and others to "unwant," a given child.
7. An individual may "repress" certain feelings, so that at the "conscious" level he "wants" a child and at the "unconscious" level does not, and vice versa.
8. The individual may conceal from others even those feelings of which he is conscious; the statements he makes to them may vary, depending upon who they are.
9. A child may be "wanted" for "unhealthy" or superficial reasons; not all "wanting" is emotionally healthy.
10. In some cultures and in some families there may never be any particular decision as to whether a child is "wanted"; the term may be almost meaningless, particularly if having children is part of an unthinking institutional pattern.
REFERENCES
BURGESS, E. W., H. J. LOCKE, and M. M. THOMES,
1963. The Family, from Institution to Companionship (3rd ed.). American Book Company, New York.
CLARE, J. E., and C. V. KISER, 1951. Social and
Psychological Factors Affecting Fertility: XIV. Preference for Children of Given Sex in Relation to Fertility. Mil. Mem. Fd. Quart., 29: 440-492. FLANAGAN, J. C, 1942. A Study of Factors Determining Family Size in a Selected Professional Group. Genetic Psychol. Monographs, 25: 3-99. FOOTE, N., 1956. A Neglected Member of the Family. Marr. Fam. Living, 1 8 : 213-218.
FREEDMAN, R., P. K. WHELPTON, and A. A. CAMP-
BELL, 1959. Family Planning, Sterility, and Population Growth. McGraw-Hill, New York.
HILL, R., J. M. STYCOS, and K. W. BACK, 1959.
The Family and Population Control: A Puerto Rican Experiment in Social Change. University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, N.C. LADER, L., 1955. The Margaret Sanger Story and the Fight for Birth Control. Doubleday, New York. MENNINGER, K., 1942. Love Against Hate. Harcourt, Brace and World, New York.
POFFENBERGER, S., T. POFFENBERGER, and J. T.
LANDIS, 1952. Intent Toward Conception and the Pregnancy Experience. Amer. Sociol. Rev., 17: 616-620.

Vol. 12, No. 1

"Wanted" and "Unwanted"

27

RAINWATER, L., 1960. And the Poor Get Children. Quadrangle Books, Chicago.
RYAN, B., 1952. Institutional Factors in Sinhalese Fertility. Mil. Mem. Fd. Quart., 30: 359-381.
SOLOMON, E. S., J. E. CLARE, and C. F. WESTOFF,
1956. Social and Psychological Factors Affecting Fertility: XXXI. Fear of Childlessness, Desire to Avoid an Only Child, and Children's Desires for Siblings. Mil. Mem. Fd. Quart., 34: 160-177.
STYCOS, T. M., 1958. Some Directions for Research on Fertility Control. Mil. Mem. Fd. Quart., 36: 126-148.

WESTOFF, C. F., R. G. POTTER, JR., P. C. SAW, and
E. G. MISHLER, 1961. Family Growth in Metropolitan America. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
, , and , 1963. The Third Child. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
WHELPTON, P. K., and C. V. KISER, eds., 19461958. Social and Psychological Factors Af-
fecting Fertility, 5 vols. Milbank Memorial Fund, New York.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

NOTICE TO MEMBERS AND SUBSCRIBERS
All inquiries regarding subscriptions, payments of dues, or back orders of Eugenics Quarterly should be sent to our business office at the following address.
AMERICAN EUGENICS SOCIETY Business Office 1323 Greenwood Road Baltimore, Maryland 21208
Correspondence regarding manuscripts and inquiries regarding the Society, its goals, and activities may be addressed to the office at 230 Park Avenue, New York, New York 10017.

