Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Resources of mental ability: How can the supply of superior ability be conserved and perhaps increased?
Lee R. Dice
To cite this article: Lee R. Dice (1960) Resources of mental ability: How can the supply of superior ability be conserved and perhaps increased?, Eugenics Quarterly, 7:1, 9-22, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1960.9987426 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1960.9987426
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 3
View related articles
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

Vol. 7,No.1,March, 1960 E u g e n i c s Quarterly
RESOURCES OF MENTAL ABILITY How Can the Supply of Superior Ability Be Conserved and Perhaps Increased?
LEE R. DICE Professor Emeritus of Zoology
University of Michigan and Research Associate Cranbrook Institute of Science

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

MODERN CIVILIZATION GROWS i n COm-
plexity the demand for mental ability is increasing in something like a geometrical progression. Needed are able and inspiring teachers, imaginative engineers and architects, resourceful investigators, broad-minded administrators, competent physicians and lawyers, and a host of other types of professional workers. In the past 50 years, for example, the number of scientists in the United States has increased ten times as rapidly as the whole population (Wolfle, 1954), but the demand still exceeds the supply.
Craftsmen, technologists, and many other types of workers with above-average ability also are required in increasing numbers. To build and to maintain the complicated machines of modern industry requires a high, degree of competence. Business also is demanding increasingly higher levels of ability. The farm manager now requires a long proc-

ess of education and experience added to a large degree of natural talent. The successful housewife and mother, furthermore, must have many special abilities. Men with muscular power and physical endurance are still needed for many operations, but machines are taking over an increasing proportion of their duties.
The maintenance and further evolution of the complicated human communities that now dominate the earth requires not only that all our resources of mental ability be fully utilized and conserved but also that these resources be, if possible, further expanded.
Facilities are consequently required in every society for discovering which of its young men and young women possess potential mental ability of any type. Means must then be found for encouraging each of these young people to prepare for the field of activity best suited to his talents and interests. Each should

9

10 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

be educated and trained so that the best possible use is made of his capabilities. The full exploitation of potential ability of every useful kind will benefit not only the individuals concerned, but will promote also the welfare of the whole commonwealth.
SUPPLY OF TALENT IS LIMITED
Even if every capable student is identified and given the best possible education and training, however, this will at best permit only the full utilization of those talents that already exist in the population. The supply of potentially able young men and women in the present world population, unfortunately, is limited. Even if all promising young people can be located and trained, their number will certainly be less than can profitably be used by the increasingly complex civilizations which are in process of evolution.
Students with high mental capacities are rare, as every teacher knows. A good education added to strong incentive has enabled many a below-average student to become a useful worker. More than education and incentive are needed, however, to produce an individual who ranks high in any special field of effort.
Some of the qualities that may enable a person to be outstanding in one type of work may contribute to his possible success in a different field of effort. The mathematician, physician, engineer, research scientist, artist, and musician, however, must each have talents of a special kind (Dorn, 1947), as well as training in his own particular field. The demand for specialists of many diverse kinds can be expected to increase for many years in the future.
Success in any kind of career undoubtedly is based on a complex of fac-

tors. These factors include not only the various elements of intelligence and training but also involve attributes of personality, such as may be called imagination, perseverance, dependability, curiosity, and social cooperativeness (Cattell, 1957: Table A-3). The state of physical health also may sometimes affect the expression of the mental qualities. At the present time, unfortunately, the numerous elements of intelligence, personality, education, and physical well-being that together may create a predisposition for any special type of ability cannot be successfully measured or classified.
IMPORTANCE OF HEREDITY
Heredity is known, however, to be an important factor in the production of many features of superior intelligence. Some important factors of personality also have a strong hereditary component (Cattell, 1950). By comparing sets of identical twins with sets of non-identical but same-sexed twins, for example, it has been demonstrated that many of the measurable psychological characters that might contribute to mental ability are dependent to a considerable degree on heredity (Vandenberg, 1956; and unpublished data). Those persons who have a special talent of any kind may fail to use it effectively unless they are given sufficient encouragement and unless they receive a suitable education. No amount of encouragement or education, however, can transform a stupid student into one who is intellectually superior.
The precise mode of heredity of the several factors that in proper combination may provide the potentiality for any human special ability, or for excellence in overall ability, is not known with certainty. The available evidence,

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

however, strongly suggests that the several factors which underlie intelligence, personality, and physical health and are basic to the expression of superior ability are each inherited through the combined action of numerous genes (Fuller, 1954; Neel and Schull, 1954). This is the multiple-factor or polygene type of heredity.
A special feature of multifactorial heredity is that the genes concerned are additive in their effects. A character that is controlled by genes of this type will in general be only slightly affected by the presence or absence of any one gene. The identification of the precise genes that may influence mental superiority, consequently, is not essential as a basis for considering the level of hereditary talent in any given population. Those individuals who exhibit superiority in any character can be assumed to be the carriers of more than an average number of those genes which may contribute to the production of that character.
Those multiple genes that control the heredity of mental capacities must be widely distributed in every human population. Due to the recombination of these genes in each generation, considerable variation is to be expected among the children in each family, but there also will be certain family resemblances. The children of a person with a certain outstanding ability may not equal their parent in this character. The expectation, nevertheless, is that from parents who both exhibit a talent of any particular kind, the children will for that talent average above the general level of the population of which they form a part.
Long before there was any precise knowledge of genetic laws, the plant and animal breeders had demonstrated how

Il
to improve traits that are controlled by multiple genes. By selecting as parents those individuals who exhibited in highest degree the particular trait desired, such wonders have been developed as high milk productivity by cows, high egg productivity by hens, and swift running by race horses. Breeds of dogs have been developed which have the capacity to be trained for various special types of behavior.
No such rigorous selection could be applied to a human population, nor would we wish it to be. The selection which would result from a wholly voluntary increase in family size by those persons who possess a particular character, such as a special mental ability, however, would be expected to produce in just a few generations an appreciable improvement in the character selected for. We are not here concerned with developing a new kind of human race but only with raising the general level of ability.
The increase of potential mental ability in human populations actually is basically not a genetic problem at all. Although it is desirable to learn as much as possible about the mode of inheritance of all kinds of human traits, including special mental abilities, it is not necessary to know the precise mode of heredity of a trait controlled by multiple genes in order to plan for the increase of that trait in a population. The knowledge we really need is how the several social factors operate among persons with differing mental capacities to determine their mate selection, age at marriage, and size of family.
DIFFERENTIAL FERTILITY IN RESPECT
TO ABILITY
For as far back as we have any records, there appear to have been differences

12 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

in fertility between the several economic, educational, occupational, and social classes and between rural and urban groups, in almost every case the higher birth rates being found in the lower class and in the rural groups (Osborn, 1951; Kiser, 1952; Grabill and others, 1958; Westoff, 1954). These differences increased with the introduction of birth control and have declined somewhat as contraception has come into wider use. At the present time these differentials appear to be directly related to the extent of the use of contraceptives.
Standing alone, these differentials would appear to make for a decrease in each generation of those genetic factors favorable to high intelligence, character, and drive. But there may be offsetting factors of which at present we have no knowledge. Indeed we do not know the extent to which the social classes differ in genetic capacities, nor whether differences in size of family within social groups may offset differences between groups.
In general, scientific opinion today favors the more pessimistic interpretation. But these differences are due to social causes, and we believe that acceptable and relatively slight changes in social, psychological, and economic conditions could result in differentials of a favorable sort. Some of these possible changes will be suggested in a later section of this paper.
OTHER MECHANISMS THAT MAY
AFFECT ABILITY
In addition to differential reproduction the most important of the mechanisms which may conceivably affect changes in mental capacity from one generation to another are assortative mating, sexual selection, natural selection, heterosis, and mutation.

Positive assortative mating, the tendency for like to mate with like, should result in the production of some families with above-average mental ability. On the other hand, some families with below-average ability also will be produced. Assortative mating offers the possibility of producing some individuals with exceptionally high mental capacity, but this is balanced by the equal probability of producing some individuals with exceptionally low capacity. Assortative mating by itself, consequently, will neither raise nor lower the average intellectual level of a population, but it may be an important mechanism in the evolution of special abilities.
Sexual selection (preferential mating) may be presumed to have been important in early human societies in promoting the evolution of certain special abilities (Holmes, 1936; Dice, 1955). In a hunting tribe, for instance, ability in hunting may give a man a preferred rating as a marriage partner (Holmberg, 1950). In many preliterate societies not only did those persons who exhibited preferred types of abilities have priority in the marriage market, but the most able men often had more than one wife. In such societies sexual selection must often have resulted in differential reproduction which favored the particular abilities which were locally esteemed.
Reliable information about the operation of sexual selection for or against mental abilities, unfortunately, is almost completely lacking in modern societies. In the United States, however, sexual selection seems in general not to favor intellectual capacity. On the contrary, overemphasis on female physical beauty probably results in some degree of selection against intellectual capacity, at least in women. This is indicated by the fact that 15 per cent or more of

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

women college graduates never marry (Population Reference Bureau, 1956). In this country there also is overemphasis on athletic ability and on economic success in men. In intellectual circles, intelligence is probably of some advantage, both to men and to women, in securing a desirable mate. It may be doubted, however, if this is true for most classes in the population. In the United States, therefore, sexual selection may be contributing to adverse differential reproduction in respect to mental capacity.
Natural selection (differential mortality) is another agency that may affect the frequency in the population of those genes that contribute to mental superiority of any kind. Any hereditary factor that results in involuntary sterility or in death before the end of the reproductive period may be considered to be subject to natural selection. In spite of statements sometimes made that natural selection is ineffective in modern populations, it is still a powerful force (Holmes, 1936; Dobzhansky and Allen, 1956; Neel, 1958). It operates especially to remove those hereditary defects which cause death before or soon after birth or which result in infertility. Idiots and imbeciles generally have no offspring, and consequently a portion of the genes that produce these severe mental defects will be eliminated from each generation. One type of low-grade mental defect associated with phenylketonuria is produced by a recessive gene. Several other types of mental defects likewise are inherited through simple genetic mechanisms (Kallmann, 1953). Mutations that produce mental defects such as these may be presumed to occur at a low but persistent rate. If these genes were not removed by natural selection, they would accumulate to form a heavy

13
load of unfortunate heredity. On the other hand, there is no evidence that in modern populations natural selection in any way affects the frequency of those multiple genes that control superior mental capacity.
Differential mortality produced by cultural rather than by biological factors might also affect the supply of inherited ability. In some populations mortality may be at a higher rate for children who are low in intelligence than for those who have greater inborn intellect (Holmes, 1933). Such differential mortality might result from inadequate care of their children by parents who are themselves of relatively low intelligence. The families of incompetent parents, moreover, will likely be reared under conditions of poverty which predispose to malnutrition and disease. The economic condition and health of all classes in the United States, fortunately, are steadily being improved. The current amount of differential mortality in the United States due to inadequate child care or other cultural features is unknown, but may be presumed to be small.
That heterosis (hybrid vigor) may cause differential fertility in respect to intelligence has been suggested by Penrose (1955). According to this hypothesis, those genes that control intelligence are assumed also to affect fertility. It is postulated that when these genes are in homozygous combinations they may produce either low intelligence combined with low fertility or high intelligence, also combined with low fertility. When, on the contrary, these genes are in heterozygous combinations, they are assumed to produce ;not only an intermediate level of intelligence, but also, through hybrid vigor, an increase in fertility.
There is no good evidence, however,

14 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

that those genes which in the homozygous combination produce both mental defects and infertility, occur at the same loci as any of those multiple genes that may contribute to mental superiority. In modern populations, furthermore, family size is mostly controlled by economic and social factors, rather than by inability to produce children. In the early years of the United States family size averaged much greater than now. This was true of families in which the parents presumably had high intelligence as well as of those whose parents were less well endowed. This indicates that high intelligence is not directly related to biological infertility. Heterosis among the genes responsible for intelligence consequently seems not to be an important factor in producing differential fertility among the classes in our society.
Mutation undoubtedly occurs in those genes that control mental ability. Little information is available about the mutation rates of those multiple genes that underlie superior talent, but each of these can be expected to mutate at approximately the same slow rate as other human genes. Further, it can be expected that most such mutations will result in a decrease, rather than in an increase of potential ability. Even those mutations that may produce some improvement in mental capacity will not spread in a large population except as a Tesult of favorable selection. Mutation, consequently, may be expected in general to produce deterioration rather than improvement.
That the intelligence requirements for marriage are currently being pushed upwards in modern societies has been suggested by Neel (1958). If this is occurring and if it is not accompanied by an increase of children born out of wed-

lock, it might offset to some degree any adverse effects of differential fertility. Evidence in support of this hypothesis, however, seems not to be available.
Differential mortality due to war undoubtedly affects to some degree the frequency of those genes that underlie ability (Hunt, 1930). So also does the celibacy which is obligatory in certain religious orders (Holmes, 1921: 361). Both these agencies, however, are believed to decrease, rather than to increase the supply of inherited ability.
The number of generations per century differs according to amount of schooling. Those persons who prepare themselves for intellectual careers by attending college, and especially those who go on to graduate school or professional school, marry on the average later in life and begin their families at an older age than those who do not have to spend so much time in special training (Wrong, 1958). This differential among the educational classes in the number of generations produced per century must be added to the other factors making for a decline in intelligence.
DECREASE IN GENES FOR SUPERIOR ABILITY
None of the genetic mechanisms or other agencies known to be operating in human societies, consequently, seem to be of a sort likely to increase the frequency of the genes underlying mental ability. It seems likely that in the United States at least some decrease in each generation must be taking place in the frequencies of those genes that produce superior mental capacity.
The seriousness of the decline per generation and per century of potential mental ability, however, is in much dispute. Some authors, taking into account not only genetic factors but also the effect on development of different home

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

environments have estimated that present rates of differential fertility would, if no other factors were involved, make for a decline at the rate of from 0.9 to as much as 4.0 or more I.Q. points per generation, when both hereditary and environmental factors are taken into account. Reliable methods for measuring this loss of intelligence, unfortunately, do not now exist (Dorn, 1947). Consequently, it is impossible to estimate the effects of current trends on the future supply of children who will have the capacity to become skilled workers or to profit by advanced training. The trend, however, is probably in the wrong direction. The world of the future will need a greater rather than a lesser percentage of persons who possess superior ability.
REQUIREMENTS FOR AN INCREASE
IN HEREDITARY TALENT
Increase in the supply of hereditary mental capacity in any population evidently requires that those persons who possess an above-average level of ability must have more children than those persons who are below average. The reservoir of hereditary talent in any community resides in all those individuals who rank above average in any type of ability. Included in this category are technicians, craftsmen, businessmen, farm and factory managers and supervisors, professional workers, and numerous other types of workers who exhibit special competence in some particular line of endeavor. Women who rate above average in home making and child rearing must also be included. If the resources of mental ability of the country are to be increased, the fertility of these persons must exceed that of the less competent members of society.
Fear of overpopulation in the nation

15
or world should not deter talented persons from rearing as many children as they can afford. Should overpopulation come in time to any country, the more able persons should have the best chance for survival. On the other hand, should the more talented members of any society continue for long to be less fertile than the less able members, then the average level of mental capacity of that society must inevitably decline.
A high diversity of those genes that underlie the production of superior mental abilities of various types undoubtedly is carried by every human population. In other words, every population carries a large supply of genetic material on which selection in the form of differential fertility can act. The genes for ability, however, are not distributed evenly throughout each population but are most concentrated in those individuals who exhibit any type of superior ability. The greater the endowment of talent enjoyed by any person, therefore, the more important it is that he or she should have a greater number of children than the average for the population.
HEREDITY COUNSELING CENTERS
Some talented persons remain childless because of the fear of transmitting to their children certain physical or mental defects which are known to occur in their ancestors or relatives. Every person, however, even though presumably "normal," carries in his heredity a number of more or less serious defects (Müller, 1950). Should it be certainly known that there is a high probability of transmitting a serious defect of any kind, then of course no considerate person will take the risk of afflicting a child. In every case, however, the probability of transmitting a defect should be bal-

16 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

anced against the probabilities for the transmission of superior characters, both mental and physical.
The heredity counseling centers which are being organized in many parts of the nation (Hammons, 1959) can aid prospective parents in assessing the probabilities for transmitting their good as well as their bad heredity. More of these centers are needed so that advice about their heredity will be available to all our citizens. Each such counseling center, moreover, should possess facilities for evaluating intelligence and personality as well as for the diagnosis of medical defects.
INCREASE IN THE FERTILITY OF
INTELLECTUAL WORKERS
The current lesser fertility of intellectual workers than of other occupational classes undoubtedly is in part due to the longer period during their early life that such workers must spend in education and training. When they are financially able to begin their families, they are consequently older than other types of workers.
For most kinds of professional work graduate training, in addition to a college degree, is a necessary prerequisite. The master's degree, which is recommended for high-school teaching and for a number of other intellectual occupations, requires at the present time an average of about one and one-half years of graduate study. The Ph.D., or equivalent degree, which usually is required for university teaching or for research, requires an average of about four years in graduate school. Professional training in such subjects as medicine or law may require from two to as many as eight or more years after the bachelor's degree.
The period of graduate study is an ex-

pensive one, no matter what the field of specialization. Not only is there tuition and living expenses to pay but also books to buy and frequently travel or other special expenses. All this expense comes at the age when most other young people are getting married and starting their families. Unless the graduate student defers marriage, however, his wife probably will have to work to help support the pair. To care properly for children then is difficult or impossible. The young scientist who marries must consequently usually defer having children until he has completed his training and has secured a more or less permanent position. The salary of a young scientist after graduation, moreover, usually is low. The paying off of debts incurred during the training years may impose additional burdens upon the young family. Parents who are wealthy can aid their children during these difficult years, but not all the parents of gifted children are financially able to supply such aid. The proportion of graduate students who are married has increased in recent years, but it still is difficult to combine post-graduate study with marriage and the rearing of a family.
In order to ease to some degree the financial burden of graduate study, I recommend that every competent graduate student who has been accepted as a candidate for the master's or Ph.D. or equivalent degree by any reputable institution be provided with a tuition scholarship. These scholarships should not be competitive. Instead, a sufficient number should be available so that one can be granted to each qualified student. The qualifications should of course be sufficiently high to select only those students who truly have superior talents.
The number of teaching and research assistantships available to graduate stu-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

dents also should be increased, so that all competent students can be provided for. Such assistantships not only help in recruiting able students for intellectual careers but incidentally provide teaching and research aid to the presently overburdened universities. A student learns much from serving as an assistant. An additional advantage of the assistantship is that the student works for the financial help he receives and is not given something for nothing.
Graduate students in the social sciences and humanities should in my opinion be eligible for scholarships and graduate assistantships on the same basis as students in the natural sciences, and graduate students who are candidates for degrees in medicine, dentistry, law, and other professions should also be considered. Ability of every kind is needed by our society.
A dependency allowance for a wife and for each child should be provided in each graduate assistantship. Such allowances now are provided in many fellowships. The extension to include assistantships is highly desirable, because of the added inducement this would give talented young married persons to prepare for intellectual careers.
These proposed graduate scholarships and assistantships should, in my opinion, be provided through the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare or through some other federal agency. Graduate students regularly cross state lines to attend those universities which provide the best instruction in their chosen field of specialization. Intellectual achievements, furthermore, are the property of the whole nation and world. The support of advanced training is consequently a national rather than merely a local or state obligation.
A program for loan funds for pros-

17
pective teachers and college and graduate students has recently been organized by the federal government. Sufficient funds for this purpose should be made available so that every qualified student can obtain such assistance.
The availability to graduate students of tuition scholarships, assistantships, dependency allowances, and loan funds, as recommended above, can be expected to encourage graduate students to marry and to begin their families at a younger age than the present average. With such financial help these talented individuals will probably have larger families than otherwise they might have had. This is highly desirable, because the children of such intellectually superior parents have a better than average chance of being also talented. Osborn (1956) and others have urged that early marriage be made economically possible for gifted young people. Intellectual workers, however, comprise only a relatively small proportion of the population. Although an increase in their fertility will be valuable, no improvement in their fertility which can reasonably be anticipated will suffice alone to provide the desired amount of increase in the supply of talent.
ECONOMIC STATUS AND FERTILITY
Within certain social and occupational groups, fertility is known to be positively related to income level, at least in countries where birth control is widely practiced. We may also note that birth rates in the United States average higher during years of prosperity than during years of adverse economic conditions (Population Reference Bureau, 1958). Further study should reveal ways in which economic forces could be harnessed to bring about desirable changes in fertility differentials.

18 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

Natural fertility decreases with age. Especial care, therefore, should be taken to make it economically possible for those workers who are above average in ability to start their families early in life. The current difference in salary between the beginning professional worker and the older, well-established worker in the same field is probably too great.
PROGRAMS OF NEGATIVE EUGENICS
Certain past proposals have been designed to increase the level of intelligence in the population through limiting the reproduction of the least intelligent members of society.
One such program of negative eugenics has been directed toward the sterilization of persons who are mentally deficient. This program has been only slightly successful. Some persons have objected to sterilization on religious grounds. Others have objected to the compulsory aspects of the program. In some states there has been confusion between sterilization and punishment. A total of 60,926 individuals are reported by the Human Betterment Association of America to have been sterilized in the United States over the 52-year period from 1907 through 1958. Of this total, 31,500 were sterilized because of mental deficiency. In 1958 the number sterilized was 747. Compared to the size of the national population, these figures are relatively small. The number of unfavorable genes eliminated so far as a Tesult of this program of sterilization must be too few to have produced any important increase in the level of intelligence of the nation as a whole (Neel and Schull, 1954: 344-346).
The segregation in mental institutions of persons with severe mental disorders, including mental deficiencies, undoubtedly operates to decrease the frequency

in following generations of the genes that adversely affect mental competence. The shortage of hospital space to care for persons with subnormal mentality, however, limits the number who can be confined. No estimates seem to have been made of the actual genetic effects of the current amount of segregation of such persons.
The elimination of as many as possible of those genes that contribute to the production either of physical defects or of mental disorders certainly is highly desirable. The production of children by persons who carry hereditary defects of any serious kind or who are mentally, temperamentally, or financially not qualified to rear children properly, therefore, should be discouraged. Those individuals who for sufficient genetic or social reasons voluntarily request to be sterilized should be given this permission. The probate court or some other local authority should have the power to authorize the surgeon to perform the necessary operation. The parents or legal guardians of mentally incompetent individuals should be permitted to petition for the sterilization of their wards.
Relatively few individuals in any generation, however, are likely to be sterilized under any program suitable to a democracy. No considerable increase from such a program can be expected, consequently, in the frequency of those multiple genes that are believed to produce superior intellectual capacity.
BIRTH CONTROL
Birth-control methods have in recent years become of increasing importance for the voluntary limitation of family size. Unfortunately, birth control seems to have been more effective in limiting the number of children per family in the

19

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

professional and skilled-labor classes than in the unskilled-labor class. Those individuals who have ambition to raise their own economic and social position and those desirous of giving their children the best possible education and other advantages have presumably restricted the number of their children to a greater degree than those individuals who have less ambition for themselves or for their children. The result has been that in past years birth control probably has increased the fertility differentials among the economic classes in the United States. With the spread of contraceptive methods throughout the whole society, some decrease may be expected in the fertility of the lower occupational and educational classes. It may be doubted, however, that birth control will ever by itself operate to reverse the adverse differentials in fertility in respect to mental ability among these classes.
Birth-control methods, nevertheless, provide opportunity for parents to adjust the size of their families to their own particular economic and social conditions and also to their own hereditary endowments. Those legal and religious barriers that now obstruct the dissemination and use of birth-control methods should consequently be removed.
INADEQUACY OF PRESENT KNOWLEDGE
The organization of any effective program designed to increase the supply of inherited ability is hampered by lack of information about the distribution and frequency in the population of those persons who possess the various desired types of intelligence and personality. No satisfactory classification now exists of those special abilities which are needed by a modern society, such as ours. Nor are fully reliable

methods available for identifying the persons who exhibit the desired qualities. The accuracy of the current estimates of differential fertility among the several occupational, economic, educational, and social classes leaves much to be desired. It is impossible with our present meager knowledge to estimate the current rate of decrease in the frequencies of those genes that affect intellectual capacity or to plan effectively for their increase.
The inadequacy of our information about these important matters has been noted by numerous psychologists, sociologists, and biologists. Research in this field, unfortunately, is not receiving nearly as much attention as its importance demands. The major reason for this neglect undoubtedly is the complexity of the problems involved. The isolated research worker on some university campus can at best make only slow progress in this difficult field of investigation. For their solution these complex problems will require the concentrated efforts of research teams composed of persons trained in the several special disciplines which are directly concerned (Snyder, 1951; Scheinfeld, 1958). Only a permanent research institute with an adequate staff can effectively investigate concurrently the numerous interrelated psychologic, economic, social, and genetic problems which are involved in the production of superior intellectual capacity.
PROPOSAL FOR A RESEARCH INSTITUTE
A research institute dedicated to investigations in the field of human abilities should be organized immediately. To be successful such an institute must have strong and permanent financial backing. Any large foundation which has uncommitted funds might well con-

20 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

sider this opportunity. Another possibility would be the organization of such a research institute in the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. The National Institute of Mental Health, under the Public Health Service, currently is supporting some investigations of the genetics of mental traits. The comprehensive attack which is needed, however, demands the organization of a new institute with its own permanent staff.
In addition to investigations of the numerous genetic and environmental factors that control or affect the development of human abilities, the proposed institute could profitably make surveys of the distribution and frequency of occurrence of the various types of special talent among the people of the nation. Another desirable activity would be to secure reliable information about the magnitude of the differences in reproductive rate which currently are exhibited by the several occupational, economic, social, and educational classes in our society. Studies designed to improve the identification of potential ability early in school life also would be highly useful. By conducting investigations and surveys such as these, and others of a related kind, an institute dedicated to research on human abilities could be of incalculable value.
HOPE FOR THE FUTURE
When reliable information becomes available about the degree to which each type of special ability is inherited, about those environmental factors which may affect the development of the talents which each individual may possess, and about the distribution of mental capabilities in the population, then I am confident that our citizens can be depended upon to take the necessary steps

to conserve and to increase the total supply of talent.
Mental ability and character are the most valuable resources that the world possesses (Wolfle, 1954). These resources should be utilized to the highest possible degree. The total supply of ability also should be increased. Any steps which will induce an increased proportion of capable young people to devote themselves to the types of work for which they are individually best suited or which will provide them with better training will be of immediate value to society. Any steps which will result in an increase in the proportion of mentally superior persons in the population will be of inestimable value to the world of the future.
SUMMARY
As civilization grows in complexity, the demand for mental abilities of many diverse kinds steadily increases. Mental ability is based in considerable part on the various elements of intelligence and is influenced by many items of personality. In its development mental ability is shaped by training and education and is affected by health and by other environmental factors. Many or perhaps all the hereditary factors involved in the production of superior intelligence and personality are believed to be based on multiple genes.
An adverse differential fertility in respect to mental capacity is probably now occurring in all Western countries and this presumably tends to decrease in each generation and in each century the frequencies of those genes that underlie superior ability. Practically no scientific knowledge, however, is available as to the actual rate of such deterioration.
The only known way for increasing the proportion in the population of per-

21

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

sons with superior mental capacity isto provide conditions under which those individuals who are above average in ability will have larger families than those whoarebelow average. Those persons who rate above average in mental ability and personality should be encouraged to have as many children as they can properly rear and educate. This encouragement maybe economic, social, or psychological. It should be based on an ever-increasing fund of knowledge. To this end,sound genetic advice should be made available in every part of the nation. Thenumber of heredity counseling centers should be increased. Each of these centers should have facilities for giving advice about mental superiorities as well as about physical andmental defects.
Part of the lesser fertility of intellectual workers compared to other types of workers is due to the older average age at which they marry andstart their families. T o enable advanced students to marry and to start their families while in graduate orprofessional school, it is here recommended that (1) atuition scholarship be granted to every graduate student who has been accepted by a competent university as a candidate for themaster's or Ph.D. degree or equivalent; (2) the number of teaching and research assistantships available to graduate students be increased; (3) dependency allowances for a wife and for children be provided in each graduate assistantship and fellowship; and (4) long-terms loans on liberal terms be made available to every student whois engaged in graduate or professional training.
The organization of a national institute dedicated to research on the factors that produce or affect superior mental ability is strongly recommended.

REFERENCES
CATTELL, R. B. 1950. Personality: A Systematic, Theoretical and Factual Study. New York: McGraw-Hill. . 1957. Personality and Motivation; Structure and Measurement. Yonkers-onHudson: World Book Co.
DICE, LEER. 1955. Man's Nature and Nature's Man: The Ecology of Human Communities. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
DOBZHANSKY, T H . , and G. ALLEN. 1956. Does
natural selection continue to operate in modern mankind? Amer. Anthrop. 5 8 : 591-604.
DORN, HAROLD F. 1947. Present knowledge concerning theeffects of differential fertility in the United States. Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, 2 5 : 359-366.
FULLER, J. L. 1954. Nature and Nurture: A Modern Synthesis. New York: Doubleday.
GRABILL, W. H., C. V. KISER, and P. K. WHELP-
TON. 1958. TheFertility of American Women. New York: John Wiley and Son.
HAMMONS, HELEN G., Ed., 1959. Heredity Counseling. New York: Paul B. Hoeber.
HOLMBERG, ALLAN R. 1950. Nomads of the
long bow: the Siriono of eastern Boliivia. Publ. Inst. Soc. Anthrop., Smithson. Inst., 10: 1-104.
HOLMES, S. J. 1921. The Trend of the Race. New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Co.
. 1933. The Eugenic Predicament.
New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Co. . 1936.Human Genetics and Its So-
cial Import. NewYork: McGraw-Hill.
HUNT, HARRISON R. 1930. Some Biological Aspects of War. NewYork: Galton Publishing Co.
KALLMANN, FRANZ J. 1953. Heredity in Health and Mental Disorder. New York: W.W. Norton and Co.
RISER, CLYDE V. 1952. Fertility trends and differentials in the United States. J. Amer. Statistical Assoc., 4 7 : 25-48.
MULLER, H. J. 1950. Our load of mutations. Amer. J. Human Genetics, 2 : 111-176.
NEEL, JAMES V. 1958. The study of natural selection in primitive and civilized human populations. Human Biol., 30:43-72.
NEEL, JAMES V., and WILLIAM J. SCHULL. 1954.
Human Heredity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
OSBORN, FREDERICK. 1951. Preface to Eugenics. Rev. ed. New York: Harper andBros.
. 1956. Galton and mid-century eugenics. Eugenics Rev., 48:15-22.
PENROSE, L. S. 1955. Evidence of heterosis in man. Proc. Roy. Soc. London, B, 144: 203-213.
POPULATION REFERENCE BUREAU. 1956. The col-
lege study report--1956. Population Bull., 12: 89-105.
. 1958. Recession in births? Population Bull, 1 4 :109-123.

22 Eugenics Quarterly

SCHEINFELD, AMRAM. 1958. Changing attitudes toward human genetics and eugenics. Eugenia Quart, 5 :145-153.
SNYDER, LAURENCE H. 1951. Old and new path-
ways in human genetics. Amer. J. Human Genetics, 3 : 1-16.
VANDENBERG, STEVEN G. 1956. The hereditary
abilities study: TheUniversity of Michigan. Eugenics Quart., 3: 94-99.

WESTOFF, CHARLES F. 1954. Differential fertility in theUnited States. Amer. Sociological Review, 19:549-561.
WOLFLE, DAEL. 1954. America's Resources of Specialized Talent. New York: Harper and Bros.
WRONG, DENNIS H. 1958. Trends in class fertility in Western nations. Canadian J. Econ. and Pol. Sci.,24:216-229.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

