Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
New voluntary sterilization law
Sheldon C. Reed
To cite this article: Sheldon C. Reed (1962) New voluntary sterilization law, Eugenics Quarterly, 9:3, 166-167, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1962.9987521 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1962.9987521
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

QeneticCounseling

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

New Voluntary Sterilization Law

Every genetic counselor eventually has parents come to him who have reached the limit of despair as the result of the repeated production of children with an anomaly such as hydrocephaly. They have no interest in the cheerfully quoted odds provided by the counselor, which prove that they have a much better than even chance of having a normal child at the next pregnancy. They don't want any next pregnancy of any kind. They are not going to change their minds and they often have more than an average sized family already. They are faced with the impossible alternative of no further sexual relationships, or of the less efficient rhythm method, or contraceptives. It is clear to them that the intelligent action is a sterilization operation. They don't expect the genetic counselor to carry out the operation personally, but they do hope that he will assist them in finding a physician who will have compassion on them and give them peace of mind.
Many physicians hesitate to carry out a sterilization operation because there have been no laws which specifically permit them to do so. It is unlikely that the prosecution of a physician who had performed the operation with the consent and request of the couple would be successful. However, there is little incentive for the physician to risk a court action, no matter how small the chances might be of his being convicted.
Recently, one state, Virginia, has passed a bill explicitly legalizing voluntary sterilization. This action was re-

ported in the March 30, 1962, issue of the Medical World News. This makes the commonwealth the first state officially to sanction the operation for other than therapeutic or genetic reasons. Much of the following is taken from the Medical World News article.
Twenty-eight states (including Virginia) have statutes which provide for eugenic sterilization of the mentally retarded and mentally ill. Relatively few people are actually sterilized in accord with these laws, and the justification is usually more social than eugenic. The sterilizations do serve a most useful purpose in that "marginal" cases of mental retardation can be returned to the community from the institution if they are freed from the possibilities of parenthood with which they could not cope. These laws are concerned with institutionalized persons.
Five of these 28 states--Maine, Minnesota, North Carolina, South Dakota and Vermont--permit voluntary sterilization, but only "for cause." And three states-- Connecticut, Kansas, and Utah--make it a crime to sterilize any person without therapeutic or eugenic justification.
None of these laws protect the physcian who would like to provide a sterilization for a normal couple who for good reason desire no more children. These cases are much more numerous than those covered by the institutional laws and are the type which arouses the sympathy of the genetic counselor.
Although Virginia had no prohibition of sterilization, and physicians had been

166

Genetic Counseling

167

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

performing such operations by inferential right on patients who gave assent, doctors who favored the bill did so in the belief that procedures concerning voluntary sterilization should be clearly specified under the law.
The new law, endorsed by the Medical Society of Virginia and the Virginia Obstetrical and Gynecological Society, had been prepared by the Virginia Advisory Legislative Council. The Council's report preceding the bill stated that:
"We therefore recommend that the law be so changed as to make it clear that in cases where the well-being of a child who might be conceived, or of children whom the parents may have already, is involved, the question of the performance of sterilization operations should be left to the discretion of the individuals concerned, if adults, and the physicians or surgeons to whom the cases have been committed for care."
According to the new law, an adult

seeking sterilization will have to make the request in writing. If married, his or her spouse will have to consent in writing. At least two physicians will have to agree that the operation is desirable, and a minimum of 30 days will have to elapse between the time the request is made and the operation is performed.
It is obvious that the new law permits no frivolous tampering with the reproductive system by physicians, yet it does give them a legal basis for the humanitarian sterilizations which are a regular, if infrequent, part of their practice. More important, it provides responsible parents the right to determine what the maximum size of their family should be with certainty. What more basic and personal right could a parent have?
SHELDON C. REED
Dight Institute for Human Genetics University of Minnesota Minneapolis, Minnesota

