Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The relation of human genetics to demography
Jean Sutter M.D.
To cite this article: Jean Sutter M.D. (1958) The relation of human genetics to demography, Eugenics Quarterly, 5:3, 131-136, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1958.9987363 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1958.9987363
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles Citing articles: 4 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

Eugenics QuarterlyVol. 5, No.3, September,1958

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

THE RELATION OF HUMAN GENETICS TO DEMOGRAPHY
JEAN SUTTER, M.D.
Institut National d'Etudes Démographiques Paris

O 1945 THE SCIENCE OF HUMAN GE- Demographic Study

NETICS has been developing rapidly. Special
treatises' were revived by publications written in the perspective of true genetic progress (e.g., the books of C. Stern, J. Neel, and W. Schull). For the first time a World Population Conference devoted an important part of its sessions to genetics (Rome,

First and foremost, we have to specify the aspects which have been brought out by quantitative or qualitative population studies; as a matter of fact such demographic techniques should be more used by geneticists.

1954). Twoyears later, in 1956, the First

When the state of a population is

International Congress of Human Genetics considered in demography, three types of

was held in Copenhagen. As in other factors emerge: (1) biological, (2) socio-

branches of genetics, some knowledge of economic (3) cultural. The first type is

human heredity has been established, and well-defined specialities have been rapidly growing. Three principal groups maybe noted: medical genetics, genetics of the blood groups, and genetics of population.

concerned with thebiological structuresand characteristics of individuals and groups, and here genetics obviously plays an important role. Socio-economic factors encom-

Each of these three progressed on its own pass all characteristics of social class inre-

initiative, without relying on the findings lation to economic means: wages are gen-

of the others. This regrettable situation erally the measure of social and profession-

has jeopardized the progress each has been al position. Within a same biological struc-

able to show by itself. Analysis in each ture, we know that important character-

field has made more difficult the valuable istics such as child growth, life expectancy,

synthesis necessary for united progress. and general morbidity vary according to

In reviewing this situation the following should be considered: (1) the vital connections which should be established between genetics and demography; (2) the communication which should exist between

income and that quality of diet appears to be a principal factor responsible in each instance. When wages and social class are equal, biological and demographic characteristics vary again according to culture,

genetic study of the individual and the i.e., religion practiced, standard and type

genetic study of population.

of education, etc.

131

132 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

These three groups of factors, defined as above, react simultaneously upon each other to give the family or group its particular demographic characteristics, the basis of which is fertility and mortality. Students of human genetics should always keep these factors in mind in order to evaluate properly phenomena observed at different levels of research.
Modern demography has shown that certain factors exist which are capable of molding individual or group characteristics. A real demographic biology, with which genetics must reckon, has been created in the course of the last decades. Among these factors should be noted the age of the mother, space between children (intervals between successive births), and order of birth.
Maternal age influences sterility of different types: couples with one child unable to have a second, those with two incapable of having a third or a fourth when they have three, and so on. This sterility increases with duration of marriage and is so important in correctly evaluating the fertility or sterility of a group of families or of populations that the matrimonial history of each family must be known. The value of the coefficients of sterility, SO, SI, S2, etc. vary in accordance with the age of the wife; it increases regularly up to 35 years of age, and more rapidly from then on. No doubt the influence of aging exists, but comparison of sterility rates SI, S2, S3, shows that acquired sterility in marriage is, up to 30 years of age, greater than that involved in aging. From 35 years of age on, sterility following a birth seems to diminish slightly with the order of that birth. These data are applicable only to populations whose behavior is not Malthusian. The study of the above problems is much more complex in populations using birth control.
The age of the mother acts as an influence again on the frequency of twin births, both dizygotic and monozygotic, which frequency rises with age. Spontaneous abor-

tions also increase with age. Their percentage, in relation to conceptions, doubles between the 15-24 year age group and that from 30-34. Stillbirths also vary in the same way with maternal age. The figures observed in a number of countries for the S2 class of birth indicate that birth fatality doubles between the age of 20 and 33 years, i.e., from 20 to 45 per thousand births. If we know that mortality at birth is, on the other hand, dependent upon biological factors (the sex-ratio is high here) and socio-economic and cultural factors, we appreciate still more the importance of the demographic factor.
We could cite, with figures to support it, the determining action of the order of birth and the spacing between conceptions on certain individual or family characteristics, but examples must be limited here. They amply show, however, that those who wish to study the influence of genetic structures on sterility, fertility, mortality and morbidity should consider these factors very seriously.
Biological characteristics, controlled by demographic factors, illustrate very well the importance of the structures of populations where genetic cases which have been studied can be located. The age of the individuals observed, their marital or professional status, their life expectancy, and the size of their families are matters of particular interest to both geneticists and demographers. To state these matters more precisely, a complete list of these points established by T. Larsson will be given later.
Medical Genetics
Medical genetics plays an essential role in our knowledge of abnormal or pathological characteristics. Its morphological descriptions, anatomic or histologic, are of primary interest, but its vast domain remains limited in regard to certain projects. For example, in determining whether one or a number of genes cause the appearance of a pathological characteristic, the matter apparently cannot be resolved if observa-

133

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

tion is limited to a few individuals or families. We now know that polygenic characteristics are very diffuse in man. Because of this knowledge the solution to the above problem is automatically transferred to the realm of population, and thence to demography. The resolution of these important aspects of medical genetics is becoming a matter of census analysis or exhaustive investigations by sampling or not. Only by gathering together individuals belonging to numerous demographic cohorts, can we then succeed in solidly establishing the essential data. The determination of dominance or recessiveness is also becoming a problem relating to population. Neglect of this essential principle sometimes results in the same anomaly frequently being described as recessive by one author and as dominant by another. The definition of penetrance and expressivity suffers from the same omission. The concept of penetrance used readily by certain authors is now repudiated by others.
Moreover the selective material which medical genetics generally uses, mostly derived from hospital cases, results from a statistically large selection. It is uncertain whether this material represents what actually exists in the population from the point of view of heredity and gene distribution. Most of the time the observations are not inductively useful in establishing data characterizing a certain large population. For example, to understand the damaging effect of a mutation on a population and to establish its state of equilibrium, it is important to know the fitness of the individual affected by the anomaly, or even of the carriers of the gene or genes involved; this fitness can be determined only within a strict demographic framework. Socio-economic and cultural factors are of similar importance; here one badly workedout observation can lead to erroneous results. We know in France (Croze and Febvay) that the meaning of child mortality varies considerably with occupation: exactly 1-7 from the professionals to the

unskilled laborer. With these conditions prevailing, it can be seen, that of the studies made, only a few careful ones can give evidence of the injurious effects in proportion to the true action of the mutations. Only heavy genetic activity (such as the effects of consanguinity) can double the rate of infant mortality in a demographically harmonious population. By limiting studies of this kind to a framework of fitness or to certain age or occupational groups in the population, it is easy to see that findings can be in direct opposition.
For example, we regret that the leaders of the extremely interesting investigation of the effects of atomic bombing in Japan did not think of determining, in the many families studied, the rate of sterility provoked in the different orders, SI, S2, S3, which have already been discussed. No doubt such an approach would have helped explain the differences observed in the sex-ratio.
We are not attempting here to place on trial the worth of medical genetics as much as scientific methods. We have simply tried to stress that the results of studies in medical genetics, which are related to population, are most of the time suspect if not quite far from the truth. It has become necessary for medical genetics to change its methods of investigation in certain ways. It must now work closely with demography, using its techniques more frequently so that fields of investigation may be more rigorously defined and medical genetics can pursue its proper research protected from serious errors. For the same reason medical genetics must work hand in hand with the genetics of population, without which it cannot in the future maintain the necessary synthesis of its achievements.
Genetics of the Blood Groups
The genetics of the blood groups can be reviewed in the same way. Many authors who have defined these groups in populations, either primitive or advanced, have ignored demographic data. Seldom is the

134 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

distribution of blood groups considered in been overlooked: gene frequency. Pata population according to age groups. terns of genetics of population show that

Nevertheless, this is a fundamental consideration, since very often the concept of blood groups is a dynamic one implying evolution from one generation to the next.

consanguinity is able to act only slightly, if at all, on very diffuse genes. The more uncommon the genes the stronger the action of consanguinity. For such reason

Only in the last few years has this important point commanded the attention of any but a few specialists. Bentley Glass (1954) expressed it in this way: "Age-

the distribution of very diffuse genes is relatively independent from the size of the group, whereas that of rare ones depends much upon it. Owing to this phenomenon,

group analysis may also assist in exploring the effects of selection upon genetically determined traits. The estimation of mutation rates from population equilibrium may

it is obvious that simultaneously most of the genes follow the Hardy-Weinberg law (whatever the size of the population, or the degree of consanguinity or homogamy)

also be better justified if it can be shown by age-group analysis that with respect to the alleles concerned the population really is in equilibrium. In short, age-group analysis promises in the future to become an invaluable method."

whereas uncommon or very rare genes follow more intricate laws of evolution. This has been experimentally verified (even on the level of blood groups) and is the whole basis upon which variation of human groups is founded.

Consider also that specialists in the blood Another example may be cited here.

groups up to now have been little con- Failure to consider demographic factors

cerned with using the data from genetics of and data from the genetics of population

population and demography. In the book has led to the questioning of the worth of

by Race and Sanger--a masterpiece in this isogenes, i.e., the origin of the distribution

field--one searches in vain for an indication of blood groups in geographic areas. It

of the demographic problem; and in that was believed for a long time that the blood

of Mourant, although the isolate is the sub- groups of the ABO system were uniformly

ject of a special chapter, the account re- distributed within very vast geographic

mains a summary one and the essential areas. Using the methods of geographers,

problems of demography and the genetics specialists traced these distributions

of population are omitted. Yet thorough throughout the continents. It is certain

understanding of these problems is neces- that the isogenes obtained in this manner,

sary to comprehend the meaning of the dis- often based on previous generalizations,

tribution of different blood groups in the were frequently contradicted by closer

scheme of anthropology.

study. Fraser-Roberts has shown in the

Unfortunately champions of this branch of genetics wishing to use data from the genetics of population have not always fully grasped it. We shall limit ourselves to two examples. In his book, "Genetics and the Races of Men," W. C. Boyd, in investigating the effects of consanguinity on the distribution of different blood groups, is astonished that the endogamy practiced to a high degree in a village of Lebanon only slightly disturbed the size of the blood groups. This situation is normal. One essential aspect of the problem has simply

north of England the existence of great variations in the frequency of the ABO groups among localities not far distant from each other. This finding is confirmed by data acquired by genetics of population in the study of the development of isolates. We have recently shown that the most endogamous parishes, in rural populations in Western France, are also those where matrimonial migrations extend geographically across the longest distances. On the other hand in limited areas the curves of genie dispersion, from one parish to another,

135

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

do not follow one normal law but are leptocurtic. The genetic homogeneity that presumably would have been established after the break-up of isolates is not so complete as previously thought. The warning of Mourant at the First International Congress of Human Genetics at Copenhagen (Proceedings, p. 354) cannot be agreed with. ". . . There is a danger of exaggeratting the importance of local variations in ABO frequencies which might have been missed in a less detailed survey." Facts are facts, and we can anticipate that the actual classifications and their isogenes will be the object of serious re-examinations.
We confine ourselves to such findings which illustrate very well how urgent it is to compare the data acquired separately by demography and by the diverse branches of genetics.
Genetics of Population
The genetics of population is closest to demography since, theoretically, the models it supplies to medical genetics and to the study of blood groups should consider the demographic data which is at its foundation. Demographic factors, which in the course of time have affected the distribution of genes, have recently been the object of interesting syntheses, of which those by F. Osborn (Rome, 1954; Copenhagen, 1956) and T. Larsson (Copenhagen, 1956) are the most complete. Here are quickly listed the most important points according to Osborn (1956): (1) Rise in life expectancy has brought a decline in genetic selectivity; (2) The average size of families, which has been considerably reduced, has had an effect on the distribution of genes, but to what extent we do not yet know; (3) The spread of birth control, in emphasizing fertility differentials, has also had an effect upon gene distribution; (4) The break-up of isolates alone has contributed to changing individual genetic structures by means of assortive mating or other mechanisms; (5) assortive mating which has certainly become general in our time, in

the sense of a homogamous or heterogamous emphasis, may have succeeded in disturbing old genetic balances.
T. Larsson has provided a more systematic though not opposing synthesis than that of Osborn. We shall note his headings to indicate the viewpoint of his study: (1) Size and geographic and social delimitation of the total and the reproducing population; (2) Length of life and age-distribution of the population; (3) Sex-distribution, especially disproportions in marriage age-groups; (4) Marriages; (5) Fertility and birth rate; (6) Migration, especially selective influx and removals; (7) Morbidity and mortality within different groups of the population; (8) Advance in the science of human genetics; (9) Public health; (10) Social, occupational and economic conditions; (11) Legislation; (12) Changed knowledge within the population about the heredity of certain diseases; (13) Disturbances of normal development.
These thirteen points demonstrate perfectly the factors which genetics of population, at the level of population and throughout the different branches of genetics, must consider in order to evaluate the distribution of genes and the meaning of the recorded data. Everyone who is gaining awareness of these patterns will appreciate the immense effort still necessary to succeed in understanding with accuracy what happens in a population within the framework of a genetics dealing with evolution.
Conclusion
This rapid examination shows how necessary it is constantly to relate all branches of human genetics in an effort to reach an open synthesis. In his book, "Les Illusions Evolutionnistes," the French philosopher Lalande wrote: "Each day it becomes more urgent to solve this vital problem for human intelligence: to reestablish the communication and unity between the sciences which, divided, threaten to become ineffective." This statement is already true for

136 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

genetics alone. It is particularly absurd, in this sense, to see develop, without a solid bond being established, medical genetics and genetics of population on the one hand, and biometrical genetics and genetics of the blood groups on the other. Because of this dichotomy certain areas of human genetics are being disastrously retarded, as is also physical anthropology, which having amassed innumerable metrical achievements from 1850-1950 still has so much to accomplish within the genetic framework. Here an understanding of the heredity of normal characteristics in man has not yet been satisfactorily developed. This, moreover, is an area where biometrics ought to associate closely with genetics which implies a development of corresponding mathematics.
It is interesting to note that the most important progress which has been recently accomplished in human genetics was only due to close collaboration between different branches of science. If Allison realized his beautiful work on polymorphism of falciform anemia, it was because he could unite the medical and racial aspects of molecular

research with data on genetics of population. The problem of natural selection advanced a step when Aird conceived the idea of collecting all the cases of stomach cancer, according to the blood groups of individuals, and comparing them with the normal distribution in a population. These are examples of collaboration which should be emulated.
Human genetics is at the crossroads. Before it lies immense problems: linkage, polyfactorial heredity, association between characters, biometrical and statistical analysis, physical anthropology. It must, on the other hand, also endeavor to create a valid eugenics. Can all these very important problems be solved if they are left in confused order? A vast reorganization of learning is necessary.
Human genetics is not a popular science in the world at large. Investigators are provided with only scant financial resources which should not be carelessly expended. There must be a serious reformation of methods in the years to come if this important science is to be saved from falling into confusion.

