Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The medical complaints of the relatives of the psychotic, the alcoholic and the epileptic
Walter G. Alvarez M.D.
To cite this article: Walter G. Alvarez M.D. (1956) The medical complaints of the relatives of the psychotic, the alcoholic and the epileptic, Eugenics Quarterly, 3:3, 143-147, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1956.9987283 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1956.9987283
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

The Medical Complaints of the Relatives of the Psychotic, the Alcoholic and the Epileptic
WALTER G. ALVAREZ, M.D.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

J[ T MAY INTEREST geneticists to hear how ency for epilepsy to breed true, but one in

a practicing physician, an internist con- four of the epileptics whose families I

cerned mainly with gastroenterology, be- have studied carefully in the last five years

came more interested in neuroses, minor had depressed relatives.

psychoses, and variants of epilepsy and the My impression is strong that if we will

heredity of these troubles than he was in study our cases without any preconceptions

diseased stomachs and bowels.

or any desire to prove anything, and if we

A mixture in a family of dipsomania, psy- will record without reluctance or emotion

chosis, mental retardation and lack of sex what happened in families such as the

interest. In 1912 a woman came to consult thousand and more I have studied in recent

me about her mentally retarded daughter. years, we will learn many things that are

Chatting with the mother, I soon saw that not now yet recorded in the books. We will

she was mildly psychotic. I then sought find cases in which the facts indicate that

out her beautiful and distinguished, but even schizophrenic and manic-depressive

unmarried sister, and found that their psychosis can come out of the same family.

father was an eminent man, and their six I know full well that men will say that my

brothers fine, able men. Another brother, diagnoses were inaccurate; I am just saying

however, was dipsomanic, and the father's how the uncorrected facts appeared.

brother was a red-nosed town drunk. I A mixture in a family of schizophrenic

suspected then that some defective genes and depressive psychoses. In one of my

that had wrecked the life of the father's families, many of whose members I know,

brother had lessened the sexual interests the old father, from his pictures, appeared

of one daughter, had produced psychosis to be a somewhat degenerated schizophren-

in another daughter, dipsomania in a son ic. His story is not that of a manic-depres-

and mental retardation in a grandaughter. sive. Yet, of his children, 6 were definitely

Mental defects need not breed true. nice-looking and able manic-depressives. In

This family was one of the first of thou- the grandchildren and children I find

sands, the experiences of which were to schizophrenia, homosexuality, hysteria, and

teach me over and over again something other troubles appearing again and again.

that I had never been taught in college, Similarly, in some of my eccentric fam-

that when a hereditary taint--or whatever ilies, epilepsy appears occasionally as if

one wants to call it--goes down through superimposed on much psychosis and alco-

a family, it commonly does not breed true. holism, while in other families, psychosis

It can produce psychosis in one child and and alcoholism appear occasionally in what

alcoholism, epilepsy, mental retardation, looks like a predominantly epileptic fam-

homosexuality, chronic invalidism, ! or ily. This is the way the problem looks to

hypochondriasis in others.

someone like me who has no genetic theor-

To be sure, there is a strong tendency for ies to support.

manic-depressive psychosis and schizo- A mixture in a family of psychosis,

phrenia to breed true, and there is a tend- myxedema and poor adjustment. In 1912

143

144 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

I studied all the members of a large and distinguished family, and again I learned much that started me to observing how a taint can produce several types of trouble as it affects a number of sibs. In this family an able but schizoid man married an intelligent woman. Among the children there was one who spent much of her life in mental hospitals with what looked like a mild schizophrenia. For years, she did not degenerate, and at times she was sensible and sweet.
A sister could not make up her mind about anything and so became a recluse. Another sister was a fat asexual person with myxedema, and a brother deserted his fine family to consort with laborers and low prostitutes. Others of the family were fine and able people.
In psychotic families there may be dejects in the glands of internal secretion. These people were the first to make me see that in families with a mental taint there can be members with defective glands of internal secretion Such persons can have goiters, diabetes, and occasionally disease of the adrenal glands. Many of the women have a poor ovarian function. Many of the men have little sexual interest, and they can lose this by the time they are forty.
Without very careful genetic studies I cannot say that the incidence of diseases of the glands of internal secretion is higher among the psychotic than it is in the population as a whole. All I can say is that when a schizophrenic mother has two schizophrenic daughters and a third daughter with Addison's disease, one wonders if the adrenal gland, so closely related to the nervous system, might have been injured by the same defect that hurt the brain. I felt surer of this when, in a similar family, I found two cases of Cushing's tumor of the adrenals.
The minor equivalents of psychosis. In the years that followed 1912, I came to see that while students of psychosis had early recognized certain major equivalents of

psychosis, such as alcoholism, mental retardation, unemployability, criminality, religious fanaticism and vagabondism, no one whose writings I ever encountered, had tried to identify the minor equivalents.
Recently, I analyzed the records of 574 of my patients who had had psychotic and/or alcoholic near-relatives. I listed their symptoms and tallied the number of them that had been observed. (I studied together the relatives of the psychotic and the alcoholic because I could not see any difference between them.) Among these 250 men and 324 women who had psychotic or alcoholic relatives, at least 37 per cent said they suffered from either definite depressions or milder "blue spells" or crying spells, or spells in which they experienced a "terrible" morning fatigue or great feelings of exhaustion, or toxicity.
Thirty-seven per cent of the 324 women had suffered from a hysterical type of nongaseous bloating of the abdomen. At least 35 per cent of the 574 "relatives" complained of great nervousness. Thirty-one per cent suffered from a poor adjustment to life. Thirty per cent were full of fears and anxieties. Ten per cent feared that they were going insane. At least 5 per cent were hypochondriacs, always certain that they had some awful disease such as heart trouble.
Twenty-five per cent suffered from short spells of diarrhea due to a panic of fear that they were going insane as a mother or an aunt had done.
Interesting was the finding that many of the "relatives" and particularly the relatives of schizophrenics, complained of weird and uncomfortable sensations. Schizoid persons complained of worms crawling under the skin, or coals of fire under the skin, or the gushing of blood or air in the head or thorax. At least 18 per cent complained of having lost their old good sense of balance. Seventeen per cent felt terribly tense, as if they would jump out of their skin or "fly to pieces." Seven per cent complained of numbness here and there

145

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

in the body. Many were terribly apprehensive. Many complained of weird spells in which their nerves played tricks on their several organs, such as the heart, bowel, arteries and skin.
Many had sexual troubles, and 22 per cent of the 324 women remained single. Many of those who had married had made such a poor adjustment that they had been divorced. Naturally, many of the schizoids were "asexual;" they could not love anyone, and had little interest in marriage.
Twenty-one per cent of the "relatives" were bad worriers. Interesting was the fact that 18 per cent complained primarily of pain. When this pain was in the abdomen, one in ten got operated on again and again. Some had from 5 to 7 operations--all without avail. Many others complained of aches and widespread and constant "miseries."
At least 15 per cent of the women had suffered from hysterical episodes. Many of the "relatives" vomited their breakfast. Fifteen per cent complained of nausea. Frank epilepsy was found in 14 per cent of the families tainted with psychoses and alcoholism. Thirteen per cent of the 574 "relatives" were constitutionally inadequate, and 12 per cent of the women complained of urinary frequency and distress of a neurotic type. Many suffered from vague indigestion. Many of both the men and women had sexual difficulties. There was frigidity, dyspareunia, and menstrual depression in the women, and premature ejaculation and loss of sexual interest and potency in the men.
At least 10 per cent of the "relatives" were schizoid and 9 per cent were cyclothymic.
The failure of physicians to diagnose psychosis. My experience with psychotic persons is that today these people can go through even a great university clinic, and many can come out without their real trouble being suspected or recognized. They will come out with either a diagnosis of some incidental finding, such as gall-

stones that are silent and harmless, or the statement that "there is nothing the matter."
A while ago, I saw a woman of 60 with an obvious agitated depression, so bad that my receptionist came to me and said there was an insane woman in the waiting room, and would I please see her right away as she was upsetting the other patients. This woman had twice been thoroughly examined in one of America's greatest institutions" of medical learning. The first time she had had some silent gallstones removed and the second time her perineum had been repaired!
The great need for recognizing equivalents of psychosis. Obviously, there is a tremendous need today for a better training of physicians so that they will recognize psychoses and especially the minor equivalents of psychosis. They need, also, training in recognizing the first symptoms of insanity and the minor psychoses of childhood.
It should now be obvious that, until the minor equivalents and carrier states are commonly recognized by physicians and recorded on patients' records, studies on the inheritance of psychoses and epilepsy can have little volue. Too many of the patients' relatives who pass in the community as normal are anything but normal, as could easily be shown by any able psychiatrist or epileptologist.
The old and trusted family physician often knows that even an eminent and highly respected member of a community behaves insanely at home, or drinks over a pint of whiskey before retiring at night, or is so paranoid that he is always snooping on his wife, or is at times so depressed that he does little at his place of business.
A schizophrenic whose psychosiswas said to come out of "a clear sky." I remember, years ago in California, having an argument with a psychiatrist friend of mine who was writing up for publication a case of what he called "isolated schizophrenia." He thought the young man's mental break-

146 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

down was a beautiful example of insanity that appears as an isolated example of mental disease in a "perfectly normal" family. He felt sure that the cause must have been a sexual trauma in childhood.
I had my doubts, and because my interest was piqued, I began some detective work. I looked up the old retired family doctor who, for 50 years, had taken care of the schizophrenic lad's mother, father and grandfather. The doctor told me that the grandfather had been an eccentric, mildly psychotic "old devil" who had managed to keep from most of his neighbors the fact that he was dipsomanic and a "lost weekender." His wife was eccentric, as was his daughter. His grand-daughter, the mother of the schizophrenic lad, in her youth was markedly schizoid, as was a sister.
These women had as cousins one who was mentally retarded, another who the old doctor maintained committed suicide, two who drank a bit, and a few who were not well adjusted.
In the ten years that followed the writing of the psychiatrist's paper, two of the schizophrenic lad's sisters developed enough mental trouble so that they placed themselves in the hands of a psychiatrist, and another developed a psychosis so bad she had to be committed. These extra 3 cases in the family should have upset my friend's theory as to the etiology of the disease he was studying. One wonders why 4 out of 5 children had so much mental trouble. It may have been because two carriers had married. A strain of schizophrenia and homosexuality ran through the lad's father's family. In his youth, this father was schizoid.
I think this story should show clearly enough that, without the sort of information that only an investigator on-the-spot can get, any genetic study must be valueless.
Hundreds of times, when my assistant wrote on a history sheet, "No insanity or epilepsy in the family," I soon drew from the patient or his mother or his old doctor

a remarkable story of bad heredity, running through three generations.
The other day I read a statement made by an authority to the effect that the incidence of epilepsy among the children of an epileptic is 2 per cent. Dr. O.P. Kimball, who studied a series of epileptic families over the course of years, got a figure of about 37 per centl He said he got much of his information only after years of effort, and after making friends with the parents of epileptic children.
In my study of 99 persons who had epileptic near-relatives, I found 59 who had definite signs of epilepsy--rarely grand mal, more often petit mal, and often a form of psychic epilepsy. If I could have gotten electroencephalograms in all cases, I probably would have found more persons with signs of epilepsy.
Some common equivalents of epilepsy. Among the 99 relatives of epileptics, I found that the incidence of many nervous symptoms was about the same as among the relatives of the psychotic and the alcoholic. Depressions, phobias, hysteria, aches and pains, compulsions and delusions and dazed feelings were found more often among the relatives of the psychotic and alcoholic.
Very interesting was the finding that irritability, irascibility and a bad temper were found 2 or 3 times more often among the relatives of the epileptic. They suffered much from alcoholism (15 per cent as compared with 7 per cent among the relatives of the psychotic and alcoholic). Noteworthy is the fact that 29 per cent of the relatives of the epileptic had suffered from depressions.
Sixteen per cent of the men complained of a distressingly premature ejaculation.
The great need today for studying carriers of nervous mental disease. I think one of the next big forward steps in medicine will involve a study of the carrier states. The world is full of carriers of the many hereditary diseases, and I doubt if genetic studies will be of much value until most of them are recognized fairly early in

147

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

life. More and more tests are being developed for the recognition of persons who some day will have diabetes, hypertension, primary anemia, lateral sclerosis, and other troubles. As every geneticist knows, one of the difficulties in his work is his inability often to tell how many of the children of a propositus will some day develop the expected diseases.
During my many years of practice, I have become impressed with the fact that, if we physicians would only observe well, if we would take better histories, and if we would know well the earliest symptoms of psychoses and epilepsy, we could recognize millions of carriers.
SUMMARY
A consultant in medicine has studied hundreds of families in which a taint which, in one member of the family produced psychosis, produced in others alcoholism, epilepsy, mental retardation and any one of many minor equivalents of psychosis. Evidently, mental difficulties do not always breed true.
Among minor equivalents of psychosis were found: blue or moody spells; crying spells; spells of great fatigue or exhaustion or feelings of toxicity; hysterical bloating of the abdomen; poor adjustment to life;

many fears and anxieties; hypochondriasis; brief spells of diarrhea due to panics of fear; weird and uncomfortable sensations throughout the body; a loss of the sense of balance; numbness in several parts of the body; spells in which the nerves played tricks with several organs; sexual difficulties; a great tendency to worry; pains and aches all over; hysteria; epilepsy; constitutional inadequacy; severe pre-menstrual depression, and premature ejaculation in the men. Some of the "relatives" were schizoid; some were cyclothymic and some were alcoholic.
Today, psychotic persons go from clinic to clinic with their real difficulty often unrecognized.
The author describes a case of what was reported as an isolated case of schizophrenia in a perfectly "normal family." By interviewing the family doctor and local townsfolk, much psychosis and psychotic equivalents were found scattered throughout 4 generations.
It is shown that if one studies with great care the relatives of epileptics, one can find over 50 per cent who have minor forms of the disease. Very important in the future of medicine will be the study of the very common carrier states of diseases.

