Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
IV. The detection of carriers of "recessive" genes
Harold F. Falls M.D. & James V. Neel M.D.
To cite this article: Harold F. Falls M.D. & James V. Neel M.D. (1954) IV. The detection of carriers of "recessive" genes, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:3, 166-170, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987187 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987187
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

IV. THE DETECTION OF CARRIERS OF "RECESSIVE" GENES

HAROLD F. FALLS, M.D.
JAMES V. NEEL, M.D.
Heredity Clinic University of Michigan

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

i HE SCIENCE OF HUMAN genetics has ad- characteristic clinical findings until late

vanced rapidly during the past decade. adolescence, middle age, or even old age.

Particularly significant and of interest to In this instance the carrier is an individual

this audience is the world-wide, growing who at first shows very minor effects of the

awareness by the medical profession of the gene; this same individual may gradually

etiologic role of heredity in disease and develop all the manifestations of the dis-

anomalous defects. This recognition of the ease in question.

importance of the genetic component in 3. Diseases due to dominant genes of human disease has, furthermore, vastly stim- variable expression, in consequence of ulated and enlarged the scope of medical which affected individuals exhibiting only

research, specifically in the fields of bio- mild or minor effects of the "dominant"

chemistry and physiology. Improved medical methodology and instrumentation, coupled with increasing experience and knowledge on the part of the geneticist,

gene may produce progeny presenting a more serious form of the disease. Carriers falling into this category are individuals in whom a gene often responsible for a path-

have advanced our science to the point that ological trait fails to find full expression,

we may now discuss such a subject as is here assigned to the authors, namely, the detection of the genetic carriers of inherited diseases.

presumably because of environmental and genetic modifiers.
4. Diseases having, at least in part, a genetic basis but for which the specific

A genetic carrier may be defined as an genetic mechanism is unknown, the carrier

individual who possesses the potentialities exhibiting clinically detectable departures

of transmitting inherited disease while from the norm, but which are relatively in-

showing no or only a slight departure from nocuous in character.

normality. One of us (Neel, 1947) has By assignment, this paper will consider

previously classified the diseases in which a only category one and thus will deal only

carrier state may be recognized into four with carrier states whose basis is genes ex-

chief categories:

hibiting incomplete "recessiveness." Most

1. Diseases dependent upon one or more of the more clearly defined carrier states

nominally recessive genes, which are com- thus far recognized fall into this category.

pletely penetrant when homozygous but However, the considerations which will be

also show slight effects when heterozygous, advanced concerning carrier states hold true

i.e., diseases dependent upon semi-domi- for all four categories enumerated above.

nant or incompletely recessive genes. Here It is obvious to this audience that the

the carrier is a hétérozygote showing very ability to recognize or detect carriers of

minor effects of the gene; such carriers will "recessive" genes affords the physician in-

never develop the disease in question.

valuable data which particularly strengthen

2. Diseases in which individuals with the the accuracy of clinical diagnosis and prog-

appropriate genotype do not develop the nosis. It is most important to realize that

166

167

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

the knowledge currently available regarding carrier states is far too meager to permit any but a preliminary report and one subject yearly to vast modification as well as amplification. Within the past few years it has become increasingly apparent that certain genes formerly believed to be completely recessive actually are detectable in the heterozygous state.
Table 1 presents an attempted summary of available information regarding "recessive" gene carrier states. The traits are arranged in alphabetical order. It must be emphasized that some carrier relationships so summarized are probably specific for a particular family or group of families and thus cannot be applied as a general relationship. This is so, for example, in the case of myopia (Yamazaki, 1927).
It is also to be emphasized that there is a wide disparity in the diseases entered in the table both in respect to the extent, validity, and usefulness of the observations concerning the existence of their carrier states. An attempt has been made to indicate the reliability and general applicability of the observations by a grading system of 1 through 4, where 1 indicates the best reliability. An arbitrary upper limit of three pertinent references or their equivalent
(personal experience) for each disease has been adopted.
There are a very few diseases for which we can now predict with a high degree of accuracy just which marriages will result in affected children. Perhaps the outstanding example is the sickle cell disease of Negroes. By means of a simple and specific test it is possible to recognize with a very high degree of accuracy hétérozygotes for the gene (with the sickle cell trait), and thus predict with considerable certainty which marriages can give rise to homozygous children with sickle cell disease. A second disease (or group of diseases) possibly on a par with sickle cell disease is sex-linked choroideremia, where apparently a very high proportion of heterozygous females exhibit

characteristic retinal changes. Unfortunately, these are the exception. Thus, the most common designation of reliability appearing in Table 1 is "4." The actual occurrence of a carrier state for any disease designated by a "4" is dubious. It would be accurate to say for such diseases that there are hints as to the possible existence of a carrier state, but further work is indicated.
It will be noted that a relatively high proportion of the traits listed in Table 1 are sex-linked. To what extent this reflects the recognized prevalence of sex-linked traits in man as contrasted to most other mammals, and to what extent this is a consequence of the difference in the operation of selection on sex-linked and on autosomal recessive genes, is not now clear.
The practical implications for genetic counseling of the ability to detect the carriers of inherited disease are obvious. The extent to which, in the light of our present fragmentary knowledge, these implications should be pursued is debatable. More specifically, the data summarized in Table 1 are presented not with the thought of their immediate usefulness but more because of their theoretical implications. Thus, any attempt to evaluate selection in man rests upon the detailed knowledge of gene action implied in the recognition of carrier states. Furthermore, insight into primary gene action may in some instances proceed more readily from a study of minimally rather than maximally affected individuals.
It is noteworthy that the criteria for the recognition of carrier states at the present time are very largely morphological. It is well established that the ultimate basis of most if not all inherited disease is a biochemical aberration. As recognition of these basic biochemical defects proceeds, it may be anticipated that more carrier states will be recognized by biochemical tests, including biochemical stress tests deliberately designed to bring out subclinical metabolic deficiencies.

168 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

TABLE 1
*'RECESSIVELY" INHERITED DISEASES FOR WHICH EXISTENCE OF A RECOGNIZABLE CARRIER STATE AMONGST HETEROZYGOUS INDIVIDUALS HAS BEEN SUGGESTED

Disease

Mode of Characteristics of car- Genetic relationship of ReliaInheritance rier state may be carrier to manifest disease bility

Reference

Afibrinogenemia a.r. Fibrinogenopenia

As hétérozygote to homozygote

Albinism (universal)
Albinism confined to the eye
Allergy (early, severe)
Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (sexlinked type)

Diaphanous irides to As hétérozygote to homoscleral transillumination zygote

s.Lr. Diaphanous irides to Carrier females heterozyscierai transillumina- gous for a gene for which tion. Female ophthal- the affected males are moscopic appearance of hemizygous scattered and isolated coarse cocoa brown islets of melanin pigment

a.r.

Development of mild As hétérozygote to homoallergies sometime after zygote but only about 1-5

puberty

hétérozygotes ever develop

symptoms

Very mildly affected females

Carrier females heterozygous for a gene for which affected males are hemizygous

Risak, 1935 Macfarlane, 1938 Schönholzer, 1939 Waardenburg, 1947 Falls, 1953 Waardenburg, 1947 Falls, 1953
Wiener, Zieve and Fries, 1936
Roberts, 1929 Levit, 1936

Anophthalmia

a.r. Small eyeballs

As hétérozygote to homo- 4 Sorsby, 1934 zygote

Choroideremia

s.l.r. Presence in females of Carrier females heterozysame family of atypical gous for a gene for which and minor degenerative affected males are hemichoroidoretinal changes zygous

Color anomaly Friedreich's ataxia

s.l.r. Females with minor im- Carrier females are hetpairment of color vision erozygous for a gene for which affected males are hemizygous

Pes cavus and absent tendon and reflexes

As hétérozygote to homozygote; findings in hétérozygote inconstant

Goedblad, 1942 McCullough & McCullough, 1948 Sorsby et al., 1952
Wieland, 1933 Schmidt, 1934 Pickford, 1949
Davidenkov, 1940 Spillane, 1940

Hemophilia
Juvenile amaurotic idiocy

S.l.r. Females with minor Carrier females are het-

prolongation of co- erozygous for a gene for

agulation time

which affected males are

hemizygous

a.r.

Various mental and As hétérozygote to homoneurologic stigmata. In- zygote

creased incidence of

vacuolated lymphocytes

Günder, 1938 Andreassen, 1943 Fonio, 1949
Rayner, 1952

Keratoconus (recessive form)

Split retinoscopic shad- As hétérozygote to homoows and/or high de- zygote. Findings in hétgrees of astigmatism érozygote inconstant

Falls (personal observation) Sorsby, 1951

Keratosis follicularis spinulosa
Laurence-MoonBardet-Biedl syndrome

s.l.r. Females with mild keratosis follicularis

Carrier females are heterozygous for a gene for which males are hemizygous

Obesity, skeletal abnor- As hétérozygote to homo-

malities, atypical ret- zygote, but carrier state

inal changes

changes of a very nonspe-

cific nature

Siemens, 1925 Galyon & Falls, unpublished
Sorsby, Avery and Cockayne, 1939

169

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

(Table 1 eont'd.)

Disease

Mode of Characteristics of car- Genetic relationship of ReliaInheritance Her state may be carrier to manifest disease bility Reference

Megalocornea
Morquio's disease
Myopia, extreme
Ophthalmoplegia, congenital
PelizaeusMerzbacher disease
Peroneal atrophy (sex-linked type)
Retinitis pigmentosa (choroidoretinal degeneration)
Rothmand's syndrome Schizophrenia
Sex-linked hypochromic
Sickle cell anemia Thalassemia major
Werner's syndrome
Xanthomatosis, extreme form
Xeroderma pigmentosa

s.l.r. Presence in females of Carrier females are het- 4 Riddell, 1942

same family of megalo- erozygous for a gene for

cornea

which males are hemi-

zygous

a.r. Small stature and short As hétérozygote to homo- 4 Grebe, 1943

midphalanges of hands zygote; relationship ob-

and feet

served in only a single

family

a.r. Mild myopia

As hétérozygote to homo- 4 Yamazaki, 1927 zygote

s.l.r. Absence of deep tendon Carrier females are het- 4 Salieras and

reflexes in lower

erozygous for a gene for

de'Zarate, 1950

extremities in females which males are hemizy-

of same family

gous

s.l.r. Presence in females of Carrier females heterozy- 4 Siemens, 1925

same family of mild gous for a gene for which

manifestations, chiefly affected males are hemi-

nystagmus and optic zygous. Relationship ob-

atrophy

served in only a single

family

s.l.r. Mild and nonprogres- Carrier females are hetsive peroneal atrophy erozygous for a gene for which males are hemizygous--not all s.l. pedigrees exhibit this relationship

Raffan, 1907 Bell, 1935

s.l.r. Presence in females of Carrier females heterozy- 1 Falls & Cotter-

same family of "tapetal- gous for a gene for which

man, 1948

like reflex" ophthalmo- the affected males are

Sorsby, 1951

scopic appearance

hemizygous; not all pedi-

Wiener & Falls,

grees manifest this rela-

unpublished

tionship

a.r.

Atrophie dermatosis with telangiectasia

As hétérozygote to homo- 4 Thannhauser,

zygote

1945

a.r. Schizoid personality

As hétérozygote to homo- 4 Rudin, 1916

zygote

Hoffmann, 1921

Strohmayer,

1925

Females with increased Carrier females are het- 1 Rundles &

numbers of pale oval erozygous for a gene for

Falls, 1946

erythrocytes and/or which affected males are

splenomegaly

hemizygous

a.r. Sickle cell trait

As hétérozygote to homo- 1 Neel, 1949 zygote

a.r. Thalassemia minor

As hétérozygote to homo- 1 Gatto, 1942

zygote

Dameshek, 1943

Valentine &

Neel, 1944

a.r.

Canities, juvenile catar- As hétérozygote to homoacts, and/or sclero- zygote; findings in hétéro-

2

Thannhauser, 1945

derma-like skin changes zygote inconstant

a.r. Hypercholesterolemia s.l.r. Excessive freckling

As hétérozygote to homozygote

1 Fliegelman, Wilkinson, & Hand, 1949 Adlersburg, Parets & Boas, 1949

As hétérozygote to homo- 4 Siemens &

zygote

Kohn, 1925

Cockayne, 1933

*a.r. autosomal "recessive" (incomplete recessive, semi-dominant, and so on) s.l.r. sex-linked "recessive"

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

170 Eugenics Quarterly

As knowledge of the genetic structure of human populations increases, it becomes increasingly apparent that each individual is heterozygous for a number of recessive genes with undesirable effects. In view of the number of recessively inherited pathologic traits already recognized, it is quite apparent that the development of the techniques appropriate to a precise evaluation of any individual's potentialities as regards the transmission of inherited disease constitutes an enormous task. In practical terms, the problem in carrier detection which will most often arise will be concerned with determining whether an individual from a family in which a given inherited disease occurs is a carrier of the recessive gene in question. The biological pitfalls inherent in genetic counseling which concentrate on the particular trait in question without an attempt to consider the genotype as a whole should be recognized. Otherwise stated, the day may soon come when by appropriate tests the average individual may actually be demonstrated to be the carrier of one or several recessive genes. This development will almost automatically force geneticists to a broader consideration of the genotype as a whole.
A few words might be said concerning the technical problems involved in the recognition of further carrier states. The logical point of departure is a search among the apparently normal members of a family in which a "recessive" disease occurs, aimed at the detection of minor manifestations of

the disease in superficially normal individuals. It is essentially this type of investigation which brought to light carrier states such as have been suggested for afibrinogenemia and peroneal atrophy. The possibility must be constantly borne in mind, however, that the findings leading to the recognition of a carrier state may either represent one of the lesser manifestations of the disease or actually bear no apparent resemblance to the principal pathology. For instance, Rayner (1952), following up the earlier observation of Bugh and Hortling (1948) on the occurrence of vacuolated lymphocytes in persons with juvenile amaurotic idiocy, reports that hétérozygotes for the gene in question also exhibit vacuolated lymphocytes. If this report is confirmed, then what is the most recently recognized, and certainly the most inconsequential, manifestations of the gene responsible for juvenile amaurotic idiocy becomes the clue to the carrier state. It is apparent that the foundation for the recognition of further carrier states--not to mention the validation of many of those mentioned in the table--is thorough family studies. Conversely, if in spite of the relatively little attention usually paid to the apparently normal members of a family in which genetically determined disease occurs, there are already this number of hints concerning recognizable carriers, it may be anticipated that systematic approaches to the problem should lead to the recognition of many more.

REFERENCES

FALLS, H. F., 1953. Clinical detection of the genetic carrier state in ophthalmic pathology. Trans. Am. Acad. Ophth. & Otolaryn., Nov.-Dec, pp. 858-872.
NEEL, J. V., 1947. The clinical detection of the

genetic carriers of inherited disease. Medicine, 26: 115-153.
, 1949. The detection of the genetic carriers of hereditary disease. Am. J. Human Genetics, 1:19-36.

