Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Darwin revisited
Harold F. Dorn
To cite this article: Harold F. Dorn (1958) Darwin revisited, Eugenics Quarterly, 5:3, 137-144, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1958.9987364 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1958.9987364
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

DARWIN REVISITED*

HAROLD F. DORN
Biometrics Branch Division of Research Services National Institutes of Health

Editor's Note: Charles Darwin's first public statement about the origin of species was published just one hundred years ago. The centenary of this epoch-making event is being celebrated all over the world.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

M,LORE THAN ONE MILLION known and de-
scribed species of animals and plants live on the earth. This is not a complete inventory of all living species since new types continually are being identified. They vary in size from the ultra-microscopic viruses to the giant sequoia and the huge blue whale; in complexity from the single cell amoeba to animals with billions of cells; some manufacture their own food while others can exist only by devouring another species. They live in all kinds of environments--in deserts and arctic wastes; in the darkness of the ocean depths; in the air, water, and soil; in forests and grasslands. Although diverse, this multitude has one thing in common--every species is governed by the same biological laws.
Of these species of organisms, only man can in part control and modify his environment. As a result of this ability man now occupies and dominates the earth to an extent probably never before approached by any other species. This dominance is very recent and constitutes a situation to which man still is far from adjusted.
It does not free him, however, from the inexorable working of the biological laws that govern all living organisms. The multitude of microorganisms over which man is temporarily dominant have not been banished from the earth. They are still striving to regain their former status. How
*Adapted from presidential address before the Population Association of America, May 3, 1958 in Chicago, Illinois.

long man will continue to enjoy his newly gained dominance will depend to a large extent upon how wisely he exercises his abilities and knowledge. The struggle for existence still goes on.
The origin of man is concealed in the dim past. The direct ancestors of Homo sapiens possibly had become differentiated early in the Pleistocene period which began 600,000 to 1,000,000 years ago. The present subgroups of Homo sapiens may have existed for as long as 100,000 years. Skeletons of modern man dating from 50,000 to 80,000 years ago have been found in caves in Europe. These dates are largely conjectural; of the millions of persons who have inhabited the earth, skeletal remains have been found of only a very few who lived prior to relatively recent times and these remains are mainly fragments of skulls.
During all but the most recent years of the centuries of his existence man must have lived, reproduced, and died as other animals. The increase in his numbers was slow and governed by the availability of wild food sources. Like other animals, Homo sapiens was subject to the three great regulators of population size--pestilence, privation, and warfare. Among all species except Homo sapiens the killing of one animal by another is primarily for food. Only man has developed the practice of killing others solely for the purpose of gaining dominance.
Approximately a century ago Darwin

137

138 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

and Wallace independently proposed the Theory of Natural Selection in explanation of the process by which existing species of plants and animals have been derived from earlier forms. With modifications made necessary by the subsequently developed knowledge of genetics, this theory is accepted today by most scientists.
Among the essential features of the Theory of Natural Selection are: (a) the mass production of offspring resulting in (b) a struggle for existence not only between species but also between members of the same species; (c) the introduction of variation through mutation and gene recombination and (d) the hereditary transmission of characteristics.
The evolutionary process has endowed most species with a reproductive potential that, unchecked, would overpopulate the entire globe within a few generations. The tape worm, Taenia, may lay an estimated 120,000 eggs per day; an adult cod lays possibly four million eggs per year; a frog will produce as many as 10,000 eggs per spawning. Under favorable conditions a pair of English sparrows would have 276 billion descendants in 10 years. The human ovaries are thought to contain approximately 200,000 ova at puberty while a single ejaculation of human semen may contain 200 million spermatazoa.
The almost incomprehensible reproductive potential illustrated by these figures is kept in check by interspecies competition in the struggle for existence, by disease, and by limitation of the available food supply. Not only are large losses of eggs and young characteristic of most species but, perhaps of equal importance for the preservation of a species, few adults survive for more than a small fraction of their potential life span.
This may be illustrated by counts of survivors of a squirrel population in a game refuge. In captivity, squirrels may live at least 15 years. Of 100 squirrels born in the wild, 53 survived 6 months, 29 survived cne year, and 8 survived two years; only

one per thousand lived to see its sixth year.
Homo sapiens has lived and died in much the same way until a few decades ago. We often forget how recently man has gained control over pestilence and famine. In 1832, 1849, and 1854 epidemics of cholera raised the general death rate in New York City to a level of more than 45 per 1,000 per year. It was not until the 1870's that the crude death rate in New York City permanently fell below 30 per 1,000. The people of western Europe have been free from the specter of famine for only slightly more than a century. The last great famine was that of 1846-47 in Ireland. The total mortality from all causes during the five years ending in 1851 is estimated at nearly 1,000,000 persons, or one-eighth of the population of Ireland just before the famine.
The increasing control over the forces of high mortality has removed part of the controls on the high reproductive potential of man with a consequent absolute increase in population size unparalleled during his long history. (Figure 1) There is ample evidence to demonstrate that the recent spurt in population growth is due to a decrease in mortality and has occurred in spite of a general decline in fertility.
The size of the world's population 25,000 years ago, the approximate end of the last glaciation, is unknown but probably did not exceed more than a few million in number. The subsequent increase in size undoubtedly was very slow and was interrupted by periods of actual decrease. Following the discovery of agriculture and the domestication of food-supplying animals about 8,000 B.C. to 5,000 B.CV man gradually became less dependent upon wild sources of food. A more stable and abundant food supply undoubtedly speeded up the absolute increase in the total population.
All of this is largely conjecture and the dotted line from 23,000 B.C. to 1650 A.D. in Figure 1 should be regarded as nothing

FIGURE 1. Estimated population of the world 1650-1956 and schematic representation of the net increase in population from 23,000 B.C. to 1650A.D.

139

2.5 W O R L D POPULATION

0.5

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

23,000 B.C

YEAR

8,000 B.C

AD. 1650

more than a rough representation of the So rapidly has this change taken place

change in population during this period. that toward theendof thenineteenth cen-

The actual change almost certainly was tury, representatives of the entire range of

not linear; the trend line is designed to cultures since themiddle Pleistocene, 300,-

suggest that thegrowth of population dur- 000 to 400,000 years ago, could still be

ing this period was very slow.

found. When Great Britain took posses-

The first reasonably accurate estimate of sion of Tasmania in 1803,it was inhabited

the world's population is a figure, due to by a dark, wooly-haired people wholived

Carr-Saunders, of about 500 million around by hunting and food-gathering and who

1650. Three centuries later, 1955, the had no domesticated animals, not even

United Nations Demographic Yearbook dogs. Their only weapons were clubs,

gave theworld's population as 2.7 billion. stones, and pointed sticks similar to early

During thepast century alone, the net in- Stone Age spears. Their chipped stone

crease in the population of the world has tools were as crude as those of the Nean-

exceeded the total number of persons ac- derthal man. TheTasmanians would have

cumulated during the preceding millenia been regarded as savages by people of the

of human existence.

latter part of the Stone Agewho already

140
50

Eugenics Quarterly
FIGURE 2. Estimated proportion of female conceptions surviving to theendof thereproductive ages.

PROPORTION SURVIVING

1500

INDIA 1941-1950

U.S. 1955 WHITE FEMALES

oy<

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

0P

had specialized bone and flint tools and crease in expectation of life at birth during

cave paintings. Thelast Tasmanian died the past half century has been as great as

in 1876.

or greater than that during the previous

The recent spectacular spurt in the two thousand years.

growth of theworld's population hasbeen An important effect of the decline in

the direct result of a rapid decline in mor- mortality rates often is overlooked, namely

tality rates which has lead to a sharp in- the increase in effective fertility. Figure 2

crease in the average length of life. Al- portrays the change that has taken place

though accurate statistics do not exist, the in the proportion of female conceptions

expectation of life at birth in Greece, that survive to the beginning and tothe

Rome, and Egypt during a period of ap- end of thechildbearing period. Although

proximately 500 years around the birth of the left diagram is labeled 1500A.D.,it

Christ probably did not exceed 30 years. could just as appropriately represent any

By 1900, it had increased to about 45-50 date near that period.

years in North America and most western The percentage of conceptions that are

European countries. A figure of 68-70 years live-born is assumed to be thesame for all

has now been attained by the population three diagrams--80 percent. Around 1500,

of many of these countries. Thus the in- only about one-quarter of conceptionssur-

141

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

vived to age 20; in the United States in 1955, the corresponding per cent was 78. From 5 to 8 of each 100 female conceptions during the earlier period lived to the end of the childbearing period, age 50 years, as compared to 74 of each 100 in the United States according to the mortality rates of 1955. The proportion of female conceptions living to the beginning of the childbearing period now is four times greater than in 1500; the proportion surviving to the end of the childbearing period is 10 to 15 times greater. A corresponding decline in the per capita fertility rate would be required to prevent this increase in survivorship from resulting in a rapid increase in population.
By 1950, only a small minority of the world's population had achieved an expectation of life at birth comparable to that of the population of the United States. Large numbers could anticipate mortality conditions no more favorable than those shown for India in Figure 2, a level reached by western Europeans during the eighteenth century.
During the past decade, the possibility of achieving a twentieth-century death rate within five to ten years has been opened to the masses of the world's population that still had an eighteenth-century death rate in 1940. The decline in mortality of the Moslem population of Algeria shown in Figure 3 illustrates what can be achieved by the application of existing knowledge.
In 1946-47, the death rate of the Moslem population of Algeria exceeded that of the population of Sweden in 1771-80, the earliest date for which accurate mortality statistics are available for an entire nation. During the next eight years the drop in the death rate in Algeria exceeded that in Sweden during the century from 1771 to 1871. The world-wide reduction in mortality is the most significant demographic event during the past decade and symbolizes both the extent to which man now can control his environment and the rapidity with which this control has been

achieved. Man is as yet far from adjusted to his
newly gained control over his environment. For the first time, a biological organism can consciously influence the direction of its evolution. We cannot foresee today how man will use this ability. We can, however, point out areas where patterns established in the past have been upset and where new adjustments must be worked out. I shall mention only three such areas:
(a) the balance between births and deaths, (b) the process of natural selection, and (c) the location of centers of power and influence.
The Balance of Births and Deaths
Man has learned how to control two of the three historic governors of population increase--disease and famine. The third, war, in the past has not been an important direct regulator of population size in contrast to the importance of its analog among all other species of animals, namely the killing of one animal by another for food. As man has gained effective control over disease and famine, he has simultaneously magnified his ability to destroy all forms of animal life including himself by warfare. However, man can choose whether his knowledge of atomic fission shall be used for his benefit or for his destruction.
Nullification of the effect of the historic governors of reproductive potential has resulted in the current spurt in population increase at a rate that cannot long continue. If unchecked, the present rate of increase would generate a population of 60 billion persons in less than 200 years, an insignificant interval in comparison to the past history of man. It seems inevitable that man must consciously reestablish control over his reproductive potential and lower his birth rate to the level of his death rate within the next century and a half. If he does not, he will lose his power to control his future and the former regulators of population growth will once again reign supreme.

142 Eugenics Quarterly
Figure 3. Age-specific death rates per 1,000 per year for Sweden, England, and Wales, Mexico, and the Moslem population of Algeria for various time periods, 1771-80 to 1954.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

ZO 30 40 SO SO TO 80 90 10 20 30 40 SO 60 70 60 90

The Process of Natural Selection
Man is now in the fourth main stage of ·civilization, the scientific, having passed through three previous stages, hunting, agricultural, and industrial. During each stage, he has extended his ability to modify and control his environment until science finally has given him the power to direct the course of his evolution.
The three principal effects of this development that are relevant to this dis-

cussion are (a) the separation of sexual gratification from reproduction by means of contraception and telegenesis, (b) the virtual elimination of lethal selection as an important factor in natural selection, and (c) the establishment of culture as a guiding force in the future biological evolution of man.
As shown by Figure 2, three-fourths of all conceptions or more than 90 per cent of all live female births survive to the end

143

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

of the childbearing period in the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and most of the countries of central and northwest Europe. There is every reason to believe that the proportion of conceptions that survive to reproduce will continue to increase. It is now considered practicable to eradicate diseases such as smallpox, yaws, urban yellow fever, malaria, cholera, plague, and typhus whereas only a few years ago the most that could be hoped for was partial control. Rapid advances are taking place in surgery and in the transplantation of tissues, bones, and arteries. The successful transplantation of entire organs is an imminent possibility. The replacement of diseased vital parts of the body such as arteries and heart valves with synthetic inert substitutes is an accomplished fact.
The genetic effect of the virtual elimination of lethal selection is not clear. Selection exists only if by differential survival and fertility, individuals of one generation are disproportionately represented by progeny in the succeeding generation. What will be the effect of the survival of persons with genetically determined defects, for example juvenile diabetes, to the childbearing ages? Will differential fertility become less marked as the necessity of limiting family size in order to control rapid population growth becomes more apparent?
Society has gradually limited the right of an individual to destroy life by killing another human being until now such action is forbidden. Will the elimination of lethal selection and the restraining effect of mortality upon the high human reproductive potential similarly force society to limit the right of an individual to create life?
Location of Centers of Power and Influence
The place of the origin of Homo sapiens is unknown. Now extinct forms of man have been found in Asia, Africa, and Europe. Early in his career, two main

groups of Homo sapiens became established, one in southeast Asia and the other in the region around the eastern Mediterranean . The history of the world, and in particular that of the western world, is largely a history of the development of the latter group. Until recent times the numerically larger population inhabiting southeastern and eastern Asia and adjacent islands has played a minor role in world history.
Throughout the history of the western world, a succession of relatively small population groups have become dominant due to superior knowledge and technology and have ruled their neighbors. At first, the region of dominance was comparatively small. The empires of Assyria, Babylonia, Persia, and Egypt are characteristic of this period. Each succeeding dominant group has extended its sphere of influence until by the end of the nineteenth century, the entire world was dominated by a small group of people of western European descent.
Alexander the Great extended the power of Greece throughout Asia Minor and to the very heart of India. His empire was more extensive than any before his time. His early death prevented the further extension and consolidation of his empire and it soon broke up. Alexander the Great was followed by the Romans who dominated the entire Mediterranean region, most of Asia Minor, western Europe, and England.
Until about the time of Galileo and Francis Bacon, new discoveries and inventions were largely hit or miss. Following the Renaissance, the systematic search for new knowledge gradually gained increasing support. It now is an essential and integral part of our modern civilization. The search for new knowledge and the subsequent technological development flourished most extensively among the populations of the countries of western Europe and led to their virtual domination of the entire world by the end of the nineteenth century.

144 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

Around 1500 the population of Europe probably did not exceed 100,000,000 or perhaps 15 to 20 per cent of the world's population and occupied about 7 per cent o£ the land area of the earth. Four hundred years later, in 1900, the descendants of these people numbered 550 million or one-third of the population of the world. They occupied or controlled five-sixths of the land area of the earth. They had seized and populated two great continents, North and South America, and one smaller continent, Australia, together with its neighboring island, New Zealand; they controlled a fourth continent, Africa, and dominated Southern Asia and adjacent islands.
The English-, French-, and Spanish-speaking peoples were the leaders in this empire building with lesser roles being played by the Portuguese and Dutch. The Belgians and Germans participated only toward the end of this period of expansion. Of these, the English-speaking peoples profited most.
The population of England around 1500, the start of this period of expansion, is unknown but probably did not exceed four or five million. By 1900, the English-speaking population numbered 129 million and occupied or controlled one-third of the land area of the earth and with the nonEnglish-speaking inhabitants of this territory made up 30 per cent of the world's population. Never before in the history of the world had so few people been able

to dominate such a large proportion of the total population and to control so much of the world's resources.
Since World War II the scientific knowledge and technological skill of the Europeans and their descendants have become available to the remainder of the world. In the past, most scientific discoveries have been made by a very small proportion of the world's population. Now the people of the U.S.S.R. and Japan must be included in this group and, in the not far distant future, the teeming millions of China and India. The tempo of discovery and change almost certainly will rapidly increase. It seems inevitable that the breaking up of the world domination by western Europeans and their descendants, which already is well advanced, will continue and that the focus of power and influence will shift toward the demographic center of the world.
The future will be marked by a dramatic increase in man's ability to control his environment provided he rapidly develops cultural substitutes for those harsh but effective governors of his high reproductive potential, pestilence and privation, that he has so recently removed. Whether man can use his scientific knowledge to guide his future evolution more wisely than the blind forces of nature, only the future can reveal. The answer will not be long postponed.

