Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Report on a conference on immuno reproduction
K. A. Laurence
To cite this article: K. A. Laurence (1963) Report on a conference on immuno reproduction, Eugenics Quarterly, 10:2, 79-80, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1963.9987547 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1963.9987547
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

Brief Reports and Communications

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

REPORT ON A CONFERENCE ON IMMUNO REPRODUCTION
K. A. LAURENCE
Population Council New York, N. Y.

In September 1962 at La Jolla, California, a conference was held to investigate the potential application of immunologie methods to the regulation of fertility processes. The conference was held under the auspices of the Population Council with the financial assistance of the Ford Foundation. Some 54 participants drawn from 31 universities, in addition to observers from several foundations and governmental agencies, took active part in the program.
The originating stimulus of the conference was Dr. Alan Guttmacher, President of the Planned Parenthood Federation of America. Dr. Guttmacher, after completing a round-the-world journey to study population problems, expressed the view that motivation for family planning remains generally weak. Therefore, individuals are reluctant to adopt birth control measures which are closely associated with the time and act of coitus. In addition, crowded living conditions prevent the use of methods which require even a modicum of privacy. Therefore, the greatest need in contraception research is development of techniques which can be employed at a time wholly remote from the coital act.
At the moment, there are two promising methods which fill this need but which still require perfection.

These are, of course, the oral contraceptive (synthetic progestins) and the intrauterine devices. The oral contraceptives have been accorded considerable attention during recent years. It is estimated that over one million women in this country alone use just one of the many orals as their method of fertility control. Perhaps as many more women use one or another of the steroidal substances available for this purpose. Research now is being directed toward preparations which are less costly, have fewer side effects, and have longer duration of activity. Experience with intrauterine devices has been increasing, and interest in this method has been gaining momentum in recent months. Results have been sufficiently encouraging so that studies designed to test effectiveness, acceptability, safety, and mode of action are now underway (see Int. Cong. Series #54, Excerpta Medica Foundation). This is a highly promising technique and should receive even more attention in days to come.
People the world over, however, have indicated that an "inoculation" to effectively confer a state of temporary sterility would be a welcomed and highly acceptable method of birth control. This faith in immunologie procedures is based upon the effectiveness of vaccines in con-

79

80 Brief Report

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

trolling many of the diseases which formerly ravaged the world's population. If immunologie procedures can help control disease, perhaps then immunologie technique can help in regulating the fertility processes and controlling population growth.
Because a vaccine to regulate fertility would be an acceptable procedure to all walks of life and because immunologie technique would fulfill the need for a birth control technique wholly remote from the coital act, this conference seemed warranted and was organized. This is not to say, however, that this is an entirely new area of study. For many years, efforts have been made to control reproduction by immunologie methods. Some earlier reports of success have been matched by some even more convincing denials. Nonetheless, a small group of immunologists have continued to investigate and have actively applied immune procedures to this important field. Thus, the conference had a threefold purpose: 1) to acquaint the immunologists with the work already accomplished, 2) to seek the counsel of the group in regard to the most promising direction future work should proceed, and 3) to stimulate the participants to undertake studies in their own laboratories.
Each participant was invited to present a brief survey of his particular area of interest with an evaluation of the basic and applied problems that have been

solved. Further, there was an open invitation to discuss the potential application of each of these studies toward the problem of fertility regulation.
It is not possible to discuss in this summary article all of the important contributions made by each of the participants. The number of pertinent subjects discussed included: immunologically induced aspermatogenesis, naturally occurring delayed-type isohypersensitivity, immunization procedures, sperm coating antigens, adjuvants, antifertility effects of natural and immune antibodies, studies on fertilization mechanisms, antidevelopment effects of antibodies, homograft reactions, placental permeability, chromosome antigens, antigonadotrophins, and potential application of antienzymes to fertility control.
It was generally agreed by the conferees that it is reasonable to anticipate development of several immunologie techniques to inhibit fertility by stimulating the formation of antibodies against one or another reproductive process. It would appear possible, with occasional booster treatments, to maintain an infertile state for lengths of time found desirable. The possibilities are many, and further studies in this area--immuno reproduction--seem warranted.
A limited number of copies of the Proceedings of the conference are available upon request.

