Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Genetic and cultural characteristics: A sociologist and a geneticist examine major issues
John A. Clausen & Benson E. Ginsburg
To cite this article: John A. Clausen & Benson E. Ginsburg (1958) Genetic and cultural characteristics: A sociologist and a geneticist examine major issues, Eugenics Quarterly, 5:2, 95-104, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1958.9987357 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1958.9987357
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4
View related articles
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

GENETIC AND CULTURAL CHARACTERISTICS*

A Sociologist and a Geneticist Examine Major Issues

JOHN A. CLAUSEN
Chief, Laboratory of Socio-Environmental Studies, National Institute of Mental Health
BENSON E. GINSBURG
Professor of Natural Sciences, University of Chicago

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

This collection of papers, which comprised one Round Table of the 1956 Annual Conference of the Milbank Memorial Fund, ranges over a wide territory embracing, as the title suggests, both the biological and the purely social or cultural components of human behavior. This was the first such Milbank Round Table in nineteen years; the rationale for this excursion, somewhat outside the usual realms of these conferences, was the progress made in the field of genetics during that period. It is, perhaps, inevitable that a conference consisting of disjunct papers should be more a mosaic than a unity and should only partially reflect the progress of the field. Nevertheless, this collection of papers does represent an attempt not merely to communicate across disciplinary lines but to bring a variety of skills to bear upon the analysis of "human characteristics." For this reason, and in the hope that a critical commentary examining some major issues of the field might be of interest, a rather lengthy, crossdisciplinary review seems in order.
The papers fall into three groups. The first of these groups provides a general orientation to "Factors Influencing the Characteristics of Populations": Th. Dobzhansky on the biological concept of hered-
*The Nature and Transmission of the Genetic and Cultural Characteristics of Human Populations. Papers presented at the 1956 Annual Conference of the Milbank Memorial Fund, New York, Milbank Memorial Fund, 1957, 143 pp., $1.00.
Sociologist, during 1957-1958 Fellow, Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences.
Geneticist, during 1957-1958 Fellow, Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences.

ity as applied to man, H. L. Shapiro on the impact of culture on genetic mechanisms, and R. B. Vance on the transmission of the social heritage. Dobzhansky's paper serves not only as an introduction to the biological concept of heredity but develops broad principles for studying the interaction of genotypes and environments. "Characters," he points out, "are no more than aspects of a single process of living, and the life of an individual is brought about, jointly and severally, by all the genes which the organism has." The demonstration that a given trait is conditioned by heredity does not in the least exclude the possibility that the variation in this trait is controlled also by environmental influences. Dobzhansky points out that even such supposedly genetically predetermined characteristics as skin color are partly modifiable, and that such completely "learned" attributes as speaking a language presuppose a human "genotype," and not all human genotypes are equipotential in this respect. He emphasizes that, even in these extreme examples, the phenotype is the product of a nature-nurture interaction and "necessarily depends upon both interacting variables." Relations between genotype and phenotype are discussed in the light of known mechanisms of gene action. Finally, culture, as an emergent human aspect of environment, is discussed and related to both heredity and the physical environment in a triangular interacting system in which the task of examining interactions entails going beyond the simple dichotomy of heredity and environment. "The genetically established

95

96 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

capacity to absorb, transmit, modify and ganizations of all sorts. On the whole,

create the body of learned tradition known Vance seems to believe in the exchange-

as culture sets our species apart from all ability of man for man within various posi-

biological species." Culture is, of course, a tions in the social structure. Motivation

part of the social environment, but it is and intelligence are seen as "the bridge

itself a heritage whereby acquired charac- between humanity's varied social heritage

teristics are transmitted (learned) from and the achievement of this inheritance by

generation to generation. Thus the inter- diverse social groups." Intelligence, the

action of three sets of variables must be most significant component of man's

considered in attempting to understand the genetic heritage, is, indeed, the only one

distribution of many human characters. specifically brought into the picture as rep-

Unfortunately, Dobzhansky's challenging resentative of the underlying genetic subformulation is not developed by the other stratum upon which human cultural evolumembers of the symposium, and one feels tion depends.

that while most of the authors of the other As a whole, the first group of papers deals

papers would accept his formulation, they with the transmission of characteristics but

do not always keep it in mind. It seems a not with the nature of these characteristics

pity that the excellent presentation of as except in the most general sense. Vance

fundamental a problem as this one is inde- lists a brief inventory of types of social

pendently rehashed by succeeding papers. heritage, but by and large characteristics,

When the "nature-nurture" theme appears or "traits," are simply mentioned illustra-

in these, it is an ancillary topic, necessarily tively in these papers: skin color, language,

foreshortened and truncated. Of the en- disease, intelligence, personality. Perhaps

suing discussions, some are apt (e.g. Falk- no systematic classification of the types of

ner, paragraph 3, p. 122) and others would human characteristics is today within reach,

have benefited from a clearer understand- but surely there exist some partial concep-

ing of Dobzhansky's analysis.

tualizations of the realms within which

In the second article, H. L. Shapiro turns to cultural characteristics and relates these to genetic mechanisms both as product and modifier. As product, culture is seen as a recent outgrowth of evolution, dating back approximately a million years. As modifier, it makes adaptive demands upon man and becomes a vectorial factor in natural selection. Shapiro's comments on "the decisive influence of culture in shaping man as he now is" are thoughtful but very general.
Vance acknowledges that we need to study the interaction of biological and cul-

human responses may be characterized! Of greatest interest, of course, would be precisely those characteristics which mediate between the two types of heritage. Are there, for example, different genetic structures underlying differentials in ability to relate to other persons, differences in reaction time, energy level, frustration tolerance? The culture is transmitted primarily within the family through relationships that are charged with emotion and almost certainly influenced by the types of factors just mentioned.

tural heritage but turns all his attention to The problem of defining types of char-

a description of the process of how we acteristics again emerges in the next group

transmit "the essential humanity, the civil- of papers which deal with the identification

ization, the social traditions that we have and distribution of variant characteristics.

inherited from the collective past." He The characteristics discussed are personality

describes how the customs of the group and intelligence tests, social schedules,

become the habits of the individual and medical and psychiatric histories, and in-

how the persistence of the group makes clusion in the 1956-57 edition of Who's

bureaucracies tenacious and maintains or- Who in America.

97

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

W. R. Thompson notes in the first paper that a basic issue in the development of psychological tests is "the taxonomic problem of choosing and specifying dimensions of description at the psychological level that have some real biological significance." But this is not a topic with which he deals adequately. After a discussion of the difficulties in trying to achieve a truly "culture free" assessment of intelligence or personality, and a brief consideration of the promises and difficulties inherent in the use of factor analysis, he seems to come to the conclusion that in the state of present knowledge it is not possible to suggest how the problem can properly be tackled. We are left, then, with the picture that present tests permit us to "describe the individual minutely" but may be of little or no value for research on the interaction of genetic and environmental factors.
The next two papers are illustrative of modern social science survey techniques seeking to establish the prevalence and social psychological correlates of mental retardation and psychiatric symptomatology. A study of mental retardation, by Jastak and Whiteman, entailed a screening interview with a random sample of the adult population in Delaware, followed up by an intensive interview of a subsample. Using four criteria of mental retardation-- I.Q., "altitude" (highest subtest score), schooling achievement, and occupational achievement -- these workers obtain findings that call into question the use of I.Q. alone as a means of identifying persons as mentally deficient. Of the lowest 25 per hundred screened out by I.Q. alone, 20 would not be screened out as being in the lowest quartile of the other three distributions. They conclude that mental subnormality need not connote an inability to fill an acceptable social role, since the adjustments of the "retarded" group to environmental demands are alleged to be good. These include job adjustments, marital adjustments and lack of legal offenses. If one may extrapolate from the results, selection

does not seem to be discriminating significantly against persons judged to be mentally retarded by the Jastak-Whiteman criteria. The same generalization would appear to hold with respect to the high incidence of psychiatric disorder reported in the paper by Dorothea Leighton. This is a preliminary report of the prevalence and socio-cultural correlates of persons with symptoms of psychiatric significance in a small town in eastern Canada. The study used case-finding, interview of a random sample of the population, psychiatric ratings of the interview materials as a basis for assessing symptom patterns, the apparent psychiatric significance of reported or revealed symptoms, and the degree of impairment by virtue of psychiatrically significant symptoms. A minimum of thirty-seven per cent of the population were felt to be more than ten per cent impaired by virtue of psychiatric symptomotology, and the bulk of the population was characterized as having suffered at one time or another from psychophysiological or psychoneurotic difficulties. In the reports of the studies of mental retardation and of psychiatric symptomotology, no mention is made of the fertility of the various categories, nor does it appear that either study attempted to ascertain the genetic contributions to the conditions studied. Both papers, in fact, use as criteria of the characteristics being assessed, ratings that are in large measure relative to the distribution of those characteristics in the particular populations studied. These studies illustrate how crude our measures are and how uncertain we are in attempting to draw the line between sick and well in the realm of psychiatric disorder.
Kirk's study of the fertility of a gifted group (men in Who's Who in America) bears more directly upon the transmission of population characteristics. He concludes that in contrast to the situation prevailing in the past, "if present trends continue the genetic qualities of men in Who's Who in America will be perpetuated at least in

98 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

their numerical proportion to the general population."
The final topic of the conference is entitled "Research on Genetic Factors in Characteristics of Populations." In the first paper, dealing with the pathways between genes and behavioral characteristics, J. L. Fuller discusses various approaches to the study of "relationships between heredity and behavior which are not conditional upon gene-induced gross defects of development and metabolism," drawing largely upon the results of research on animal behavior. In the succeeding paper on genetic aspects of mental disorder, Gordon Allen examines some "misunderstandings that obstruct communication between geneticists and others, especially in the realm of psychology." He observes that failure to demonstrate a biochemical or anatomical stigma in no way rules out the possibility that a behavioral trait has a genetic basis, and conversely, the findings of a correlated anatomical or chemical variation is in no way a demonstration that genes are determinants of the associated behavior. He notes the fallacious assumption that continuous variation and the frequency of mental disease argue against a genetic basis and discusses the possibility that genes responsible for producing illness in the homozygous state may be "paying their way" by conferring benefits in the heterozygous state. In discussing the design of research in this area, he suggests that the foremost task is the development of "biologically meaningful definitions and classifications." He proposes the development and use of a variety of sets of criteria for distinguishing schizophrenia, for example, subjecting the resulting materials to analysis by genetic methods.
Finally, a paper by Frank Falkner appraises the potential contribution of longitudinal twin studies. Successive measurements in the same individuals permit the study of growth increments and of change. Admittedly, longitudinal studies are far more difficult to carry out than cross-sec-

tional assessments, and the recruitment of adequate samples of monozygous and dizygous twins would add greatly to the complexity of the research. Falkner calls attention to some of the problems to be faced but stresses the potential pay-off if such studies can be conducted comparably among diverse populations.
A SOCIOLOGIST'S VIEW
This sociologist, interested in personality development and especially in the interaction between the biological organism and the family environment, was gratified at the general agreement that the heredityenvironment question should be phrased in terms of interaction. Because he had expected more controversy, his first reaction to this symposium was to feel that social scientists and geneticists had learned to work together in the study of human behavior. But further consideration suggests that to a large extent their research efforts tend to bypass each other. It is natural that most workers in the biological and the social sciences will be primarily concerned with the theoretical and methodological problems that lie at the core of their respective fields. As Vance suggested, workers in each field are willing to admit that the variables studied by the other do make a difference, but in their own work they tend to proceed by the method of "all other things being equal." Interaction between two sets of variables cannot, however, be studied on this basis.
It is instructive to note that the study of intelligence represents by far the most impressive area of collaboration -- and of agreement -- between biological and social scientists studying human characteristics. All are agreed that this is a most important characteristic influencing adaptation to one's environment, especially through the learning of the cultural heritage. Moreover, there is qualified agreement that despite cultural biases and other shortcomings of intelligence tests, the I.Q. is a reasonably stable and sufficiently valid measure of in-

99

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

telligence to use in studies of the interaction of genetic and social components within a relatively homogenous culture to which the test is appropriate. At least, no one purporting to study intelligence fails to ascertain I.Q.I
One gets little idea, from this collection of papers, what other characteristics are regarded as of general importance, except those which, in Fuller's words, are "conditional upon gene-induced gross defects of development or metabolism." The quest for constitutional types is mentioned by Fuller and by Falkner; both indicate that the substantial amount of effort devoted to this quest has thus far failed to provide useful behavioral characterizations of man. Falkner seems to hold some hope for finding a relationship between body build and temperament, but not on the assumption of completely static types.
We come back to the question then, what is it, in the individual make-up as given genetically (other than intelligence), that makes a difference in the way that the patterns of the culture are internalized, in the kinds of relationships that are formed with others, in the response of the infant to his parents, his world? Again and again in these papers, one is told that a major problem relates to finding psychological classifications which are biologically significant. The failure to find them is a reflection of the extent to which genetic mixture and cultural diversity so blend their effects in human interaction as to mask the resemblance of phenotypes. Many psychological treatises on personality development hypothesize that differences in temperament or in response to stress may be influenced by genes. But no measures of temperament or response to stress have achieved general acceptance, even as minimally adequate. A general review of the current status of psychological theory and testing in this area would be helpful. It is not enough to assume that factor analysis will turn up the relevant dimensions in time.
A consideration of the studies which deal

with mental disease and mental deficiency suggests that even here alternative hypotheses are not used as the basis for setting up studies of interaction. Studies that attempt to assess genetic influences in schizophrenia or other personality disturbances seldom examine variables regarded by the psychodynamic psychiatrist as most significant; in turn, studies of the prevalence and sociocultural correlates of mental retardation and mental disorder tend to ignore the genetic dimension. In the present group of papers, for example, there is reference to the finding that individuals with O blood type are relatively more susceptible than those of other blood groups to peptic ulcer. The prevalence of peptic ulcer seems also to be related to parental authority in the family structure, to occupation and to characteristic ways of handling aggression. But rather than being viewed as a challenging problem for research, the finding is noted and dropped because "neither the genetic nor the psychological hypotheses are strong enough by themselves to support any additional theoretical edifice." There may be insurmountable difficulties in the way of such research, but it is not clear that such is the case. To this reviewer it simply does not make sense to avoid cooperative crossdisciplinary study in those areas where geneticists and behavioral scientists have competing hypotheses and then to seek other variables for which no hypotheses yet exist.
What many of the papers seem to be saying is that we have a long way to go and that neither routes nor vehicles now available are adequate to get us where we want to go. Better measures of personality variables are needed--on this there is general agreement--and this reviewer would argue for trying to delineate some of the relatively enduring aspects of personality which can be reliably assessed in childhood by a variety of techniques. Despite the great progress in some areas of psychology, this particular area has not been systematically approached from the perspective needed to serve research on the interaction of genetic

100 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

and socio-cultural factors. Falkner's paper does suggest that this situation is now being remedied, but the process will take time.
The studies of mental retardation and psychiatric symptoms reported in this collection make no attempt to achieve classifications that are biologically significant. Indeed, it would be difficult to find classificationsmore designed to obscure the study of genetic components. These tend to be conglomerations of behaviors which bear similar social stimulus values but result from a great variety of circumstances. For social planning purposes such classifications may be useful, and neither study purports to go beyond the search for sociocultural correlates. But the reader interested in examining interrelationships between genetic and socio-cultural factors gets little help from these studies. The JastakWhiteman paper, for example, reports the use of a multiple criterion of retardation which looks reasonable at first glance but entails several dubious assumptions. For example, school achievement (indexed by the number of completed grades of school divided by the average number completed by one's age group) can only be taken as an index of retardation if under-achievement is primarily a reflection of inability to do well in school. Even in this case, under-achievement is, of course, a result of the interplay of genes and cultural factors. But to classify all persons in any age group retarded if they fail to complete N grades of school, when the cultural norm for their socio-economic and ethnic group may have been less than N grades, does violence to this sociologist's concept of mental retardation. Small wonder that there is only a modest intercorrelation between the several criteria when one uses them jointly for screening purposes. I.Q. alone is an inadequate basis for diagnosing retardation, but the multiple criterion proposed may be more useful as the basis for analytic crosstabulations than as a means of identifying mentally retarded persons.

As Gordon Allen points out in his paper, progress in clarifying the influence of heredity upon mental deficiency has come about in part through ability to discriminate among similar diseases with better diagnostic methods, psychological as well as physical and chemical. The classification of persons according to degree of impairment by psychiatrically-significant symptoms, as is done in the Leighton paper, clearly makes no effort at etiologically relevant discrimination. Nor does the lumping of "psychoses" or "psychophysiologic symptom patterns." One is left, then, with interesting data on the reported occurrence of symptoms over a lifetime, but with little hope of discovering sub-groups which differ significantly in the relative contributions of heredity and life experience.
Perhaps the tone of the above observations is too critical. The contributors to this Round Table prepared their separate papers without apparent coordination and could hardly be expected to bring their several specialties to bear upon the issues so clearly stated by Dobzhansky. A reviewer cannot help but wonder how much further, in the light of present knowledge, a more coordinated examination of the issues, the concepts and the methods of research in this field might have gone. It is to be hoped that before another two decades have passed, another Round Table can bring reports of research which examines more closely the selective interplay of genetic and socio-cultural factors in human populations.
A GENETICIST'S VIEW
So far as topic I is concerned, from the point of view of the cultural bias of a geneticist, more evidence for the views advanced by Shapiro and Vance with respect to the role of culture in human evolution would have been welcome. For Shapiro, the ability to use tools (thus modifying the natural environment) and the ability to communicate (thereby transmitting the cultural accretions to others) are the pri-

101

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

mary results of human evolution. Culture, in turn, becomes a selective factor, making "demands to which our population must adapt itself in the long run if it is to be maintained" The suggestion is made that cultural differences have already caused genetic differentiation among castes in India. But has culture really acted in this way? The reference to the specific instance in India is unsupported by bibliographic citations and thus not readily accessible to evaluation. The alleged demands of civilization would suggest that people of substandard intelligence and skills should have difficulty in competing in our society, if not in leaving progeny, yet, in this same symposium, the Jastak and Whiteman results argue that selection does not operate in any obviously adverse manner against such people in the state of Delaware. They also state that culture has not "interfered with genetic mechanisms or distorted them in any way." But what about the increase in high energy radiation that "culture" is adding to our environment and that must, in the long run, involve a mutagenic effect? Or, what about the possibility of directed mutation which seems to be a reasonable cultural expectation of the future? Or the effects of medical knowledge in preserving genetic defectives? Is it not possible to argue that as culture advances, selection pressure in general is decreased except in the most extreme cases, and that the major effect of our civilization is to preserve, rather than curtail or direct genetic variability, as would be the case if selective pressure were to increase in a given direction?
R. B. Vance, in pointing out that social organization can compensate for a dearth of talent, so that "we have government by clerks, rather than by geniuses," and "even the traits of the managerial elite can be analyzed in terms of acquired characteristics," adds credence to this view (op. cit.) as does J. L. Fuller in a later section. While a cataloguing of diverse opinions on this question is interesting, where are the facts on the basis of which one may test each

view? What principles are to be invoked in determining which facts are critical?
Turning, now, to the second topic and beginning with the discussion of genetic requirements for the analysis of psychological traits, Thompson appears not to have been affected by the reasoning in Dobzhansky's introductory article. Thus (pp. 4647) Thompson writes, "If we are concerned with effecting a separation between hereditary and environmental causes of personality, we must first be able to provide a parsimonious description of personality at the phenotypic level. In classical genetics this has not been a major difficulty, since the characters chosen for study have usually been of an all-or-none variety, such as flower color or pod shape. With psychological traits which are continuous, the problem is a very real one indeed."1
In the first place, we are not concerned with effecting a separation between environment and heredity. We know that they interact. In our laboratory, for example, the effects of standardized early experience on the later aggressiveness of inbred strains of mice varies with the strain. A given type of experience interacting with a given genetic background produces an "aggressive personality." The interaction produces different results on different biological substrata, and the latter will interact with other environmental variables to produce results similar to that of the first interaction. Knowing these facts, one can produce a variety of interactions leading to similar end results. Nor, do we first describe a behavioral phenotype. To discover a behavioral phenotype that corresponds to a genetic-evolutionary unit in nature is more often the result of research. One cannot decide what it is going to be a priori. If one can discover a presumed phenotype and then find that it has a clear genetic basis, the further analysis of the mode of gene action may reveal that the initially

102 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

presumed phenotype was, in fact, only an obvious aspect of an aberration whose most important effects did not correspond to a standard test or piece of apparatus. Thus genetics may be used as a tool to help discover natural units of behavior, rather than the reverse. Finally, genetic analysis does not depend upon all-or-none traits as Thompson implies. Even Mendel, who is apparently alluded to in the reference to "classical genetics," concluded his paper with a model that extended his theory to continuous characters, and genetic analysis of continuous variations were being competently made by Edward Murray East as early as 1910.
In his statements about human population structure, Thompson argues a particular model based on assumptions that demarcations of social status, religion, and ethnic origin are, as a rule, observed in human marriage patterns within our culture. He offers only his own opinion of the extent to which this is so. If one uses paternity rather than marriage as a criterion, how high are the barriers? It could be argued ad hoc, that the barriers are crossed with significant frequency for genetic exchange. Where would Thompson set the criteria for significance? In this country, for example, do not Catholics, Jews, and Protestants of diverse old world origins intermarry commonly within religious boundaries, and, less commonly, across them? How rare is a Bobo Rockefeller? What, in fact, are the groups in our present society among which there is restricted genetic exchange and how much genetic exchange actually occurs between them? Conjecture without fact is useless here.
The remaining articles grouped under topic II, offer more grist for the sociological than for the genetic mill. Jastak and Whiteman define mental "retardation" in terms of multiple criteria used individually and aggregately against a population distribution in which the lower quartile is the demarcation point. This is hardly a conventional criterion of retardation but

simply a relative ranking. Even granting their identification procedure, are they maintaining that mental retardation as defined by their study is genetically predisposed? If not, of what relevance is the paper to the symposium? If so, where are the genetic data, the differential fertility data, and the progeny studies?
The Leighton study, too, is predominantly sociological. Its genetic interest to this reviewer arises out of the suggestion made in the final section of the symposium (by Allen) that the symptoms dealt with may be of genetic origin.
The Kirk paper, which argues that, contrary to the trend of a generation ago, men listed in Who's Who in America today are replacing themselves at a rate that will preserve their numerical proportion to the general population, ends the section on a hopeful note.
In the final topic, dealing with genetic factors, the first paper by Fuller argues for an approach that relates the genotype to the phenotype without the delay and difficulty of dissecting the intervening modes of gene action. He states (p. 101) that "we identify an intelligent man by his actions, not by his body chemistry." This seems to me to be based on a rather bleak view of the complexities involved in physiological genetics and a misplaced confidence in the adequacy of our behavioral "phenotypes." This contrasts with Thompson, for example, who would consider the matter of defining an "intelligent" man by his actions to be rather more complex than Fuller does. In the latter's example (p. 104) concerning susceptibility to audiogenic seizures in mice, in which my work is cited, the seizures led to the elucidation of several underlying neurochemical abnormalities, each correlated with a particular genotype. The differential localization of enzymatic deficiencies in the brain on a genetic basis in turn led to hypotheses about learning behavior and stress behavior that are now proving valid in our laboratory, so that the elucidation of the total behavioral pheno-

103

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

type was consequent to the discovery of the intervening variables, and the spectrum of these as related to genotypes within a phenotype, in turn, provided a new and broader view of how it is that genes may act in the nervous system. This approach helps define natural evolutionary units of behavior. The mere correlation of heredity with a given aspect of personality has been going on for a long time and has not advanced us spectacularly in understanding genetic effects on behavior. It is difficult to see how an accumulation of more data in this field will provide us with the new and different insights that seem to be needed, except as a springboard for the kinds of studies just mentioned, which Fuller disavows.
Since this is the major difference between us, it is, perhaps magnified here. In the long run, such differences in point of view may lead to a complementarity which is required in order to give a well-rounded picture.
In comparison with the previous papers, Fuller takes the view that human populations are selected for diversity and that complex social organization is a factor in preserving and extending such diversity.
In view of the statements made by Vance (p. 34) to the effect that many genetic traits, such as pigmentation, bear no relation to the ability to acquire cultural traits, the data cited by Fuller concerning genotype and phenotype are of particular interest. He reports that "results indicate that many, if not all, gene substitutions have effects upon behavior which are not obviously related to the most conspicuous action of the gene. Thus, the yellow gene reduces the mating drive of male Drosophila, in addition to its effect upon body pigment." He further reports that humans with O blood type are more susceptible to peptic ulcer than those of other blood types. While Fuller is conservative in his interpretation of such findings, the assertion by Vance to the effect that physical traits bear no known relation to the ability to acquire

cultural traits is not as completely open and shut as he makes it seem. If, in addition, as Shapiro states, cultural factors have indeed produced genetic differentiation (at least among castes in India), the notion that diverse human stocks are equipotential with respect to the acquisition of cultural traits requires demonstration.
Gordon Allen, in dealing with genetic aspects of mental disorder, points to the recency of the marvelous evolution of human mental capacities and, reasoning by analogy with other rapid and significant developments in evolution, where variability precedes stability, argues that the prevalence of human psychopathology (see also D. Leighton) may be a phenotypic manifestation of this genetic instability. This seems an intriguing and noteworthy hypothesis.
In the final paper, F. Falkner considers the potential contribution of longitudinal twin studies and discusses the role these could play in filling present gaps in our knowledge, especially by means of comparison between "monozygous and dizygous twins and their siblings . . . to elucidate the weightings of genetic and environmental influences."
One wonders, in this connection, whether monozygous twins are really genetically completely identical. If the potential genetic repertoire of an individual is broader than that which actually comes to expression, can it not be that, for humans, as for lower organisms, the narrowing of the genetic potential is in part determined by environmental differences, especially during critical periods of ontogeny? If so, Falkner's suggestion that discordant features in monozygous twins may be of singular importance is open to alternative interpretations depending on the notion of geneticenvironmental interaction against which the reader balances the suggestion. The importance of the suggestion remains, whatever the range of mechanisms occurring to the reader may be.
Since this is a joint review by a geneticist

104 Eugenics Quarterly

and a sociologist, each of us has reserved his major criticism for his own area of competence. The conference was certainly a stimulating one. If it was conjectural on many points, it is because clear-cut data on the basis of which one might settle the questions at issue do not exist. If the papers were not completely integrated, it is because they are, after all, the individual contributions of individual authors. Hopefully, continued preoccupation by social and biological scientists with the problems

of behavior, and more cross-disciplinary communication between them, will provide the needed exchange of information and stimulate the type of research that will result in data that are needed to replace informed guesses with facts. Finally, the conference would have benefited from a report of the discussion of each paper among the conferees. It is regrettable that the published volume contains no such record of the exchange of ideas among the participants.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

MARRIAGE AND FAMILY LIVING
May, 1958, Vol. XX, No. 2
Editorial Board: James H. S. Bossard, Meyer F. Nimkoff, John Spiegel Harold T. Christensen, Editor
Marriage Counseling Involving a Passive Husband and an Aggressive Wife John R. Crist, with comments by Albert Ellis
My Psychotherapy Helped My Entire Family Barbara Scott
A Study of Some Aspects of Marital Behavior as Related to Religious Control J. Anthony Samenfink
Legal Science and the Social Sciences: The Family Court Paul W. Alexander
And other articles of research and interpretation of family phenomena, abstracts, and book reviews.
Published by the National Council on Family Relations
1219 University Avenue, S.E., Minneapolis 14, Minnesota
Membership in the Council: $6.00 a year including subscription to
Marriage and Family Living.

ANNALS OF

HUMAN GENETICS

VOL. 22, NO. 4

AUGUST, 1953

CONTENTS

LYNAS, Margaret A. Marian's syndrome in Northern Ireland. An account of 13 families.
LYNAS, Margaret A. and MERRETT, J. D. Data on linkage in man. Marfan's syndrome in Northern Ireland.
DAWSON, G. W. P. The Wood group frequencies in some occupational groups in County Dublin.
HOLT, Sarah B. Genetics of dermal ridges: the relation between total ridge-count and the variability of counts from finger to finger.

BULMER, M. G. A note on monozygotic twin diagnosis.
LAWLER, Sylvia D., RENWICK, J. R , HAUGE, M., MOSBECH, J. and WILDERVANCK, L. S. Linkage tests involving the P blood group locus and further data on the ABO:nail-patella linkage.
SIMPSON, H . Estimation of linkage on an electronic computer.
MILLIS, Jean. The influence of maternal age and birth order on the outcome of pregnancy in poor Chinese women.
BERG, J. M. and STERN, J. Iris colour in phenylketonuria.
ARCHER, H. E., DARMER, A. E., SCOWEN, E. F. and W A T T S , R. W. E. Observations on the possible genetic basis of hyperoxaluria.
SALDANHA, P. H . Taste thresholds for phenylthiourea in a sample of Japanese.
KARN, Mary N . Considerations arising from weight and some other variables recorded in the Survey of Women's Measurements (1957).

Issued by the CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 11=32 East 57th Street, New York 22, N. Y.=

