Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Biology, politics and race
Arnold R. Kaplan
To cite this article: Arnold R. Kaplan (1963) Biology, politics and race, Eugenics Quarterly, 10:4, 188-190, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1963.9987565 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1963.9987565
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

Brief Reports

BIOLOGY, POLITICS AND RACE

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

ARNOLD R. KAPLAN
Laboratory of Medical Genetics Cleveland Psychiatric Institute
Cleveland 9, Ohio

During the last several years, coincident with the accelerating revolution in American race relations, several writers with impressive academic backgrounds have assumed increasingly active roles in the national controversy over integration. These writers are frankly opposed to social changes involving greater degrees of integration and social communication between Caucasians and Negroes. They argue that Negroes not only manifest inferior intelligence, but that they lack the innate qualities needed to develop and maintain civilization--e.g., restraint, creativity, intellectual curiosity, drive. They believe that those qualities characterize Caucasians, that they are based simply on genetic factors, and that the traits can only be retained by maintaining racial purity. Integration, it is argued, would lead to intermarriage, which would bring about racial amalgamation and loss of the very characteristics which have enabled Caucasians to achieve their position of leadership and enabled them to develop western civilization. Thus, relaxation of social barriers between Caucasians and Negroes would allegedly lead to destruction of western civilization via biological destruction of the genetically-based racial characteristics needed to create and maintain such civilization. Frequently, these writers devote considerable space to excoriating their opponents, the proponents of what they call "equalitarian doctrines," as

Communists. The accusations are made against many prominent scientists, without objective documentation.
The prominent involvement of genetic and eugenic allegations and jargon in the above publications necessarily involves in such controversy those who are affiliated with these disciplines. Adherence to a professional ideal of involvement solely in objective scientific and/or academic endeavor, with abstinence from such mundane argument, would be difficult for geneticists in the present context. Both social and scientific responsibilities require that the publicized arguments be examined and evaluated, particularly in genetic and eugenic contexts.
Ideas of racial superiority and allegations of dangers inherent in "racial amalgamations" are, of course, neither new nor original. In the nineteenth century, Wagner used his great artistic talents to popularize ancient German myths regarding racial purity and racial degeneration. He viewed racial inferiority as a biological fact, the result of immutable law. Such doctrines affected, and in turn derived new impulses from, the imperialist wave of the nineteenth century--and beliefs in such doctrines were not confined to Germans. European colonial administrators in general tended to look on their native charges as lower breeds and displayed an aloofness toward them that was more a product of strongly-be-

188

Brief Report

189

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

lieved superiority than mere cruelty. The social and racial theories es-
poused by Wagner assumed a more dynamic character in the hands of his disciples. He was convinced that disintegration of the German nation was inevitable because of its "advanced racial decay." Houston Stewart Chamberlain, his spiritual heir and son-in-law, however, rejected such fatalism and insisted that this decline was far from inevitable. Chamberlain was not only convinced that the German race could thus be saved and ennobled; but he was equally certain that once it had overcome its racial decay it could, by means of a scientific organization of its entire national life, secure the domination of the world. Later, Hitler and those who supported him (and those who accepted him) translated these cerebrations into reality. They set out literally to rebuild the world exactly as Chamberlain had envisaged it--by breeding a new "German race," by the mass killings of "undesirables," by the rigid organization of all available human "material," and the wholesale shifting of populations. It behooves biologists -- particularly geneticists -- to recall that prominent academicians and scientists provided the German political and military-industrial leaders with respectable support and an allegedly scientific rationale for their practices. The contemporary doctrines advanced by several biologically-oriented writers simulate the doctrines espoused by Wagner and Chamberlain and the latter-day activists of the Third Reich-- with the modification of broadening the "master race" concept from German or "Aryan" or Nordic to Caucasian. The similarities are not limited to goals of racial purity and dominance, and the above contemporaries exploit analagous demogogic techniques to discredit their

scientific and literary protagonists. The personality attacks and political allegations in lieu of argument based on properly controlled scientific data do not provide foundation for myths regardless of the academic degrees and histories of the writers.
The major human races evidently originated as geographical variants of Homo sapiens, the populations having adapted to the different environments in which they had become restricted. Graded geographic variations occur between different p o p u l a t i o n s for genetically based morphologic and biochemical traits which distributions have been studied.
The characteristics of personality and intellect have not been shown to be based on simple genetic factors. If they were based only on simple genetic factors, however, there would still be no demonstrated basis for assuming the operation of biological mechanisms contrary to the known facts of Mendelian genetics. Thus, genetic factors are particulate entities and not subject to "amalgamation." Genetic variability is maintained in the gene pool of a population regardless of crossing, and is not eroded and leveled off.
When the potentialities of intelligence in two major racial or ethnic groups-- such as Caucasians and Negroes--are assessed as scientifically as possible, the frequency curves for the two groups overlap over almost the whole of their extent.* Thus, there are large differences in mental endowment within single racial groups, but relatively minimal ones between different racial groups. Breeding for such characteristics might theoretically be facilitated by segregation of
* Huxley, J., 1963. "Eugenics in Evolutionary Perspective." Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 6 s 155-187.

190 Brief Report

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

population isolates or castes according to the intellectual and personality characteristics. The overlap in distributions between different racial groups, however, would make racial segregation irrelevant even to such goals.
A significant fact for eugenic advance may be the large difference in achievement made possible by small increases in the numbers of exceptional individuals, the tiny minorities which are largely responsible for advances in cultural evolution. The occurrence of different proportions of highly gifted individuals may contribute to the considerable differences in achievements of different population groups despite overlap in most of the ranges of genetic capacities. Every population, regardless of how undeveloped its economic and social system may happen to be, contains vast reservoirs of untapped talent which can be elicited by combinations of challenging opportunity, sound educational methods, and efficient training.
Natural science deals with phenomena that are material, that work according to probabilistic laws, and that can be observed repeatedly. Darwinian natural selection and Mendelian genetics did not originate the racial attitudes dis-

cussed above but simply strengthened them and provided philosophical bases apparently consistent with naturalism. Alternative uses of the social significance of "Darwinism" and "Mendelism" are available. Philosophies of racial superiority and domination existed long before Darwin published his formulation of evolution by natural selection or Mendel demonstrated the paniculate transmission of genetic factors. Indeed, some of the coarser formulations of racial superiority were produced in America by apologists for slavery, most of whom evoked biblical text and religious sanction at the time when naturalistic sanctions were less authoritative. The contemporary spokesmen for these concepts stretch and manipulate genetic and eugenic concepts, as earlier spokesmen stretched and manipulated scripture, to provide authority for their position in a moral and social debate. Skillfully employed fables can provide more potent weapons than objective truths: fables may be molded to match the "will to believe," but objective truths are less malleable. Contrary facts may be accumulated ad infinitum, but those who believe the fables go on believing and acting and writing as though they were truths.

