Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Natural selection and degenerative cardiovascular disease
E. R. Nye
To cite this article: E. R. Nye (1967) Natural selection and degenerative cardiovascular disease, Eugenics Quarterly, 14:2, 127-131, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1967.9987712 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1967.9987712
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:29

NATURAL SELECTION AND DEGENERATIVE CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

E. R. NYE
Department of Medicine University of Otago Medical School
Dunedin, New Zealand

Considerable research is now devoted to the elucidation of the problems of the degenerative diseases. Huge sums are spent annually in many countries on the subject of degenerative cardiovascular disease and research programs range from the investigation of details of lipids metabolism to the possibility of grafting whole hearts or implanting artificial ones.
The impetus for all the effort devoted to research on coronary heart disease stems from the view that a man in his fifties, or forties, who is the victim of a coronary artery occlusion, is a needless loss, complete or temporary, to society. If nobody had a coronary attack before his sixtieth year there would be much less interest in the disease.
Mortality and morbidity statistics show that coronary artery disease is increasing and it seems likely that not all of the increase is due to the effect of antibiotics in providing an increase in the number of people in the "coronary prone" age groups. Support for the belief that coronary atheroma is a preventable disorder comes from the knowledge that a proportion of sufferers come from families with known defects of lipid metabolism and that diabetics, for whom a genetical basis is postulated for most cases, are also particularly afflicted. Progress in the correction of metabolic defects, such as diabetes, encourages the view that the same may be done for "coronary prone" individuals once the nature of the defect can be defined. It seems not unreasonable

to suppose therefore that future research may show that a genetical basis of coronary artery disease may be commoner than we now suspect and acting in more subtle ways than we now conceive, possibly for example in association with other factors such as obesity, inactivity, heavy smoking, hypertension, and occult diabetic tendency (Stamler et al., 1966).
It is interesting to note at this point that the atheromatous process is widespread in the animal kingdom (Finlayson, 1962; Gresham and Howard, 1964; Roberts and Strauss, 1965), at least among the vertebrates, and man is clearly not unique in seeding his own destruction in his vascular tree but he appears to suffer more from coronary atheroma than other species. The question is posed therefore, has degenerative vascular disease, and possibly other degenerative disease, arisen as a result of natural selection? In other words does a time come for the individual when his death, given that he has escaped the hazards of accident and infection, may in some way be advantageous to the rest of the species? This question can only be answered in the affirmative if it can be shown that some advantage follows from the existence of "built-in obsolescence." The writer takes the view that there are grounds for believing such an advantage existed formerly even if not now for man.
It is clear that in changing environ-
ment a steady turnover of the genetic
pool represented by a population pro-

127

128 Nye Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

vides the most rapid way of adapting the population to new circumstances. After the age of about 30-40 years primitive man had fulfilled his function to his species and was expendable as his genetic material was represented in his offspring. If by "mischance" he lived, say into his forties, he was perhaps becoming, in the evolutionary sense, a liability, largely by being past his reproductive peak, possibly by competing with younger males for females and also for available food. After passing the peak reproductive period an individual would assume the increasing role of a parasite in his community. It seems probable that in very primitive societies disease or accident would take an increasing toll of the individuals past their prime, but in the absence of such factors some built-in "safety mechanism" could ensure that a community did not become overburdened with relatively less productive individuals. The speculation that this "safety mechanism" could be the degenerative diseases, including coronary artery disease, follows.
The operation of a mechanism culling the excess of aged individuals from a population would probably be appreciated best, as a desirable evolution process, in consideration of small, primitive human groups or tribes perhaps living near subsistence level, or at least subject to periods of food scarcity at intervals, since, as pointed out by Boule and Vallois (1956), a population is limited by conditions in times of scarcity, not by available food in times of plenty. The maintenance of the status quo would depend on a rapidly reproducing population, ensuring greatest adaptability, with minimum competition from within from individuals past reproductive or food gathering prime. It is easily seen that such a group that became overburdened with healthy, probably aggressive, but relatively unproductive

individuals could have been at a disadvantage compared with a group not so constituted, particularly during periods of food shortage.
If coronary artery disease evolved as a factor in population control then the question may be posed as to when in human history it assumed its particular importance in our species, since, as previously noted, the disorder is unusual in other animals. The consideration of this point and others is continued below.
CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE IN WOMEN
If degenerative cardiovascular disease confers some ultimate advantage, then, unless some alternative process is operating, it is difficult to see why in the case of the human species there is a marked sex differential in incidence, men being much more affected than woman before the age of 50 years. The mortality data for men and women from affluent societies (United Nations, 1955) shows lower mortalities for women in almost all quinquennia of life for recent years. In contrast, however, countries characterized by a lower degree of overall prosperity are frequently seen to have higher female mortality than male, particularly during the childbearing years. In India for example during the decade 1891-- 1901 the mortality among females averaged about 14 per 1000 more than males from 10 to 14 years of age until 30 to 34. This sex differential had largely disappeared by 1941-1950 with some shift of the increased female mortality into the later quinquennia.
If the same trend of increased female mortality during the childbearing years occurred in primitive human society, it can be seen that a population "culling" process, capable of exerting the check which degenerative disease of the vascu-

Vol. 14, No. 2

Natural Selection of Cardiovascular Disease

129

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

lar system may have provided in the case of the male, already existed.
The above considerations are unquestionably a simplification of the effect of natural selection on the appearance of coronary artery disease in the human species. The question of the interplay between clotting and arterial lesions has not been discussed but comparative studies (Finlayson et al., 1962) do seem to indicate that the coronary artery lesion may be more a feature of human pathology than it is in other species; thus alteration in coagulability, also perhaps ultimately influenced by natural selection, could not have their often fatal effects in the absence of the coronary lesion.
It may also be argued that forces of natural selection cannot operate on a process that tends to appear after the later phases of an individual's reproductive life. Put another way, if the appearance of degenerative vascular disease is part of an undirected, fortuitous "ageing" process, then, as it comes after peak reproduction is over (or probably would be in primitive human society), the tendency cannot come under the influence of eliminative forces and will thus persist. It might also be argued that the late appearance of coronary artery disease in life is simply the consequence of the fact that any inborn tendency favoring early appearance of the disease will operate against successful reproduction by the affected individual. The same argument applies, of course, to malignant disease. These objections do not take account, however, of the fact that the life span of our species is extremely well defined and it seems not unreasonable to suppose that evolution is responsible for our expectancy of "three score years and ten." The objection is also met by considering evolutionary forces acting on communities of individuals rather than,

in the present context, on the individuals themselves. As pointed out by Simpson (1958), "Selection favours successful reproduction of the population, not of any or all individuals in it." Thus a small human community living under marginal conditions of existence is clearly at a disadvantage if it carries an excess of relatively nonproductive individuals, compared with a community not so burdened.
CORONARY HEART DISEASE IN
PRIMITIVE SOCIETIES TODAY
The chief difficulty in accepting any such simplified concept as that outlined above, and one which will occur to any worker in the field of coronary heart disease, is that in primitive societies today coronary heart disease (CHD) is generally uncommon. Thus in diabetic Yemenite Jews, who live under relatively primitive conditions in Israel, the incidence of vascular disease, including coronary disease, is less than in their diabetic compatriots living under more affluent circumstances (Brunner et al., 1964). Similarly, the South African Bantu suffers less from atherosclerosis than affluent Caucasians. Therefore the thesis that coronary heart disease was a killing disease of early man, and that it reduced the likelihood of his living to old age, seems untenable in the light of present knowledge. One would have to postulate that the environment of our primitive ancestors was different from that of primitive societies today or that they were perhaps more prone to coronary disease and that the incidence of the disorder has decreased since then. The last possibility is not remote since modern studies on the incidence of atherosclerosis in primitive people (Higginson and Pepler, 1954; Walker and Arvidsson, 1954) emphasize that the reduction in

130 Nye Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

atheroma may be associated with a diet low in animal fat content. Can it be therefore that CHD developed as a peculiarity of human pathology, and perhaps as a population limiting process at a time in human history when man was more carnivorous in his habits than at present? It seems more possible that this may have happened since anthropologists favour the view that early man went through a long term period of meat eating.
PATTERN OF HUMAN SOCIAL DEVELOP-
MENT AND POSSIBLE COURSE OF THE EVO-
LUTION OF CORONARY HEART DISEASE
If we accept the possibility that coronary artery disease is a mechanism of population control which has arisen as a result of evolutionary processes, then we may speculate as to how this arose in association with changes in human society.
Anthropologists have maintained that early human society was based on hunting, thus Bartholomew and Birdsell (1962), drawing on evidence from bone middens associated with remains of the australopithecines, express the view that this early toolmalcer was a "generalized carnivorous animal."
It will be noted that this carnivorous habit is in contrast to the vegetarian diet of the manlike apes who seldom or rarely eat meat (Goodall, 1963; Howells, 1960).
This change in dietary emphasis was probably a consequence of the use of tools and of fire. A rich source of previously almost unobtainable food became available; it is even possible that hunting was easier in the early days of palaeolithic man since prey species were not accustomed to regarding man as a potential predator and flight reactions to anthropoids may have taken quite some time to become established. The rela-

tively sudden alteration in dietary pattern in response to changing circumstances is not unknown in other species, note for example the recent appearance of carnivorous tendencies in the New Zealand Kea, a formerly vegetarian parrot that is now often responsible for attacking and eating sheep. If CHD developed during the palaeolithic age and was in some way connected with the biochemical consequences of a change in dietary pattern the next question that must be posed is whether or not the duration of the stone age period allowed a sufficiently long time for the processes of natural selection to operate. Kroeber (1948) quotes estimates of the stone age lasting, according to various authorities, between 200,000 years and 1,000,000 years; this is in marked contrast to the age of metals which has not lasted longer than 4,000 years. Assuming an intermediate period of about 500,000 years, this would allow about 20,000 generations on which natural selections would operate. In any event it seems likely that after a long period of meat eating, augmented doubtless by eating obtainable fruits and roots, man in more recent times entered upon an agrarian phase with a consequent shift of dietary emphasis towards a more "primitive" style of feeding. It may be significant today that essentially stone age cultures, such as the Australian aborigine, depend on hunting to a great extent for food, whereas primitive communities of a more advanced order and skilled in the use of metals have become farmers. Examples are the Bantu of South Africa and many Indian communities; it may be noted that shortage of dietary protein and probably animal fat is not uncommon in these people.
Our present dietary position seems to be therefore that after the wheel having swung the full circle, from partial or

Vol. 14, No. 2 Natural Selection of Cardiovascular Disease

131

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

complete vegetarianism back to the same state, we are now moving back into stone age feeding habits, therancher and the dairy farmer having in the meantime relieved us of the need to kill ourown meat.
Mechanisms which may have evolved in early man associated with the need to maintain the youthful vigour and genetic adaptability of stone age tribes may now be operating again since, biologically speaking, the palaeolithic period isthe yesterday ofhuman evolution.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
My thanks are due to Dr. A. M. O. Veale for his comments and his criticisms ofmy arguments.
REFERENCES
BARTHOLOMEW, G. A., and J. B. BIRDSELL, 1962.
In Culture and Evolution of Man, Oxford University Press, London, p. 29.
BOULE, M., and H. V. VALLOIS, 1956. Fossil Men.
Thames and Hudson, London.
BRUNNER, D., S. ALTMAN, L. NELKEN, and J.
REIDER, 1964. The relative absence of vas-

cular disease in diabetic Yemenite Jews. Diabetes, 13: 268-272.
FINLAYSON, R., C. SYMONS, R. N. T-W-FIENNES,
1962. Atherosclerosis: A comparative study. Brit. Med. J., i: 501-507. GOODALL, J., 1963. My life among wild chimpanzees. Nat. Geogr. Mag., 124: 272-308.
GRESHAM, G. A., and A. N. HOWARD, 1964. Bull.
Soc. Roy.Zool. d'Anvers., Bull. No. 34.
HIGGINSON, J., and W. J. PEPLER, 1964. Fat intake
serum cholesterol concentration andatherosclerosis in the South African Bantu. Part II. Atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease. J. Clin. Invest., 33: 1366.
HOWELLS, W. W., 1960. Mankind in the Making, Secher and Warburg, London, pp. 84-86.
KROEBER, A. L., 1948. Anthropology. Harcourt, Brace, New York, p. 651.
ROBERTS, J. C., AND R. STRAUS, 1965. Compara-
tive Atherosclerosis, Harper and Row, New York. SiMpsoN, G. G., 1958. The Study of Evolution. Yale, New Haven.
STAMLER, J., D. M. BERKSON, H. A. LINDBERG,
Y. HALL, W. MILLER, L. MOJONNIER, M.
LEVINSON, D. B. COHEN, Q. D. YOUNG, 1966.
Coronary risk factors. Medical Clinicsof North America, 50: 229-254.
UNITED NATIONS, 1955. Age and sex patterns of
mortality, model life tables for under-developed countries. Population Studies No. 22.
WALKER, A. R. P., AND U. B. ARVIDSSON, 1954. Fat
intake, serum cholesterol concentration and atherosclerosis in the South African Bantu. Part I. Low fat intake andtheage trend of serum cholesterol concentration in the South African Bantu. J. Clin. Invest., 33: 1358-1365.

