Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Genetics of race equality
Theodosius Dobzhansky
To cite this article: Theodosius Dobzhansky (1963) Genetics of race equality, Eugenics Quarterly, 10:4, 151-160, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1963.9987562 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1963.9987562
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 7 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

GENETICS OF RACE EQUALITY

THEODOSIUS DOBZHANSKY
Rockefeller Institute New York, New York

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

The crucial fact of our age is that people almost everywhere now take the idea of human equality quite seriously. It is no longer accepted as nature's law that people with darker skins are destined to be servants and those with lighter ones, masters. Children of those at the bottom of the social ladder no longer acquiesce in being placed automatically in a similar position. Everybody is entitled to equality. But what is equality? On the authority of the Declaration of Independence, it is a selfevident truth "that all men were created equal." Yet we hear that biology and genetics have demonstrated conclusively that men are unequal. Do biology and genectics really contradict what the Declaration of Independence holds to be self-evident? Or are the words "equal" and "unequal" being used in different senses? Just what have biology and genetics discovered that is relevant to the problem of equality or inequality?
Two geometric figures are said to be equal if they are identical in size and shape and coincide when superimposed on each other. Human equality, whether of persons or of groups, obviously means nothing of this sort. We generally have no difficulty distinguishing between persons whom we meet; the similarity of socalled identical twins strikes us as something unusual and remarkable. In fact, no two persons, not even identical twins, are ever truly identical. Every human being is in some respects unlike any other. This is not something that modern biology has recently found, but a

matter of simple observation, so amply documented by the experience of everyone that its validity can hardly be questioned. Every person is, indeed, an individual, unique and unrepeatable. However, diversity and unlikeness, whether of individuals or of groups such as races, should not be confused with inequality. Nor should the affirmation of equality be taken to imply identity or uniformity.
Biology and genetics have some relevance to the problem of human equality. They have ushered in a new understanding of the nature and causes of human diversity. This nature resides in the remarkable chemical substances, the deoxyribonucleic acids, which are the principal constituents of the genes carried in the chromosomes of cell nuclei. Human genes are products of the evolutionary history of the human species, of the changes which were taking place in response to the environments in which our ancestors were living.
At this point one is tempted to discuss technicalities, which, although interesting and even fascinating in their own right, are not absolutely indispensable to our main theme. I shall resist the temptation. The essentials, developed from the seminal discoveries made by Gregor Mendel almost a century ago, can be stated quite simply. How many kinds of genes we inherit from our ancestors is not known with precision; there are at least thousands, and there may be tens of thousands, of genes carried in each human sex cell. An individual carries, then, thousands or tens

151

152 Dobzhansky

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

of thousands of pairs of genes--one member of each pair being of maternal and the other of paternal origin.
What happens when the individual comes, in its turn, to form sex cells--egg cells or spermatozoa? It follows from Mendel's findings that each sex cell receives one or the other, the maternal or the paternal, member of every gene pair, but not a mixture of the two. A sex cell which receives a maternal copy of a gene A may, however, receive either the maternal or the paternal copy of the gene B, of the gene C, etc. Taking 1000 as a minimum estimate of the number of genes, it turns out that an individual is potentially capable of forming 21000 kinds of sex cells' containing different assortments of the maternal and paternal (or grandmaternal and grandpaternal) genes. I say potentially, because 21000 is a number far greater than that of the atoms in the universe. Even if only one tenth--i.e. 100--of the maternal and paternal genes are different, the potentially possible number of kinds of sex cells is 2100, which is a 31-place figure, vastly greater than the number of the sex cells produced.
All this adds up to something pretty simple after all: not even brothers and sisters, children of the same parents, are at all likely to have the same genes. No matter how many people may be born, despite any possible "population explosion," a tremendous majority of the potentially possible human nature will never be realized. A carping critic may remark that we hardly needed to learn genetics to discover what we know from everyday observation, that no two persons are ever alike. Genetics does, however, demonstrate something less commonplace when applied to analysis of the racial diversity among men.
Since our neighbors and even our

closest relatives are all distinguishably different persons, it is not in the least surprising that people living in remote lands, or people whose ancestors came from such lands, are more noticeably different. We are inclined, however, to treat the diversity of groups in a manner rather different from diversity of individuals. If asked to describe your brother, or a cousin, or a fellow next door, you will probably say that he is somewhat taller (or shorter), darker (or lighter), heavier (or slimmer) than you, and you may add that he is inclined to be kind or easily angered, lazy or impatient, etc. A person whose ancestors lived in America before Columbus is, however, likely to be referred to as an Indian, and one whose ancestors came from tropical Africa, as a Negro.
Up to a point, this is, of course, legitimate. People of African ancestry usually have such conspicuous traits as a dark skin, kinky hair, broad nose, full lips, etc. One should not, however, forget that individual Indians, or Negroes, differ among themselves as much as do persons of the white race or any other race or group. When a group of people is given a name, a stereotype is likely to be invented; and oddly enough, the fewer persons of a given group one knows, the more rigid are the stereotypes of what all Indians, or Negroes, or Irishmen, or Jews are supposed to be. Most unreasonable of all, persons are then likely to be treated not according to what they are as individuals but according to the stereotype of the group to which they belong. This is as unwarrantable biologically as it is ethically iniquitous.
Biologists have found between a million and two million species of animals and plants. An individual animal belongs to a certain species. It is, for ex-

Genetics of Race Equality

153

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

ample, either a horse (Equus caballus), or an ass (Equus asinus), or a sterile species hybrid (mule); but it cannot belong to two species at the same time. When anthropologists and biologists started to describe and classify races of men and animals, they treated races the same way as they treated species. Each was catalogued and given a name. But then difficulties arose. Biologists are sometimes in doubt as to whether certain forms should be regarded as belonging to the same or to two different species; however, with enough material, and given careful study, the doubts can usually be resolved. There is, however, no agreement among anthropologists concerning how many races there are in the human species. Opinions vary from three to more than two hundred. This is not a matter of insufficient data; the more studies are made on human populations, the less clear-cut the races become.
The difficulty is fundamental. Biological species are genetically closed systems; races are genetically open ones. Species do not interbreed and do not exchange genes, or do so rarely; they are reproductively isolated. The gene pools of the species man, chimpanzee, gorilla, and orang are quite separate; gene interchanges do not occur between these species. The biological meaning of this separation is evolutionary independence. Two species may have arisen from a common ancestor who lived long ago, but they embarked on separate evolutionary courses when they became species. No matter how favorable a new gene arising by mutation in the human species may be, it will not benefit the species chimpanzee nor vice versa.
Not so with races. Mankind, the human species, was a single evolutionary unit, at least, since mid-Pleistocene (the

Ice Age). It continues to be a single unit, all segregations and apartheids notwithstanding. Wherever different human populations are sympatric--i.e. geographically intermingled in a common territory as castes or as religions or linguistic groups--some miscegenation and gene exchange crops up. More important still is the interbreeding and gene flow among populations of neighboring territories. It is a relative innovation in mankind that some racially distinct populations live sympatrically, like Negroes and Whites over a considerable part of the United States. Before, say, 2000 B.C., the human races, like races of most animal species, were largely allopatric, living in different territories. However, the peripheral gene flow, the gene exchange between allopatric but neighboring populations, whether human or animal, is and always was a regular occurrence.
This continuous, sometimes slow, but unfailing gene flow between neighboring clans, tribes, nations, and races upholds the biological and evolutionary unity of mankind. There may be no recorded case of a marriage of an Eskimo with, say, a Melanesian or a Bushman, but there are genetic links between all these populations via the geographically intervening groups. In contrast with distinct species, a beneficial change arising in any population anywhere in the world may become a part of the common biological endowment of all races of mankind. This genetic oneness of mankind has been growing steadily since the development of material cultures has made travel and communication between the inhabitants of different countries progressively more and more rapid and easy. What should be stressed however, is that mankind has not become a meaningful biological entity just

154 Dobzhansky

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

recently, since men began to travel often and far. The human species was such an entity even before it became recognizably human.
Races, on the contrary, are not, and never were, groups dearly defined biologically. The gene flow between human populations makes race boundaries always more or less blurred. Consider three groups of people, for example: Scandinavians, Japanese, and Congolese. Every individual will probably be easily placeable in one of the three races-- White, Mongoloid, and Negroid. It will however, be far from easy to delimit these races if one observes also the inhabitants of the countries geographically intermediate between Scandinavia, Japan, and Congo, respectively. Intermediate countries have intermediate populations, or populations which differ in some characteristics from all previously outlined races. One may try to get out of the difficulty by recognizing several intermediate races; or else, one may speculate that the races were nicely distinct at some time in the past, and got mixed up lately owing to miscegenation. This helps not at all. The more races one sets up, the fuzzier their boundaries become. And the difficulty is by no means confined to man; it occurs as well in many biological species where it cannot be blamed on recent miscegenation.
Populations which inhabit different countries differ more often in relative frequencies of genetically simple traits than in any single trait being present in all individuals of one population and always absent in another population. Not only are the differences thus relative rather than absolute; but, to make things more complex still, the variations of different characters are often independent or at least not strongly correlated. Some populations may be clearly

different in a gene A but rather similar in a gene B, while other populations may be different in B but less so in A. This makes the drawing of any lines separating different races a rather arbitrary procedure, and results in the notorious inability of anthropologists to agree on any race classification yet proposed. Race classifiers might have indeed preferred to find simple and tidy races, in which every person would show just the characteristics that his race is supposed to possess. Nature has not been obliging enough to make the races conform to this prescription. Exactly the same difficulties which a student of races encounters in the human species are met with also by zoologists who are working with species of nonhuman animals, and arguments have actually been put forward that animals have no races, or at least that the races should not be described and named. Where, then, are races found? If they are nowhere to be found, then what are these visibly différèrent populations of the human species which are usually referred to as races?
Much needed light on the nature of population or race difference came from studies on the genetics of chemical constituents of the human blood. As far back as 1900, Landsteiner discovered four blood types, or blood groups, distinguishable by simple laboratory tests. These blood groups--called O, A, B, and AB--are inherited very simply, according to Mendel's laws. Brothers and sisters and parents and children may, and quite often do, differ in blood types. An enormous number of investigations have been made, especially in recent years, on the distribution of the blood types among peoples in various parts of the world. Any race or population can be described in terms of the percentages of the four blood types. Almost every-

Genetics of Race Equality

155

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

where persons of all four types are found, but in different proportions. Thus B and AB bloods are commonest among peoples of central Asia and India, A bloods in western Europe and in some American Indians, while many American Indian tribes belong predominantly or even exclusively to the group O.
Several other blood group systems have been discovered, including the Rhesus system, usually referred to as the Rh factor. The genes for these blood groups behave in general like those for the "classical" OA-B-AB blood types. For example, one of the variants (alíeles) of the Rhesus gene occurs much more often in the populations of Africa than elsewhere. But mark this well--this gene does occur, albeit infrequently, in human populations almost everywhere in the world, and it is quite certain that it has not spread so widely owing to a Negro admixture in recent centuries.
These facts are profoundly significant. Consider the following situation, which is by no means unusual. A person of European origin, say an Englishman or a Frenchman, has O-type blood, while his brother has B blood. In this particular respect, these brothers differ from each other, while one of them resembles many American Indians with O bloods, and the other matches numerous persons in Asia and elsewhere who have B bloods. Or else, one of the brothers may have the kind of Rhesus blood type most characteristic of the Africans, and the other brother may have blood more like a majority of his European neighbors. Such characteristics, of which the persons concerned are usually quite unaware, may become vitally important in some circumstances. If an individual with O-type blood needs a blood transfusion, then O-type blood from a donor of no matter what race will be safe,

while the blood of the recipient's brother may be dangerous if that brother has A, B, or AB blood.
Though not different in principle from the blood types, the genetics of skin color and similar traits is considerably more complex. The color difference between Negro and White skin is due to joint action of several genes, each of which by itself makes the skin only a little darker or lighter. Geneticists have studied the inheritance of skin pigmentation for half a century, yet exactly how many genes are involved is still unknown. The skin color is obviously variable among the so-called "white" as well as among the "black" peoples, some individuals being darker and others, lighter. If we were able to map the geographic distribution of each separate skin color gene as thoroughly as it has been done for some blood group genes, the race differences would probably be resolved into gene frequency differences. It is fair to say that the studies on blood types and similar traits have, so far at least, helped more to understand races than to classify them.
Thus every race includes persons with diverse genetic endowments. Genetic studies show that race differences are compounded of the same kinds of genetic elements in which individuals within a race also differ. An individual must always be judged according to what he is, not according to the place of origin of his ancestors. Races may be defined as populations which differ in frequencies, or in prevalence, of some genes. Race differences are relative, not absolute.
This modern race concept, based on findings of genetics, appears to differ from the traditional view so much that it has provoked some misunderstanding and opposition. The use of traits like the

156 Dobzhansky

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

blood groups to elucidate the nature of the races of which mankind is composed may seem a questionable procedure. To distinguish races, should one use, rather, traits like the skin pigmentation in place of the blood types? Some blood types can be found almost anywhere in the world; on the other hand, pale skins (other than albino) do not occur among the natives of equatorial Africa or of New Guinea, and black skins are not found among the natives of Europe. This objection is beside the point. The blood types are useful because their genetic nature is relatively simple and well understood. The classification of the human races need not be based on any one trait; the behavior of the blood types helps, however, to understand the behavior of other traits, including the skin color.
To sum up, the races of man are not integrated biological entities of the sort biological species are. Race boundaries are blurred by the more or less slow but long-sustained gene exchange. The number of races that should be recognized is arbitrary in the sense that it is a matter of convention and convenience whether one should give names to only a few "major" or also to a larger number of "minor" races. An anthropologist who maintains that there are exactly five or any other fixed number of races, or who resolves to cut the Gordian Knot--mankind has no races--is nurturing illusions. On the other hand, there need be nothing arbitrary about race differences; human populations are racially distinct if they differ in the frequencies of some genes, and not distinct if they do not so differ. The presence of race differences can be ascertained, and if they are present, their magnitude can be measured.
The problem that inevitably arises in any discussion of individual and race

equality is how consequential the differences among humans really are. Man's bodily structures do not differentiate him very strikingly from other living creatures; it is the psychic, intellectual, or spiritual side of human nature that is truly distinctive of Man. Physical race differences supply only the externally visible marks by which the geographic origin of people, or rather of their ancestors, can be identified. The blood types, nose shapes, and skin colors of people whom we meet are so much less important to us than their dispositions, intelligence, and rectitude. It is a person's personality that matters.
The diversity of personalities would seem to be as great, and surely more telling, than the diversity of skin colors or other physical traits. And, though the biological basis of both kinds of diversity is the same in principle, it is different enough in its outward manifestations that the difference constitutes a genuine problem. This is the perennial nature-nurture problem. The confusion and polemics with which it was beset for a long time were due in part to the problem having been wrongly stated--which human traits are due to heredity and which to environment. No trait can arise unless the heredity of the organism makes it possible, and no heredity operates outside of environments. A meaningful way is to ask what part of the diversity observed in a given population is conditioned by the genetic differences between persons composing this population, and what part is due to the upbringing, education, and other environmental variables. Furthermore, the issue must be investigated and solved separately for each function, trait or characteristc that comes under consideration. Suppose one collects good data on the genetic and environmental com-

Genetics of Race Equality

157

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

ponents of the observed diversity in the intelligence quotients, or on the resistance to tuberculosis. This would not tell us anything about the diversity of temperaments or about resistance to cancer.
Even correctly stated, the nature-nurture problem remains a formidable one. Dogmatic statements abound on both the hereditarian and the environmentalist side of the controversy, and they usually say much about their authors but not much about the subject at issue. The plain truth is that it is not known just how influential are the genetic variables in psychic or personality traits or how plastic these traits might be in different environments that can be contrived by modern technology, medicine, and educational methods. There is no way in practice to arrange for a large group of people to be brought up under controlled and uniform conditions in order to see how similar or different they would develop. The converse experiment--observing identical twins, individuals with similar heredities brought up in different environments--is possible, but opportunities for such observations are scarcer than one would wish they were.
Some partisans of human equality got themselves in the untenable position of arguing that mankind is genetically uniform with respect to intelligence, ability, and other psychic traits. Actually it is, I think, fair to say that whenever any variable trait in man was at all adequately studied genetically, evidence was found of at least some, though perhaps slight, contribution of genetic differences. Being equal has to be compatible with being different, and different in characters that are relevant to the specifically human estate, not alone in "skin-deep" traits like skin color.
The current civil rights movement in the United States has elicited a rash of

racist pamphlets which pretend to prove, very "scientifically" of course, that races cannot be equal because they differ in the average brain size, the average I.Q., etc. Now, there is no reason to believe that small differences in the brain volumes are any indication of different mental capacities; the I.Q. tests are not reliable when administered to people of different sociocultural backgrounds, and in any case they cannot be taken as anything approaching a measurement of human worth. Be all that as it may, the striking fact--which not even the racists can conceal--is that the race differences in the averages are much smaller than the variations within any race. In other words, large brains and high I.Q.'s of persons of every race are much larger and higher than the averages for their own or any other race. And conversely, the low variants in every race are much below the average for any race. This is a situation quite analogous to what is known about race differences in such traits as blood groups and is in perfect accord with theoretical expectations in populations which exchange genes.
It is impossible in an article such as the present one to summarize and to evaluate critically the abundant but often unreliable and contradictory data on the nature-nurture situation in man. It is more useful to consider here some fundamentals that must be kept in mind in dealing with such data. An all too often forgotten and yet most basic fact is that the genes determine, not traits or characters, but the ways in which the organism responds to the environments. One inherits, not the skin color and intelligence, but only genes which make the development of certain colors and intelligence possible. To state the same thing with a slightly different emphasis, the gene complement determines the path

158 Dobzhansky

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

which the development of a person will take, given the sequence of the environments which this person encounters in the process of living. Any developmental process, whether physiological or psychological, can be influenced or modified by genetic as well as by environmental variables. The realization of heredity is manageable, within limits, by physiological and social engineering. What the limits are depends upon our understanding of the developmental processes involved. Modem medicine is able to control the manifestations of some hereditary diseases which not so long ago were incurable. This does not make hereditary defects and diseases harmless or unimportant; even if they can be cured, it is better for the individual and for his society to have no necessity of being cured. This does give substance to the hope that hereditary need be, not destiny, but conditioning.
Although the mode of inheritance of physical and psychic traits in man is fundamentally the same, their developmental plasticity--the ability to respond to modifying influences of the environment ·--is different. There is no known way to alter the blood group with which a person is born; it is possible to modify one's skin color, making it somewhat darker or lighter by sun tanning or by lack of sun exposure; the development of personality traits is very much dependent on the family and social environments in which an individual is brought up and lives. The great lability of psychic traits is at least one of the reasons why it is so hard, not only to measure precisely the role played by heredity in their variations, but even to prove unambiguously that some of these traits are influenced by heredity at all. The more environmentally labile is a trait, the more critical it is for its investigation to have

the environment under control; this is difficult or impossible to achieve with man.
The great environmental plasticity of psychic traits in man is no biological accident. It is an important, even crucial, evolutionary adaptation which distinguishes man from other creatures, including those nearest to him in the zoological system. It is by brain, not by brawn, that man controls his environment. Mankind's singular and singularly powerful adaptive instrument is culture. Culture is not inherited through genes, it is acquired by learning from other human beings. The ability to learn, and thus to acquire a culture and to become a member of a society is, however, given by the genetic endowment that is mankind's distinctive biological attribute. In a sense, human genes have surrendered their primacy in human evolution to an entirely new, nonbiological or superorganic agent, culture. However, it should not be forgotten that this agent is entirely dependent on the human genotype.
A pseudobiological fallacy--dangerous because it is superficially so plausible-- alleges that the differences in psychic traits among human individuals and races are genetically fixed to about the same extent as they are among races or breeds of domestic animals. This overlooks the fact that the behavior of a breed of horses or of dogs is always a part of a complex of characters that are deliberately selected by the breeders to fit the animals for its intended use. A hunting dog with a temperament of a Pekingese, a great Dane behaving like a fox terrier, a draft horse as high-strung as a race horse or vice versa--all these monstrosities would be worthless or even dangerous to their human masters. Man has seen to it that the genes that sta-

Genetics of Race Equality

159

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

bilize the desirable behavior traits in his domestic animals be fixed and the genes that predispose for variable or undesirable behavior be eliminated.
What is biologically as well as sociologically requisite in man is the exact opposite--not to fix rigidly his qualities, but to be able to learn whatever mode of behavior fits a job to be done, the mores of the group of which one happens to be a member, a conduct befitting the circumstances and opportunities. Man's paramount adaptive trait is his educability. The biological evolution of mankind has accordingly so shaped the human genotype that an educability is a universal property of all nonpathological individuals. It is a diagnostic character of mankind as a species, not of only some of its races. This universality is no accident either. In all cultures, primitive or advanced, the vital ability is to be able to learn whatever is necessary to become a competent member of some group or society. In advanced civilizations the variety of function has grown so enormously that learning has come to occupy a considerable fraction of the life span. Even where, as in India, the society was splintered for centuries into castes specialized for different occupations, the ability to learn new professions or trades has been preserved.
Champions of human equality have traditionally been environmentalists, conspicuously distrustful of genetic determinisms. Historically their attitude has been useful in counterbalancing the influence of those racist hereditarians who tried to justify the denial of equality of opportunity to most people on the pretext that the latter are genetically inferior. The environmentalists, however, went too far in their protest. They simply failed to understand that to be equal

is not the same thing as to be alike. Equality is a sociological, not a biological, ideal. A society may grant equality to its citizens, but it cannot make them alike. What is more, in a society composed of genetically identical individuals, equality would be meaningless; individuals would have to be assigned for different occupations by drawing lots or in some other arbitrary manner. The ideal of equality of opportunity is precious, because it holds out a hope that persons and groups diverse in their endowments may enjoy a feeling of belonging and of partnership and may work for the common good in whatever capacity without loss of their human dignity. Men must be dealt with primarily on the basis of their humanity and also on the basis of their potentialities and accomplishments as individuals; the practice of treating them according to their race or color is a nefarious one.
Genetic diversity is a blessing, not a curse. Any society--particularly any civilized society--has a multitude of diverse vocations and callings to be filled, and new ones are constantly emerging. The human genetically secured educability enables most individuals of all races to be trained for most occupations. This is certainly the basic and fundamental adaptive quality of all mankind; yet this is in no way incompatible with a genetically conditioned diversity of preferences and special abilities. Music is an obnoxious noise to some, ecstatic pleasure to others. Some have a bodily frame than can be trained for championship in wrestling, or running, or sprinting, or weight lifting. Some can develop phenomenal abilities for chess playing, or painting, or composing poetry. Can anybody develop a skill in any of these occupations if he makes sufficient effort? Possibly many people could, to some extent.

160 Dobzhansky

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

The point is, however, that what comes easily to some requires great exertion from others, and even then the accomplishment is mediocre at best. The willingness to strive derives, however, at least in part, from a feeling that the labor is rewarded by the thrill of accomplishment or in some other way. There is little stimulus to exert oneself if the results of the exertions are likely to be pitifully small. And it is also possible that there is such a thing as predisposition to striving and effort.
It is a perversion of the ethic of equality to endeavor to reduce everybody to a uniform level of achievement. "From each according to his ability" is the famous motto of Marxian socialism, and it behooves democracy to grant no less recognition to the diversity of human individualities. This is not an apology foi "rugged individualism"; the "ruggedness" amounts often to indifference or even contempt for individualities of others. Equality is, however, not an end in itself, but a means to an end, which can only be the self-actualization of human individuals and the fullest possible realization of their socially valuable capacities and potentialities. Individuals and groups will arrange their lives differently, in accordance with their diverse

notions of what form of happiness they wish to pursue. Their contributions to mankind's store of achievements will be different in kind and in magnitude. The point is, however, that everybody should be able to contribute to the limit of his ability. To deny the equality of opportunity to persons or groups is evil, because it results in wastage of talent, ability, and aptitude, besides being contrary to the basic ethic of humanity.
RECOMMENDED READING
CARRINCTON, R., 1963. A Million Years of Man. World Publishing Co., Cleveland and New York.
CARSON, H. L., 1963. Heredity and Human Life. Columbia Univ. Press, New York.
DOBZHANSKY, TH., 1955. Evolution, Genetics and Man. John Wiley, New York. (Paperback Edition, 1963.) , 1956. The Biological Basis of Human Freedom. Columbia Univ. Press, New York. (Paperback Edition, 1960.) , 1962. Mankind Evolving. Yale Univ. Press, New Haven.
GARDNER, T. W., 1961. Excellence. Harper, New York.
GARN, S. M., 1961. Human Races. Charles C. Thomas, Springfield.
GRANT, V., 1963. The Origin of Adaptations. Columbia Univ. Press, New York.
HULSE, F. S., 1963. The Human Species. Random House, New York.
MAYR, E., 1963. Animal Species and Evolution. Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge.
SIMPSON, G. G., 1949. The Meaning of Evolution. Yale Univ. Press, New Haven. (Paperback Edition, 1961.) , 1961. Principles of Animal Taxonomy. Columbia Univ. Press, New York.

