Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Current theories on the etiology of mongolism
George S. Baroff
To cite this article: George S. Baroff (1958) Current theories on the etiology of mongolism, Eugenics Quarterly, 5:4, 212-215, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1958.9987374 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1958.9987374
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

CURRENT THEORIES ON THE ETIOLOGY OF MONGOLISM
GEORGE S. BAROFF
Department of Medical Genetics New York State Psychiatric Institute

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

T. HEORIES ON THE ETIOLOGY OF MONGOLISM
are generally couched in terms of either genetic or nongenetic causation. This tendency is likely to obscure the implications of data that support either alternative, since various findings are consistent with both interpretations. The apparent diversity is even compatible with the hypothesis that mongolism is not a single etiological entity. It may be a trait complex which includes genetic as well as nongenetic forms. Harelip and cleft palate are congenital defects illustrating this etiological variation (13).
With a frequency of about one in 700, mongolism is one of the most common mental deficiency syndromes and accounts for 10 per cent of the admissions to New York State schools for the retarded. According to Benda (3, 5), the condition is a central growth disorder characterized as congenital hypopituitarism. The skeletal system, which is the area of major involvement, shows pathological growth of both skull and extremities. Onset of the defect is associated with the eighth week of fetal life because it is at this embryonic stage that the affected structures differentiate (10).
Early proponents of a genetic causation based their conclusions primarily on twin data. Recent disclosure of the presence of a dermatoglyphic pattern characteristic of mongolism in the relatives of mongoloids, and the birth of mongoloids to mongoloid mothers lent significant support to this

point of view. Exponents of a nongenetic etiology stressed especially the well-established relationship between mongolism and maternal age, the syndrome being produced by noxious agents interfering with fetal nutrition during the pre-placental period.
Twin Data
Early observations based on twin studies came either from small series of twins or from single case reports. Although over 100 instances of mongolism in twins had been reported, the evidence for zygosity classification was insufficient in about onethird of them (8). The results pointed to complete concordance in one-egg twins, and to almost complete discordance in two-egg pairs. In a presumably monozygotic pair of South African twins, discordant as to mongolism, the zygosity diagnosis was made on the basis of the absence of a chorion in the placenta (6), but an opposite-sex pair is on record as having no separating membranes (17).
Twin concordance rates derived mainly from the literature are obviously not sufficient to substantiate a genetic theory of mongolism. Furthermore, the application of concordance estimates presupposes that one-egg and two-egg pairs are equally susceptible to the condition. A difference in susceptibility in itself might have a bearing on the etiology.
In a more recent study of a statistically representative series of mongoloid twins

212

213

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

and their siblings (1), concordance was observed in 3 one-egg pairs, and discordance in 23 two-egg pairs. As a group, twins did not seem to be more or less susceptible to the condition than non-twins. In comparing the non-mongoloid cotwins with their siblings, no significant mongoloid trend emerged in either group. This absence of mongoloid traits in the dizygotic twin partners of mongoloids weakens the hypothesis that the defect is solely a reflection of an abnormal intrauterine environment.
In Benda's opinion (4), discordance in two-egg pairs is explained by the fact that they occupy different implantation sites. Although the same situation exists in 15 per cent of one-egg twins, the occurrence of discordance in this group has yet to be confirmed. Of course, the total number of one-egg twins with a verified mongoloid syndrome is still relatively small, so that the implantation site hypothesis cannot as yet be regarded as refuted.
Allen and Kallmann (2) attached etiological significance to the observation that mongoloid traits did not differ appreciably between two-egg cotwins of mongoloids and their sibs. They believe that if subclinical manifestations tended to result from intrauterine effects, such changes would occur with greater frequency in the cotwins than in the sibs of mongoloids. Conversely, were subclinical signs to depend on genetic factors, the frequency for cotwins would not differ from that of their sibs. With the available data supporting the latter hypothesis, the investigators assumed that mongolism results from the damaging effect of a defective maternal reproductive system on
(a) a genetically susceptible embryo, or (b) the ovum, or (c) the embryo prior to the earliest stage when twinning occurs.
The hypothesis that the embryo is vulnerable to mongolism before the cell division which results in twinning (prior to the time of nidation) is of particular interest. It would account for the consistent

tendency for concordance in one-egg twins, regardless of the specific nature of the vulnerability. This appears to have been the primary consideration in formulating the defective ovum theory (11, 18).
From a genetic standpoint, vulnerability prior to nidation and pathological changes in the eighth week of gestation are not mutually exclusive. Gene action seems to observe a timetable which covers the life span of the individual. Some hereditary defects, such as cleft palate and harelip, are present at birth, while Tay-Sachs disease is not manifest until the age of six months, and Huntington's chorea is usually not apparent until the mid-thirties.
Familial Incidence
Familial incidence estimates have been less consistent than twin data. Earlier investigators found no increased morbidity risk in mongoloid sibships. More recently, morbidity studies were focused on the expectancy rate for sibs born after the mongoloid, with the observed sibship risk figures varying from 1 to 14 per cent (7, 14, 15). The highest morbidity rate (14 per cent) was found in sibships recorded in the literature and is, therefore, not based on a valid sample. Apparently, the expectancy rate for sibs born after the mongoloid does not exceed 4 per cent. Indeed, the risk may not be any greater than that for children born to older mothers who have not given birth to mongoloids (1-2 per cent). Although sibships with as many as five mongoloids have been reported (21), the tendency to familial concentration seems to be rather low, pointing to the participation of nongenetic factors in the total mechanism of causation.
The old notion that mongoloid females were sterile blocked one of the more obvious avenues of approach for genetic analysis. Actually, seven instances of reproduction in a mongoloid have been recorded. Of the seven children, five were normal and two mongoloid (12, 19). According to one

214 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

hypothesis, the duplication of the mother's defect in the child is due to impaired maternal endocrine function. This explanation does not suffice, however, to account for the birth of normal children to mongoloids whose endocrine system would be assumed to be impaired to the same extent as that of their "less fortunate" counterparts. It is more plausible, therefore, to think of a mode of causation that includes a gene-specific differential fetal susceptibility.
Dermatoglyphics
Among the dermatoglyphic anomalies common in mongolism, of particular interest is the position of the palmar triradius (16), a feature that is assumed to be largely gene-specific under normal as well as abnormal conditions. Ordinarily found in the heel of the hand, the triradius of mongoloids is placed near the center of the palm. While this change in location is part of the symptomatology of mongolism, the triradial site has not been shown to bear a relationship to variation in maternal age.
A clear association has been established between the central (mongoloid) location of the triradius and the frequency of this genetically determined trait in the families of mongoloids (16). The mongoloid type of location has been shown to vary from a rate of 11 per cent for the parents and sibs of non-mongoloids (2,046 individuals) to a rate of 18 per cent for the parents and sibs of mongoloids (736 individuals). Even more impressive was the finding that the given rate for the parents and sibs of mongoloids showed a further increase when the number of mongoloids per sibship was taken into account. The observed figures were 16.9 per cent for sibships with one mongoloid (673 individuals) and 36.5 per cent for those with two mongoloids (63 individuals) .. The differences among the three groups of families were statistically significant and formed one of the most important pieces of evidence for a direct link between gene-action and mongolism.

Maternal Age Effect and Genetic Analogues
Apart from the apparently consistent trend toward concordance in one-egg twins, a striking aspect of the disorder is its relationship to maternal age. The condition tends to occur most frequently in older mothers who have a history of previous miscarriages as well as a period of infertility prior to the mongoloid birth. The nature of the underlying reproductive deficiency, however, has yet to be delineated. A thyroid dysfunction has been postulated but not confirmed.
Specific effects of maternal age on genetically determined traits such as polydactyly have been described in guinea pigs and mice, with penetrance reduced in older mothers (9, 22). In the guinea pig the frequency of white spotting is increased with maternal age (20). These illustrations o£ the effect of maternal age on the expression of a genetic trait may be paralleled in mongolism.
Etiological Problems
Three major questions require clarification in understanding the cause or causes of mongolism:
1. What is the primary pathological substrate?
2. What is the nature of the reproductive deficiency in the maternal organism?
3. What is the origin of varying degrees of susceptibility to early damage in the fetus?
At present, no definitive answer is available to any of these questions. However, as is indicated by the accumulated findings, the etiology of this syndrome apparently requires both a gene-specific vulnerability and an unfavorable intra-uterine milieu. The genetic mechanism involved is not likely to be a simple one, since the low familial incidence rate militates against a single-factor type of inheritance. Equally implausible is the theory of a new single-

215

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

factor mutation for every case of mongol-

BIBLIOGRAPHY

ism. In this instance, the mutation rate 1. ALLEN, G. and BAROFF, G. S., Acta Genet. 5:

observed would bemuch higher than is ac- 2.

294, 1956. : andKALLMANN, F.J.FActa Genet. 7:

tually seen for spontaneous mutations un-

385, 1957.

der controlled conditions. Involvement of sex-linked genes can also beprecluded,because there is no evidence of unequal sex

3. BENDA, C.E.,Arch. Pediatr. 73: 391, 1956. 4. , in The Biology of Mental Health
and Disease. Paul B.Hoeber, New York, 1952. 5. , Mongolism and Cretinism. Grune

distribution.

and Stratton, New York, 1946.

Summary
Of theetiological background factors in mongolism considered here, the pronounced difference in concordance between one-egg and two-egg twins, certain dermatoglyphic similarities between mongoloids and their parents and sibs, and the fact that some mongoloid mothers have had a

6. VAN BEUKERING, J. A. and VERVOORN, J. D.,
Acta Genet. Med. Gemel. 5: 113, 1954.
7. B÷÷K, J. A. and REED, S. C., J. Amer. Med.
Assoc. 143: 730, 1950.
8. FRIEDMANN, A., Amer. J. Dis. Child. 90: 43, 1955.
9. HOLT, S. B., Ann. Eugen. 14: 114, 1947.
10. INGALLS, T. H., in The Biology of Mental Health and Disease. Paul B. Hoeber, New York, 1952.
11. JENKINS, R. L., Amer. J. Dis. Child. 45: 506, 1933.

mongoloid child point to a gene-specific 12. LELONG, M. et al. Arch. Franc. Pediatr. 6:

mechanism. The low familial concentra-

231, 1949. 13. NEEL, J. V. and SCHULL, W. J., Human Hered-

tion indicates the participation of non- ity, Univ. Chicago Press, Chicago, 1954.

genetic factors in the variability of penetrance. Apparently these factors are associated with maternal age, specifically, with the state of health of theintrauterine environment prior to nidation.

14. OLIVER, C. P., Eugen. News. 35:35, 1950. 15. OSTER, J., Danish Med. Bull. 3: 158, 1956. 16. PENROSE, L. S., Lancet. 267: 505, 1954.
17. PICKERINC, G. H., Brit. Med. J. 2: 988, 1946.
18. ROSANOFF, A. and HANDY, L. M., Amer. J. Dis.
Child. 14: 764, 1934.

In conclusion, it may be said that mongolism is associated with a specific period of fetal development, andthat its potenti-

19. SAYWER, G. M. and SHAFTER, A. J., Amer. J.
Ment. Def. 61: 793, 1957.
20. SORSBY, A., in Clinical Genetics. Butterworth, London, 1953.

ality exists in the embryo prior to the divi-

21. TURPIN, R. and LEJEUNE, J., Sem. Hop. Paris.
29: 1, 1953.

sion that results in twinning.

22. WRIGHT, S., Amer. Naturalist. 60: 552, 1926.

