Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Genetics and demography: Notes on the third Princeton conference (Princeton, N.J., October 20­22, 1966)
R. H. Post
To cite this article: R. H. Post (1967) Genetics and demography: Notes on the third Princeton conference (Princeton, N.J., October 20­22, 1966), Eugenics Quarterly, 14:3, 199-204, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1967.9987726 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1967.9987726
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:29

GENETICS AND DEMOGRAPHY: NOTES ON THE THIRD PRINCETON CONFERENCE (Princeton, N.J., October 20-22, 1966)
R. H. Post Department of Human Genetics
University of Michigan Ann Arbor, Michigan
The American Eugenics Society has sponsored three conferences at the Princeton Inn for informal discussion among population geneticists and demographers and representatives of other disciplines. Ten geneticists met with eleven demographers at the first conference, in 1964; anthropologists, psychologists, and sociologists also participated in the second and third conferences. Summary reports of the first and second, including statements of purpose, were published in Eugenics Quarterly 12:41-71, 1965, and 13:147-151, 1966. At the third conference four genetic and demographic research projects were presented, each by its chief investigator^), and critically discussed by participants.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

OLD COLONY MENNONITES
Gordon Allen and Calvin Redekop extended the description that they presented at the 1965 conference of their project of investigating natural selection in a number of behavior traits among the Old Colony Mennonites of Chihuahua, Mexico, a closed religious isolate of some 13,000 persons. Their full report has now been published (EugenicsQuarterly, 14:103-111, 1967). The purpose of this project is, essentially, to investigate individual differences in survival and reproduction in terms of behavioral differences by use of overall measures of fertility. It might be called a study of ongoing natural selection in behavioral traits, particularly in intelligence and success in farming.
They plan to commence with a threeyear pilot study, or feasibility study, which is to describe the structure of the population, focusing on the parameters of greatest interest. Various behavioral tests will be tried out. Questions to be attached include the number of families suitable for the study, the proportion of

children apt to emigrate away, and the cooperativeness and accessibility of those who remain. A series of practical problems are foreseen, such as in the giving of psychological tests and the systematizing of certain sociological criteria which would facilitate interpretation and assessment of individual differences in behavior.
The main purpose of the pilot study is to obtain parameters that will help in the planning and design of the final study. A second purpose is to study changes in the population, by comparing the results of the pilot study with results to be obtained 10 years or more afterwards.
In the long-range study, which may take from 15 to 20 years, the estimates of selection forces that are to be investigated would be in terms of the number of children and of grandchildren produced by each individual. This would be broken into components, because mortality at different phases of the life cycle has different significance. Thus, in the earliest years it is probably related rather strongly with the competence of

199

200 Post Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

the parents, but in later years, with the individual's own competence.
The interviews take about two hours to cover all the questionnaires to be completed by a family. A short questionnaire is used on the first visit, for several reasons. It has been quite successful--for example, out of 860 families in which the mother was over 45 years of age, 840 cooperated, which is better than 98%. Yet these forms were much more complicated than the village record forms.
The demographic factors that affect fertility and survival are interrelated with economic, social, and cultural factors in such a complicated manner that, in most societies, it is very difficult to attribute any of them to genetic variation. It is indeed almost impossible to trace any connection between differential survival and the possible genetic bases for variation in survival. However, insofar as genetic components in the variation of any behavioral trait may exist, some of these variations must have been selected for or against by natural selection during long periods of prehuman and early human evolution. Such selective forces must have been operative in order to have shaped human nature into what it is today.
The Old Colony Mennonites of Mexico present socioeconomic conditions that are closer to those of European peasants during the late middle ages than any other known group. They approximate closely the conditions under which Europeans experienced pre-Malthusian selection. A clearer picture of selection forces should emerge from studying a population in which no contraception is practiced.
The fact that higher intelligence has been developed by our species is itself proof that intelligence must have some genetic basis and that natural selection

must have favored higher intelligence under some circumstances, at least, operating over very long periods of time. But this fact has never been demonstrated in a contemporary population. Efforts have been made to obtain evidence that intelligence has some selective advantage, or "survival value," in a number of human societies, but such evidence is very poor.
The heritability of intelligence (I.Q-) is not the same in all environments. The more homogeneous the environment, the higher it will be; for the genetic component in I.Q. variation will be relatively higher when the environmental component is relatively lower, and vice versa. This is why the Old Colony Mennonites offer a particularly advantageous opportunity for making estimates of the heritability of intelligence. Of course, making the assumption of high heritability of I.Q. just because the environment is homogeneous may be incorrect. The only way to estimate heritability is actually to make a heritability study.
Some of the critique offered by members of the conference are incorporated in the foregoing summary. Other points follow:
1. We don't know that behavioral trait tests, which are designed for use in our culture, would be significant in this culture. "Noncultural" intelligence tests seem a practical impossibility to devise.
2. Intelligence tests were devised to estimate scholastic aptitude and "bookish" intelligence rather than the type of intelligence required to get ahead in farming.
3. The factors that affect family size are so many, and some of them are so strong, that the factors of intelligence and success in farming may be swamped. The amount of variance in fertility at-

Vol. 14, No. 3 Genetics and Demography: Third Princeton Conference

201

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

tributed to biologic factors is so high that it leaves very little variance for psychological factors.
4. New forms of differential mortality are arising as the years pass, as are many other sociological and economic conditions. Selection pressures are bound to change even in this most conservative society during the course of the study.
THE HUIXQUILUCAN PROJECT
Herbert R. Harvey and Richard H. Osborne described their study of the biosocial composition of a network of rural communities near Mexico City. While the study is focused upon the contemporary situation, it will also be based upon a detailed study of the historical records by which change in these communities can be analyzed over a long period of time.
The municipio of Huixquilucan, where the study is centered, offers many advantages, not only because of its geographic proximity to Mexico City, but also because it still preserves a sizable Otomi Indian population, hence important ethnic, social, and cultural variables. The municipio presently numbers over 20,000 inhabitants and contains 23 communities. The area in which it is located varies in altitude from 8,000 to 11,000 feet and covers more than 70 square miles.
Over the past century, the municipio has undergone considerable change in population size and in settlement pattern. The population has more than tripled, and the number of communities has doubled. The records relating to this locality are very extensive, dating from the seventeenth century, and are available from a number of sources: church records covering births, marriages, deaths; census records, from which can be extracted family composition, occupation, and so forth; tax records, indi-

cating income, hence estimates of living standards; military records; and town records covering property exchanges, production, and so forth. Moreover, several important items are obtainable from more than one source--birth, marriage, and death records which are available in both civil census and church documents.
The kinds of research problems that can be undertaken in this complex of communities are extremely varied. Some of the communities are located high enough to produce altitude effects--a village of 1,286 people is situated at almost 10,000 feet. Disease patterns vary with altitude and race, as well as through time. During recent decades, the standard of living has risen with increased industrialization and prosperity of Mexico City, where growing numbers have obtained employment. Changing disease patterns are already indicated as communications improve. During the next few years, these communities will be incorporated into the culture of Mexico City. The interrelationships between race, occupation, altitude, and health, as well as between urban and rural society, can be studied for a period covering more than three centuries through the wealth of records, while at the same time, they can be observed as on-going processes as modernization changes the life of these communities.
Several preliminary studies have already been completed. One of these is a mapping project. Thirty-two square miles, covering the heart of the occupation zone of the municipio, have been mapped and a base map prepared at a scale of 1:6750. From this, large-scale field sheets are made which form an integral part of the information retrieval system for recording certain classes of data. Since they show houses, fields, and other features of the cultural landscape, they are most useful, for example, for record-

202 Post Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

ing census data. Furthermore, with these base maps, it now becomes possible to determine the precise amount o£ cultivable acreage and to relate subsistence patterns quantitatively with population distribution.
Several aspects of the social and political organization have been studied, using a small, selected sample of communities. These aspects include determination of kinship networks, marriage patterns, inheritance rules, family and household composition, political factionalism, and dispute resolution. Moreover, one community, San Bartolome Coatepec, has been studied intensively in terms of land tenure, subsistence, and population. From these small-scale pilot studies, it appears evident that genealogies can be worked out for the entire municipio for the period 1840 to the present. Tacuba parochial records going back to the sixteenth century should make it possible to document the Spanish contributions from shortly after the conquest. A preliminary comparison of census data for the mid-1880's and the present indicates that there have been few significant structural changes in the municipio. Communities still tend to be self-contained in certain respects (e.g. marriage patterns) and linked in some respects (e.g. marketing practices). The data for the two periods are comparable in all ways, except that there is better definition of ethnic differences in the early material, owing to naming practices.
The age at marriage has increased significantly, however, over the past century, from a male average of 23.09 in the 1860's to 28.68 in the 1960's; and for females, from 18.60 in the I860's to 24.81 in the 1960's. There has also been a proliferation in the number and kinds of occupations men of the area are engaged in. Women, likewise, are participating

more in nondomestic activities. These changes reflect the influences of an industrializing economy; they are having an impact upon social and political organization of the municipio and can be anticipated to affect profoundly the demography of the area.
The interpretation of impending changes in the age structure of the population, fertility differentials, and so forth will require medical and biological information. Consequently, plans are being developed to obtain a current health profile of the communities in the municipio. This will also make it possible to institute specific studies of local health problems, e.g. cardiovascular disease, parasitic infections, and bacterial and viral disease. It is also planned to obtain a genetic description of the population utilizing the facilities of the Blood Genetic Laboratory at the University of Wisconsin. In this way it will be possible to document and investigate such changes as the breeding structure of the population, relative genetic contributions of Spanish-Mestizo and Indian during the period of change, and selection differentials in respect to identifiable genetic traits.
ETHNICITY AND INHERITED DISEASE
Victor McKusick commented briefly on the complex of studies which he has been directing for several years among the Old Order Amish in Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Indiana. (An earlier report is in Volume 29, pp. 99-114 of the Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology of 1964).
Two main approaches are distinguished: an ethnic group or isolated population may be surveyed for all hereditary disease and abnormalities, or the ethnic background and distribution of a specific disease may be investigated.

Vol. 14, No. 3 Genetics and Demography: Third Princeton Conference

203

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

A third approach combining these two has been made in genetic surveys of a city, such as in Washington County, Maryland, and Fredericksburg.
Still another approach is illustrated by comparisons in the frequencies of hereditary diseases between several ethnic groups in the U.S. and their relatives in areas whence their ancestors had come, viz., Japanese, Negro, and Mediterranean white populations. In such studies one must first make a study of the genetic structure of the population, with its history of migration, and then work up a careful demographic picture.
Several genetic diseases were discussed in some detail and their ethnic distribution noted.
Homocystinuria has been found among English, Dutch, Swedish, Jewish, and Negro populations but appears to be very rare among Poles and perhaps other Slavs and possibly is absent among Orientals. Only some 700 families have been screened, however.
Familial dysautonomia (Riley-Day Syndrome) is particularly associated with Ashkenazi Jews. This is a very rare disease; only 220 families have been located, among whom only 164 have been seen, but 162 of these were Jewish. Several obvious problems arise in such work, such as how widely the net is cast, and what the ethnic backgrounds of the fisherman are. In the studies of familial dysautonomia most of the reporting physicians are themselves Jewish.
Several other rare diseases have been noted among Ashkenazi populations, including pentosuria and Tay Sachs disease, but others are remarkably low in frequency, as phenylketonuria.
Mediterranean populations have higher frequencies of thalassemia and G-6-PD deficiency than have other whites but lower frequencies of cystic fibrosis of the pancreas. Negroes have somewhat

higher frequencies of cystic fibrosis and of phenylketonuria.
Multifactorial diseases reveal ethnic differences also. Jews appear to have higher frequencies of hypocholesterinemia and polycythemia vera but lower frequencies of severe cases of tuberculosis--at least, lower mortalities. Negroes have high frequencies for uterinefibrosis, corneal arcus, and hypertension but low frequencies for osteroporosis. American Indians are high for congenital dislocation of the hip, low for myopia.
McKusick and his co-workers have recently added Quebec to the areas where they have been working. They are considering adding Armenian populations also.
WISCONSIN UNIVERSITY ALUMNI
Richard Osborne described his study of students and alumni of the University of Wisconsin. This select group was chosen for an analysis of the complex medico-biologic and psychologic factors determining successful adaptation in mid-twentieth century U.S.A., which demands a combination of many qualities.
The university student is an important and definable subsample of the population, and the university graduate constitutes society's most valuable resource. Both have been selected for a certain level of adaptation to our complex modern society; yet within these two groups there is great variability in adaptive qualities. Various measures of achievement are available for university students and university graduates as well as routinely obtained I.Q. test scores, personality ratings, and health evaluations. Other tests can be readily obtained for comparisons to actual levels of achievement. A large state university population such as that of the University of Wisconsin also provides genetic and environmental control data.

204 Post Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

Data for 130,000 University of Wisconsin alumni are recorded on magnetic tape. Among the approximately 6,521 freshman entering the university in the fall of 1966, 965 were the children of these alumni; 78 students were twin born; 984 came from families of 4 children; 504, from families of 5; and 491, from families of 6 to 13 children. Special studies of physiological responses to stress have been instituted for the twins in the university population and their siblings. The retrieval of routine scholastic and test score data for offspring of alumni and the alumni parents is now being attempted.
ETHNIC ISOLATE STUDIES
James Spuhler made three recommendations for research in population genetics.
1. Studies of ethnic isolates are particularly rewarding. The discovery of hemoglobin S in American Negroes and distinct types of G-6-PD deficiency in Negroes and Mediterranean whites illustrates this.
2. Studies of genetic loci in different ethnic groups or isolates can be very revealing. Demonstration that the gene for phenylketomiria has the same locus in Japanese and Europeans has recently been reported, from a critical mating. Variations in the clinical manifestation of what might appear to be the same deleterious gene in two or more different races or isolates may or may not prove to be due to a difference of locus.
3. Studies of phenotypic selection are

more meaningful when restricted to one ethnic group. Demonstration of phenotypic selection for birth weight by Penrose and Cam illustrates this. Survival during the first 28 days was found to be significantly higher for modal birth weights and lower for both extremes, underweight and overweight. Thus, selection for modal birth weight was demonstrated. Sheldon Reed and Carl Bajema have demonstrated that the intrinsic rate of natural increase for modal I.Q.'s also, is greater than for either tail of the I.Q. distribution range.
In conclusion, Spuhler made a plea for family pedigree data in mass studies based on census sources, in order to permit heritability estimates. Without the latter it is impossible to investigate phenotypic selection, which is the crux of on-going evolution. Family studies are also an important adjunct of twin studies.
FUTURE CONFERENCES
The Third Princeton Conference concluded general discussions on population genetics and demography. Future conferences will be directed at specific topics of mutual concern to the two disciplines. The 1967 Conference on Assortative Mating will be held November 9 to 11. As a conclusion to the general sessions, Carl Bajema has compiled a bibliography of basic works in the fields of population genetics and demography, and interdisciplinary studies and theoretical treatments. Eugenics Quarterly, 14: 205-236, September 1967.

