Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Sex education and eugenics
Jacob A. Goldberg
To cite this article: Jacob A. Goldberg (1954) Sex education and eugenics, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:2, 39-46, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987176 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987176
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 6 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

Family Life Division

SEX EDUCATION AND EUGENICS

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

JACOB A. GOLDBERG
Director, Social Hygiene Division N. Y.Tuberculosis andHealth Association

I

O.'NE MUST NECESSARILY adopt a long-term into the life of every normal human indi-
point of view when discussing eugenicsand vidual." It is readily evident, asstressed by its application to the human race. So, in Bigelow, that the term as defined includes considering the utilization of a branch of much more than thepassing on of informa-

education which has come to be called sex tion relating to anatomical and physioeducation and its possible influence in bet- logical data. While this definition ofsex tering the human race, it is likewise essen- education has remained valid since itwas

tial to consider that while such education may be of some help to thepresent generation of children andyoung people, theultimate effects may not become evident, if at

first published in 1916, there has come to be general agreement that the emphasis placed on the word sex has militated against this aspect of education, and that

all, for decades.

another term or terms would help toad-

Before specifically considering the pos- vance this field of education and at the

sible influence of sex education on human same time remove objections from various

betterment, it seems essential to define sources.

what is meant bythe terms employed in the A major attempt to perform this task was

title of this discussion. Theword eugenics made at a conference called by the U.S.

(eu = good; gen = race or stock) was first Commissioner of Education held in Wash-

used by Sir Francis Galton in 1883. It was ington, D. C. December 7-9, 1944, and at-

defined byhim as "The science which deals tended by Bigelow and the writer, among

with all influences that improve the inborn others. A series of principles was devel-

qualities of the race; also with those that oped at that time, with emphasis placed on

develop them to the utmost advantage." "education for personal andfamily living,"

Since this basic definition provides forthe as a substitute for the more limited term

utilization of various measures, especially "sex education." The following are some

educational means, it is pertinent to in- of the statements drafted by this conference

quire into the possible use of what has of educators:

been termed sex education in this desirable effort to advance the eugenic movement.
A leading American biologist andeducator, Profesor Maurice A. Bigelow, has provided us with the basic definition of the term "sex education." According to him:

1. Education for personal and family living is based on the thesis that the sex factor in human living, as it affects personal development, and especially in its relation to marriage, parenthood, the home, and the family, merits a dignified place among other topics of deep human

"Sex education in its largest sense includes interest.

all scientific, ethical, social and religious instruction and influence which directly and indirectly may help young peopleprepare to solve for themselves the problems of sex that inevitably come in some form

2. Education for personal and family living is an integral part of the total education of each human being. It is never finished but keeps pace with increasing maturity and experience.
3. Education for personal and family

39

40 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

living strives for the best possible development of all physical, psychological, ethical and social aspects of life as these are in any way determined or influenced by the sex factor and its resulting traditions and associations. Thus broadly conceived it inevitably involves moral con-

Bigelow has pointed out that some of the chief facts of eugenics should be a part of every well-organized scheme of sex instruction and should be taught in biology courses. Probably no other topic in biology is as likely to make an ethical-social appeal,

cepts and religious values. 4. Education for personal and family living is based on the recognition and acceptance of sex as basically important in human behavior and relations. A primary purpose of such education is to establish attitudes, habits and ideals to-

for one of the central points of eugenics is the responsibility of the individual whose uncontrolled sexual actions may transmit undesirable and heritable qualities and bring a train of disaster to generations of descendants.

ward sex which are satisfying to the individual and which, at the same time, enable him to act in a socially responsible manner.

In considering how this information is to be imparted, it is essential to appraise the available opportunities in school systems. In many communities a considerable

II segment of the high school registrants does

It is an interesting coincidence that the not complete a course in biology. In other

same month and year that this Conference was held in Washington -- December 1944 -- there appeared an article in EUGENICAL NEWS entitled "Eugenics and Family Life Education." Written by Paul Popenoe, it pointed out that the study of human heredity is widely neglected in spite of its universal appeal and its practical significance

areas, the teaching is sketchy, if provided at all, and the instructors may not be adequately qualified. In one of the largest cities, for instance, the biology course is technically not a requirement, though 85 per cent to 90 per cent of the academic students -- those who are taking a precollege course --have some type of biology.

to every individual. It further indicated In the many vocational high schools the that this is partly due to technical difficul- percentage is hardly as high. Some attenties associated with the teaching of human tion is given to biology in junior high

heredity. Numerous textbooks on psychol- schools through the required course in genogy, child guidance, and sociology devoted eral science.

a conventional chapter or section to eugenics. In most instances, Popenoe held, the authors either knew too little about the subject or too much, and introduced complicated reactions of cytology and Mendelian mechanisms which the average student is unable to grasp. Perhaps he might have added some high school textbooks on biology as well.

In the development of courses of study in both elementary and secondary schools, there are many opportunities to incorporate information which will help to meet the specifications of the definition of sex education as written by Bigelow. But altogether too few school systems have taken advantage of the possibilities. This may be due to one or more restrictive factors, in-

Ten years ago it was still necessary to cluding failure to point up the material in

attempt to convince many educators that teacher-training institutions; lack of intereugenics and family life education were est of biology faculties in secondary schools

essential obligations of the educational sys- in this socialized approach to the scientific

tem. While some progress has been made material of instruction; local prejudices

on the college level in the interim, much and ignorance of the objectives and constill remains to be done insofar as imple- tent of such sources of instruction; and

mentation in the secondary schools is con- even inertia on the part of administrators

cerned.

and instructors. But such prejudice and

41

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

inertia may also be shared by parents who, in the last analysis, must help to provide the leadership which can bring about the introduction into the curricula of sex education or education for personal and family living.
There are other courses in the secondary schools in which this type of material can be effectively incorporated. Gruenberg, in his report on "High Schools and Sex Education," points out how the material can be integrated into the following courses: biology, general science, physiology and hygiene, physical education, home economics, social studies and English. Psychology is another area in the high school curriculum where material on sex (family life) education and eugenics is being introduced.
Ill
If a program covering sex (family life) education and eugenics is to be effective, it must not only be well taught by properly trained teachers but must also be aimed at reaching the largest number of students at a crucial time in their lives. This means that high school is the period during which most emphasis is to be placed on these subjects. Waiting till college courses are available is deferring a responsibility for too long a time. Still another factor involved relates to the many high school students who fail to complete their four-year courses and go on into college. It is likewise recognized that many who enter college do not remain till they graduate.
The United States Census Bureau reports indicate that in October 1951, 6,780,000 students were enrolled in our public and private high schools. Compared to this number, there were only 1,844,000 enrolled in all our colleges. Of course, many high school enrollees are in vocational high schools which do not prepare students for college entrance. These total figures indicate where the emphasis is to be placed, both from the points of view of desirability and practicality.

IV
The writer has tried to learn what high school systems in different parts of the country are teaching in the field of sex oí family life education and how they relate such teaching with eugenics. Such information is somewhat difficult to gather as curricula covering these subjects have not been readily available. To meet such lapses, a further study was undertaken covering textbooks in biology and psychology being used on the high school level.
Isolation of a segment of a course of study in biology naturally cannot give a complete picture of the teaching in a high school system in sex (family life) education and eugenics. Let us take, as an example, the requirements of the New York State Education Department. The standards set for examinations in biology covering (1) behavior, (2) prevention and control of disease, (3) reproduction, and (4) heredity, seem to be fundamentally inadequate if high school students are to be provided with a guide in sex (family life) education and eugenics.
Under behavior, the following topics are outlined: (a) responses of plants and animals, (b) the central nervous system of man, (c) behavior patterns (nature of reflexes, conditioned reflexes, habits and voluntary acts), (d) habit formation, (e) mental and emotional adjustment, and (f) study of ductless glands.
The prevention and control of disease section, dealing with the usual topics of organisms, methods of disease transmission, body defenses, immunity and antitoxins, at this late date still includes social disease (methods of transfer and detection)! Now, what is a social disease? Presumably, this term refers to the venereal diseases, which properly belong in social hygiene education, of which sex (family life) education forms an integral part. And yet, the health teaching syllabus for high schools in New York State includes material on the control of venereal diseases, (so designated) with

42 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

specific reference to the study of the causes, look alike? (2) How has man learned the

methods o£ spread, and treatment of syph- facts about heredity? (3) How is it pos-

ilis and gonorrhea.

sible for an organism to have a trait not

Popenoe's criticism of the content of present in either of its parents? (4) How

high school curricula in the area of hered- do scientists explain the inheritance of sex?

ity instruction was evidently well taken a (5) What defects seem to be more fre-

decade ago, if we are to judge from the quently associated with one sex than with

preceding. Interestingly enough, the health the other? (6) How has man improved

teaching syllabus for New York State, in a his domesticated plants and animals? (7)

section given over to Mental Health, incor- How does environment influence the de-

porates the following material: heredity velopment of an individual's traits? (8)

and environment; the physical basis of Why must our society continue to stress

heredity; how and what traits are inher- environmental factors in every generation?

ited; relative effects of heredity and envi- (9) What traits are possessed by all human

ronment; possibilities of improving the beings? This unit VIII seems to cover the

individual and the group, from the family subject of heredity adequately, considering

unit to the Nation, through heredity and the age group for which the course is in-

environment.

tended. Listed visual aids include the films

Under the same heading of Mental Health, other topics listed include the endocrine glands and their influence on behavior; the relation of family life to

"Heredity and Environment," and "Man, One Family," which was produced under the direction of Huxley and Haldane. The family life aspect, however, is not covered.

mental health; the emotions; the integrat- Frederick Osborn in his "Preface to Eu-

ing, coordinating function of the nervous genics" points out: "A eugenic attitude can

system including reflexes, instincts, condi- best be taught not by teaching eugenics as

tioned reflexes, habit formation, health of such, but by acquainting the students all

the nervous system, and a number of other along the line with materials which go into

topics of interest to eugenics.

a sound eugenics. If the materials and at-

The Board of Education of New York City recently completed a curriculum on general biology for the lOth-year students in academic high schools. Unit VII covering Reproduction is introduced "To furnish some basis for the study of heredity." The material deals with reproduction of fish, frog, bird, and mammal (rabbit or rat). The omission of human reproduction is significant, even though the curriculum is

titudes are well integrated, the students will have eugenic attitudes as a natural part of their preparation for living." From the preceding comments on the evident lack of integration in one large school system between the curricula in two courses of study, it is plain that much remains to be done to relate selected courses in such a way that sex (family life) education and eugenics may take a distinctive pattern.

presented to the lOth-grade or junior high The Ohio Department of Education cur-

school students.

riculum on Health, Physical Education,

Unit VIII is entitled Heredity. It states Recreation and Safety contains a unit on

that "the aim of this unit is to present a Reproduction and Heredity, with the fol-

simple non-technical introduction to an lowing sections: (a) anatomy and phy-

important concept. In addition to learning siology of reproduction; (b) sex hygiene;

how traits are inherited, the pupil is ex- (c) heredity and successful marriage.

pected to gain insight into the role of the The Oregon Health Guide Units for

environment in modifying traits."

teachers of Grades 10, 11 and 12 incorporate

The following topics are covered: (I) Unit XVII, covering Mental Hygiene,

How are we to explain why no two people which also includes family life education.

43

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Among the topics dealt with are the following: (a) components of personality, both mental and physical; (b) factors that aßect personality, including heredity, environment, individual differences, intelligence and aptitude; (c) development of mental health; (d) preparation for marriage, parenthood and family life, including human reproduction and covering structure and functions of the male and female reproductive system; fertilization and pregnancy; birth and maternal and infant care; personal interpretation of affection and sex; love, courtship, marriage and parenthood. This is a fairly complete unit and may well serve as a guide to other parts of the country.
The curriculum for Health Education courses in Virginia outlines in some detail much material on the endocrine system, including the gonads, male and female reproductive systems. In addition, heredity and environment are included under the heading of factors influencing personality. Family relationships, preparation for adult living, and preparation for marriage are likewise given adequate consideration. It is interesting to note that all this material is incorporated in the section given over to Mental Health.
In Pennsylvania, the Science Course of Study includes a unit on heredity in the 7th grade, with these listed objectives: the understanding of problems of reproduction and heredity; the complexes of living genes as the source and foundation of human thought and action; and the significance and problems of adolescence. Units covering the influences exerted by the environment are provided for in the biology course for the 9th grade. Heredity, human reproduction, family life, and venereal diseases are also included in this grade course.
The preceding summaries of courses of study in several high school systems in relation to the inclusion of materials on sex (family life) education and eugenics show

no uniformity of thinking on the desirability of covering these subjects.
Curricula from some other states not incorporated in the preceding discussion do not indicate as full a treatment of the subjects of concern as those mentioned. Available information is too sparse to permit the writer to draw conclusions as to whether or not most units of study covering sex (family life) education and eugenics are adequate.
V
In the attempt to obtain additional information several standard textbooks on biology for secondary schools were reviewed. The assumption was that these selected texts would be indicative of the materials covered in biology courses. Likewise, the same procedure was followed with three psychology texts. Oddly enough, it seems that the authors of the psychology books have covered materials which should be more helpful to high school students in the areas under consideration than the biology texts. This observation tends to confirm Popenoe's stricture against certain high school texts.
As previously indicated, the subjects under consideration are also incorporated ·under health education in various school systems. While the number of secondary schools having regular courses in psychology may be limited, much of the material in such courses is included under mental hygiene in the health education curricula.
The following notations and excerpts are of interest.
Biology Texts
1. AMERICAN HIGH SCHOOL BIOLOGY
Charlotte L. Grant, Keith Cady, Nathan A. Neal, Harper &Bros.
Ch. 30--How Heredity Works Genetics, the Science of Heredity, How
Cells Divide, Chromosomes Carry Heredity Traits, the Laws of Heredity Ch. 31--Heredity in Human Beings How are Physical Characteristics Inherited? Boy and Girl Babies, Some Hidden Traits, Inheritance of Mental

44 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Traits, Choosing Future Parents, Heredity and the Human Race
2. MODERN BIOLOGY
Truman J. Moon, Paul B. Mann, James H. Otto, Henry Holt & Co.
Unit 10--Like Begets Like, The Biology of Heredity
Ch. 54--The Basis of Heredity Ch. 55--The Principles of Heredity Ch. 56--Plant and Animal Breeding Ch. 57--Genetics Applied to Human
Inheritance Ch. 58--The Changing World of Life
3. BIOLOGY IN OUR LIVES
George W. Hunter and F. R. Hunter, American Book Co.
Problem 4--What Determines Heredity?
Problem 6--How May Our Knowledge of Genetics Be Applied to Human Beings?
4. DYNAMIC BIOLOGY TODAY
Arthur O. Baker and Lewis H. Mills, Rand McNally & Co.
Unit 9--Genetic Principles in the Improvement of Plants and Animals
Ch. 1--What Illustrations of Genetic Principles Can Be Observed in Human Beings?
Ch. 2--How Is the Reproductive Process Related to Inheritance in Plants and Animals?
Ch. 3--How Do the Laws of Heredity Operate?
Ch. 4--How Are Mendelian Principles Being Applied to the Improvement of Plants and Animals?
Ch. 5--What Personal and Social Problems Have Genetic Origins?
5. BIOLOGY IN DAILY LIFE
Frances D. Curtis and John Urban, Ginn &Co.
Unit 7--Life Continues From Age to Age
Ch. 16--Types of Reproduction Ch. 17--Life: Past, Present and Future What Are Some Further Important Dis-
coveries Concerning Heredity? How May Living Things Be Improved?
6. BASIC BIOLOGY FOR HIGH SCHOOLS
C. L. Fenton & P. E. Kambly, Macmillan Unit 8--Old Characters and New Ones Ch. 29--Heredity and Variation

Ch. 30--Order in Heredity Ch. 31--Human Heredity Ch. 32--Putting Heredity to Work
7. ELEMENTS OF BIOLOGY
Smallwood, Really, Bailey, Dodge, Allyn and Bacon
Unit 10--Life Through the Ages Ch. XL--Classification of Living Forms Ch. XLI--Life in Ages Past Ch. XLII--Progression of Life Ch. XLIII--The Basis of Heredity
Psychology Texts
1. PSYCHOLOGY
T. L. Engle, World Book Co. Ch. 6--Heredity and Environment Ch. 7--Biological Foundations of Be-
havior Ch. 12--The Growth of Friendship
and Love Ch. 17--Marriage and the Family (in-
cluding sex instruction of children)
2. PSYCHOLOGY AND SUCCESSFUL LIVING
Charles C. Josey, Scribner's Ch. 5--Individual Differences--Causes
and Consequences How Individuals Differ Why Individuals Differ Importance of Heredity Importance of Environment Ch. 13--Adolescence Ch. 14--Successful Marriage Ch. 15--Child Care
3. PSYCHOLOGY FOR LIVING
Herbert Sorenson and Marguerite Malm, McGraw-Hill Book Co.
Sect. I--Behavior and its Foundation Ch. 1--What You Are Born With and
What You Acquire Eugenics and Euthenics Heredity--How It Functions Principles of Heredity How Environment Influences Develop-
ment How Make Most of Heredity and En-
vironment Sect. VI--Courtship, Marriage and Life
Work Ch. 25--Relationships With Others Ch. 26--Success With the Opposite Sex Ch. 27--What to Consider in Selecting
a Mate Ch. 28--Making Marriage Successful

45

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

VI
The approach in this discussion of sex (family life) education and its relation to eugenics has followed a line that seems essential at the present time. This particular field of education rests under several handicaps. At first, clergymen and physicians took the lead in attempting to guide and control the physical expression of a biological urge by frightening stories of the "wages of sin," and the suffering and horrors of the venereal diseases. The imparting of scientific facts relating to the human male and female reproductive systems fell in part to the teachers of biology, if their superiors and curricula permitted them to touch on this subject at all. These are still the so-called educational methods used in many places. But adolescents, who are most concerned, evidently did not and still do not respond to such teachings insofar as their conduct patterns are concerned. They need something more and something that is sounder pedagogically.
Along came the social biologists--men like Bigelow, Galloway, Popenoe--with a newer approach, as evidenced by Bigelow's original definition of sex education and as subsequently modified, plus the writings and teachings of others. They helped to blaze a new trail. Even then, much more was needed. The secondary school faculties in many parts of the country attempted to meet the challenge they faced. With the expansion of health and physical education courses, and thereafter those on mental hygiene, family life and psychology, new concepts began to take hold and additional teachers have participated in teaching and advising their students in the physical, emotional and social areas which were of major concern to them.
But presently difficulties began to arise as they had in previous years whenever the subject of sex came to the fore. Objections from various groups and individuals-- though rarely from the students themselves --impeded the effective development of courses of study to meet the pressing need.

This, however, has not been the whole
story. Comparatively few teachers were pre-
pared by study and experience to undertake
the task of teaching the subjects incorpo-
rated under the term sex or family life edu-
cation. Realization of this fact has been
evidenced in newly developed courses on
family life education in teachers' colleges,
most recently at Teachers College, Colum-
bia University.
Much opposition is still indicated by un-
informed parents and others. The curricu-
lum on Health Education, Physical Edu-
cation and Recreation of the West Virginia
State Department of Education states the
problem in the following way:
The sex education aspect of the human relation program will be dependent, in large, upon the attitude of the parents and community. However, the school has a major responsibility for cooperatively developing with the community--its homes, institutions, and agencies--such understandings as will insure a program which will have the support and meet the needs of the community. School administrators and teachers must make use of every available community resource in securing information, planning the content, and promoting the program. The help and guidance of physicians, nurses, clergymen, home economics and physical education teachers and others must be enlisted.
Let us emphasize that in introducing sex education in the school program the first step is to gain the cooperation of parents and parent groups. It is important that parents share in the planning of what is to be taught and show a willingness to have it taught before such program is introduced. Parents can be very helpful when it is pointed out that sex education--good or bad--really begins at home long before the child starts in school. Some children come to school with the idea that sex is something not to be discussed. Others come from homes where the parents are welladjusted and maintain those standards of good family living which help them to know that sex is incidental in the life of a well-integrated family. Of course the teacher should make use of every available resource in the effort to increase her

46 Eugenics Quarterly

knowledge and her confidence in her ability to establish wholesome attitudes and understanding in boys and girls.
VII
The task of advancing the eugenics movement requires a long-term point of view. Evidently a real contribution can be made to this objective through courses in high schools and colleges covering areas of sex education or family life education and relating them to teachings on heredity, environment, and the eugenics program. Emphasis on the negative aspects, such as the concomitants of venereal disease infections and their sequelae, gives no promise of being helpful in advancing the major objectives. While it might be desirable to indicate to older students, at least, that gonorrhea may cause sterility in the male or female, and that syphilis can result in congenital syphilis or other con-

ditions, available antibiotics are mitigating these primary infections and bringing about comparatively rapid cures.
There is a wide area of service open to those interested in eugenics. Perhaps one field that warrants immediate cultivation is broadening the base of those who should participate in the movement, if such it may be called. This seemingly is not only the task of biologists, nor even of social biologists. If we are to advance family life education, eugenics, and the technical aspects of heredity coupled with environmental factors, it may be necessary to go outside of the laboratory and the experimental animal cages; in part, at least, lay aside our computing machines, and move more effectively into the community. How all of this is to be done involves conferences with leaders of various groups and the development of a point of view which will serve as a guide to educational effort.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

