Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
A quarter century in the natural sciences
Warren Weaver Vice President & Alfred P. Sloan
To cite this article: Warren Weaver Vice President & Alfred P. Sloan (1960) A quarter century in the natural sciences, Eugenics Quarterly, 7:3, 157-162, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1960.9987443 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1960.9987443
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

A QUARTER CENTURY IN THE NATURAL SCIENCES*

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

WARREN WEAVER
Vice President Alfred P. Sloan Foundation

. . . The progress in modern experimental biology during the past quarter century has been so vast, so penetrating, and so exciting that it would require a battery of experts and a set of books to do it justice. As a single example, is it not a striking fact that only for a very few years has science realized the sexual nature of the reproduction process in bacteria and the interchange of genetic material between virus strains? . . . It has nevertheless been the physical sciences which have, to a large extent at least, produced the great modern armament of biological and medical research equipment.... For as science moves forward through an array of problems of increasing complexity, the physical sciences, dealing as they have for so long a time with problems of simplicity, have quite naturally had the great early successes, and have in this process produced many tools of thought and experiment which can now be used to drive deeper into biological complexity. Furthermore the trend of modern biology is toward an ever finer scale of dimension. The classical morphologist or systematist used his eyes--the bacteriologist, the ordinary optical microscope. But modern biology is deeply concerned with structure and events on a much more refined scale. This push into an ever-smaller world of analysis and explanation can be symbolized by the statement that there is very likely no more basic or central prob-
*Extracts by permission from The President's Review (Including A Quarter Century in the Natural Sciences) by Warren Weaver from The Rockefeller Foundation Annual Report, 1958, New York.

lem of modern biology than that of the detailed arrangement of the millions of individual atoms within the DNA of chromosomes.
The physical sciences have also been engaging in a drive toward smallness, and for reasons which we now recognize as obvious, they are ahead of the biologist. Whereas the latter is, so to speak, inside the cell and in extreme cases inside huge macromolecules of protein, the physicist is inside the nucleus, some ten orders of magnitude smaller than a cell. It is therefore not surprising that the physical sciences have developed a whole range of devices and experimental procedures which are now becoming a normal and accustomed part of biological experimentation.
Many of these devices and procedures can be classified under two headings-- new and more powerful ways of separating, and new and more powerful ways of seeing. Here both of the words separating and seeing are used in a rather extended sense. . . .
If biology presents, for the most part, problems of organized complexity, then one must expect any piece of living matter to contain a vast number of individual substances, all tangled together in an intimate interrelation. But this kind of complexity remains a mystery until one can, in some way, untangle the mess, separate out parts that are themselves homogeneous, and find out what these separate parts are. So separation is a basic procedure in attacking biological problems....
Thus first in our list of newer methods

157

158 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

of separation we should note the improvements in the ancient procedure of screening. Modern science and technology now makes available cellulose ester filters of remarkable porosity (up to 80 or even 85 per cent) with a range of carefully controlled pore sizes. . . . The centrifuge, familiar to the dairyman who separates the cream from the milk by utilizing their difference in density, has been developed over the period under review into a most powerful tool for separating out the various component particles, differing in density, which are suspended in or go to make up a liquid. . . . One . . . method, useful both for identification and separating, is the modern procedure of electrophoresis. The basic principle is an old one, and is due to observations made in 1809 by the Russian physicist F. F. Reuss. But modern development dates only from the midthirties, and is due very largely to the brilliant researches of the Swedish physical biochemist, Arne W. K. Tiselius. . . .
An extraordinarily useful and interesting set of procedures which involve identification, although normally not separation, depends upon the obvious fact that tiny experimental creatures such as bacteria or fungi are available in large, willing and rapidly replenished numbers, and upon the further not at all obvious fact that they have chemical skills which no human chemist possesses.
If, for example, one studies a large number of micro-organisms (the red bread mold Neurospora crassa is a now classic example, although the method is only about twenty years old) some of these turn out to be mutant strains, this meaning that one of the creature's genes has become altered. According to the present view, certain genes are responsible for the possession by the organism of certain enzyme systems; and in some instances at least, one gene controls the enzyme. If this gene is altered, the mutant strain of the fungus would lack that particular enzyme.

Now this tiny and lowly creature, in order to live, carries out a great many chemical tasks. It can take a number of relatively simple chemical substances and link them together into some large and more complex substance which it requires; or it can take large and complex material which is unusable in its complete form, and split it up into useful parts. Each one of these individual steps of joining or splitting is activated by one special enzyme. Whereas a human organic chemist can carry out multitudes of chemical reactions, an enzyme system (generally speaking) can carry out only one specific chemical operation. But it may be a job which no human chemist can do; and it is, moreover, easy to exploit the fact that each enzyme is such a specialist.
For suppose one has produced (by irradiating with X-rays, for example) a lot of mutant strains of Neurospora. Suppose these have been sorted out, and a strain isolated which cannot live unless the food furnished to it contains a supply of, say, the B vitamin thiamine, whereas the normal strains do not require thiamine since they possess an enzyme which is a specialist at making thiamine from other material.
This thiamine-requiring mutant strain (which incidentally breeds true so that it can be maintained in the laboratory) is now ready to go to work for the scientist. If he has a sample of mixed-up material, and wants to know whether or not it contains thiamine, he merely introduces the sample into a thiaminelacking food supply and offers it to the mutant strain. If the fungus prospers, then the mess contained thiamine; otherwise not.
A single example of this sort is likely to sound like a tour de force; but actually there are numerous and highly useful ramifications of this general technique. . . .
Before closing this section on sepa-
rating and identifying we must pay trib-

159

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

ute to one of the most dramatic successes of this period--the development of chromotography. This is in fact a kind of screening procedure, so that in a very broad sense we return to the topic which started this section. But the screening, here, does not depend on size. . . . This amazing discovery was used only a few times between 1906 and the beginning date of this review; but chromatography, in its present greatly improved forms, is now one of the most powerful tools in the hands of the chemically minded biologist. It promptly turned out that this method of separation, almost mysterious in its simplicity and its ability to deal with complex mixtures which defy ordinary chemical means, was not restricted to colored dyes, but could be used for a wide range of materials. . . .
"It has been said by many, notably the eminent nineteenth century physiologist Claude Bernard, . . . that progress in science frequently depends upon the development of good methods. Chromatography furnishes a vivid example of the truth of this statement. . . ."
Even more spectacular than the new ways to separate are the developments which give the biologist new ways of seeing; and among these the most obvious and also one of the most important is to be found in the modern improvements in microscopy . . . the great advance in resolution--which is the technical term for the capacity of a seeing device to discriminate fine detail--came from the development of the electron microscope. Utilizing the fact that electrons behave like light of wave length less than one-thousandth that of ordinary light, instruments have been developed which can handle detail down to a ten-millionth of a centimeter. This whole instrumental development has occurred over the period here under review. . . . There are a variety of other devices which have improved the scientist's capacity to see. Several of these are modifications of the older optical microscope.

The reader, more than once as he has read thus far, may well have wondered if modern biology no longer is concerned with the classical fields of anatomy, physiology, genetics, embryology, neurology, etc.; if it is now so preoccupied with tools and techniques that it is not interested in the conceptual aspects of the great problems of biology; if it no longer is mystified as to how differentiation, growth, decay, and death occur; if it no longer hopes to get fuller understanding of instinct, of learning, of behavior in general.
The reply, of course, is that these remain great central concerns of the biologist. What has changed is that these problems are now being approched not only from above, with the broad view of the natural philosopher who scans the whole living world, but also from underneath, by the quantitative analyst who measures the underlying facts. . . .
The most biological of biologists should welcome this newer orientation, not as a replacement for a more naturalistic attitude, but as a supplement to it. For the fact is that biology, for all the richness of its collection of bits and pieces of information about nature, has been singularly weak in discovering great principles around which myriads of otherwise isolated facts can cluster in a meaningful and unifying way. In the case of the physical sciences one can write down a substantial number of "great laws," applicable universally. . . . For biology, one starts off bravely with the concepts of evolution, the universality of the cell as a unity of life, and the central principles of genetics and then rather lamely turns to discussion of individual problems rather than broad pronouncement. . . .
There is, however, real reason to expect that biology is now in the process of establishing the kind of base of analytical and often quantitative fact which can lead to and can sustain a much

160 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

broader theoretical base than has as yet been available to the life sciences.
It is of the most characteristic significance, relative to the movements in modern biology, that in many instances the underlying facts are now being successfully explored at the submicroscopic scale of molecular and even atomic dimensions. Biological ultrastructure has become a recognized and rich field. For several years now a term has been used, seriously and in an operational sense, which in 1932 would have been used only with imagination and hope--molecular biology.
A great deal of the information about biological material at this new scale of smallness consists of knowledge about structure. This knowledge has to a great extent been made possible by the procedures and instruments which have been reviewed in the preceding sections. . . . When an organic chemist says that he understands the structure of a molecule, he means that he knows, about that structure, the things which enable him to deal usefully with it. This means, in part, that he has it classified in relation to a lot of other compounds which he also understands; and that he therefore has a very good idea of how it will behave under a lot of chemical circumstances. It also means that he knows how to go about modifying the compound, and perhaps even knows how to synthesize it. This, however, is not at all what the physicist, in particular the X-ray crystallographer, means when he says that he knows the structure of a molecule, . . .
The organic chemist can often carry out purely chemical studies which give him what he calls the full stereochemical structure. But there are instances in which he finds it awkward or impossible to get this information by chemical means. He is then glad to accept the three-dimensional assistance of the X-ray crystallographer.
It should be no surprise that the X-ray crystallographer has not, as yet, been

able to give by his methods the location of each of the hundreds of atoms in the insulin molecule. Crystallographic studies have been made of insulin--or more strictly, of two insulin derivations, and the point has now been reached at which the chemical studies and the crystallographic studies are progressing together, each aiding the other.
That sort of collaboration between the chemist and the crystallographer is very characteristic of the present state of structure studies. In the case of nucleic acid studies, for example, the organic chemist went as far as he could when he determined the precise nature of the individual nudeotide units and showed how they were joined together through the phosphate groups. He then had achieved his goal of chemical and stereochemical knowledge of the units and their mode of linkage. It remained for the X-ray crystallographer, basing his deductions on physical measurements but interpreting them, of course, in the light of all the chemical data, to deduce and prove the two-stranded helical structure of the DNA molecule. . . .
The most spectacular of the large molecule structure determinations, and surely one of the most basic interest to biology, is that of deoxyribonucleic acid; better known by its short name, DNA. The great interest in this substance results from the fact that it is this long chain molecule which, on all present evidence, constitutes the naked genetic material in every cell . . . there are two intertwined helices, formed of alternating phosphate and pentose sugar groups, linked together with side groups, or bases. There are (at least) four kinds of these bases, of which two, adenine and guanine, are purines, while the other two, cytosine and thymine, are pyrimidines. When guanine is attached to one helix at a certain point, it always pairs with cytosine on the other helix; and similarly adenine always pairs with thymine. Thus the sequence of bases on one

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

helix determines the sequence on the other. But the over-all sequence of bases, as found on one molecule of DNA, is by no means the same as that to be found on another molecule, at least unless these two come out of the same living organism. For it is precisely the sequence of these bases which is, by the present view, supposed to contain--and at duplication to pass on--genetic information.
Thus it seems very likely that this beautiful helical molecule, whose long chain pieces inside cells have molecular weights in the millions, is the really critical link between chemistry and biology. It is a pure chemical; but there is strong reason to believe that it is the special chemical which possesses two capabilities necessary for life--the capability of causing itself to be duplicated, and the capability of storing and passing on, to the next generation, a vast amount of genetic information.
A single chromosome of a cell is now thought to consist of about ten million turns of DNA, and there is evidence that what we normally call a gene corresponds to only a few base-pairs along the double helix.
If indeed the genetic constitution of an organism depends fundamentally upon the order along one of the two DNA helices of the four bases A (adenine), G (guanine), C (cytosine), and T (thymine), then at a single base point the question is: which one of the letters A, G, C, or T is to be written down. This requires two simple either-or choices; that is, shall we pick a purine or a pyrimidine, and having settled that, shall we pick the first or the second of the kind? In the language of modern information theory, in which one "bit" of information corresponds to a single either-or or yes-no choice, one would say that it requires two bits of information to decide upon a single one of the chemical cross-links between the two DNA helices: and since there are roughly nine cross-links per turn, a chromosome has

161
something of the order of one hundred million of these cross-links, each of which requires for its specification two bits of information.
We all know, from playing twenty questions, that it is usually possible to single one out of a vast array of possibilities by asking "yes or no?" only twenty times. A chromosome is able, so to speak, to answer such a yes-or-no question some two hundred million times, which corresponds roughly to the total information stored in about one thousand large textbooks.
How DNA, this master chemical of life, duplicates itself, how the genetic information is coded on to the sequence of bases, and how it is read off, are massive questions for the future.
A large part of the credit for this DNA structure story goes to J. D. Watson and F. H. Crick. But, as they have been the first to emphasize, they utilized the superb X-ray diffraction data of M. H. F. Wilkins, Rosalind Franklin, and their co-workers at King's College, London; the basic structural concept of the a-helix which owes so much to Pauling and Corey and to various other scientists back to the pioneer ideas of Astbury; and a mass of essential knowledge built up, step by patient step, by the various organic and biochemists who have worked on nucleic acids. This is a proud example of the fact that it is, after all, within the capabilities of men to deal successfully with organized complexity.
In this brief sketch we have by no means surveyed the entire range of structure studies. Much as we now know, it remains a startling challenge that it has as yet not been possible to determine the complete structure of a single protein. "The proteins, as the name implies, are of first importance in the structure of living matter. No living cell is without them, and any discussion of biological ultrastructure must inevitably start with a consideration of the structure of the proteins." . . .

162 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

We are, at this moment, just on the threshold of what should be a quite new era in biology, in that we are just now gaining the first knowledge of the threedimensional structure of a protein. . . . At the present time it seems most hopeful that we will, over the next decade or so, have deeper and much more extensive and explicit information about protein structure; and that this new information will open vast new opportunities for understanding human health and disease. This new knowledge should contribute in a most significant way to certain of the large medical problems which now confront our society, such as the degenerative diseases of later life, circulatory and cardiac disorders, mental abnormalities, as well as certain less acute but widespread and sometimes disabling handicaps such as allergies. Deeper knowledge of protein structure should permit an understanding of enzyme action, with all that this implies. It will open new vistas in genetics, both in the area of urgent human problems and in the universally important area of world-wide food production. In addition to these tangible benefits, moreover, such advances in a broader understanding of the living world would form, from every intellectual and aesthetic point of view, a worthy and satisfying response of man to the challenge of nature.
For centuries it has been considered that physical nature is orderly, that it is subject to discoverable laws, and that it may be brought under a considerable degree of control through the study of its problems of simplicity and its problems of disorganized complexity. But it has

not only been recognized that the phenomena of life present problems of organized complexity; it has also been considered by many that these phenomena of life, are, in some dark and foreboding way, irrational. Indeed, some have gone even further, and have believed that vital phenomena are not only inaccessible to scientific investigation, but are improper and impious objects of any such attempt. This is an old attitude, which centuries ago forced the Italian anatomists to steal corpses in order to carry out their studies.
Even during the magnificent progress made in the last century by medical sciences, there continued the attitude that certain gross and relatively simple disorders of man were analyzable and curable; but that man as a conceiving, childbearing, thinking, remembering, behaving, growing, and finally dying organism presented problems that were in large part outside the range of rational analysis. This last quarter century has seen a considerable reversal of this view.
We can be well satisfied if this Program in Experimental Biology of the Rockefeller Foundation has helped in a small way to demonstrate that the living world, in its most intimate details, exhibits discoverable rationality and orderly beauty; and that the tools of science are just as effective here as they have proved to be in the purely physical world. Indeed one no longer wishes to insist that man is alien to the universe in which he exists. It involves no belittlement of his higher self to recognize that his body is brother to the molecule and the star.

