Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Some relations between thyroid disease and genetics
Sidney C. Werner
To cite this article: Sidney C. Werner (1957) Some relations between thyroid disease and genetics, Eugenics Quarterly, 4:1, 30-35, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1957.9987306 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1957.9987306
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:24

SOME RELATIONS BETWEEN THYROID DISEASE AND GENETICS*
SIDNEY C. WERNER
Department of Medicine Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons and the Presbyterian Hospital in the City of New York

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

T goiter. The hypothyroid group is cate-

X HE ROLE OF GENE-SPECIFIC ELEMENTS 111
thyroid disease has been subjected to critical analysis by many geneticists. There is still lack of uniformity of opinion about ,

gorized in many ways, according to etiology, pathology, age of onset, or a mixture of these when feasible.

some aspects of the problem (1,2a), despite general agreement that genetic factors seem Question of a Unified Schema to be involved. Disagreement exists as to for Thyroid Disease

whether one or two genes may be involved, A question of pertinence to the geneticist

and as to whether such genes are recessive is whether thyroid disease includes a num-

or dominant, of high or of low penetrance. ber of discrete disorders or represents only

It is not the purpose of the present paper the varied manifestations of a single dis-

to pursue this analysis further. Progress order. This latter possibility is sometimes

must come from further study by experts expressed by the slogan that "hyperplasia

in this field. Rather, this presentation has leads to neoplasia." According to such a

been designed to summarize those aspects schema:

of thyroid disease and physiology which may bear upon the making of such an analysis, or which may otherwise be of interest to the geneticist.
Classification of Thyroid Disease Thyroid disease is generally divided func-

Thyroid cancer

and adenoma Nontoxic nodular/'1

/" goiter

Nontoxic diffuse

Toxic nodular

goiter

goiteri

Toxic diffuse

goiteri

tionally, according to whether the patient

is euthyroid, hyperthyroid, or hypothyroid It is well known, for example, that en-

(3). These categories are then subdivided demic goiter, due presumably to iodine

on a pathological basis. The euthyroid want, begins as a diffuse process. There

group comprises those patients with non- follows the cycle of hyperplasia and invo-

toxic diffuse goiter, nontoxic nodular goiter, lution described by Marine (4) ending ulti-

thyroid cancer, and most instances of thy- mately in nodular goiter. If iodine is made

roiditis. Nontoxic goiter may be further available, there may be sudden onset of

classified into endemic or sporadic, congenital or juvenile subgroups. Hyperthyroidism is represented by 2 pathological entities, toxic diffuse goiter and toxic nodular
*Some of the work from this laboratory cited in the paper was aided by grants A-8 (C7) and A-1233, Division of Arthritis and Metabolism, National Institutes of Health.

1 Whether toxic diffuse goiter arises from antecedent nontoxic diffuse goiter in non-endemic are; or whether the disorder is toxic from inception is an open question; probably the latter view is correct. It is also unsettled whether toxic nodular goiter is primarily toxic diffuse goiter with incidental nontoxic nodularity, as seems to be the case from radioautographic studies, or is a separate entity as seems to be the case from clinical behavior (3).

30

31

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

hyperthyroidism, the "Jod Basedow" of the German school (5).
Experimentally, the sequence has been studied further. Mice have been given antithyroid drugs chronically. They develop initially a diffuse hyperplasia of the thyroid and then nodularity of the gland (6). Morris transplanted such nodules into other mice maintained on antithyroid drug. After several generations, he found that the transplants became autonomous and truly neoplastic. This suggests that persistent hyperplasia had indeed led to neoplasia. Cancer has also been produced in the thyroid of rats given propylthiouracil therapy for several years (7). The block to hormonal synthesis by the gland causes a decrease in circulating thyroid hormone, compensatory hypersécrétion of pituitary thyrotropin, and as a result, protracted stimulation of the thyroid.
Somewhat similar observations have been made in the young of maternal mice given 1-131 near term (8). The isotope crosses the placenta and is taken up by the fetal thyroid which in turn becomes injured by radiation effect. As the young become adults, nontoxic nodules, benign thyroid adenomas and pre-cancerous Hurthle cell infiltration of the thyroid appear, presumably from continued thyrotropic stimulation. In congenital goiter in man, the seemingly large diffuse gland is almost invariably found on pathological examination to contain nodules, frequently adenomas, and occasionally papillary change (9).
Thus, the experimental data fit with a unified schema for thyroid disease, at least of the nontoxic variety. On the other hand, clinical studies lead to the viewpoint that thyroid cancer is cancer from its inception and not a development of diffuse or nodular goiter (10).
Some Clinical Pitfalls in the Pedigree Method
Apart from the obvious meaning to the geneticist of the studies just presented,

there is another lesson involved. Pedigrees in nontoxic thyroid disorders are subject to great errors unless the disease of the index case and his relatives was established by operation and pathological examination of the tissue obtained. Clinical diagnoses or hearsay evidence may be inaccurate and misleading.
Also open to question is information about the functional status of the gland in thyroid disease, namely, whether the goiter is toxic or nontoxic. Apart from the inherent difficulties in diagnosis, the life history of thyroid disease becomes important in this regard. Nontoxic goiter may later become toxic, and toxic goiter may subside spontaneously to reactivate after a time, or to enter sustained spontaneous remission. Both circumstances may lead to errors in the pedigree.
At the present time, some of the newer test procedures make possible a more accurate diagnosis of the functional status of the thyroid than was possible in earlier studies. The use of radioiodine in uptake and labelled hormonal release procedures, as well as the chemical determination of the level of serum precipitable (protein bound) iodine have greatly increased diagnostic efficiency. Still more specific for hyperthyroidism has been the triiodothyronine suppression test (11). This latter derives from experimental studies which revealed that the normal pituitary thyroid relation is disrupted in hyperthyroidism, (12). Thus, an excess of thyroid hormone administered to healthy subjects suppresses release of thyrotropin by the pituitary. As a consequence, activity of the thyroid decreases, with a sharp drop in 1-131 uptake. In hyperthyroid patients, however, no suppression of uptake results even when doses are given which are sufficient to produce drastic symptoms of thyrotoxicosis (13).
In hyperthyroidism in remission, either spontaneously or after definitive therapy, the abnormal response to triiodothyronine administration may persist for some years, although the response reverts to normal in

32 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

the majority after 5 years of euthyroidism (10). It is of interest in this connection that Ingbar and associates failed to demonstrate an abnormal response to triiodothyronine in the relatives of patients with hyperthyroidism (15). On the other hand, they found that the carrier proteins for thyroxine had a decreased binding capacity in both the patients and their euthyroid relatives.
Triiodothyronine fails to suppress 1-131 uptake in 1 of 4 patients with nontoxic nodular goiter. Such patients could well be in a pre-hyperthyroid phase, since the life history of the "hot" nodule suggests that hypersécrétion is its ultimate goal (16). It is of interest in this connection that Martin and Fisher could obtain no incontrovertible evidence of the action of a recessive gene in toxic nodular goiter although they found such for toxic diffuse goiter (17).
Most genetic studies of toxic goiter reveal that some of the relatives of the index case are said to have nontoxic goiter and some hypothyroidism. It is important to stress that the inherent errors in the diagnosis of hyperthyroidism apply perhaps even more strongly to hypothyroidism. Such diagnoses in the past, short of frank myxedema, must be regarded with caution.
It is thus clear that pedigree data from the past and the conclusions drawn therefrom may not be satisfactory. Perhaps a current-day reappraisal of the problem is in order, employing series of patients scrupulously screened by modern techniques.
Enzymatic Defects in Cretinism and Congenital Goiter
The mechanisms responsible for the production of cretinism and congenital goiter are slowly being elaborated. The suggestion recently made by several groups (1820) seems to be increasingly confirmed that enzymatic defects might be responsible for at least some of these disorders. This possibility was expressed earlier by Gates in his text (1).

The synthesis of thyroid hormone can be outlined as a series of steps: accumulation and trapping of iodide ion; oxidation of the ion to a form which reacts with tyrosine to form mono- and diiodotyrosine; and finally coupling of diiodotyrosine to yield thyroxine. Iodination is thought to occur in the aminoacids of already formed protein rather than in free amino acids which are later combined into protein. Deiodination of these compounds also occurs: at the thyroxine level to form triiodothyronine, and at the diiodotyrosine level to form monoiodotyrosine and iodide ion. However, an enzyme for deiodination of thyroxine has not been found in the thyroid itself but only peripherally, whereas raonoand diiodotyrosine are deiodinated both in the gland and peripherally.
At present patients with cretinism and congenital goiter have been identified with defects in trapping of iodide, in dehalogenation of mono- and diiodotyrosines, and in coupling of diiodotyrosine. These defects are presumably due to absence of the enzymes responsible for these processes. Familial accumulation is observed in the histories of some of these patients, and in these a gene-controlled basis for the errors of metabolism is implied (21).
In 1950, Stanbury and Hedge encountered a goitrous cretin with an unusually high uptake of 1-131 by the gland (22). However, the trapped iodine failed to leave the gland. The iodine was proven to be trapped but not bound because it was discharged by the gland upon the administration of thiocyanate ion. Stanbury tested the 3 siblings of this member of the family and found the same defect in all.
In 1953, McGirr and Hutchison (18) and Hubble (20) demonstrated a rapid turnover of 1-131 in patients with goiter and cretinism. They were at that time unable to identify the compounds secreted, although they lately have reported the presence of mono- and diiodotyrosine in the serum of one of their patients (23) ; or the abnormal mechanism responsible for their

33

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

release. More recently, Stanbury and group studied a family of Dutch adults and demonstrated that mono- and diiodotyrosine were present in their sera (24). Some of these were goitrous cretins, some simply goitrous. By using 1-131 labelled diiodotyrosine, these workers were able to demonstrate that very limited deiodination of this material took place, either peripherally as occurred readily in normal subjects, or in the thyroid (25). Thus at least a partial explanation of the mechanism responsible for the disorder in this group appears to be limited dehalogenase activity within the thyroid and peripherally.
While this work was going on, a 5-yearold mildly hypothyroid colored girl with a large vascular goiter, and a family history of goiter in a cousin, was seen in our clinic (9). The serum was found to contain both mono- and diiodotyrosine. Active dehalogenation of diiodotyrosine was readily demonstrable in gland and periphery. Following a labeling dose of 1-131, the thyroid was found to contain mostly labeled mono- and diiodotyrosine and very little thyroxine. These findings suggested that a defect in the coupling of diiodotyrosine was present, possibly due to an enzymatic failure. Thus thyroxine could not be formed, and the excess of diiodotyrosine was discharged into the circulation. Stanbury and group on indirect evidence made a similar surmise in another patient (26).
Recently a cretin with markedly delayed growth and a cretinoid adult with failure of sexual muturation have been shown in our laboratory to have circulating iodoproteins as the defect (27). No definite family history was obtainable to establish the abnormality in other members of the family.
Genetic Implications of 1-131 Therapy for Thyroid Disease
Hyperthyroidism and thyroid cancer are successfully treated by 1-131. This isotope emits both beta and gamma rays which provide radiation effect. Since the isotope is

largely accumulated by the thyroid, most
of this effect is limited to the gland. How-
ever, a certain amount of general body radi-
ation results, as well as specific organ radi-
ation, such as to the gonads.
Glass has estimated the effect of radi-
ation from 1-131 therapy upon the muta-
tion rate in the offspring of the population
as a whole, and in the progeny of the par-
ticular patient (28). From a liberal esti-
mate of the number of patients of child-
bearing age who might be treated annually
and from the dosages in current use, he has
estimated that the increase in mutations
from this cause will have virtually no mean-
ing for the population at large. To quote
him:
"The average gonadal dose can be estimated to be about 6 rads per person from data presented at the recent A. E. C. sponsored conference on 1-131 therapy. This indicates an equivalence of about 1 rad to the gonads from 1 millicurie of radioiodine administered. The effect upon the population as a whole must be regarded as negligible because of the small number of individuals being treated. Thus one can assume that 100,000 persons under 40 years of age are given radioiodine in the course of a human generation, a number which is much greater than actually now given such treatment. The product would be 1500 mutations scattered in the descendants of these 100,000 persons in a population oí 100 million persons per generation. The permissible dose set by the National Academy of Science Committee, 10 r, administered to the entire population would result in 5 million mutations. The ratio works out 0.03 per cent or 3/10,000 of what might be considered a critical limit. Even if 100,000 persons were treated per year, this would produce only 45,000 mutations, which works out at 0.9 per cent of the permissible limit. Since the administration of radioiodine is only one of many sources of radiation exposure to which the population is subject, I would think personally that this latter level would begin to be of some significance.
If the administered dose averaged 36 rads, this would about equal the dose that would double the spontaneous mu-

34 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

tation rate from all sources, including the background radiation."
However thesituation for the individual patient is somewhat different. As just seen from Dr. Glass' estimates, thepossibilityof tangible genetic defects in the progeny of

3. WERNER, S. C., Editor, 1955. The Thyroid: A Fundamental and Clinical Text. Paul B. Hoeber, New York.
4. FRANTZ, V. K., &WERNER, S. C., 1955. The Thy.
roid: A Fundamental and Clinical Text. Paul B. Hoeber, New York. p. 278.
5. MEANS, J. H., 1948. The Thyroid and its Diseases. J. B. Lippincott Co., Philadelphia.

the 1-131 treated individual is about 1 to 2 percent (1500 mutations per 100,000 patients at risk) with the usual doses employed in the treatment of hyperthyroidism, about 10 per cent of which would appear in the first generation. Such a likelihood may besmall percentage-wise. Yet it would seem to be too large to warrant 1-131 therapy in the younger age groups when only uncomplicated hyperthyroidism is being treated, and not cancer. Here surgery is available, is effective, andcarries nosuch

6. MORRIS, H. P., & GREEN, C. D., 1951. The
role of thiouracil in theinduction, growth and transplantability of mouse thyroid tumors. Science 114: 44.
7. PURVES, H. D., & GRIESBACH, W. E., 1947.
Studies on experimental goiter; thyroid carcinoma in rats treated with thiourea. Brit. J. Exp. Path. 28:46.
8. SPEERT, H., QUIMBV, E. H., & WERNER, S. C.,
1951. Radioiodine uptake by the fetal mouse thyroid and resultant effects in later life. Surgery, Gynecol. & Obstet. 93:230.
9. WERNER, S. C., BLOCK, R J., MANDL, R. H., &
KASSENAAR, A. A. H. Pathogenesis of a case of congenital goiter with abnormally high SPI levels and with mono- and diiodotyrosine in the serum. J. Clin. Endoc. & Metab. In Press.

genetic risks.

SUMMARY

10. SLOAN, L. W., & FRANTZ, V. K., 1955. Werner,
S. C.: The Thyroid: A Fundamental and Clinical Text. Paul B. Hoeber, New York.
Ch 24, P. 394.

11. WERNER, S. C., 1955. A new and simple test

1. An analysis has been made of some of

for hyperthyroidism employing 1-triiodothy-

the facets of thyroid disease which bear

ronine and the 24 hour 1-131 uptake method. Bull. N. Y. Acad. Med. 3 1 : 137.

upon the field of genetics. It has been 12. WERNER, S. C., SPOONER, M., & HAMILTON, H.,

concluded that inaccuracies in clinical

1955. Further evidence that Graves' disease is

diagnosis may have affected the value

hyperthyroidism and not hyperpituitarism: effects of triiodothyronine and sodium iodide.

of many of the pedigree studies ofthe

J. Clin. Endoc. 1 5 : 715.

past in this field. A reappraisal of the

13. WERNER, S. C. &HAMILTON, H., 1953. Pituitary-
thyroid relations. Lancet 1 : 796.

subject in series of patients screened 14. WERNER, S. C., 1956. Response to triiodothy-

with modern techniques may be inor-

ronine as index of persistence of disease inthe thyroid remnant of patients in remission from

der. hyperthyroidism. J. Clin. Invest. 3 5 : 57.

2. Certain enzymic failures in cretinism and congenital goiter have been recently demonstrated and suggest the possibility of a gene-controlled basis forthese

15. INCBAR, S. H., FREINKEL, N., DOWLING, J. T., &
KUMAGAI, L. F., 1956. Abnormalities of iodine metabolism in euthyroid relatives of patients with Graves' disease. J. Clin. Invest. 3 5 : 714.
16. MEANS, J. H., 1954. Lectures on the Thyroid. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

defects.

17. MARTIN, L. & FISHER, R. A., 1945. The heredi-
tary and familial aspects of exophthalmic

3. Theuse of 1-131 therapeutically in hy- goitre. Quart. J. Med. 3 8 : 207.

perthyroidism is gradually being extended to patients of childbearingage. The genetic implications are discussed, and it is concluded on these grounds that 1-131 treatment in this age group is probably unjustifiable.

18. MCGIRR, E. M. & HUTCHINSON, J. H., 1953.
Sporadic cretinism with goiter. Lancet 1 : 1117.
19. WILKINS, L., CLAYTON, G. W. & BERTHRONG, M.,
1954. Development of goiters in cretins without iodine deficiency: hypothyroidism due to apparent inability of the thyroid gland to synthesize hormone. Pediatrics 1 3 : 235. 20. HUBBLE, D., 1953. Familial cretinism. Lancet 1: 1112.

REFERENCES
1. GATES, J., 1946. Human Genetics. Vol. I. Macmillan Co., New York.
2a. SORSBY, A., 1953. Clinical Genetics. Butterworth, London.
2. KEMP, T., 1951. Genetics and Disease. Ejnar Munksgaard, Copenhagen.

21. STANBURY, J. B. & QUERIDO, A., 1956. Genetic
and environmental factors in cretinism: a classification. J. Clin. Endoc. & Metab. 1 6 : 1522.
22. STANBURY, J. B., & HEDGE, A. N., 1950. A study
of a family of goitrous cretins. J. Clin. Endoc. 10: 1471.
23. MCGIRR, E. M. & HUTCHINSON, J. H., 1956. Spo-
radic cretinism with goiter. Lancet 1: 106.

35-

24. STANBURY, J. B., KASSENAAR, A. A. H. & MEIJER.
J. W. A., 1956. The metabolism of iodotyrosines. II. The metabolism of mono- and diiodotyrosine in certain patients with familial goiter. J. Clin. Endoc. & Metab. 16: 848.
25. QUERIDO, A., STANBURY, J. B., KASSENAAR,
A. A. H. & MEIJER, J. W. A., 1956., The metabolism of iodotyrosines. III. Diiodotyrosine deshalogenating activity of human thyroid tissue. J. Clin. Endoc. & Metab. 16: 1096.
26. STANBURY, J. B., OHELA, K. & PITT-RIVERS, R.,
1955. The metabolism of iodine in 2 goitrous

cretins compared with that in 2 patients rereceiving methimazole. J. Clin. Endoc. & Metab. 15: 54.
27. WERNER, S. C., BLOCK, R. J. & MANDL, R. H..
Circulating iodoproteins in a non-goitrous, adult with primary amenorrhea, bony deformities, normal SPI and 1-131 uptake. Submitted; for publication.
28. GLASS, J. B., Nov. 9, 1956. A.E.C. sponsored: conference, 10 years of 1-131 therapy. Argonne. Hospital and Univ. of Chicago.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

