Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
In memoriam: Maurice A. Bigelow
Paul Popenoe
To cite this article: Paul Popenoe (1955) In memoriam: Maurice A. Bigelow, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:1, 7-8, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987213 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987213
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

I N MEMORIAM
MAURICE A. BIGELOW
Maurice A. Bigelow passed away at the age of eighty-two on January 6, 1955, in Peekskill, N. Y. Dr. Bigelow was Honorary Secretary of the American Eugenics Society and a Director at the time of his death. He had been President, Secretary, and Managing Editor of the Society at various times in the last two decades. The American eugenics movement owes him an unpayable debt for his devotion to the cause of eugenics in the years when organization was lacking. The following tribute was written by Dr. Paul Popenoe, a long-time associate of Dr. Bigelow and a pioneer himself in eugenics, who gave Dr. Bigelow faithful cooperation through the years in his successful efforts to keep the Society alive.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

The death of Maurice A. Bigelow takes one of the last pre-Mendelian students of heredity and one of the last generalists in the field. Specialists are now in control, and few college graduates today ever get the firm grasp of the broad principles of evolution that was given a half century or more ago by such teachers as David Starr Jordan, and that Dr. Bigelow himself always tried to give. With the increasing amount to be learned, it is becoming almost impossible for anyone to be a generalist; yet that point of view is needed more than ever. Perhaps undergraduate courses might at least be expected to provide this foundation, though few of them do so.
In his early life, Dr. Bigelow worked on such subjects as the development of Crustacea and he always had the greatest respect for research, but his life work was largely the development of methods of teaching rather than research. Here again his influence will be missed. He had nothing but contempt for those whose teaching was not tied to first-hand experience in the field or laboratory, and I well remember his indignation when he learned that one teacher's college was giving a Ph.D. in biology to pedagogues whose training included not a single hour in the laboratory.
He was a good field naturalist, and much

of his activity during the first decade of this century was devoted to promoting that subject. He founded (1905) and edited the Nature Study Review and wrote several books in collaboration with his wife. But his wide interests and practical concern with human betterment quickly led him to concentrate on the application of biological knowledge to immediate human problems. His pioneer work in sex education was so sound that his book on that subject, first appearing in 1916, was published in the last of its revisions not many years ago and is still quoted. Public health, social hygiene, education for family life, and eugenics all commanded his support and his productive collaboration. During his forty years at Teachers College, Columbia University, as Professor of Biology and Dean of the School of Practical Arts, he was in a position to influence the education of thousands of persons. Although most of his time was taken up by administration, he insisted on teaching some courses himself, particularly human heredity, and I felt it a very genuine compliment when he entrusted this favorite of his to me during the summer of 1927 and a number of succeeding years.
Dr. Bigelow was always receptive to new ideas and eager to examine anything brought forward as a new fact, but he sub-

7

8 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

jected everything relentlessly to scrutiny from the biological point of view, and to the tests of logic and common sense. He was therefore not at all partisan or doctrinaire but eclectic and conservative to a degree that antagonized cultists. I think it might be said that he was somewhat prejudiced in favor of biologists, but even then he was picturesquely outspoken in his denunciation of what he considered superficiality and bluff. He was always for the genuine as against the sham, for the biological fact as against metaphysical speculation, for the logical and proved as against the hypotheses so recklessly thrown out as facts by psychoanalysts, and for observation as against mere theory. This last point is well illustrated by his little book on adolescence (1924) which topic at that time was still viewed largely in the light of extreme theories set forth by G. Stanley Hall and his followers as well as by the Freudians. "Don't take anybody's word for it," Dr. Bigelow said in effect. "Just look around and see for yourself." And he went on to show that instead of a period of sensational "storm and stress," adolescence was commonly a quiet and normal development through which boys and girls passed with little disturbance.
Many will remember him best as host at luncheons in the Faculty Club where he usually monopolized the conversation. He always enjoyed puncturing myths (particularly those that were very dignified and academically respectable) with the sharp point of an anecdote or a fact. Those who were invading his beloved field of human ecology with no more preparation than the valor of ignorance were the particular object of his barbs. After that, he liked to turn the conversation to his farm up the Hudson, to his orchard, his flowers, his dogs, and the woodchucks that were his perpetual enemies.

Dr. Bigelow was always ready to give his time and influence to any movement that he thought useful without asking for recognition or "What is there in it for me?" It was perhaps characteristic that he became President of the American Eugenics Society just before the outbreak of World War II. With everyone else being called into government service, the organization had very nearly come to an end. He was determined that it must be kept going even though others favored giving up. For six years he preserved its life almost singlehanded, and at much personal expense, with such assistance as a few others could give him from a distance. Throughout, however, he was calling attention to the need of a completely new foundation under it, a foundation made up of younger men and women who would look on it as something to which they wanted to dedicate part of their lives. He had a plan (never carried out) to circularize teachers in all the colleges in North America and ask each of them to nominate at least one graduate in the past ten years who might have the understanding and enthusiasm to help create a permanent and active organization.
His own association with the eugenics movement dated almost from its beginning. His influence was always for balance, sanity, and avoidance of extremes. His long training in college administration made him unwilling to go ahead of public acceptance. He often irritated those who pushed some point of view that he thought was not based on "Human Ecology," but even those who differed with him most strongly never questioned his honest and complete devotion to social welfare and human betterment.
PAUL POPENOE
Director
American Institute of Family Relations

