Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
A reading list on eugenics
Gordon Allen M.D. , Helen Hammons , C. Nash Herndon M.D. , Clyde V. Kiser & Frank Lorimer
To cite this article: Gordon Allen M.D. , Helen Hammons , C. Nash Herndon M.D. , Clyde V. Kiser & Frank Lorimer (1957) A reading list on eugenics, Eugenics Quarterly, 4:4, 214-218, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1957.9987333 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1957.9987333
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 3
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:24

A READING LIST ON EUGENICS

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

Eugenics covers a broad field and cuts across many areas: genetics, population, marriage counseling, psychology, medicine, and so forth. Likewise its appeal is to many groups: scientists, doctors, nurses, marriage counselors, social workers, teachers, ministers, parents. Eugenics today is concerned with encouraging couples with sound intelligence, personality, and character, who can provide wholesome home influences, to have as many children as they wish. Many factors such as the cost of bringing up children and providing for their education as well as fashions in size of family sometimes influence parents directly or indirectly to have rather fewer children than they really want. Eugenic influences begin at birth and extend to the end of life.
Eugenics seeks to integrate its position with scientific findings as they become available. Today medical genetics is especially important to eugenists because new practical application here seems to be more advanced than in many of the related fields. Heredity counseling has been established in the last fifteen years as a practical way of transmitting information to people with

genetic problems. We still know very little about the inheritance of such important traits as personality and intelligence, and we don't know whether present birth rate differentials are actually dysgenic. But we do know that the quality of a population is its most important asset.
Eugenics also favors measures that may assist persons to avoid transmitting serious genetic disability to their offspring insofar as such measures are consistent with their own interests and welfare.
The following reading list has been prepared for those who want to study eugenics in general or who want to pursue a particular aspect. This list is not all-inclusive but is intended only as a useful and comprehensive reference which can be supplemented indefinitely. Many valuable references have not been included.
GORDON ALLEN, M.D.
HELEN HAMMONS
C. NASH HERNDON, M.D.
CLYDE V. KISER
FRANK LORIMER
American Eugenics Society, Inc.

GENERAL EUGENICS
Statement of Objects. The Eugenics Society, London, 1950. A discussion of the goals of the British
Eugenics Society in pamphlet form.

Eugenics Review. The Eugenics Society and Cassel and Co., Ltd., London. Semi-technical quarterly journal on eu-
genics and related fields of population and genetics.

BLACKER, C. P. Eugenics, Galton and After. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1952. A readable introduction to eugenics by
a leader in the field.

GALTON, FRANCIS. Hereditary Genius. Watts and Co., London, 1950. A new edition of classic studies by the
founder of eugenics of families in which exceptional ability has appeared.

Eugenics Quarterly. American EugenicsSociety, Inc., New York, N. Y. Semi-technical journal on eugenics and
related fields of population, family life and genetics with emphasis on medical genetics.

. Inquiries Into Human Faculty and Its Development. The Eugenics Society and J. M. Dent and Sons, London, 1951. A new edition of a classic study of hered-

214

215

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

itary characteristics with emphasis on moral and intellectual faculties.
OSBORN, FREDERICK. Preface to Eugenics. Harper and Brothers, New York, N. Y., 1951. Revised edition of a readable introduc-
tion to eugenics.
WILLIAMS, GLANVILLE. The Sanctity of Life and the Criminal Law. Alfred A. Knopf, New York, N. Y., 1957. Semi-popular examination by a jurist of
our attitudes toward birth control, sterilization, artificial insemination, abortion, suicide, and euthanasia.
GENETICS
Ada Genetica et Statistica Medica. S. Karger, Basel. Quarterly of very technical genetic and
statistical studies.
Acta Geneticae Medicae et Gemellologiae. Gregor Mendel Institute of Medical Genetics and Twin Research, Rome. Quarterly of technical twin studies writ-
ten in the language of the contributors.
American Journal of Human Genetics. American Society of Human Genetics and Williams and Wilkins Co., Baltimore, Md. Quarterly of technical research studies
with annual bibliography of current periodical publications in human genetics.
Annals of Human Genetics. Cambridge University Press, London. Quarterly journal of very technical re-
search studies.
AUERBACH, CHARLOTTE. Genetics in the Atomic Age. Essential Books, Fair Lawn, N. J., 1956. A short, popularly written book on mu-
tation and its connection with radiation and nuclear fission.
COOK, ROBERT C. Human Fertility. William Sloane Associates, New York, N. Y., 1951. A popular discussion of population
trends including dysgenic influences in the

modern world.
CROW, JAMES F. Effects of Radiation and Fallout. Public Affairs Pamphlet No. 256. Public Affairs Committee, New York, N. Y., 1957. A short and simply written discussion of
the genetic effects of radiation and fallout.
DOBZHANSKY, THEODOSIUS. Biological Basis of Human Freedom. John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, N. Y., 1956. A brief, semi-popular discussion of evo-
lution from the newer genetic viewpoint.
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION. Effect of Radiation on Human Heredity. Geneva, 1957. Technical report of a study group con-
vened by WHO together with individual papers by group members. Suggests lines of research.
FULLER, JOHN L. Nature and Nurture: A Modern Synthesis. Doubleday Papers in Psychology. Doubleday and Co., New York, N. Y., 1954. A semi-popular pamphlet which surveys
the implication for human affairs of present genetic knowledge and evaluates the nature-nurture problem.
Human Biology. Wayne University Press. Detroit, Mich. Technical quarterly on biometrics with
occasional articles on population genetics.
Journal de Ginetique Humaine. Me'de'dne et Hygiene, Geneva.
Technical research journal in French.
Journal of Heredity. American Genetic Association, Washington, D. C. A bi-monthly emphasizing animal genet-
ics, with material on human genetics. Lavishly illustrated.
LERNER, MICHAEL, I. Genetic Homeostasis. John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, N. Y., 1954. A technical exposition of the role of
genetic diversity in maintaining fitness in population and in indivduals. Li, C. C. Population Genetics. University

216 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

of Chicago Press, Chicago, 111., 1955.

Basic textbook providing thorough foun-

Textbook on statistical studies o£ gene dation in human genetics. New edition in

frequencies in populations.

preparation.

NEEL, JAMES V. and SCHULL, WILLIAM J.
Human Heredity. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 111., 1954. Very mathematical textbook with illustrative material from the Heredity Clinic at the University of Michigan.
NEWMAN, HORATIO, FREEMAN, FRANK N.,
and HOLZINGER, KARL J. Twins: A Study of Heredity and Environment. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 111., 1937. A classic study of identical and fraternal twins including identicals separated in infancy.
Proceedings of the First International Congress of Human Genetics. S. Karger, Basel, 1957. Papers given at the first international
congress devoted entirely to human genetics held in Copenhagen, August, 1956.
RACE, R. R. and SANGER, RUTH. Blood Groups in Man. Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford, Second Edition, 1950. A presentation of the blood groups from
the genetic point of view.
REED, SHELDON. Counseling in Medical Genetics. Saunders and Co., Philadelphia, Pa., 1955. A semi-popular book for the physician
and general reader with easily understood case histories.
SNYDER, LAURENCE H. and DAVID, PAUL R.
The Principles of Heredity. Heath and Co., Boston, Mass., 1957. Fifth edition of a best-seller textbook.
SORSBY, ARNOLD (Editor). Clinical Genetics. Butterworth and Co., London, and C. V. Nash and Co., St. Louis, Mo., 1953. Discussion of the medical aspects of
genetic diseases by different authorities.
STERN, CURT. Principles of Human Genetics. W. H. Freeman and Co., San Francisco, Cal., 1949.

The Biological Effects of Atomic Radiation: National Academy of Sciences and National Research Council, Washington, D. C, 1956. Non-technical summary reports of the
Committees appointed by the National Academy of Sciences to study the effects of radiation. Free.
The Hazards to Man of Nuclear and Allied Radiations. Medical Research Council. Her Majesty's Stationery Office, London, 1956. A complete survey of the dangers of
radiation with a discussion of probable effects of doubling the present mutation rate by a committee of British scholars.
The Nature and Transmission of the Genetic and Cultural Characteristics of Human Populations. Milbank Memorial Fund, New York, N. Y., 1957. Papers presented at the 1957 Annual
Conference of the Milbank Memorial Fund.
SCHEINFELD, AMRAM. The New You and
Heredity. Lippincott and Co., Philadelphia, 1950. A revision of the author's popularly written You and Heredity.
POPULATION
BROWN, HARRISON. The Challenge of Man's Future. The Viking Press, Inc., New York, N. Y., 1954. A popularly written survey of the prob-
able alternative developments of population growth and resource consumption.
ELDRIDGE, HOPE. Population Policies: A Survey of Recent Developments. International Union for the Scientific Study of Population, Washington, D. C, 1954. A survey of recent developments in some
of the main areas of population policy made under the auspices of the International Union for the Scientific Study of Population and UNESCO.

217

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

GLASS, DAVID, V. and GREBENIK, E. The
Trend and Pattern of Fertility in Great Britain. Papers of the Royal Commission on Population, Vol. VI. Her Majesty's Stationery Office, London, 1954. A report on trends and differentials in the fertility of marriage cohorts of women based on the Family Census of 1946.
LEWIS-FANING, E. Family Limitation and Its Influence on Human Fertility During the Past Fifty Years. Royal Commission on Population, His Majesty's Stationery Office, London, 1949. Report of an investigation carried out by
the Council of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists.
LORIMER, FRANK et al. Culture and Human Fertility. Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization, Zurich, 1954. Study of the relation of fertility to social
organization for non-industrial and preindustrial societies.
Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly. Milbank Memorial Fund, New York, N. Y. Reports of research in public health,
mental health, and population.
News of Population and Birth Control. International Planned Parenthood Federation, London. Short, popularly written bulletin with
current items on population problems and birth control. Published ten times a year.
Population. Institut National D'£tudes De'mographiques. Paris. A quarterly with very comprehensive
coverage of research on population in French, including extensive critical bibliographies.
Population Bulletin. Population Reference Bureau, Washington, D. C. Popularly written, brief discussions of
current population problems. Published eight times a year.
Population Index. Office of Population Research, Princeton University, Princeton, N. J. and Population Association of America, Inc.

Exceptionally complete quarterly listing of population materials with annotations and introductory notes on population. Population Studies. The Population In-
vestigation Committee, London School of Economics, London. Technical journal of research studies on population issued three times a year. THOMPSON WARREN S. Population Problems. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, N. Y. 1953.
Fourth edition of a classic textbook covering population problems. UNITED NATIONS. Proceedings of the World
Population Conference, 1954: Summary Reports and Papers, Vols. 1-6. Department of Economic and Social Affairs, New York, N. Y., 1955. Brief reports by Chairmen of the Sessions (Summary Reports) and complete papers (Vols. 1-6) presented at the World Population Conference held in Rome, August 31September 10, 1954.
The Determinants and Consequences of Population Trends. Department of Social Affairs, New York, N. Y., 1953. A summary of findings on the relationship between population changes and economic and social changes. WHELPTON, PASCAL, K. Cohort Fertility: Native White Women in the United States. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N. J., 1954.
A technical study of the fertility of women which employs a new method for measuring fertility.
and KISER, CLYDE V. (Editors). Social and Psychological Factors Affecting Fertility. Milbank Memorial Fund, Vol. 1, 1946; Vol. II, 1950; Vol. Ill, 1950; Vol. IV, 1954; Vol. V (in preparation). Reports of an investigation of social and psychological factors in fertility. World Population and Resources: A Report by PEP (Political and Economic Planning), London, 1955. Semi-popular survey of resources of world

218 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

in relation to expected growth of population over the next few decades.
PSYCHOLOGY AND THE FAMILY
BECKER, HOWARD, and HILL, REUBEN. Fam-
ily, Marriage, and Parenthood. Heath and Co., Boston, Mass., 1955. Second edition of a symposium on the family. Family Life. American Institute of Family Relations, Los Angeles, Calif. A short and exceptionally readable bulletin including material on heredity from time to time.
GLICK, PAUL. American Families. John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, N. Y., 1957. One of a series of Census monographs
with nation-wide information on marriage, family composition, and other important aspects of family life.
Marriage and Family Living. National Council on Family Relations, Minneapolis, Minn. Technical research journal of studies on
the family.
MUDD, EMILY, and KRICH, ARON (Editors). Man and Wife: A Sourcebook on Family Attitudes, Sexual Behavior and Marriage Counseling. W. W. Norton and Co., Inc., New York, N. Y., 1957. Covers developmental and cultural influ-
ences on men and women in marriage and how to help develop competence in interpersonal relations.

NISBET, JOHN D. Family Environment: A Direct Effect of Family Size on Intelligence. The Eugenics Society and Cassel and Co. Ltd., London, 1953. A survey of intelligence and family size.
STONE, ABRAHAM, and LEVINE, LENA. The
Premarital Consultation. Grune and Stratton, New York, N. Y., 1956. A practical and detailed outline for the premarital interview for physicians and professional counselors.
TERMAN, LEWIS, M. Genetic Studies of Genius: Mental and Physical Traits of a Thousand Gifted Children. Stanford University Press, Stanford, Cal., 1925. A classic study of gifted children.
The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science. "Toward Family Stability." 1950. A series of essays on aspects of the family.
The Trend of Scottish Intelligence: A Comparison of the 1947 and 1932 Surveys of the Intelligence of Eleven-Itear-Old Pupils. Publications of the Scottish Council for Research in Education, University of London Press, London, 1949. Compares the two Scottish studies of
intelligence of selected groups of children.
TYLER, LEONA E. The Psychology of Individual Differences. Appleton-CenturyCrofts, Inc., New York, N. Y., 1956. Second edition of one of the few text-
books in psychology which emphasize genetics.

