Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Genetic signposts of preventive medicine
H. Warner Kloepfer
To cite this article: H. Warner Kloepfer (1960) Genetic signposts of preventive medicine, Eugenics Quarterly, 7:2, 69-76, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1960.9987433 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1960.9987433
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

Vol. 7, No. 2, June, 1960

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

GENETIC SIGNPOSTS OF PREVENTIVE MEDICINE
H. WARNER KLOEPFER
Tulane University School of Medicine

ALTHOUGH IMPLICATIONS ARENOT clear,
one often hears the expression "Life begins at forty." In genetics the introduction of new terms to represent the units of material that are transferred from generation to generation seems to begin at forty-three or forty-four, whether or not new terms be signposts of preventive medicine. Mendel (1866), at the age of 44 years, used the term "factor" to describe what is transferred from parents to offspring but Johanssen (1909), 43 years later, introduced the word "gene" to represent the same entity. Forty-four more years passed and Watson and Crick (1953a, 1953b) reported units of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) to be the basis of heredity. The location of DNA is still in the chromosome as was the "factor" (after 1902) and the "gene," but the new term has a definable structure and today biochemical structures command universal attention. The new science of "deoxyribonucleicacidology" may still be the study of hereditary factors and genes, but without uncomplimentary stigmata such as "fate," "taint," and "bad" heredity. The

biochemists have a reputation for doing something about their initial monumental discoveries. The discovery of the general molecular structure of vitamins and hormones was followed by the discovery of molecular structures of specific vitamins and hormones. The discovery of specific chemical structures paved the way for large-scale production of numerous vitamins and hormones for distribution through pharmaceutical supply outlets of all kinds. New industries came into being and the expected life span was extended.
Now a new effort and a new hope are in the making. A gene (DNA particle) looks something like a flexible ladder which has been twisted to include 10 rungs within each complete spiral. Just as the uniqueness of each word in the dictionary is dependent upon a specific linear arrangement of 26 possible letters of an alphabet, the uniqueness of each DNA ladder is dependent upon the specific linear arrangement of 4 possible letters (each rung in the ladder being one of four possible pairs of known amino acids: adenine-thymine, cystine-

69

70 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

guanine, thymine-adenine, and guaninecystine). Learning to spell with only a four-letter alphabet may seem easy and appear to limit the number of possible words (genes), but one must not forget that each "word" contains about 10,000 letters. Can the biochemist discover the structure of specific DNA particles associated with specific deleterious mutations and their normal alíeles? Can these particles eventually be synthesized one by one and used therapeutically to control the thousand or more genetic conditions caused by pathological genes (pathogènes)? Can genetic conditions be prevented by applying the artificially prepared DNA at the right time and by the right portal of entry into the body? Can normal metabolism be maintained over critical periods in the life cycle of the individual? Can the occurrence of the most dreaded hereditary diseases be avoided? The geneticist has unlimited faith that the biochemist can solve eventually the problem of DNA "spelling" and synthesis.
Before facing the signposts of the future, the geneticist might profit from a look at the fruits of a century of medical microbiological research which began soon after the improvement of the compound microscope. The results of this research have been very impressive: the accumulated knowledge is so extensive that a considerable fraction of the fouryear medical curriculum is needed to communicate this progress to a medical student. Patients take for granted today that they need not die from typhoid fever, pneumonia, diphtheria, and the various other communicable diseases which were once high on the list of most dreaded diseases. However, during the period of time in which medical research effort was being concentrated on how to control non-genetic conditions, no com-

parable effort was being expended to control the hereditary diseases. It took half a century for genetics to be born, and during the next half century it was common practice to exclude the appointment of geneticists from medical school faculties. During this period it was popular to "prove" that conditions are not hereditary and to discredit even the possible existence of genes. However, as the non-hereditary diseases were removed from the category of the most dreaded diseases, genetic conditions such as cancer, muscular dystrophy and certain neurological, psychiatric, and cardiovascular problems became increasingly a focus of genetic research attention. (Cancer caused by a somatic mutation is genetic but not necessarily hereditary when the mutant gene is not in a potential germ cell.) .
In contrast to the past century perhaps the first reason why medical research now is being directed to the study of hereditary diseases is the fact that these conditions are now so high on the list of most dreaded diseases that they can no longer be ignored. Any particular hereditary condition may occur less than once in 10,000 individuals, though of some 400 diseases of genetic origin, 1-25 individuals would be expected to have one of these conditions. It would seem that almost every person or one of his relatives has at least one undesirable hereditary condition which impairs health and happiness.
A second possible reason why medical research is now being directed to hereditary conditions could be related to the development of atomic energy. The public has learned that exposure to radiation from fall-out and from peaceful uses of atomic energy can increase the occurrence of unfavorable genetic conditions in future generations. The ge-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

neticist has been made a member of the medical research team only recently; and the fact that many medical schools have had difficulty in securing genetically trained personnel does little to reduce the level of anxiety. On the other hand, the panic reaction may in itself now be an important reason why medical schools are willing to revise their curricula and architectural plans to provide for research personnel and facilities needed to understand the major genes which cause hereditary diseases. If there is a positive correlation between the amount of research attention given a group of diseases and the ability of medical science to cure or control that group of diseases, one might predict that present efforts are only the beginning of much greater ones in the future. It should be emphasized that the new mutations arising from radiation, which cause a gene to have pathological effects, are no different in principle from the many accumulated spontaneous mutations which cause genes to have pathological effects; but radiation accelerates the rate of their production.
A third factor which probably inspired genetic research in the medical school was the discovery made by biochemists that the gene has a molecular structure. The gene can be seen through the use of X-ray diffraction and the electron microscope. Before the work of Watson and Crick a student would frequently ask after a lecture in medical genetics, "Is the gene a hypothetical imaginary something which has no actual existence?" A common answer to this question was, "Molecular structures can never be seen with the compound microscope, yet the chemist knows when a specific molecule exists. The geneticist knows that genes exist in given positions on the chromosome and he believes

71
them to have specific biochemical structure." The biochemist is a respected member of the medical research team, and when he announced that genes are biochemical entities even the reluctant medical school became willing to make a place for the geneticist on the faculty.
A fourth reason for increased interest in medical genetics research is the recent realization (Ford I960) that irregularities (aberrations) in specific human chromosomes may be observed to occur in individuals with specific congenital anomalies such as mongolism and certain types of hermaphroditism (Klinefelder's syndrome and Turner's syndrome).
A fifth reason which may make the need for genetic research more apparent is the realization (Snyder 1959) that the gene can be an important etiological factor in the causation of all human diseases including those caused by metabolic errors and communicable agents. For example, a recent preliminary progress study on the genetics of leprosy (BelknapHayes, 1960) shows that a dominant gene with possibly 3/5 penetrance could be a prerequisite to an infection by Hansen's bacillus. About one in every 20,000 individuals in the population studied seem to carry this dominant gene, and 3 out of 5 of these carriers get a clinical diagnosis of leprosy if they live until 80 years of age.
Unlike the merger of the disciplines of cytology and heredity in 1902 to form the new science of genetics which must have been "love at first sight" because the two disciplines had not been courting one another previously, merger of genetics and biochemistry in 1953 succeeded a courting that had been in progress for a long time. As a matter of fact, as long ago as 1908 Sir Archbald Garrod

72 Eugenics Quarterly-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

presented his famous Croonian Lectures on inborn errors of metabolism, in which he emphasized the fact that in four human metabolic disorders genes produce their effects through the control of specific enzymes. After extending and generalizing the ideas of Garrod, it took the winning of Nobel prizes by George W. Beadle, Joshua Lederberg, and Edward L. Tatum in 1958 to publicize further the possibilities in medical genetics. Hsia (1959) reviews 76 inborn errors of metabolism in man. Although many biochemical procedures have been used as tools by the geneticist, observations in protein chemistry and genetics followed rather independent paths until 1953, except for promising efforts in serum electrophoresis and chromatography.
The purpose of medical genetic research in the broad sense is to learn to control all pathological conditions which are caused by changes in the molecular arrangement of normal genes. These changes (mutations) sometimes behave as if a "gene deficiency" were present, although it is now well known that no mutation (pathogène) can produce an effect except by some quantitative or qualitative change in a particular enzyme. "Whether the DNA code is transferred to the enzyme by way of RNA (ribonucleic acid) or by some other media, and whether the use of an alternative biochemical pathway at times is a mechanism of apenetrance (pathogène fails to cause clinical effects) when a certain enzyme does not function, or whether unidentified genes cause apenetrance, the fact remains that normal cell function is dependent upon the interaction of a multiplicity of different enzymes. One of the purposes of biochemical medical research is to learn the molecular structure of the specific gene. Thus, it can be seen that genetic research is not

limited to the understanding of how pathological genes become distributed within families to cause undesirable conditions in certain individuals and not in others. Instead, an important purpose of human genetic research is to help the biochemist make his contribution to the eventual control of hereditary diseases at the level of the gene or only a few biochemical steps removed from this level.
Although the geneticist has the responsibility of extending basic knowledge about genes in all directions, the human geneticist has the special responsibility of describing each and every pathogène with the same degree of thoroughness that the microbiologist has described each and every agent of communicable disease.
Some of the problems of interest to the human geneticist are similar to those pursued by any type of genetic specialist, while other problems are of greater importance to the human geneticist and the clinician than to other disciplines in genetics. Since procedures used in the analysis of problems in human genetics are not based on controlled matings, generation times, etc., statistical methods of analysis (Neel-Schull, 1954) must be used which need not be employed in the studies of non-human organisms. The need for human genetic studies to extend knowledge about any given pathological gene may be determined by evaluating the completeness of answers to the following questions:
1. Among unrelated cases of a disease or medical condition encountered in a given population, situation, or clinical practice: (a) May no major gene be associated with the condition? (b) If the condition is genetic, may only one major gene be involved? (c) May more than one major gene cause the same or similar clinical stigmata?

73

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

2. If no major gene is involved: (a) is the condition heritable? (b) caused by a chromosomal aberration? (c) caused by polygenes? (d) are racial and constitutional factors associated with the condition?
3. For each major gene known to be associated with a given condition, are the clinical symptoms associated with the: (a) heterozygous genotype only (typical for dominant and sex-linked recessive genes)? (b) homozygous genotype only (typical for autosomal recessive genes)? or (c) both heterozygous and homozygous genotypes?
4. If more than one genetic entity can cause a given clinical syndrome or condition, with what frequency are the various genetic entities encountered in different populations?
5. For each major gene associated with a given clinical entity in a given population: (a) how can one detect the asymptomatic genetic carrier? (b) what is the penetrance of the gene? (c) what is the range of manifestation of clinical features among individuals sharing a common pathological genotype? (d) with what frequency are the various clinical stigmata encountered among individuals with the same genotype? (e) what is the frequency of the gene? and (f) what is the frequency of the carrier of the gene in the population?
6. For each major gene causing a genetic condition: (a) what is the spontaneous mutation rate of the normal alíele to the pathological alíele? What are (2) the linkage relationships of each pathogène? (c) the chemical formula of the specific enzyme or enzymes associated with the normal alíele of the mutant gene? (d) the specific formula of the DNA associated with the normal alíele? (e) the stages of the life cycle of the individual in which the abnormal

metabolism may be altered to avoid the pathology? (f) the various biochemical genetic methods available for controlling the pathology?
As knowledge about specific major genes accumulates from studies of different population groups, some human genetic problems of lesser concern to the clinician but of greater concern to the theoretical human geneticist include:
1. What is the composition and extent of the "load of deleterious mutations" for various population groups?
2. How much of the variation in gene frequency among different populations can be due to specific mutagenic environments, various selective factors, etc.?
3. Is the frequency of a given major gene increasing or decreasing in a given population? What is the rate of change in the frequency of the gene? What are the factors causing the gene to change its frequency?
4. How does the rate of change of one gene compare with the rate of change of other genes in the same population?
Even though a single genetic center or one human geneticist may have the opportunity to pursue a very limited number of the questions listed about the genetics of given clinical entity, it is important to extend knowledge on all levels whenever possible. Small bits of information from a number of independent studies may then be combined to answer questions which must be based on more data.
Since procedures are now available for finding answers to most of the above questions, perhaps the most encouraging signpost toward preventive medicine is the fact that studies in medical genetics are being developed at the present time in various medical schools throughout

74 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

the nation. These programs of study are on a sound footing. The most important question no longer is "Can genetic diseases eventually be controlled?" The answer to this question can be confidently answered in the affirmative. Rather, the most pertinent question seems to be, "How much time will be required by the medical genetic research teams throughout the world to make genetic conditions controllable?" Must the size of the personnel force needed for this research effort be larger or smaller than that needed throughout the past century to bring communicable diseases under control? How will financial support of medical genetic research projects compare with that of other disciplines?
Molecular structures of specific genes are not known at present; nevertheless, prevention and control are now possible at other levels for a number of diseases. No attempt will be made to list the numerous diseases which can be diagnosed and controlled after clinical symptoms appear because it can be argued that genetic knowledge (except for possible contribution of earlier diagnosis) has contributed little if anything in these situations. For example, a cancer of the eye known as retinoblastoma may be caused by a dominant gene with reduced penetrance, but early surgery would be equally effective in saving lives if the condition were not hereditary. Perhaps one of the most promising contributions of genetics at present to prevention is for diseases meeting all three of the following criteria:
(a) Potential sufferers can be identified.
(b) Pathology may not be completely repaired or corrected after symptoms have appeared.
(c) Procedures are available to prevent the appearance of sigas and symp-

toms when the potential sufferer can be identified.
Two rare autosomal recessive diseases which may be controlled by diet might be cited to illustrate conditions meeting these criteria. In order to assure prevention of symptoms in galactocemia, foods containing galactose sugar must be withheld from the diet in the first few weeks of life. If individuals with the homozygous genotype for this disease be undiagnosed and untreated for too long a period, they may fail to gain weight, develop an enlarged liver and jaundice; mental retardation and cataracts may result in those who survive childhood. Since heterozygous parents can be identified (Hsia 1959) by means of galactose-tolerance tests, the 14 risk of a potentially affected offspring can be predicted in advance, and early tests may be made soon after birth to learn whether preventive steps should be initiated to preclude the development ot symptoms of the disease.
A second rare autosomal genetic disease in which all cases could be prevented is phenylketonuria. To assure prevention of clinical symptoms of this disease, phenylalanine must be excluded from the diet as soon as possible after birth. Individuals who receive a recessive gene from each of their heterozygous carrier parents may develop mental retardation if undiagnosed and untreated. Since these heterozygous parents can be identified (Hsia 1959) by means of phenylalanine tolerance tests, the 14 "sk of a potentially affected offspring can be predicted in advance, and early tests can be given before symptoms appear to learn whether phenylalanine should be withdrawn from the diet.
Hereditary spherocytosis is an example of a third rare disease in which lives can be saved by preventive steps. In this

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

case surgical removal of the spleen may seem like a high price to pay for prevention, but the survival risk from splenectomy is quite small compared to the survival of individuals in which the spleen is not removed. In contrast to galactocemia and phenylketonuria, heterozygous genetic carriers of the dominant gene for hereditary spherocytosis are potential sufferers and these individuals may be identified in advance of clinical symptoms by appropriate tests. Except in the event of new mutation, each offspring, each sibling, and each sibling of the carrier parent has a ]/2 chance of being a genetic carrier in which prophylactic splenectomy should be considered.
In the instances cited, and possibly in many more to be recognized in the future, one important contribution of the geneticist seems to be the identification of genetic carriers. It would seem that greater efforts should be made to simplify and extend the tests which can be used to identify genetic carriers. Also more concern should be directed toward the use of these tests to prevent symptoms from occurring in potential sufferers. An extension of chromosome maps is another area of basic research which might have use in identifying carriers when other means are not available, and no one can foresee the possible value of such maps for the use of the researcher in biochemistry and cytology.
Although research that might lead to the control of genetic disease at the level of the gene or only a few biochemical steps removed from this level wasconsidered impossible for a long time, it is quite likely that progress could now be swift compared to speeds of progress in other medical disciplines because so many tools developed for use in other

75
disciplines may readily be adapted for use in genetics. Also, genetics is oneof the most exact of all biological disciplines. By making use of modern human tissue culture techniques, almost any part of the human body can be placed in a test tube and made to grow there. With corresponding tissues growing from various members of a family or series of related families, all the experimental procedures developed for non-human genetic studies can be applied to studies in human genetics without waiting for Ft and F2 generations (See Pontecoroo, 1958). In addition the various specialized procedures developed for the study of a condition by a particular discipline of the medical school are available. For example, dermatology, otolaryngology, opthalmology, neurology, etc., each has developed special facilities for the study of specific parts of the human body which are unmatched by facilities for the study of a comparable part in any lower animal.
Depending upon the personnel and physical facilities which will be made available to genetic-biochemical and medical specialty teams, there is room for hope that the passing of signposts toward the control and prevention of the various hereditary diseases may be quite rapid and exciting.
REFERENCES
1. BELKNAP, HAROLD R. and WILLIAM G.
HAYES. 1960. A genetic study of families in which leprosy occurs. (Thesis forDoctor of Medicine at Tulane University School of Medicine.) 28 pp. 2. GARROD, A. E. 1908. Lancet 2 : 1-7, 73-79, 142-148, 214-220. 3. FORD, C. E. 1960. Human Cytogenetics: Its Present Place and Future Possibilities. Am. Jour. Hum. Genet., 1 2 : 104-117.
4. HSIA, DAVID YI-YUNG. 1959. Inborn Errors
of Metabolism. The Year Book Publishers. 358 pp. 5. JOHANNSEN, W. 1909. Elemente der exakten Erblichkeitslehre. 6. MENDEL, GRECOR. 1866. Versuche über Pflanzenhybriden. Verhandlungen des

76 Eugenics Quarterly

Naturforschenden Vereins. Vol. IV.
7. NEEL, JAMES V. and WILLIAM J. SCHULL.
1954. Human Heredity. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. 361pp.
8. PONTECORVO. G. 1958. Trends in Genetic Analysis. New York: Columbia University Press. 145pp.
9. SNYDER, LAURENCE H. 1959. Fifty years of medical genetics: The union of biochemistry and genetics offer a rational ap-

proach to diagnoses, prevention and therapy. Science, 129: 7-13.
10. WATSON, J. D. and F. H. C. CRICK. 1953a.
Molecular structure of nucleic acids: A structure for deoxyribose nucleic acid. Nature, 171:737-738.
11. . 1953b. The structure of DNA. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology. 1 8 : 123-131.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

ACTA GENETICAE MEDICAE

ET GEMELLOLOGIAE

(A. Ge. Me. Ge.)
Published aa a quarterly from 1952 through 1956, this Journal now appears every 3 months. The Editorial Board, as well as the list of contributors, include most of the best-known names in the field of twin-research, genetics, anthropology and related topics.
The Journal is published in Borne by the Gregor Mendel Institute of Medical Genetics and Twin-research, the founder and Director of which, Prof. Luigi Gedda, is also the Editor of this Journal.
The Editor will be glad to consider for publication manuscripts pertaining to twinresearch, genetics, heredity, anthropology and related subjects.
Bequests for subscriptions as well as for the publication of manuscripts should be addressed to:

ACTA GENETICAE MEDICAE ET GEMELLOLOGIAE

Largo Amba Aradam 1

Rome, Italy

The yearly subscription price is $18.00 per volume. A volume consists of four issues. Back numbers may be obtained by writing to the above-mentioned address.

