Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Heredity counseling: Eugenic aspects of the premarital consultation
Abraham Stone M. D.
To cite this article: Abraham Stone M. D. (1955) Heredity counseling: Eugenic aspects of the premarital consultation, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:1, 51-52, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987221 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987221
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4
View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

HEREDITY COUNSELING Eugenic Aspects of the Premarital Consultation

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ABRAHAM STONE, M. D.
Margaret Sanger Bureau

The emphasis in medicine is rapidly extending from care to prevention. Both the public and the medical profession have come to accept the view that the function of the doctor is not merely to restore health but also to conserve it, not merely to remedy illness, but, wherever possible, to forestall it.
An expression of this newer medical attitude is the increasing stress on the value and desirability of a premarital examination and consultation. A medical survey and discussion in preparation for marriage often serves to prevent potential conjugal discord, and makes for a more successful marriage and family life.
"Examination for fitness," once commented Dr. Robert L. Dickinson, a pioneer in marriage education, "has become customary for all occupations save marriage and parenthood. Eventually common sense may be expected to demand a similar preparation before deciding on matters so important to the life of the individual and the race. There should be developed a public opinion in favor of a routine consultation (on major physical difficulties and psychic inhibitions) before the announcement of an engagement, followed by a general and medical examination of both bride and groom a month or so before the wedding date is fixed."
The need for some form of medical examination before marriage has long been recognized. Many states have enacted laws making such examinations compulsory. In most instances, however, the primary aim of these laws has been merely to detect the presence of transmissible venereal disease.

In the United States, for instance, forty states now require that an applicant for a marriage license present a medical certificate declaring that he or she is "free from all venereal disease." In a few states the requirements are somewhat broader and include other transmissible diseases, but in the main the examinations are generally quite limited in scope, and do not deal with the wider aspects of genetics and eugenics.
Many individuals considering marriage come to the> physician for a number of reasons. Mostly they come to obtain the required examination and blood tests, but many of them also seek general information about interpersonal relations in marriage, about sexual anatomy and physiology, about sex techniques and family planning. "Tell us," they may say, "what we ought to know about marriage and family life." The function of the doctor, then, is to provide basic information and whatever guidance the individuals or couple may need to help them make a stable marital relationship.
Some young people, however, come before marriage with specific problems, with questions about the advisability of a particular marriage or about their chances to beget healthy offspring. Usually these questions center around such social or emotional problems as economic difficulties, parental disapproval, differences in age, culture, religion. At times, though, they relate to physical disabilities or genetic traits. One or the other of the couple may be uneasy about some familial mental or physical defect, and they become fearful about the possibility of transmitting such a defect to their children.

51

52 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

In our marriage consultation services at the Community Church and at the Margaret Sanger Bureau we have seen many such "eugenic problem" cases during the past quarter of a century. Among the genetic problems for which premarital or preconceptional counsel is sought are family histories of mental disease or deficiency, epilepsy, diabetes, cancer, consanguinity, and, occasionally, some of the rarer hereditary diseases.
Aware of the responsibilities which parenthood entails and of the tragic consequences of inherited physical or mental disorders, young people are today more likely to seek guidance on eugenic grounds. Often enough, it is true, their fears are unwarranted and based on an inadequate understanding of human heredity, but at times the history may be serious enough to cast doubts upon the advisability of a marriage or of reproduction. The following two cases illustrate both these points:
Miss A was an attractive young woman, twenty-seven years of age, who repeatedly refused to marry any of the several men who had courted her. She always explained it on the basis of one or another incompatibility. During the course of the interview, however, it developed that her mother, who had died at a young age, had suffered from epileptiform attacks which Miss A had witnessed on several occasions during her childhood. These episodes disturbed her profoundly. She had a deep fear that the children she might bear would inherit this condition, and had therefore decided to avoid marriage entirely. In this instance, a thorough discussion and study of the family history failed to show an adequate reason for her fears, and eventually she did marry and now has two apparently normal children.
The other case is that a young man who came to our consultation service to discuss

the advisability of marrying a girl in whose family there were several cases of mental disorder. The girl's mother had committed suicide at thirty-eight, an older brother had been institutionalized for some two years, while a second brother was also in a sanatorium. Although the young woman herself seemed to be both physically and mentally well, the man was deeply concerned about the chances that some mental disease might be passed on to their children. The fact that there was some history of mental disease in his family clearly added to the genetic hazards in this case.
The premarital consultation can thus1 play an important role in preventive eugenics. When doubts arise about genetic traits, an objective study and evaluation of the situation either before marriage or before conception may aid young people in their ultimate decisions about marriage or parenthood or, more often, dispel unwarranted anxiety. It is essental, however, that the physician who would undertake to guide young people in the eugenic aspects of their marriage should himself have a thorough understanding of genetics and of the heredity of human disease. Not many physicians are today sufficiently well equipped to give competent genetic advice. It would be well if marriage consultation centers would have attached to their staffs a well-trained geneticist to whom problems in human heredity could be referred. There is also a need for developing special heredity centers to which both the public and the counselor could turn for authoritative information. At present there are less than a dozen such centers in the United States. Their extension throughout the country would be a distinct aid to the marriage counselor and to the people seeking advice, and an important forward step in the development of practical preventive eugenics.

