Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
III. Intelligence in family groups in the Blue Ridge Mountains
C. Nash Herndon M.D.
To cite this article: C. Nash Herndon M.D. (1954) III. Intelligence in family groups in the Blue Ridge Mountains, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:1, 53-57, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987163 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987163
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

III. INTELLIGENCE IN FAMILY GROUPS IN THE BLUE RIDGE MOUNTAINS

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

C. NASH HERNDON, M.D.
Associate Professor of Medical Genetics Bowman Gray School of Medicine Wake Forest College

A
XYTTEMPTING TO EVALUATE genetic factors in "intelligence" in man is a little like trying to catch smoke in a basket. First, we have no really satisfactory method of measuring the attribute which we wish to assess, and second, this attribute is certainly a resultant of many factors. Therefore any attempt to investigate any one or even several of the contributing factors must admittedly be only an approximation and probably will include errors the magnitude of which can only be guessed. In spite of these limitations, however, studies in this field should be of particular interest to geneticists. The predominance of man as a species is largely due to the high degree of development of his nervous system and his ability to think, and the evolutionary significance of man's mental ability is tremendous. Any study that may enable us to understand the functioning of this ability and perhaps throw light on the hereditary factors which establish this species characteristic, and which apparently set the limits of its functioning ability, therefore seems worth-while.
There have been numerous studies of the ranges of intelligence in various population groups, as measured by one or more of the standard intelligence tests. There are also numerous evaluations of the validity of test scores, advantages and disadvantages of various types of scores, and discussions of the effects of a wide range of environmental variables on the test score results (Woodworth, 1941; Wechsler, 1944). There seems to be general agreement that the standard form intelligence tests measure both an hereditary component of basic intellectual ability and certain modifications

of this resulting from learning and experience. For this reason comparisons of testscore results between populations with differing opportunities for education and experience must be made with caution.
The distribution of intelligence in the general population approximates the "normal" or Gaussian curve, and indeed the standard test-scoring methods have been standardized on this basis. We have come to expect continuous variation with this type of distribution in practically all normal metrical characters which are determined largely or partly by genetic factors. Such distributions are in accord with the theory of multiple genes as determining factors of the base pattern, with modification to a greater or lesser extent by environmental factors. The multiple gene theory implies that the basic limits of reaction or capability of the individual are determined by a constellation of genes, while experience and education may greatly modify the relative position of the individual within the limits of this group. The extremes of the normal distribution, the gifted and genius groups at the high extremes and the borderline and high-grade mentally deficient groups at the low extremes, represent the rarer fortuitous combinations of the available genes offered by the parents. An exception to this must be made in the case of low-grade mental deficiency, which does not fit into a scheme of continuous variation (Kallmann, 1953), but represents a pathologic suppression of the genetic potential for normal mental development, the suppressing factor itself being sometimes genetic and sometimes environmental in origin.

S3

54 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

As yet we have no critical data con- being 15 times its standard error. This in-

cerning the number of genes that may be dicates that the scores of girls tend to clus-

effective in determining normal intelli- ter more closely about the mean, while a

gence in man. Most of the schemes that larger proportion of males are found at the

have been suggested hypothesize a relative- extremes of distribution, both among the

ly small number, such as the suggestion of most highly intelligent and among the

Hurst (1934) of one major and five minor dullest groups. The significance of this

gene pairs. Evidence of the importance of observation is unknown.

hereditary factors is provided by twin We have recently been interested in

studies, which uniformly show high degrees studying the distributions and intra-family

of correlation in I. Q. scores between pairs correlations of certain characteristics in a

of monozygous twins, and lower correlation normal population in western North Caro-

between pairs of fraternal twins and sib- line, the major purpose being to study fac-

pairs. Newman, Freeman and Holzinger tors involved in selective mating. The area

(1937) found the correlation coefficient under study was Watauga County, located

with respect to the Binet intelligence quo- in the Blue Ridge Mountains, a part of the

tient for monozygous twin pairs to be .88, Appalachian chain. The county is pre-

while that for dizygous pairs was .63. Herr- dominantly rural, with no heavy industry,

man and Hogben (1933) found the mean and with a population in 1950 of 18,342.

difference in I. Q. as measured by the Otis Although the area is mountainous and the

advanced test to be about half as great in more remote sections might be considered

monozygous twin pairs (9.2±1.0) as in sib rather isolated, the county is traversed by a

pairs (16.8 ± 2.3). Correlations have also system of good roads providing access to

been studied between parent and child, surrounding areas. The town of Blowing

usually being found to be somewhat less Rock is a tourist and resort area, and a

than .50, but higher than correlations state teacher's college is located at Boone,

studied between parents and adopted chil- the county seat. The area was chosen for

dren. Several studies on twins and within study as being typical of this mountain dis-

family groups have been summarized and trict.

evaluated by Woodworth (1941) and by Osborn (1951). Kallmann (1953) summarizes the situation by stating, "According to the most recent authoritative estimates, the genetic contribution cannot be assumed to be less than 50 per cent or more than 75 per cent of the total measured variation of normal or moderately deficient intelligence."

There were scattered settlements in the Watauga area before the American Revolution, and practically all arable land was taken up during the eighteenth century. The original population was predominantly of English descent. The population has been relatively stable, a large proportion of the present inhabitants being descendants of the original settlers. During the

An additional point relating to the dis- nineteenth century there was a steady tribution of intelligence levels in the gen- stream of emigration from this region to

eral population that is puzzling and for the lands then being developed in the west-

which no adequate biologic explanation ern states. Migration into Watauga was

exists has been pointed out by Roberts considerably less, with no major trends of (1945). Based upon the very large samples origin being apparent. Both the roads and studied by the Scottish Council for Re- the primary schools were rather poor until

search in Education, it is shown that while after World War I, but transportation and

the mean scores of boys and girls are essen- education have improved markedly during

tially equal, the variance is much greater the past 25 years.

in boys, the difference in the two variances An attempt was made to study a fairly

55

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

wide range of normal characteristics, in- The average is thus slightly below the

cluding educational background and intel- standardized mean of 100 as determined on

lectual ability, in a series of randomly se- the New York population. As the back-

lected families resident in Watauga Coun- ground of experience of the rural mountain

ty. Families were selected by making a group is considerably different from that of

random choice of houses on rural roads, a metropolitan urban group, we are not

and asking the occupants to cooperate. convinced that the observed mean really is

These choices were so arranged that the significant of any true difference in basic

number of families studied in each town- intellectual ability.

ship of the county was roughly proportional to the population of the township according to the 1950 census. About half of the families approached in this manner declined to cooperate, but no definite trend with regard to social or economic level or family size was noted in the refusal group. As the battery of tests desired usually required two or three days' study for the average family, we feel that the rate of cooperation attained was satisfactory. There was no special motivation involved in acceptance of the study by families, as we offered no special services or compensation

In 49 families we were able to test both the husband and the wife. The differences in scores between members of a mating pair are given in Table 1. It will be noted that in approximately half of the marriages, the agreement in I. Q. score of husband and wife is within 10 points. In only 3 marriages was there a disparity of more than 20 points in the scores of a married couple. This small sample tends to bear out the observation frequently discussed of intellectual ability as a factor in mate selection generally.

for cooperation and had no sponsorship other than the good name of our school of medicine and its teaching hospital.

TABLE 1
DIFFERENCES IN I. Q. SCORES OF HUSBAND-WIFE PAIRS

Of all of the factors chosen for study, it

Difference

Frequency

is unfortunate that the most incomplete data are those provided by the intelligence tests. The clinical psychologist member of the field team was recalled to military duty during the course of the investigation, and

0-4 points
5-9 10-14 " 15-19 " 20-24 " 25-29 " 30-34 "

12 marriages
12 9 11
2
0 1"

our family data in this respect are therefore sparse, including data on only 86 fam-

TOTAL

49 marriages

ilies. The Wechsler-Bellevue intelligence In the entire sample, the mean scores of

test was used, with appropriate use of alter- all husbands and all wives were not signifi-

nate forms where indicated. In each house- cantly different, being 96.17 ± 1.72 for hus-

hold, an attempt was made to obtain an bands and 94.75 ± 1.97 for wives. Within

I. Q. score for the husband, wife, and all families, correlation coefficients were calcu-

children. Data on some families remain in- lated for husband-wife pairs, mother-child

complete. For example, we were able to pairs, father-child pairs and sib pairs.

test more wives than husbands, and we These results appear in Table 2. The high-

were often unable to test older children est degrees of correlation were found be-

who had left the family circle to work or tween husband and wife and between sib

live elsewhere.

pairs. The correlation between mothers

The distribution of I. Q. scores for the and their children was less, but still signifi-

entire sample of 223 individuals was found cant. This sample is unusual in failing to

to approximate the expected normal dis- show evidence of correlation between

tribution, with an average of 94.52*0.87. fathers and their children. Other studies

56 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

have consistently shown a higher degree of correlation of the scores of children with those of the mothers than with those of the fathers, but a significant correlation in father-child pairs is consistently found. We can only attribute this unexpected result to small sample size and sampling error. This is probably related to the fact that the small sample of fathers had the highest mean noted for any group, this being 101.07 ± 1.64, while the average score of children was 94.10 ± 1.33. The fact that all "husbands" were not also "fathers" accounts for the discrepancy in the means cited for these two groups.

TABLE 2
CORRELATIONS WITHIN FAMILIES IN I. Q. SCORES

Husband-wife Mother-child Father-child Sib-sib

Pairs 49 80 49 62

Correlation
.40 ± .14 .24 ± . --.02 ± .14 .45 ± .1

Among the adults tested, the sample was examined for evidence of a secular trend. From the known history of primary and secondary school facilities in the area, it seemed that the younger adults had somewhat better educational opportunities than the older ones. Among adults there was no significant correlation of test score with age. The possibility of correlation of test score with birth rank was also tested for the children, and no significant deviations were found.
In summary, the results of this relatively small sample provide no new interpretations, as they agree in principle with other published studies, but they do provide some information on a segment of the population for which few data are available. In some quarters it is a rather popular notion that the southern mountaineer is a lazy, shiftless and stupid character, this characterization being due in no small part to "hill-billy" cartoons, songs, and stories. We regard this notion as nothing short of slander. Although there are certain local customs and figures of speech that may

seem strange to the casual visitor, the same is true of almost any definable population group. Our data indicate a normal range of intelligence among natives of the Blue Ridge Mountains, with a mean not greatly different from those observed in other rural areas.
A comparison may be made with certain other segments of the North Carolina population. Jordan (1947) has reported the result of group tests done on 1,980 white school children in another rural county (Orange County) located in the central part of the state in the industrial Piedmont area. The mean score on the Pintner series of tests for white children was 91.40, this being slightly less than the corresponding mean of 94.10 observed in Watauga. To illustrate the consistent advantage enjoyed by urban groups in tests of this sort, the same group (Jordan, 1948) tested 5,429 white school children in Winston-Salem, a city also in the Piedmont area with a 1950 population of 92,477. The mean score of this urban group was 97.70. The reservation should be made that careful individual testing, such as was done in the Watauga sample, is generally more accurate than group testing, with the group tests sometimes giving values lower than those obtained by individual scoring. Caution should therefore be employed in comparing our figures with those of Jordan, but even with all allowances our rural mountain group shows no remarkable difference when compared with other rural groups.
A further point that may have some interest in this connection is the unusually high rate of cousin marriages found in the Watauga population. A preliminary report on cousin marriage rates in this population was presented at the 1952 meeting of the American Society of Human Genetics but has not been published. This report was based on pedigree analysis of 1,651 marriages, and indicated a first cousin marriage rate of 1.57 per cent. Marriages of persons related as close or closer than second cousins (coefficient of relationship 0.0312 or

57

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

higher) make up 6.72 percent of thetotal of normal reported for other rural

marriages. It is difficult to find strictly populations andconsistent with exami-

comparable figures on other normal popu- nations of larger groups from other seg-

lation groups as most studies report only ments of the North Carolina popula-

the incidence of first cousin manages. Data summarized byStern (1949) and byNeel et al. (1949) give first cousin marriage rates in normal American and European populations ranging from 0.20 to 1.03 per cent. The rates determined in the Watauga sample are two to three times as high as the usually reported figures. This would tend to reflect relatively small sizes of mating isolates, a finding notunexpected in a rural mountain area.
It isa rather common misconception that a high cousin marriage rate andtheresulting rise in level of inbreeding of a population should be associated with prompt

tion.
3. Theintrafamily correlations areconsistent with usually accepted estimates that the genetic contribution to the total measured variation of normal intelligence is not less than 50 per cent nor more than 75 per cent.
4. It is pointed out that the population studied provides an example of a normal distribution of intelligence quotient scores in a group with an unusually high rate of cousin marriages and presumably with small size of mating isolates.

deterioration in both physical and mental Acknowledgment: This report is based in part on

abilities. Dahlberg (1947) discusses this point in some detail, and the following

data collected by Dr. Harold Fahs and E. R. Kerley, andanalyzed by Dr. H. O. Goodman.

quotation is pertinent. "It is not infre-

REFERENCES

quently asserted that the defective individ- DAHLBERG, G. 1948. Mathematical Methods for uals in the isolates and the primitive cul- Population Genetics. Basle: S. Karger.

tural conditions area sign of degeneration due toinmarriage. This iswrong, of course. There is no reason for assuming that the hereditary constitution of the population

HERRMAN, L. & HOGBEN, L. 1933. The intellectual
resemblance of twins. Proc. R. Soc. Edinburgh 53:105-129.
HURST, C. C. 1934. The genetics of intellect. Eugen. Rev., Lond. 26:33-45.

of small isolates is either better or worse than in large isolates." We feel that our data support this position, as they indicate a range of I. Q. scores within normal limits for a rural population, occurring in a population with an unusually high cousin marriage rate andwith presumably small size of mating isolates.

JORDAN, A. M. 1947. Testing theintelligence of the children of a rural county. High School J. 30: 35-45.
JORDAN, A. M. 1948. Efficiency of group tests of intelligence in discovering the mentally deficient. High School J. 31:73-94.
KALLMANN, F.J. 1953. Heredity in Health and Mental Disorder. New York: W.W. Norton.
NEEL, J. V., KODANI, M., BREWER, R. & ANDERSON,
R. C. 1949. The incidence of consanguineous matings in Japan. Am.J. Hum. Genetics 1:156178.

Summary

NEWMAN, H. H., FREEMAN, F. N. & HOLZINGER, K. J.
1937. Twins: A study of heredity andenviron-

ment. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
1. Data are presented concerning the dis- OSBORN, F. 1951. Preface to Eugenics. New York:

tribution of intelligence quotient scores Harper & Bros.

obtained with the Wechsler-Bellevue

ROBERTS, J. A. F. 1945. On the difference between the sexes in dispersion of intelligence. Brit. M.

test on 223 persons in 86 families se- J. 1:727-730.

lected at random from the population STERN, C. 1949. Principles of Human Genetics. San

of Watauga County, North Carolina, located in the Blue Ridge Mountains.

Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
WECHSLER, D. 1944. The Measurement of Adult Intelligence. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.

2. The mean I. Q.score of the sample was 94.52 ± 0.87, this being within the range

WOODSWORTH, R. S. 1941. Heredity and Environment. New York: Social Science Research Council.

