Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The PriceZubrzycki measure of ethnic intermarriage
Stanley Lieberson
To cite this article: Stanley Lieberson (1966) The PriceZubrzycki measure of ethnic intermarriage, Eugenics Quarterly, 13:2, 92-100, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1966.9987652 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1966.9987652
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:28

THE PRICE-ZUBRZYCKI MEASURE OF ETHNIC INTERMARRIAGE*

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

STANLEY LIEBERSON
Department of Sociology University of Wisconsin
Madison, Wisconsin

In a series of two important papers, Price and Zubrzycki (1962a, 1962b) have recently leveled serious criticisms of the commonly used method for measuring ethnic intermarriage. The authors go on to propose an alternative index that they claim avoids the shortcomings found in earlier methods. The present paper examines the two measures systematically in terms of their assumptions and concludes that, if anything, the customary measure is superior in virtually all respects to the index proposed by Price and Zubrzycki. Although the discussion is couched in terms of immigrants and their descendents, the issues raised are largely applicable to other intermarriage measurement problems such as those between races, socioeconomic classes, religion, and the like.
Customarily an ethnic or immigrant group's degree of intermarriage in a given country or community is measured on the following basis:
Mt
where Ot is the number of outmarriages recorded in the country of settlement for a specific sex and generation of a given group during a restricted period of time, t; and Mt is the total number of marriages recorded in the same locale for the same sex and generation of the group during the period of time, t. Following Price and Zubrzycki's terminology, we
* The support of the University Research Committee on the University of Wisconsin is gratefully acknowledged.

shall refer to the customary measure as a Type B index. More elegant measures of intermarriage such as the homogamy index (Savorgnan, 1950) are essentially a variation of B that incorporates the sex ratio of the groups and the ethnic or nationality composition of the married population.
The alternative index suggested by Price and Zubrzycki, which they call Type A, is also sex- and generationspecific but is based on the following proportion:
M,
where Ot is the number of outmarried surviving to a given date, s; and M, is the total number married and surviving to the same data, s. Essentially this is the procedure employed by Glick (1960) and Besanceney (1965) in a method that takes into account the number of intermarriages "expected" if husbands and wives were mated randomly.
The A and B indexes differ in several significant ways. The A index is based upon all married people surviving to a given time without divorce or death. The B index is based only upon marriages occurringwithin a specified period of time. The A measure includes marriages occurring outside the country under study; e.g., persons who were married prior to migration and those who leave their country of settlement, marry elsewhere, and then return. By contrast, B excludes immigrants who were married

92

Vol. 13, No. 2

Ethnic Intermarriage

93

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

prior to arrival as well as all others who did not marry within the nation under study. In effect, a measure based on the status of the surviving population, such as A, is the only possible index for most data obtained from censuses or other surveys unless additional information is made available. Measures based on vital statistics or other registration schemes will normally be restricted to a B type of measure. A comparison of the A and B measures of intermarriage is therefore basically applicable to other problems involving the use of these two different types of data.
Actually, the two measures of intermarriage will be identical if all five of the following conditions occur: either all marriages are in the country under study or the proportion intermarried among those marrying elsewhere is the same as in the country of settlement; the proportion of outmarriages among members of the group entering marriage is constant through time; there is a stationary population; the dissolution rates for in- and outgroup marriages do not differ; and the propensity to outmarry is the same for those remarrying as for the population making their first marriage. Since it is unlikely that all or very many of these conditions will be found, the relative advantages of the two indexes can be determined by examining their differences when these assumptions are not met. In describing the influence of different locations of marriage on the two types of indexes, it is desirable to consider the problem separately for immigrants and later generations. With respect to the four other conditions, all forms of ethnic intermarriage can be examined at the same time.
LOCATION OF MARRIAGE: IMMIGRANTS
Since neither the A nor the B indexes are capable of handling the nationality-

birthplace or the generational difficulties described by Price and Zubrzycki, the principal advantage for the A measure of immigrant intermarriage rests upon the proxy-visit-wharfside problem; that is, B indexes will "overstate the number of females exposed to intermarriage because they include numbers of girls who come to join their fiancés and marry within three or four weeks of arrival, sometimes on the day of arrival at the church nearest the landing wharf" (Price and Zubrzycki, 1962a, p. 65). Thus these "wharfside brides" marry without any exposure to the opportunity of intermarriage. By contrast, Price and Zubrzycki claim the B index for immigrant males understates ingroup marriages because a number of males return to their country of origin temporarily to marry a woman of the same nationality, and these ingroup marriages are not included in the B index since they did not occur in the country of settlement. In addition, other males marry by proxy; and again these unions, which presumably are primarily with mates from the same country of origin, are not recorded in the computation of the B index. We shall treat these criticisms separately for females, and males.
Females
"Wharfside marriages" are included in both the A and B measures; thus each underestimates the degree of intermarriage of female immigrants if one considers the fact that these females are not exposed to the risk of intermarriage because they wed immediately after arrival in the country of settlement. Thus, not only does the A index provide no improvement over B with respect to wharfside marriages, but it can be shown that A actually underestimates intermarriage to a greater extent than B because of the proxy-visit problem described for males.

94

Lieberson

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

The A index also includes those women who were later brought to their husband's country of settlement after marriage in the home country by proxy or with an immigrant visitor. These are women with surely no exposure to intermarriage; yet they will be included in the A rates that are not limited to marriages occurring in the country of settlement. By contrast, the B measure will exclude such marriages. Thus, if anything, A will underestimate the proportion of female immigrants intermarrying among those exposed to risk by a far greater degree than will B. The latter measure, although including wharfside marriages, will at least not record women married in their homeland through proxies and by temporary visitors and thus will be closer to a true measure of intermarriage based upon exposure to risk. Price and Zubrzycki make the implicit assumption, which we accept, that there are very few instances of the female immigrant's either returning to the homeland for the purposes of obtaining a mate or marrying a mate in the homeland by proxy.
Males
It is claimed that the B rate will inflate intermarriages estimated for immigrant males because those males marrying by proxy or during short overseas visits will not be recorded by B but are included in A after the wife comes to the country of settlement. Thus, a class of primarily ingroup marriages will be omitted by B. Two points should be raised about this criticism. One, the desirability of including such marriages is a moot point. Presumably, most of the proxy marriages will involve mates who knew each other and were pledged to marriage prior to the emigration of the male from the homeland. Hence, from an exposure to risk perspective, the omis-

sion of such marriages by the B index can be viewed as largely an advantage. Second, the omission of marriages due to visits is counterbalanced because of the inclusion of immigrant males who have married wharfside brides from the old country. Presumably such males who marry shortly after these women arrive had some commitment at the time of emigration and hence were not fully exposed to intermarriage after immigration. Thus the relative merits of the A and B indexes with respect to foreignborn male marriages hinges on the balancing of these types of errors. From an exposure to risk perspective, the difficulties for immigrant males are as follows:
A: 1. Errs toward too-low intermarriages by including proxy marriages.
2. Errs toward too-low intermarriages by including wharfside marriages.
3. Properly includes visit marriages.
B: 1. Properly excludes proxy marriages.
2. Errs toward too-low intermarriages by including wharfside marriages.
3. Errs toward too-high intermarriages by excluding visit marriages.
Thus the relative merits of the indexes depends upon whether errors 1+2 for A are greater than the net differences between errors 2 and 3 for B.
LOCATION OF MARRIAGES: LATER
GENERATIONS
Only the A index will take into account marriages among second or later generations that occur elsewhere such as by proxy, temporary return to the country of origin for the purposes of marriage, or the unions of citizens while living outside the nation as students, workers, members of the military, and

Vol. 13, No. 2

Ethnic Intermarriage

95

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

the like. Obviously, these marriages will not be recorded by a B type measure, since both Ot and Mt are restricted to marriages actually occurring within the country under study. It may be readily seen, however, that the outgroup marriages of students, soldiers, workers, etc. while located in other nations are included in the A index after they return to their country of birth. If we assume that persons born in the host society do not generally travel to their country of origin for the purposes of obtaining a mate (Price and Zubrzycki, 1962a, p. 68), then presumably the vast majority of second- or later-generation persons intermarrying outside their country of birth will be doing so because of an increased exposure to risk resulting from their temporary stays overseas. The A index will therefore overestimate intermarriage to a far greater extent than will the B index because the former will include all overseas intermarriages in which the couples return to the country, whereas the B index, in excluding such marriages, will merely miss those few cases where there is temporary emigration to the country solely for the purposes of finding a mate of the same origin.
We might add that the A index will, however, miss those cases of intermarriage due to the temporary visit to the country under study of foreign persons who select a mate from the country and then leave. Such marriages, which are true intermarriages for the persons born in the nation because they were exposed to their compatriots in the nation, will be lost by the A index.
CHANGING PROPENSITIES TO INTERMARRY
The A and B indexes vary greatly insofar as the native generation's propensity to intermarry changes through time. The B type of measure will ob-

viously be considerably more sensitive to temporal changes since it is based upon only those marriages occurring at specifiedintervals--normally as short as a year and no longer than five or ten years. By contrast, A is usually based upon all marriages of those surviving to a given period of time. Thus, A will be relatively insensitive to shifts over a short period of time in the propensity of a group to intermarry since the results will continue to reflect the mates chosen by all those persons marrying in earlier periods who are still alive and married.
Nevertheless, the A index will normally rise or fall in accordance with the behavior of those most recently married when the more recent unions maintain the same trend of the group for earlier decades. However, the A index may yield extraordinarily misleading results if there is either a reversal in trend in the most recent period or if the earlier trends were in the form of a second or higher order function. Suppose the trend for a given group's intermarriage was increasing in the 50 year span between the years t¿ and t2 based on all those surviving to that time. As the graph shows, let there be a reversal in trend in the decade from t2 to t3 such that the proportion intermarried during this decade declines from the peak at i2. Under such circumstances, A3 would show a higher degree of intermarriage than would A2 if the married members of the group who died between t2 and f3 were those with lower ratés of intermarriage than the entire married population surviving to t2. In other words, if at t2 the relationship between intermarriage and age was such that the younger persons had higher intermarriage rates than the older members of the group, then more of the intermarried will survive to i3, and the actual decline in intermarriage between t2 and ts will be obscured by mortality among the

96
too
ta Cent Xntexmarrleâ

Lieberson

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

Figure 1. Hypothetical relationship between intermarriage and year.

population surviving to t2 but dying before t3.
The same difficulty would hold for the A index if there was a reversal in function with declining rates of intermarriage between tx and t2 followed by increasing rates between t2 and t3; or simply a stabilizing of the intermarriage propensities between t2 and ts along with an agerelated intermarriage function among the population surviving to t2.
This problem of reversal in trend is perhaps unlikely, although Price and Zubrzycki do report such an instance among Italian immigrant males in Griffith (1962a, p. 67), and thus the A index is probably adequate for determining trends through time in most instances. However, it would never be certain to what degree changes in the index over time were reflecting true changes in the propensity to intermarry and the extent to which the index was changing because of the mortality among those in the married population at earlier periods.
Stationary Population
There is another difficult problem encountered if one attempts to compare

intermarriage over time for either a single group or between different groups when they do not have stationary populations. The problem is similar to the one posed in the preceding section. In this case, comparisons in the A rate over time will be confounded by the composition of each group's total married population such that A will be weighted by the size of each cohort. Suppose, for example, that groups X and Y both have the same A measure at t2 and identical age-specific A rates. If between t2 and t3 the newly married from both groups have equally higher tendencies to intermarry than did members of their respective groups in earlier decades, we would expect the A rates at fs to again be identical for groups X and Y. However, it can be readily seen that this will occur only if groups X and Y have the same proportion of survivors at t3 who were married in the period t2.3. If this is not the case, then the group with the larger proportion of its survivors who were married between t2 and t3 will appear to have a greater increase in intermarriage when the A measure is employed. If, for example, a larger proportion of the X

Vol. 13, No. 2

Ethnic Intermarriage

97

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

population who survive to t3 were married after t2, then X will appear to have a greater increase in intermarriage than Y when the A measure is employed. Yet the proportion of intermarriages among X's and Y's marrying between t2 and t3 is identical. In other words, intermarriage comparisons over time for a single group or between groups will be greatly affected by the proportion of each group's total surviving married population who were married in the intervening years. By contrast, B is generally not affected by variations over time in the number of persons who get married since the results for each period are independent of the preceding cohorts of married persons.
Dissolution of Marriage
Divorce and mortality can provide a serious difficulty for the A index because such marriages are dropped from the computations since the basic data are the marriages surviving to a given time. The B index, by contrast, is not affected by this problem since the basic data are the acts of marriage--not survival.
Ignoring the remarriage problem, the A index is at a disadvantage when unions between mates of the same group differ in average length from those of intermarried couples. In other words, if on the average one type of marriage lasts longer before divorce or death of a mate, then the A index will be distorted in the direction of the lengthier class of marriages. Such questions become relevant as whether couples who intermarry tend to be wed at later ages than couples who do not intermarry, or whether intermarried couples are more likely to be divorced than ingroup couples. Because the A measure is based upon survival to a given date, any propensity for shorter unions between intermarried couples due

to later age at time of marriage, socioeconomic handicaps, higher divorce rates, and the like would yield an underestimate of intermarriage. Any tendency for longer marriages for intermarried couples prior to dissolution would, of course, yield an overestimate of intermarriage by the A index. The B measure is not affected by such differentials, regardless of their direction, other than with respect to the remarriage problem discussed below. If intermarried couples tend to be wed at later ages and are more likely to be divorced, then the A index would underestimate intermarriage.
The span of time covered by a continuous series of A indexes for a given group or groups will also affect the degree to which mortality and divorce differentials will affect the A index. Generally, the shorter the span covered, the less will A be affected by such differentials. Under any circumstances, these differences in survivorship do not affect the B index, nor does the length of time between computations of the index affect B.
Remarriage
The existence of divorce and death means the possibility of remarriage, and one does encounter here some argument in favor of the A measure. The B index allows for the possibility of a given person's appearing more than once since each remarriage would normally be recorded separately and given equal weight. The A index, by contrast, assures that no person will be reported more than once in a given period since only the surviving marriage is recorded--barring polygamy. There is therefore a possibility of the B measure being distorted by the existence of a differential between inand outmarried persons in their propensities to marry more than once and also to repeat the same type of marriage.

98

Lieberson

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

On the other hand, the A index is handicapped because marriages ending in divorce or the death of one mate that do not lead to remarriage are completely lost and are thus equivalent to remaining single. In short, both indexes appear limited in dealing with remarriages: the A measure tends to lose marriages, whereas B allows for the possibility of the same person's being reported more than once.
In summary, our examination of five major factors shows little advantage for the A type of index in analyses of intermarriage among first or later generations in a given country. While in some instances the A and B measures may be rather similar, there are a number of cases in which B will be superior to the measure proposed by Price and Zubrzycki.
CONCLUSIONS
There is little reason to view the intermarriage index proposed by Price and Zubrzycki as an improvement over the more customary computations of intermarriage. It has been shown that it is possible for the A and B indexes to yield identical results when a number of specified conditions hold. Since these are unlikely to occur, differences between the two measures have been examined; and, overall, it is found that A is usually at a distinct disadvantage. Although the A type index is certainly justified where data necessary for the computation of B are not available, this investigation has disclosed little value in A for situations in which it is possible to measure intermarriage through B. The careful discussion by Price and Zubrzycki (1962a, pp. 58-65) of the difficulties in measuring intermarriage because of the confusions between ethnic and nationality classifications and between sociological and birth-

place generations are valid and relevant to research in this area. However, their proposed index does not overcome most of these difficulties, or creates equally serious ones instead. Our discussion of the differences in the two types of measures should enable the investigator to determine the more desirable index for his specific purposes in a given context. Also, where two or more studies using the same or different types of indexes are at variance with each other in their findings, it is possible to analyze the possible reasons due to the measurement errors described earlier rather than simply attributing the discrepancies to the locales or time periods.
Without minimizing the criticisms of A raised thus far, one of the major differences between A and B is due to A's inclusion of immigrants who were married in their country of birth prior to arrival in the country under study. Likewise, the A measure for second or later generations is affected by the factors described earlier that influence survivorship. As a consequence, A is at best an adequate measure of intermarriage only if the purpose is to describe the status of the married population of a given generation at a specified time and place. The A index is analogous to the crude birth or death rate in that comparisons between groups or through time are not easily possible since it is unclear what is causing the variations. In the same way that it is unclear whether differences in the crude death rate reflect true differences in life expectancy or are merely functions of age and sex variations between two populations, the A rate of intermarriage could be responding to true differences between groups in their propensity to intermarry when exposed to the possibility of intermarriage, or the A measure may be merely reflecting differences between groups in their

Vol. 13, No. 2

Ethnic Intermarriage

99

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

proportions who arrive in a country already married. If one wishes to consider whether groups differ among themselves in the propensity to intermarry or whether a given group has changed through time in its immigrant members' propensity, then clearly it is necessary to employ a measure such as B that does not equate ingroup marriage prior to arrival with ingroup marriage after arrival in the country of settlement. Also, A would be virtually useless as a predictor of the future marital choices of immigrants in the country who are single at present. One of the difficulties of the Price and Zubrzycki paper is that they discuss the proxy-visit-wharfside problem in terms of exposure to risk but fail to see this issue when arguing for the inclusion of premigration marriages in the intermarriage index.
It should be noted that A may be computed for only the survivors of recent marriages, thereby excluding married survivors from earlier periods (Price and Zubrzycki, 1962a, p. 67). In the case of the foreign born, measurement of intermarriage among those recently married or arriving married during a specified period would still be affected by the size of immigration, number of married among the immigrants, and the actual marital choices of those mating in the country of settlement. It is desirable for analytic purposes that these factors be included as additional variables to be used in interpreting the degree of intermarriage, rather than complicate the basic measure of marital choice. Among second or later generations, where presumably nearly all marriages occur in the country under study, a short-term A index limited to survivors of recent marriages will actually be almost identical to the customary B index.
As noted earlier, census data are for the most part analyzable only in terms

of Type A measures; vital statistics on marriage are usually most suitable for Type B measures. Much of the difficulty in analyzing census reports on intermarriage from an exposure to risk perspective could be overcome if the marriage data are cross-tabulated by age of the couples and if a question on year of marriage is added. The latter question, combined with a knowledge of age of the couples and inferences on survivorship could allow investigators to approximate the probabilities of intermarriage over different periods rather than settle for a Type A survivorship measure.
It should be noted that there are additional difficulties often overlooked in studies of intermarriage that would apply to both types of intermarriage indexes. For example, both measures are restricted to the married population and ignore the frequency members of a given group enter a union. Hence, neither A nor B are "rates" in the sense of measuring intermarriage among the population exposed to risk; i.e., the total adult population. Rather, both are measures of intermarriage among the population married. Intermarriage is also but a crude approximation to biological amalgamation because of the possibilities of differential fertility and the fact that offspring may be classified into but one of the groups; e.g., offspring of Negroes and whites are classified as Negroes in the United States. There is also the serious difficulty of determining the ethnic origins for later generations in a nation that has experienced some intermarriage. For example, more than half of the nonFrench children born in Canada in 1951 were the offspring of ethnic intermarriages (Ryder, 1955). Both types of indexes are equally handicapped under these conditions. However, it is clear that there are a number of ways in which

100

Lieberson

Eugen. Quart.

B offers a more justifiable measure of intermarriage.
REFERENCES
BesanCENEY, P. H., 1965. On reporting rates of intermarriage. Amer. J. Sociol., 70(6): 717721.
GLICK, P. C., 1960. Intermarriage and fertility patterns among persons in major religious groups. Eugen. Quart., 7(1): 31-38.

PRICE, C. A., and J. ZUBRZYCKI, 1962a. The use of
inter-marriage statistics as an index of assimilation. Population Stud., 16(1): 58-69.
and , 1962b. Immigrant marriage patterns in Australia. Population Stud., 16(2): 123-133. RYDER, N. B., 1955. The interpretation of origin statistics. Canad.J. Econ. Polit. Sci., 21(4): 475-476.
SAVORGNAN, F., 1950. Matrimonial selection and the amalgamation of heterogeneous groups. Population Stud., 3(Suppl., March 1950): 59-67.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

