Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Genetichygienic impairment through incestuous matings
Carl A. Larson
To cite this article: Carl A. Larson (1956) Genetichygienic impairment through incestuous matings, Eugenics Quarterly, 3:2, 104-106, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1956.9987275 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1956.9987275
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4
View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

GENETIC-HYGIENIC IMPAIRMENT THROUGH INCESTUOUS MATINGS*

CARL A. LARSON
Institute of Genetics University of Lund
Lund, Sweden

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

M,.OST WESTERN SOCIETIES FORBID mat-
ings between members of the same family. Some restrictions of that kind have biological consequences, reducing the numbers of matings between individuals that have at least a 25 per cent chance of having a given chromosome of common origin. Matings of this kind occur between parent and child, brother and sister; grandparent and grand-child, halfbrother and halfsister, uncle and niece, aunt and nephew. Notwithstanding the motivations for such prohibitions, they reduce the incidence of homozygosity for rare recessive genes. Such genes are, in human genetics, best known when causing weakness, illness or specific defects. It would, then, seem possible that transgressions of the incest barrier would cause ill effects to the offspring. The present series illustrates some aspects of that problem.
Data on 6,097 inmates of institutions for mental defectives were filed and completed as to birth district and parentage. Thus 4,466 individuals were observed to have been born to identified parents within Gotaland, a South Swedish region inhabited by 3.4 million people, i.e., 49 per cent of the Swedish population. Of those 4,466 defectives 14, or 0.3 per cent, were from matings prohibited by a law valid until 1937. One aunt-nephew mating, included in the number of 14, was detected in 1939 when cohabitation with a sibs child was not prohibited; in this case the mating

was still illegal because of the mental disease of the mother. When the number of matings between identified individuals was considered, 14 out of ,4,255 were incestuous, i.e., 0.3 per cent.
This incidence of incestuous matings, of the order of first cousin marriages stated for some Central European populations, could be compared with the observations by Kinberg, Inghe and Riemer (1943) of about 30 cases of legally recognized incest each year in Sweden, or 0.5 per 100,000 individuals. About one-fourth of these incestuous unions in the general population occurred between step-father and stepdaughter; in the abnormal material presented here one such mating was included among the 4,255 producing mentally defective offspring, but not in the series of 14 close kin matings.
In 58 cases of incest between father and daughter, speciality studied by Kinberg and co-workers, 17 resulted in pregnancy, or 29 per cent. Lacking more precise data for comparison with the present series, an estimate of 30 births each year would mark the upper limit of issue from legally recognized incestuous unions in the general population. When the yearly number of births in Sweden was taken as roughly 100,000 for the period under investigation, the institutional series contained at least the tenfold rate of incestuous offspring as compared with the legally recognized incidence in the general population.

*Aided by a grant to the Institute of Genetics Out of 14 incestuous births in the pres-

from the Rockefeller Foundation and by a personal grant from the Royal Physiographic Society.

ent series 13 were rural, defined by the

104

105

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

mother's residential community. A higher rural incidence could be expected, as Sonden (1936) had observed that incest was more than twice as frequent in rural districts as in towns. In the present series efforts to secure the identity of fathers even in the many illegitimate unions were in vain in 359 cases, where the proband was born in Gotaland. Among these 359 births 229 were rural, or 63.8 per cent, whereas 2,608 of 4,466 probands with known fathers were born in rural districts, or 58.4 per cent. The difference is significant at the five per cent level, but might be partly due to technicalities in registration of birth communities. Three of those unknown fathers of rural probands were said to be identical with the mothers' fathers, though legal proof was lacking. It is not excluded that the incidence of incest matings was still somewhat higher than this suspected frequency of about one per cent of incests between parents of illegitimately born defectives. The incidence of incestuous births among individuals born in wedlock was not necessarily nil, but still more inaccessible to any estimate. However, since serious forms of incest were, until 1937, punished as sternly as manslaughter or first degree murder, and common opinion is strongly against sex offenders, any conjecture at essentially higher frequencies of mental defectives through incest matings in South Sweden, than observed in the present series, would need additional proof. Possibly 16 out of 2,837, or 0.6 per cent, would not be too far below the real maximum incidence of incestuous births in rural districts within Gotaland, of mental defectives of institutional level, needing special care. Absence of vast city slums (cf. Kinsey and co-workers, 1953) in the region under study admits of reduction, to perhaps 0.3 per cent, of the maximum incidence of such births in urban districts.
Could such estimates be extended to the larger group of perhaps 120,000 mental defectives in Sweden? If so, 360 to 720 of them would stem from incestuous unions,

a yearly contribution of six to twelve mental defectives from incestuous matings, provided that the life span of the defectives measured 60 years. These estimates are somewhat arbitrary, but would probably not be transgressed to any considerable extent. As held forth by Penrose (1949), the incest situation tends to make for institutionalization of the offspring; thus the incidence in an institutional series such as this one would be higher than among defectives outside of institutions. Three legally recognized incestuous births per one thousand mental defectives in the general population would, then, be a maximum incidence.
A limited number of recessive genes are known to cause mental deficiency, mostly of severe degree. Since such genes are rare, the parents of homozygotes are expected to be hétérozygotes, and free from the phenotypic manifestation of the gene. In the present series of 14 probands from incestuous matings such was frequently not the case, subnormal or defective intelligence occurring in one or both partners of at least nine incests. So far the findings are in accord with observations and interpretations of Penrose (1938, 1949), and Kinberg and co-workers (1943) ; very often incest is due to the subnormal or defective intelligence of the partners.
Under such circumstances the genetichygenic impairment through incestuous matings is mainly brought about by defectives breeding their kind. When incest births are rare, as was probably the case in the region under study, they add little to a huge class of defectives. A raised frequency of such births would increase the smaller category of individuals mentally disabled through recessive genes.
REFERENCES
KINBERG, O., INGHE, G. AND RIEMER, S. 1943.
Incestproblemet i Sverige. Bokförlaget Natur och Kultur, Stockholm. KINSEY, A. C. et al. 1953. Sexual Behavior in the Human Female. W. B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia, p. 117. PENROSE, L. S. 1938. A Clinical and Genetic Study

106 Eugenics Quarterly

of 1280 Cases of Mental Defect. Medical Re- fect. Sidgwick and Jackson Limited, London.

search Council. Special Report Series, No. 229. SONDEN, T. 1936. Die Inzestverbrechen in Schweden

His Majesty's Stationery Office, London.

und Ihre Ursachen. Acta Psychiatrica et Neuro-

PENROSE, L. S. 1949. The Biology of Mental De-

logica, 1 2 : Fasc. 4, 379-401

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

HEREDITY COUNSELING The Role of the Doctor*

SHELDON C. REED
The Dight Institute University of Minnesota

M.. OST PHYSICIANS ARE CALLED UPON tO that concerns him? The fact that the pa-

give genetic counseling from time to time. tient wants the information is one good

The patient expects the answers he gets reason. In addition, it may make the dif-

regarding heredity in his family to be of ference between happiness or sorrow for a

the same high quality as the surgical or generation or more in the future.

other medical counseling which he receives. The physician may obtain assistance

Most physicians, however, have had little from the professional geneticist at the

training in medical genetics and may not heredity clinics throughout the country.

be able to give professional service in this But counseling in medical genetics at the

field. The reason that training in medical "grass-roots" level will have to be done by

genetics is still inadequate is that the sub- the family physician in the vast majority

ject is new, and space in the medical cur- of cases.

riculum has not yet been found for it in It is the physician whois likely to have

very many medical schools.

a hand in shaping the future evolution of

Where are the facts to be found which mankind because our reproduction is no

are needed for counseling in medical longer completely capricious. The desire

genetics? They are scattered throughout for a happy family of normal children is

scores of scientific publications, and some one of the strongest human motivations.

of the most useful of these are unavailable For the first time in history the physician

to the practitioner. There are a few texts which describe how heredity works for each one of the vast array of human anomalies. But there are expensive and cumbersome, and none of them gives the physician much help in the job of translating the science of human genetics to his patients.
Why should the doctor try to explain to the patient that a predictable percentage of his children will display the abnormality

is able to be of major assistance in achieving this highest of life's goals. If the couple are sterile, he mayhelp in bringing about fertility. If the couple find that the family is increasing beyond their fondest expectations, he canslow down the flood. In civilized countries responsible parents no longer leave reproduction to the vagaries of chance. The physician officiates at the birth of the child and is the authoritative source

Extracts from Counseling in Medical Genetics, by Sheldon C. Reed, W. B. Saunders, Philadelphia and London, 1955,286 pp. By permission of the author and publisher.

of scientific information about reproduction.
The physician of today not only helps

