Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Timing of first pregnancy as a factor in divorce: A crosscultural analysis
Harold T. Christensen
To cite this article: Harold T. Christensen (1963) Timing of first pregnancy as a factor in divorce: A crosscultural analysis, Eugenics Quarterly, 10:3, 119-130, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1963.9987555 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1963.9987555
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 9
View related articles Citing articles: 8 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

TIMING OF FIRST PREGNANCY AS A FACTOR IN DIVORCE: A CROSS-CULTURAL ANALYSIS

HAROLD T. CHRISTENSEN
Purdue University

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

INTRODUCTION
THIS PAPER is addressed to two separate though related questions pertaining to the spacing of first birth from marriage: 1) What bearing does the timing of first pregnancy have on the success of marriage? 2) What is the relationship between cultural norms concerning conception and the differential effects of the timing of initial parenthood?
In previously reported research the writer found some evidence of a positive relationship between premarital pregnancy and subsequent divorce; a positive relationship between early postmarital conception and subsequent divorce; and greater negative effects from premarital sexual intimacy extant in sexually restrictive as compared with sexually permissive cultures. These findings supported the hypotheses that premarital and early postmarital conception both tend to associate with marriage failure, as measured by divorce, and that failure rates from premarital intimacy are, to some extent, contingent on the permissiveness-restrictiveness of the sex norms of the cultures involved--being greatest where the restrictions are the-greatest, since it is there that behavior stands in sharpest violation of the values held. (Christensen, 1953, 1958a, 1959, 1960; Christensen and Meissner, 1953; Christensen and Rubinstein, 1956; Christensen and Carptenter, 1962a and b).
The present report, designed to supplement the earlier ones by means of new data, replicates those parts of the previous analyses having to do with

pregnancy timing as related to divorce, and, what is perhaps even more important, attempts to fill in certain crucial gaps in the data and in the theory.
PROBLEM AND PROCEDURE
Our long-range concern has been, and is, primarily with the phenomena of premarital intimacy and of child spacing, compared cross-culturally. The attempt has been to understand the various substantive problems, first in their own right, but secondly in light of the surrounding culture considered as an intervening variable. To get at this latter, comparable data were gathered from three contemporary western societies known to differ from each other in regard to sex norms and practices: sexually permissive Denmark, sexually restrictive Mormondom in the Intermountain region of the United States, and Midwestern United States, which is in between but was found to be nearer the restrictive than the permissive end of the continuum. Samples taken from each of these societies were studied by means of both the questionnaire, administered to university students, and a systematic matching of marriage, birth, and divorce records. However, only data from the second of these methodological approaches, known as "record linkage," are of concern here.
The writer's previously reported record-linkage data were gathered for
1 T h e somewhat narrow focus of this paper even precludes treatment of much of these new record-linkage data. Subsequent reports will deal with additional aspects of the problem.

119

120 Christensen

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Utah County, Utah, in the late 1930's; for Tippecanoe County, Indiana, in the early 1950's; and for Copenhagen, Denmark, in the late 1950's. However, the early Utah data came from a pioneering exploration of the method, in which only marriage and birth records were matched; it was not until over a decade later, during the Indiana research, that we conceived of the idea of adding divorce records to the matching process so as to discover how childspacing phenomena relate to marriage failure. This was done in Indiana and Denmark, but the earlier Utah data remained deficient. Consequently, our report on cross-cultural differences concerning the effect of premarital pregnancy on divorce compared Indiana and Denmark only. Since premarital pregnancy showed a greater effect on divorce rate in Indiana than Denmark (or in the more restrictive of the two cultures, as hypothesized), we hazarded the guess that its negative effect would be even greater in Utah, which has an even more restrictive culture than Indiana. (Christensen, 1960, pp. 36-39.) But our guess remained speculation and further research was indicated.
Opportunity to update the Utah data, and to make it completely comparable with the others by including divorce, came through a grant from the Purdue Research Foundation for work during the summer of 1961. At that time we recorded on a separate 4 x 6 card each marriage occurring in Utah County during 1949-51 and in Salt Lake County during 1950, along with names and other relevant data. The cards were arranged alphabetically and then checked against the divorce records for the two counties and the birth records for the entire state, from the earliest marriage date through 1960. For each successful matching, ad-

ditional data, including date of birth of first child and/or of divorce, were added to the card.2 In the analysis, data from the two contiguous counties were combined to provide larger N's.
GENERAL FINDINGS FROM THE NEW DATA
The over-all sample consisted of 5,157 marriages. Of these, 2,699 cases (52.4%) were successfully matched with birth records and 336 (6.5%) with divorce records, following the procedure described above.3
More than two thirds (77.1%) of all first births were found to have occurred within the first two years of marriage, and more than two-fifths (40.9%) within the first year. Premarital pregnancy, as measured by birth within the first six months of marriage, constituted only 3.4% of all first births; and as measured by birth within the first nine months, 15.7%. A shorter than average interval to first birth was found to be associated with such factors as young age at marriage, a civil or nonchurch wedding, and an unskilled or laboring occupation.
Several general points, preliminary to our central analyses, can be made with reference to divorce percentages. First, the birth-not-found group showed a considerably higher percentage than the birth-found group (8.3 vs. 4.9), suggestting not only that early divorce tends to beat the stork but that divorce-prone couples may (more than others and specifically because of their difficulty) de-
2Marriages occurring in Utah County, 1939-41, were also studied, but are not part of this analysis.
3Due to limitations in the method unknown numbers of matchings were lost; namely, cases in which the first birth occurred outside of Utah, or in which divorce occurred (or is to occur) outside of either Utah County or Salt Lake County or later in time than the year 1960. Though it is believed that bias introduced by this loss is either nonexistent or insignificant, a later paper will further explore the matter.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Timing of Pregnancy

121

liberately put off starting their families. Second, in the great majority of cases (78.0%) the wife sued for divorce, a fact well in line with usual practice as reported by virtually all studies. Third, young age of bride was found to be associated with high divorce rate (of the couples with a child, 7.5% of brides under age 20, as compared with 2.S% of all others). Fourth, low social class, as measured by occupation of father, showed disproportionately high divorce (of the couples with a child, 7.1% of unskilled laborers, as compared with 4.1% of all others). Fifth, the civil wedding group produced a substantially higher divorce percentage than the religious wedding group (of the couples with a child, 14.1% compared with 4.6.%)
Most of the divorcing couples took action relatively soon after marriage. Average (mean) duration of marriage prior to divorce was 4.7 years. Eighteen percent of all divorces occurred before the first wedding anniversary, another

18.0% before the second, and an additional 17.0% before the third--or 53.0%, over half, within the first three years of marriage. Furthermore, there was found to be a general negative relationship between divorce rate and marriage duration; that is, the interval categories with higher than average divorce rates tended to have shorter than average marriage durations prior to the breakup.
The above named findings, to repeat, are from the most recent Utah study covering Salt Lake and Utah counties. They support the writer's earlier findings on most of these points derived from previous studies of samples from Indiana and Denmark. But, since they are given here largely as background information, there is little need now for further elaboration.
HYPOTHESES FOR CROSS-CULTURAL TESTING
Table 1 presents the recent Utah data on spacing of the first birth from marriage, alongside earlier comparable data

TABLE 1
FREQUENCY AND PERCENTACE DISTRIBUTIONS IN THE THREE SAMPLES BY INTERVAL TO FIRST BIRTH

Interval to First Birth

Number Denmark Indiana

Utah

Denmark

Percent Indiana

Utah

1st Year of Marriage
(1) 0-181 days (6 months)
(2) 182-272 days (3 months)
(3) 273-363 days (3 months)
2nd Year of Marriage (4) 364-727 days
3rd through 5th Year (5) 728-1819 days
6th Year and After (6) 1820 days and over* (7) Total

249 148 93 24.2 9.4 3.4

65 238 333

6.3 15.1 12.3

62 274 679

6.0 17.3 25.2

181 499 976 17.6 31.6 36.2

320 372 536 31.1 23.5 19.9

(est.)
152 50 82 14.8 3.2 3.0 1029 1581 2699 100.0 100.1 100.0

·In the Danish sample, birth records were searched for a 16-year period following the last marriage, and in the Utah sample it was 10 years; thus, in both cases the inclusion of all first births (except those lost through migration) is virtually assured. However, in the Indiana sample the birth record search was for only a 5-year period. The 50 cases shown in this line for Indiana is an estimate, based on a method of extrapolation whereby a 50% decrease between the number in successive year groups was assumed (this_ is the approximate percentage for each yearly difference from the second to fifth years) and projected into the future.

122 Christensen

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

from Denmark and Indiana.4 The picture of contrasting normative systems is clear and dramatic: Denmark with relatively high premarital conception, low early postmarital conception, and high late postmarital conception; Utah at the other extreme, with low premarital and low late postmarital, but high early postmarital conception; and Indiana in between on every point. In comparison with Indiana and especially with each other, Danish couples tend either to start their families before marriage or to delay for awhile afterwards; whereas Utah couples tend to avoid these two extremes and to concentrate the beginnings of parenthood within the early months of marriage.
A very important problem for family sociologists is to understand how unconventional sexual behavior affects marriage. Many societies, including our own, frown upon premarital coitus and stigmatize the offenders--especially when conception occurs. But the nature and strength of such sanctions differ in both time and place. It might be hypothesized, therefore, that premarital pregnancy will tend to affect the marriage negatively, and that the degree of this effect will increase with each increase in negative sanctions regarding it. Thus, it may be assumed for purposes of testing that there is a cultural relativism of effects as well as of behavior, and that sexual permissiveness is associated with high coital behavior, accompanied by
4The Indiana data come from Tippecanoe County marriages, 1919-21, 1929-31, and 1939-41, matched with county birth records searched for five years following the wedding (with estimated matchings for beyond five years), and matched with county divorce records searched up to the end of 1952. The Danish data were derived from a sample of every third marriage occurring in Copenhagen during 1938, matched with birth and divorce records for 16 years following the wedding, eliminating remarriages and cases in which the bride was 30 or more years old.

low negative effect, while sexual restrictiveness is associated with low coital behavior before marriage but high rates of negative effect.
Actually this is exactly what we discovered in our earlier comparison of Denmark with Indiana: in both of these cultures premarital pregnancy was found to be associated with disproportionately high divorce rate, and the disproportion was significantly greater in Indiana than Denmark (Christensen, 1960, pp. 36-38).5 But what of the Mormon culture of Utah, which, because of the absence of divorce data was omitted from the earlier analysis? If our hunch holds, this culture, being the most restrictive of the three regarding premarital coitus, should show the greatest disproportion (of divorce rate from the premarital pregnancy group compared with divorce rate from the postmarital pregnancy group) of the three. The recent Utah data described above offered a nice opportunity to retest the hypothesis and thus further validate the theory.
In addition to considering premarital versus postmarital pregnancy as related to marital outcome, family sociologists also need to understand how marriage is affected by early as opposed to late postmarital conception. From the standpoint of the success or failure of the marriage, is it better to start the family right off or to delay for awhile until husband and wife have the opportunity to adjust to each other before the relationship is complicated by pregnancy or parenthood? There have been arguments on both sides but very little data
5The cross-cultural questionnaire data permitted comparisons between the Utah sample and the other two samples, and certain additional measures of negative effects--such as guilt feelings following first premarital coitus--showed up highest in the Utah group, as hypothesized (Christensen and Carpenter, 1962b, pp. 72-74).

Timing of Pregnancy

123

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

presented. What we do have suggests that couples who conceive immediately after marriage are put to a disadvantage.6
Here too our hunch is that the effects, to some extent, may be a function of cultural norms. If it proves to be true that early as opposed to late postmarital conception works against the adjustments of the couple, we would hazard the guess that this negative effect will be least in cultures where early postmarital conception is the norm, and vice versa.
In other words, it may be hypothesized that the negative effects of any pattern of pregnancy timing (premarital, early postmarital, or late postmarital) will vary directly with the discrepancy between cultural norm and actual behavior. Specifically, we may hypothesize that:
1) Divorce rate will be higher for premarital than for postmarital pregnancy cases.
2) Divorce rate differentials between premarital and postmarital pregnancy categories will be greatest in the most restrictive culture (Utah) and least in the most permissive (Denmark).
3) Divorce rate will be higher for early than for late postmarital pregnancy cases.
4) Divorce rate differentials between early and late postmarital pregnancy categories will be greatest in the culture which normally delays first postmarital pregnancy longest (Denmark) and least in the culture which normally has first postmarital pregnancy the earliest (Utah).
PREMARITAL PREGNANCY AS RELATED TO DI-
VORCE.
The first part of Table 2 presents data on divorce, broken down by interval to first birth, for each of the three cultures under investigation. The last three columns, showing divorce rates, are of special interest. No importance should

be attached to the magnitudes of the individual figures as seen cross-culturally, since these rates were built from differing coverages of divorce records and are not absolute.7 The phenomenon that specially interests us is the cross-cultural picture of rate change relative to the spacing of the first child. In this regard, it will be noted that in all three cultures divorce rate and interval to first birth are negatively related. Especially relevant to the point now under discussion is the finding that divorce rate is highest for those who bore their first child within the first six months of marriage (premarital pregnancy certain) and next highest for those whose first child was born during the seventh, eighth, or ninth months after marriage (premarital pregnancy probable). The three cultures did not differ in this over-all pattern.
Since early divorce often interferes with reproduction, the lower than average divorce rates for the late conceivers may possibly be accounted for by the fact that disproportionately more of divorcing couples who delayed conception, as compared with those who did not, would be left in the childless category and thus eliminated from the sample under analysis. It is important, therefore, that the raw figures be cor-
6Actually, the problem has been inadequately studied. The writer knows only, of his own previous analyses from Indiana and Danish data, which tentatively concluded that early conception is the more hazardous from the standpoint of divorce (Christensen and Meissner, 1953, pp. 642-44; Christensen, 1959, pp. 41-43; and Christensen, 1958b, pp. 205-208).
7Whereas in the Indiana and Utah samples only the divorce records of the sample counties were searched, in Denmark the recording system established by law has presumably picked up all divorces regardless of where they occurred--a fact explaining the higher rates for Denmark shown in Table 1. Furthermore, as explained in footnote 4, the time spans of the divorce record searches have differed from sample to sample.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

124 Christensen

TABLE 2
DIVORCE DIFFERENTIALS IN EACH OF THE THREE SAMPLES BY INTERVAL TO FIRST BIRTH

Interval to First Birth

No. of Divorces Denmark Indiana Utah

I. Original Samples

lstYr. of Marriage

(1) 0-181 days

78 25 16

(6 months)

(2) 182-272 days

16 31 40

(3 months)

(3) 273-363 days

14 25 24

(3 months)

2nd Yr. of Marriage

(4) 364-727 days

35 35 33

3rd through 5th Yr.

(5) 728-1819 days

59 21 18

6th Yr. and After

(6) 1820 days and over 13

/oof \
(est.)

2

(7) Total

215 139 133

II. Adjusted Samplesf

lstYr. of Marriage (8) 0-181 days

78 25 16

(6 months)

(9) 182-272 days

16 31 40

(3 months)

(10) 273-363 days

22 27 37

(3 months)

2nd Yr. of Marriage (11) 364-727 days

59 39 53

3rd through 5th Yr. (12) 728-1819 days

102 24 29

6th Yr. and After (13) 1820 days and over 36 2 4

(14 Total

313 148 179

% Divorced* Denmark Indiana
31.3 16.9 24.6 13.0 22.6 9.1
19.3 7.0 18.4 5.6
8.6 4.0 20.9 8.8
31.3 16.9 24.6 13.0 31.4 9.8
28.8 7.8 28.1 6.4 20.6 4.0 27.8 9.4

Utah
17.2 12.0 3.5
3.4 3.4
2.4 4.9
17.2 12.0 5.3
5.3 5.3 4.8 6.5

·Calculated by using the frequencies of Table 1 as the base figures; to illustrate, 78 (the first figure in the first column) was divided by 249 (the first figure in the first column of Table 1) to give 31.3%.
The reader should not attempt to compare these percentages cross-culturally line by line; since our search of the divorce records was for differing lengths of time in the three cultures, and since the proportions of the divorces that were found might be affected differentially by varying patterns of population mobility, such comparisons would be meaningless. These are not absolute divorce rates. It is the divorce rate differentials on pregnancy timing within each culture, as seen by examining the columns vertically, that interests us here. Then, these over-all patterns--of divorce rate relative to pregnancy timing--can be compared cross-culturally, as is done in Table 3.
·¡·Adjusted to take marriage rate duration into account. First, estimates were made of the numbers of childless divorced couples who would have borne a child if divorce had not interfered; these cases were then added into the child spacing categories involving 273 days and above (shorter interval categories were omitted because of the impossibility of divorce preventing a premarital conception) ; and, finally, the divorce percentages were recalculated.
To illustrate: In the Danish sample, 88.7% of the nondivorced group had children, as compared with 60.9% of the divorced group. On the assumption that 88.7% of the divorced group would have had children if they hadn't gotten divorced, additional fertile cases among the divorced were estimated at 98 (88.7%) of 353 total divorce cases, or 313 cases, less the 215 divorce cases which actually showed up as fertile). These 98 cases were then distributed into the interval categories, for both total and divorce cases, according to a percentage distribution derived from lines 3 through 6 of the first column of Table I. Similar procedures were followed for the Indiana sample, where 36.5% of the nondivorced had children as compared with 34.3% of the divorced; and foT the Utah sample, where the percentages were 53.2 and 39.6, respectively.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Timing of Pregnancy

125

rected to take marriage duration into account. The second half of Table 2 represents a step in this direction. We have estimated the numbers of childless divorced couples who would have borne a child if divorce had not interfered, and have added these cases into appropriate child spacing categories, and then recalculated the divorce percentages. Assumptions back of this procedure are: first, that if divorce hadn't occurred, the same percentages of the divorced groups would have had children as the nondivorced groups; and second, that for those estimated to have been deprived of parenthood by divorce, the distributions of interval to first birth would have been the same as for the nondivorced.8
This attempt to control marriage duration has not changed the picture of higher divorce rates in the premarital pregnancy categories--though it has lessened the differentials and, in the case of Denmark, has made the divorce hazard about equal between the definitely premarital and early postmarital (Table 2, lines 8 and 10).
Since divorce is used here as a measure of marriage failure and may be presumed to be a negative effect of premarital pregnancy,9 it is also important that we study its relative relationship to premarital pregnancy among the three cul-

tures. In other words, we desire to know if culture has any influence on the degree to which premarital pregnancy couples have higher divorce rates than postmarital pregnancy couples. A first approach to this question may be found in Table 2, where Danish divorce percentages are shown to decrease more or less uniformly with each increase in interval to first birth, whereas divorce percentages for both Indiana and Utah take a sharp drop between the premarital and postmarital conception categories (lines 1 and 2 compared with line 3).
This question is further examined in Table 3, Part I, which compares couples who unquestionably were pregnant before marriage (0-181 days intervals) and those whose first pregnancy was definitely postmarital but not delayed too long after marriage (364-727 days intervals) . We attempted to refine the analysis by eliminating the somewhat questionable cases with intervals between six and nine months (where prematurity plus some normal variation in length of gestation make the determination of premarital pregnancy less exact) and both the very early and very late conception cases (which may be atypical in some respects), leaving only the definitely premarital cases to be sized up alongside the somewhat normal postmarital cases.10 It can be seen that Denmark shows the

8Except that divorce could not have prevented a premarital conception; hence, only those interval categories involving births of nine months or more from marriage were used in the calculations. See footnote 2, Table 2, for greater detail on the procedure.
9This is not to to suggest, certainly, that all of the statistical association herein reported is to be causally explained. Indeed, it seems probable that some of it is simply a matter of selection, in that divorce-prone couples may be the ones most likely to get pregnant out of wedlock because of the personality and background factors which make them divorce-prone to start with. Furthermore, when couples are pressured into marriage because of pregnancy,

they may be more likely to fail, not so much because of the pregnancy, but because of a lack of maturity, or preparation, or love, or whatever it is that normally helps marriage to succeed. Nevertheless, the presumption that premarital pregnancy does act as a contributing factor to divorce in some cases, because of guilt feelings and added social complications, is supported by logic and by some of our previously reported data. (Christensen and Rubinstein, 1956).
10Statistically speaking, births during the second year of marriage represent the modal, and hence normal, pattern in all three cultures when just postmarital conception cases are considered.

126 Christensen

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

TABLE 3
CROSS-CULTURAL COMPARISONS OF DIVORCE RATE DIFFERENTIALS

Type of Comparison*

Percentage Difference]-
Den- Indimark ana Utah

I. Between Postmarital and Premarital Pregnancy Groups
A, Original sample (Table 2,
lines 4 & 1) B. Adjusted sample
(Table 2, lines 11 & 8)

625 141.4 405.9 8.7 116.7 224.5

II. Between Normal and Early Postmarital Pregnancy Groups A. Original sample (Table 2,
lines 4 & 3) B. Adjusted sample
(Table 2, lines 11 & 10)

17.1 30.0 2.9 9.0 25.6 0.0

III. Between Normal and Late

Postmarital Pregnancy

Groups

A. Original sample

(Table 2,

lines 4 & 5)

--4.7 --20.0

B. Adjusted sample

(Table 2,

lines 11 & 12)

--2.4 --17.9

0.0 0.0

·In every case, births during the second year of marriage are considered as the modal or normal pattern; hence, this category is used as the base for calculating percentage differences between divorce percentages, as indicated.
·(·Calculated from the percentages of Table 2. The procedure was to subtract line 4 (or line 11, as the case might be) from the line being compared and then divide the difference by line 4 or line 11); thus, 31.3 minus 19.9, divided by 19.3, gives 62.2.

lowest, Indiana the next, and Utah the highest percentage difference in divorce rate between premarital and postmarital conceivers. The cross-cultural difference in this regard is very clear and convincing--a 62% differential on the one extreme compared with 406% on the other (or 9% and 225% respectively when the adjusted sample is considered). As hypothesized, the most permissive of the cultures (Denmark) shows the least negative effect from premarital pregnancy

and the most restrictive of the cultures (Utah) the greatest negative effect. The inclusion of Utah data into the analysis has given additional support to the earlier, somewhat speculative generalization.
POSTMARITAL PREGNANCY
TIMING AND DIVORCE
Tables 2 and 3 are relevant also to the question of early versus late timing of first pregnancy after marriage. Table 2 shows that in general the relationship is a negative one; that is, the longer the interval to first birth the lower the divorce rate. This is true in the original samples and in the adjusted samples, wherein the effects of marriage duration have been controlled--though differentials in the Utah sample, smallest of the three to start with, were entirely eliminated by this latter procedure.
Table 3, Parts II and III, shows percentage differences between two sets of divorce rates. Again, second-year births are considered most normal, and hence this category is used as the base for comparison. It is compared first with the early conception category (births 273-363 days after the wedding, which means that conception took place within the first three months of marriage) and next with the late conception category (births in the third, fourth, and fifth years after marriage) . The very late conception category (births six or more years after marriage) was ignored, since the data here are less reliable and the cases relatively few.
For Denmark and Indiana, the secondyear-birth category showed lower divorce rates than the early conceiver category, and higher than the late conceiver category. Except for the first of these comparisons, and only then when the original or uncorrected data were used, Utah showed no divorce rate differentials

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Timing of Pregnancy

127

by timing of first conception from marriage. Further, Indiana, not Denmark, had the largest divorce rate differentials separating the postmarital pregnancy groups. This latter was contrary to expectation; and we see no very clear explanation for it in the data at hand.11 The difference between Utah and the other two cultures in this regard was expected, however. Early postmarital conception represents the norm in Mormon culture, and so when it happens it is less likely than in the other cultures to affect the marriage adversely.
SUMMARY AND THEORY
Recent record-linkage data from Utah have been analyzed alongside similar data previously reported for Indiana and Denmark, in order to better understand the relationship of the timing of first pregnancy to marital success, and to determine how cultural norms may affect this relationship. Marriage records were matched with birth records, to get at the timing of first pregnancy in relation to the wedding; and then further matched with divorce records to see which marriages ended in failure as measured in this way. The sexually restrictive Mormon culture of Utah, the somewhat restrictive but typically American culture of Indiana, and the rather

permissive Scandanavian culture as represented by Denmark provided a suitable range for cross-cultural testing.
The over-all relationship between first pregnancy timing and divorce rate was found to be negative; that is, the shorter the interval between marriage and first birth the higher the divorce rate. This was true both for the original data and for hypothetical data adjusted to control the effect of marriage duration. The conclusions that premarital pregnancy is more likely to be followed by divorce than is postmarital pregnancy, and that early postmarital pregnancy is more likely to be followed by divorce than is delayed postmarital pregnancy seem almost inescapable.
But one exception and another near exception, which modify the above generalizations, become apparent when the control for marriage duration was introduced. The near exception is in the premarital-postmarital comparison for Denmark; though the divorce rate differential was in the expected direction when second-year births were considered, no differential was found when early postmarital conception was considered (see Table 2, lines 8 and 10). The rather clear exception is in the early-late postmarital comparisons for Utah; no differentials were found (see Table 2, lines

11However, our data have revealed two crosscultural patterns which at least suggest an explanation: 1) Indiana was the only one of the three cultures showing a tendency to hurry the wedding following a discovery of premarital pregnancy; Danish couples were not rushed into marriage by this, and Utah couples, it was presumed, speeded up the marriage if and when coitus was started, without waiting for a pregnancy to force them (Christensen, 1960, pp 35-36). It may be that this panic behavior, which especially characterizes Indiana in regard to premarital pregnancy, also characterizes it in regard to very early postmarital pregnancy, since both patterns find strong disapproval in the culture. Whereas in the first instance it can be presumed that Indiana couples marry hurriedly in order to escape the public gaze, in the

second instance it can be reasoned that they feel the pressure of social disapproval and that the guilt thus engendered works against their marital adjustments. Perhaps in Indiana, more than in either Utah or Denmark, it is considered naive to get pregnant too soon after marriage. 2) Our Midwestern sample was the least homogeneous of the samples from the three cultures regarding religious affiliation, attitudes toward premarital sexual intimacy, attitudes toward postmarital infidelity, and perhaps other variables (Christensen, 1962, pp. 134-35). It may be that this greater heterogeneity of Midwestern culture reflects itself in correspondingly greater ambiguity in norms for starting the family, which in turn results in greater frustration and maladjustment in the marriage. These explanations, of course, are speculative and need to be tested.

128 Christensen

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

10, 11, and 12). Thus, in sexually permissive Denmark whether the first pregnancy is premarital or postmarital seems to make little difference; and in Utah, which is premaritally restrictive but encouraging of early parenthood within marriage, whether the first pregnancy comes early or late following the wedding seems to make no difference. At least these contrasts between cultures are in the expected directions.
There are at least two reasons for the association of divorce with premarital pregnancy. In the first place, it is safe to assume that many pregnant couples feel pressured into marriage; they marry because they are pregnant and not because they are in love, and hence it may be presumed that they are ill-prepared and divorce-prone to start with. These result in the "shotgun marriages" one hears so much about. Since couples in this predicament are reluctant, they tend to put off marriage as long as possible and hence disproportionately more of them have the first child very soon after marriage. These groups, as shown in lines 1 and 8 of Table 2, have the very highest divorce rates of all. But a second reason for the association of divorce with premarital pregnancy may be presumed to be in the nature of causation more than selection. Some pregnant couples --even though in love and otherwise well prepared for marriage--may harbor feelings of guilt or blame or may be made anxious due to the disapproving judgment of others; and these feelings may mean frustrations which interfere -with adjustment. Couples of this kind tend to marry soon after discovery of pregnancy and, as shown by lines 2 and '9 of Table 2, end up with a divorce tendency lower than that of the first group but higher than for all groups of postmarital conceivers (Denmark ex·cepted).

Likewise there appear to be at least two good reasons why early postmarital conceivers show higher divorce rates than those who delay for several months or years after the wedding. The first of these has to do with frustrations coming from unsuccessful birth control. Separate studies have found that early conceivers in marriage have disproportionate numbers of unplanned pregnancies (Poffenberger et al., 1952) and that couples with unplanned children have lower than average marriage adjustment scores (Christensen and Philbrick, 1952). When these two facts are put together it becomes apparent that the value-behavior discrepancy of many early conceivers, whereby they find themselves pregnant without wanting to be, is a likely factor in the higher than average divorce rate of this group. But a second explanation, which seems to have good logic but little research in support, is that very early postmarital conceivers tend to complicate their adjustments by a pregnancy and then a child before there has been time for their own marital relationships to settle down. Further research on this point is needed, but in the meantime it seems safe to assume that successful marriage is more likely where the couple eases into parenthood by delaying it until the minimal marital adjustments have taken place.
Though culture does not seem to affect the direction, it has been found to affect the degree of relationship between divorce and timing of first pregnancy. Two contrasting cross-cultural patterns have been found, the first pertaining to premarital and the second to postmarital pregnancy. Regarding the first, it has been demonstrated that divorce varies negatively with permissiveness in sex norms; the most permissive culture (Denmark) produced the lowest divorce rate differential between premarital and post-

Timing of Pregnancy

129

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

marital conceivers, and the most restrictive culture (Utah) the highest differential. This finding, made possible by the recent acquisition of fresh data from Utah, verifies our earlier generalizations on cultural relativism as applied to the effects of premarital intimacy (Christensen, 1960, pp. 36-39; Christensen and Carpenter, 1962b). Clearly, negative effects are greatest where permissiveness is least, and vice versa--probably because of variations in discrepancy between norms and performance.
With the second cross-cultural pattern, that comparing early and late postmarital conceivers, the picture is different. Here it was the most restrictive culture (Utah) that produced the lowest divorce rate differential--no differential at all when the data were adjusted to control marriage duration--and the moderately restrictive culture (Indiana) the highest differential. Nevertheless, this nearly opposite finding for postmarital conceivers is also in line with expectation (except that Denmark rather than Indiana should have shown the highest differential), since behavior norms, cross-culturally compared, are exactly opposite for early postmarital conception than for premarital conception. Denmark has the greatest proportion of premarital conceivers and Utah the smallest, whereas Utah has the greatest proportion of early postmarital conceivers and Denmark the smallest (Table 1). Therefore, if divorce rate is to reflect value-behavior discrepancies, as hypothesized, we would expect Utah divorce rates to be relatively highest of the three cultures with respect to premarital pregnancies and relatively lowest of the three with respect to early postmarital pregnancies--and this is exactly what was found. Furthermore, we would expect just the opposite for Denmark--an expectation that was met with respect to

premarital but not with respect to early postmarital conception.
The belief that the negative effects of behavior will vary directly with the discrepancy between that behavior and the cultural norms which either support or condemn it, still seems a plausible hypothesis. It has been given additional support by the research reported here.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The writer was assisted in gathering of the new Utah data by his wife, Alice; his son, Larry; Kenneth Cannon of Brigham Young University, who is also responsible for some of the research ideas; Professor Cannon's two daughters, Connie and Ruth; Utah County Clerk, Mr. Boyack, and Salt Lake County Clerk, Mr. Keddington, who made the marriage and divorce records available and provided space to work on them; and John W. Wright, Director, Division of Vital Statistics, Utah Department of Health, who provided many hours of staff time for the rather extensive checking of the birth records. Later, Jean Pavela, a graduate student at Purdue University, provided valuable assistance in checking, calculating the time intervals, and coding the data for card punching. Edward Dager and Robert Perrucci, of Purdue University, went over the first draft of the paper as critics and provided several very helpful suggestions.
REFERENCES
CHRISTENSEN, H. T., 1953. Studies in child spacing: I. Premarital pregnancy as measured by the spacing of the first birth from marriage. Am. Sociological Review, 18(1): 53-59. , 1958a. Value variables in pregnancy timing: Some intercultural comparisons. In Neis Anderson, ed., Studies of the Family, Gottingen, Germany, Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht. Vol. 3, pp. 29-45. , 1958b. Marriage Analysis. Ronald Press, New York, pp. 205-208. , 1959. Selected aspects of child spacing in Denmark. Acta Sociologica, 4 (2) : 35-45.

130 Christensen

, 1960. Cultural relativism and premarital sex norms. Am. Sociological Review, 25 (1) : 31-39.
, 1962. A cross-cultural comparison of attitudes toward marital infidelity. Int. J. Comp. Sociology, 3 (1); 124-137. (See especially pp. 134-135.)
, and G. R. CARPENTER, 1962a. Timing patterns in the development of sexual intimacy. Marriage and Family Living, 24 (1): 30-35.
, and G. R. CARPENTER, 1962b. Valuebehavior discrepancies regarding premarital coitus in three Western cultures. Am. Sociological Review, 27 (1) : 66-74.

, and H. H. MEISSNER, 1953. Studies in child spacing: III. Premarital pregnancy as a factor in divorce. Am. Sociological Review, 18 (6) : 641-644.
, and R. E. PHILBRICK, 1952. Family size as a factor in the marital adjustments of college couples. Am. Sociological Review, 17: 306-312.
, and B. B. RUBINSTEIN, 1956. Pre-
marital pregnancy and divorce. A follow-up study by the interview method. Marriage and Family Living, 18(2): 114-123.
POFFENBERGER, S.,T. POFFENBERGER, a n d J. T.
LANDIS, 1952. Intent toward conception and the pregnancy experience. Am. Sociological Review, 1 7 : 616-620.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

