Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Reply to Cracraft's comments
Pete E. Lestrel
To cite this article: Pete E. Lestrel (1967) Reply to Cracraft's comments, Eugenics Quarterly, 14:4, 300-301, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1967.9987742 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1967.9987742
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:29

REPLY TO CRACRAFT'S COMMENTS
PETE E. LESTREL Department of Anthropology University of California, Los Angeles

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

Cracraft's comments regarding my tendency to define "adaptation" in terms of an "indiscriminate use of mathematical symbols" reflects an unfortunate bias. There seems to be a lack of understanding here regarding the use of mathematical approach. Nevertheless, at the risk of sounding presumptive, it should be remembered that modern science is composed of two facets lucidly stated by Hans Reichenbach (1953):
. . . it must be recalled that experimental method, however revolutionary its appearance on the scene turned out to be, is only one of the two major instruments of modern science. The other is the use of mathematical methods for the establishment of scientific explanation.
and again
The mathematical method has given modern physics its predictive power. Whoever speaks of empirical science should not forget that observation and experiment have been capable of building up modern science only because they were combined with mathematical deduction.
The present difficulty with such an approach in the life sciences lies not with any defect on the part of the practitioners but rather on the formidable complexity of life processes. If it could be readily demonstrated that "adaptation" could be reduced to a simple formula such as E = mc2 and experimentally verified then many of the often semantical difficulties would disappear.
Cracraft's objection, "The concepts of adaptation and fitness certainly bear a relationship to one another, but it is by no means true, as was stated by Lestrel,

that these terms are synonymous," shows the terminological difficulties. To quote Lewontin (1958):
There is virtually universal disagreement among students of evolution as to the meaning of adaptation. Within a population the relative adaptive value or fitness of a genotype can be rigorously defined as the relative ability of individuals of that genotype to contribute offspring to successive generations.
Dobzhansky (1955) succinctly stated that:
Attempts have been made to draw distinctions between adaptness, fitness, and selective value. Given the present unsatisfactory level of knowledge, it is perhaps best to treat them as synonyms.
It should be clear then that the "synonymity" to which Cracraft refers is a matter of definition. It is not too surprising that Cracraft did not find Wright (1949) using the words "adaptation" or "fitness." Wright, in fact, has preferred the words "selective value" in their stead. In addition, a look at the equations of Wright and others would have alleviated the terminological difficulty as it is generally clear that the same variable is indicated.
The population geneticist prefers to define adaptation in rather narrow terms, a necessity, otherwise the number of variables would be so great making any scientific analysis next to impossible.
Cracraft's statement that "To almost all evolutionists the concept of adaptation has centered around the interaction between the organism and its en-

300

Vol. 14, No. 4

Brief Reports

301

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

vironment," is a sweeping generalization reducible to a truism with which noone would care to argue. The difficulty with such statements is that they are tautological in nature. The replacement of the word adaptation by selection should make the circular reasoning clear.
The semantic difficulties again arise with Cracraft's assumption that "It is also important to realize that the ability to modify the adult phenotype with changes in the environment is itself an evolutionary adaptation." This statement needs to be qualified to include the hereditary transmission of such modifications.
Cracraft implies an opposition between Bock and Wahlert's viewpoint (1965) and the principles outlined in my previous communicaiton. That this is largely illusionary is made clear bythe following quote:
Students of genetics and especially of population genetics are most concerned with the changes in the genetical frequencies of the gene pool . . . Lerner, for example, defines selection as: "Selection can be defined in terms of its observable consequences as the non-random differential reproduction of genotypes." This definition is just as correct as our definition, but expresses selection in terms of its results instead of its action. This definition does not clarify what factors act upon the organism to produce the nonrandom differential reproduction of genotypes nor does it indicate how

these factors act. Our definition is clear on these points, but does not give any clue as to the consequences of natural selection on the genetic composition of the population. The differences between these definitions are minor and do not deserve further discussion.
Bock and Wahlert's thesis utilizing energy principles has theoretical validity and it is interesting to note that Lotka (1924) anticipated such an application already at an early date. Considerable difficulties remain however, in view of the immense complexity of the evolutionary process, before such energy principles can be translated directly into evolutionary concepts. The guiding principle, by which science progresses, is that all theoretical constructs must become amenable to verification by experiment.
REFERENCES
BOCK, W. J., and G. VON WAHLERT, 1965. Adapta-
tion and the form-function complex. Evolution, 19: 269-299. DOBZHANSKY, T., 1955. A review of some of the fundamental concepts and problems of population genetics. Cold Spring Harbor Symposium, Quant. Biol. 20: 1-15. LEWONTIN, R. C., 1958. "The Adaptations of populations in varying environments." Cold Spring Harbor Symposium, Quant. Biol. 22: 395-408. LOTKA, A. J., 1924. Elements of Mathematical Biology. Dover Publications, Inc.,New York. REICHENBACH, H., 1953. The Rise of Scientific Philosophy. The University of California Press, LosAngeles, Calif. WRIGHT, S., 1949. "Adaptation and Selection." In G. L. Jepsen, E. Mayr, and G. G. Simpson (eds.), Genetics, Paleontology and Evolution. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.

