Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Family policy in France
Dominique Ceccaldi
To cite this article: Dominique Ceccaldi (1957) Family policy in France, Eugenics Quarterly, 4:3, 148-152, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1957.9987321 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1957.9987321
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:24

FAMILY POLICY IN FRANCE

DOMINIQUE CECCALDI
Ministry of Public Health and Population Paris, France

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

·TRANCE'S FAMILY POLICY HAS BEEN one of
her most unusual characteristics for the last 15 years. The idea of a family policy, directed by the State, contradicts the individualistic traditions of the French people for whom the family represents the natural sanctuary of their privacy.
Today, however, about 1,300 billion francs, or 9 per cent of the national income, is allotted by the government to the annual budget for family relief measures. To explain this enormous collective effort, we should look first into the basic principles of family policy before examining its methods and evaluating its first results.
The Foundations of Family Policy
The French experiment is guided by three main principles: a demographic concern, a search for social justice, and a psycho-sociological objective. The Demographic Goal--During the years of international tension after World War I France became aware of the gravity of the demographic situation. From 1920 to 1939 the population rose about 7 per cent, which was only one-half that of Germany and of Italy and one-fourth that of Eastern Europe. In 1939 the Code de la Famille, the plan to aid the economic condition of the French family and thus raise the birth rate, was passed. Social Justice--The State also set itself the task of making social justice prevail. Industrialization had taken away from the family its economic function since before the lawful regulation of child labor, children brought their wages home. After

child-labor laws were enacted, the family resources tended to dwindle, especially since the education of children became more and more expensive.
The idea of compensation for child dependents rapidly gained ground, even in countries with a predominantly capitalistic concept, as in the United States and Switzerland. The institution of family allotments in twenty-five countries under different forms and to varying degrees is proof of this, and in 1947 it received its sublimation with the declaration of human rights in Article 23: "Whoever works is entitled to an equitable and satisfying remuneration, assuring him, as well as his family, an existence that conforms with human dignity, and to be completed, if possible, by all the means of social protection."
The French law stems from the same concept; the compensation of family dependents is inspired not from the idea of social charity but from that of justice. It tends toward the redistribution of the national income by permitting everyone who works to found a family, with assurance of provision for the main needs of his family. This redistribution is even more necessary because the general wage level is rather low.
Psycho-Sociological Aspects -- Social and demographic aspects, however, give only a partial view of the family policy, which is dominated by ideas that have evolved mainly since the beginning of the century. The experiment of the Soviet Union in this field shows that predictions about free union and collective upbringing of chil-

149

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

dren have turned out to be erroneous. Soci- an influence on living conditions, family

ologists, geneticists, pediatricians, and psy- structure, fertility, and stability of a family

chiatrists agree that the family unit, as a unit. Such is the meaning of the welfare

social cell as well as an educational en- program as carried out in France. Prin-

vironment, represents certain irreplaceable ciples, methods, and habits of the tradi-

sociological values. On the international scene the studies of Spitz in the United States, Mme. Aubry Roudinesco in France, Bowly in England, and of many others further confirm that the family environment is indispensable for the normal development of the child and that it constitutes

tional social program have a continuous trend toward a new objective. This tendency demands a sustained impulse and a constant coordination, and it justifies the existence of organizations on the various levels in charge of defining and defending the interest of the family.

the "chosen ground of human growth." In the State Secretariat for Public Health "At one time I believed, "declared the bi- and Population it is the main task of the ologist Jean Rostand, "that the child could "Sous-Direction de la Famille" to encour-

live by being taken away from its family age and coordinate the activities of public

and could be raised by the State. Today I administration (Social Security, farmers'

don't believe this any more after the ex- aid, housing, education, taxes, etc.) and of

periments that have been made."

private organizations working toward the

Therefore, once the danger of depopulation was averted, the demographic aim shifted imperceptibly to preoccupations of a social and moral character. The preamble of the French constitution of 1946, as well as the universal declaration of the rights of man follow this trend of thought, with the latter emphasizing that "the fam-

founding of a family. Under the same secretariat the National Institute of Demographic Studies supplies responsible authorities with the scientific premise for their actions in the field of demography and sociology. This is accomplished through its publications, Population and specialized magazines.

ily is the natural and fundamental element The Respect for Private Life--On the oth-

of the society and has a right to be pro- er hand, respect for the family, for its au-

tected by the society and the State."

tonomy and its freedom, is also character-

Chief Characteristics of Family Policy

istic of the French policy which is a policy of protection, without interference or op-

The main trend of action of public au- pression. Since 1939 no government has

thorities is reflected in the different family been tempted to yield to a control of the

institutions.

family as in certain totalitarian states.

A New Trend in SocialPolicy--Family pol- While family subsidies show a slight con-

icy is not an independent element superim- cern for an increase in birth rate--a con-

posed on social policy. The latter takes the cern which is perfectly legitimate for a gov-

reality of family life into account. The ernment mindful of its future--the legis-

protection of the worker, of the pregnant lator avoids exerting pressure. He limits

woman, of the child, etc., is regarded as the himself to helping only the head of the

protection of these individuals as members family in maintaining the home which he

of a family unit. Yet this protection is not freely established. The origin and develop-

aimed at the individual but is centered on ment of this home depend upon the sole

the whole family. On the other hand, it is conscience of the head of the family. Pub-

based on the realization that solutions giv- lic welfare does not replace the parents. It

en to great social problems, such as a mini- only endeavors to stimulate their educa-

mum living standard, taxes, housing, Social tional responsibilities. We can thus under-

Security, education, must necessarily have stand the preference given to financial as-

150 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

sistance, which the head of the family can dispose of freely, in contrast to assistance in kind.
The importance given to family organizations in public institutions proves that the State does not want to place the family under its tutelage. In addition to the family aid the government established the formation of an organized family unit. Thousands of family associations with varying jurisdiction and of every social milieu have grouped themselves into unions of family associations which are in charge of representing all the French families before public authorities and ensuring them the rendering of family services. Like syndicates, these unions can especially act as the voice of the family in the Economic Council, in the "Commission Supérieure des Conventions Collectives," in the organs and councils of Social Security and Family Allotments.
Family Allotments--Among all the measures of compensation for dependents, family allotments occupy a very outstanding place in France. The right to allotments is not limited by the amount of income nor do the allotments increase with the income of the recipient. Between maximum uniform subsidies or subsidies decreasing with income and subsidies proportioned to salary, the legislator has chosen a system of equal allotments for all, a system which is satisfactory with few exceptions.
However, in no case does the French legislature aim at the entire leveling of family subsidies. The family representatives themselves think that an exact leveling, besides being impossible to determine, would risk stultifying the worker's desire for bettering his professional qualification and that it would be an unbearable burden on the economy. From the point of view of family morals it would weaken the sense of responsibility of the head of the family.
Theoretically, anyone with dependents to care for has a right to family subsidies. However, except for prenatal allotments, the law requires that the head of the fam-

ily be working or that he prove his inability to be employed.
The subsidies are calculated in relation to a basic monthly salary, varying with the locales (at the present time 18,000 francs in in the Seine department). They were to have followed the movement of salaries and prices according to the cost of the living index clause which was included in the law of 1946. This generally could never be applied, but periodic readaptations have luckily enough played the same role, due to the method of financing through monthly payments in proportion to salaries.
Main Family Subsidies. 1. Family allotments granted to people who have at least two children to care for are calculated upon the basic salary, 22 per cent of this salary for two children, 33 per cent for the third and for each following one. Since 1955, an increase equivalent to 5 per cent of the salary is granted for each of the children over ten years, with the exception of the eldest. To these family allotments is added an adjustment which was enacted in 1948 when the tax, which was withheld from the salary every month, was repealed. Without this adjustment the tax repeal would have favored bachelors and not families with children, the former paying but a reduced tax or no tax at all.
2. The allotment of a single salary is granted to persons or households which fulfill a double condition: a. to be engaged in a remunerative professional activity, (or to be unable to work after the interruption of a remunerated activity or to be a widow of a salaried person); b. to benefit from a single professional income coming from the salaried activity of either husband or wife or of a free union between a man and a woman.
From the economic point of view, the allotment of a single salary, the rates of which vary from 10 to 50 per cent, does not seem to have had a statistically measurable influence on the professional activity of married women.

151

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

The allotment of the single salary represents 35 per cent of the family subsidies of the salaried and non-salaried people and the family allotments and adjustments of 1948 represent 60 per cent.
4. The pre-natal allotments from which any woman can benefit have a triple aim: social, demographic and health. They were enacted in 1946 and are linked to the legislation pertaining to the protection of the mother and the child. The monthly payment is calculated at the rate of 25 per cent of the basic salary and meets the special conditions.
5. Maternity allotments are granted at the birth of each child of French nationality, born living and legitimate or recognized. For the first birth the allotment amounts to twice the monthly salary of the highest basic monthly salary of the department, and for the following births the rate is one and one-third of the same salary.
6. The housing allotment takes a separate place at the crossroads of the allotments for family dependents and housing policy.
Other Forms of Social Protection of the Family
Next to family subsidies which tend to ensure a regular addition to the income of the head of the family, several compensational measures aim at either giving him financial help in certain extraordinary circumstances or at lessening the family burdens by the reduction of tariffs or other financial obligations; for instance, families with many children benefit from advantageous rates for railroads and transportation. In the same way social insurance covers the members of the salaried person's family without increase in the monthly payment. Income tax, applying the "quotient familial," i.e., the size of the family, takes the latter into consideration by reducing the income of the taxpayer to an average income by means of units of consumption and taxing each of the latter individually.

Social redistribution of resources has limitations and creates for the head of the family a handicap which might force him to sacrifice some elements essential to the material and mental well-being of his home. In this instance, assistance in kind must complete the effectiveness of monetary subsidies. This complementary effort of public welfare requires an appropriate social action which still has to be developed further: proper housing and social services for the family, special housing facilities for vacations. A staff of social workers especially trained is thus required.
Results
Considering the strength of the methods used, it is not surprising that French family policy has registered tangible results from the demographic as well as the social point of view.
The increase in the birth rate in France surpassed the most optimistic anticipation. Demographers compared the increase in birth rate in France since the last war with that of their own countries and sought to isolate the effect of family subsidies. They believe that the new legislation exerted a lasting influence upon the fertility of present generations. For this reason, if the birth rate is to be maintained at its present level, the measure of aid to the family must not be lessened.
The improvement of family conditions, from the point of view of social justice, has been accomplished by a redistribution of incomes. Today the laborer with four children who is paid 30,000 francs a month and whose wife is not working doubles the amount of his individual pay. The evolution of opinion about family and birth problems was just as fast. The political parties and unions with communist and socialist tendencies, who were at first reticent, later were all in favor of family policy. The Charter of 1946 was voted for unanimously and the opposition, often the prey of Malthusian fears, represents an infinite minority.

152 Eugenics Quarterly

Looking into the Future
Although the institutions of social protection for the family deeply affect the France of today, one cannot assert that they have reached the last stage of their development. Imperfections remain in the field of family compensation. As far as the tax is concerned, the "quotient familial" is only applied in a limited scope. Marriage loans, practised by a few organizations, must become general. Family subsidies are bound to make new progress: effective application of the cost of living index, adjustment of rates, reformation of the singlesalary allotment. The housing subsidy seems to be destined to increase quickly, owing to the speed of construction. It seems that all efforts must be placed in the

field of social facilities: development of schools for home economics, construction of vacation housing for families, increase in the number of specialized social workers, and establishment of marriage counseling centers.
The results already encourage public authorities to intensify the course. What is more, the influx of young generations creates new needs which hasten the primary plans of facilities of the post-war period: construction of schools, vocational centers, housing units, sport fields and working places. With the demographic progress and rebirth of the French family, France is experiencing a renascence which will lead her to choose a plan for economic development.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

