Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Warfare, demography, and genetics
Frederick S. Hulse
To cite this article: Frederick S. Hulse (1961) Warfare, demography, and genetics, Eugenics Quarterly, 8:4, 185-197, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1961.9987484 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1961.9987484
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

WARFARE, DEMOGRAPHY, AND GENETICS

FREDERICK S. H U L S E
Professor of Anthropology University of Arizona

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

/'"VRGANIZED CONFLICT between different V ^ social groupings, to the extent of bloodshed, slaughter and the imposition of the will of one group upon the other, is older than history itself. The extent to which such practices were institutionalized among our still earlier ancestors may well be subject to debate. Since data which might bear upon the relationship between warfare and the characteristics of the population for this prehistoric period are lacking, I shall not speculate upon the matter in this paper. However, since warfare does result in the killing of some, and the reduction of opportunities for many, it is of some interest to examine what relation it may have to the numbers, the demographic composition, and the genetic characteristics of various human population groups during periods, and in areas, for which data do exist. To what extent can it be demonstrated that the size, composition and characteristics of social groups, be they labeled bands, communities, tribes or nations, have led to warfare on the one hand, or prevented it on the other? To what extent can it be shown that the practice of warfare has affected the size, composition and characteristics of such social groups? With respect to each of these two questions, it is only proper that indirect as well as immediate consequences should be taken into account, insofar as this is feasible.
Let us first undertake a brief examina-

tion of the proposition that the numerical size, age and sex composition or genetic characteristics of a given society have either led to, or prevented, warfare. Certain peoples have, for instance, been characterized as warlike, with the clear and intended implication that this is an hereditary quality, whereas others have been labeled peaceful, or servile by nature. I know of no evidence which either a geneticist or an ethnographer would accept to support either proposition. With respect to age and sex, it is of course true that if, for any reason, the proportion of young adult males in a society happens to be very much less than the average, or than the proportion which such a society had been accustomed to in the past, discretion may substitute for valor until the demographic situation has returned to normal. A generation should ordinarily suffice to bring this about, however. It is also true that a number of societies are known in which warfare does not appear to be institutionalized, and others in which it is quite seriously, not just verbally, deprecated. But neither genetic nor demographic factors appear to be connected with these culture traits.
In considering the question of the actual number of inhabitants of a society in relation to warfare we find ourselves confronted with such terms as "over population" and "population pressure." Perhaps the use of such terms is thought to

185

186 Hülse

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

be a less crass way of saying "economic motives," for economic motives may frequently be observed, and even more frequently suspected, in warfare among societies of many sorts. A tender conscience may need the assurance that deplorable activities are quite inevitable, that populations explode as naturally as atomic bombs when a critical mass is reached. But this is simply not so. Communities, bands and nations are not composed of plutonium atoms, but of people, and the analogy drawn between them is false.
Many causes have existed for violent conflict between societies, and many excuses have been given, but only in rare instances does the theory of population pressure even appear plausible. The desire to maintain or improve the material comforts to which one is accustomed, on the other hand, can well be a motive for aggressive warfare. No doubt a series of dry years on a steppe will be succeeded by encroachments of one band of nomads on another, or upon their settled neighbors (Musil, 1928). No doubt the desire for a larger hunting territory helped impel the Plains Indians to intertribal war (Newcomb, 1950). It was the better organized, or the better armed, however, who behaved most aggressively, not those who were most hungry. Population pressure appears to be relative to the amount of force at one's disposal, rather than to the numbers of individuals per acre or per unit of food.
Furthermore, by far the greater number of wars recorded in historical and ethnographic literature do not appear to be related to population pressure even in this modified sense. The religious necessity for heads in New Guinea, for sacrificial captives in Anahuac and Ashanti, for converts in the Near East, have been felt to be perfectly adequate justifications for warfare. The social desirability

of having extra wives in Uganda, of maintaining slaves on the Northwest Coast and of counting coups on the Plains have been ample excuse to wage war, also. Even when economic motives for warfare are more obvious, pride and prestige have been so commonly involved that such economic advantages as might be secured are frequently neglected. The Buin of Bougainville, ruled by a conquest aristocracy, not only do not seize the lands and possessions of defeated opponents, but pay damages (Lowie, 1948) and the Mohave, although almost constantly in a state of hostilities, do not occupy territory from which they have driven their enemies (Fathauer, 1954). The indubitable fact that, as among the Maori (Vayda, 1956), various Plains Indians (Newcomb, 1950) and many other peoples, such opportunities are seized simply shows that causes and results ought not to be confused. Hoebel (1958) discusses this matter very carefully and concisely, and reaches the same conclusion.
Whether or not there may be demographic causes for war, there might still be demographic results. Motivations, rationalized excuses, or even social functions are rather irrelevant to this question. Do we have evidence that warfare has, as a rule, altered the demographic characteristics of the world's population, or of an important number of peoples? Do we have evidence that it has increased the population of the world as a whole, or of certain tribes? Do we have evidence that, on the contrary, it has tended to reduce population significantly?
If the warfare engaged in is serious, it may well, at least for the time being, alter the age and sex composition. Most peoples expect their young adult males to engage in the most frequent and active hostilities, and this particular group

Warfare and Genetics

187

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

is therefore bound to suffer the greatest number of casualties from direct enemy action. It would be rash to jump to the conclusion, however, that wars inevitably result in a short supply of this cohort of the population, to an extent that other activities do not. Among many Eskimo groups, for instance, the death rate of young adult males from hunting accidents may be very high even without war. And, in many cases direct enemy action may be taken against all members of a society, rather than against warriors only. Modern technology has of course made such action relatively easier than it used to be, but indiscriminate massacres of enemy populations appear to date back to the Paleolithic. The rock-shelter at Alfalou Ben Rhummel in North Africa contains remains of men, women and children who appear to have been the victims of such a misfortune (Arambourg, et al, 1934).
Direct enemy action, however, on the average, will probably reduce the numbers of males to a greater extent than it will the number of females, since, while both are liable to slaughter at home, the males are also exposed to the hazards of the battlefield or the warpath. Nevertheless, and entirely discounting the occasionally slight rise in the male birthrate (Colombo, 1957) during times of war, a single generation should normally suffice to restore the sex ratio to its prewar state. The case of Paraguay after the war with Brazil and Argentina three generations ago is a case in point (Pendle, 1954). Consequently, we cannot regard warfare as a means of altering the sex ratio unless it be waged more or less continually, or at least during each successive generation.
Furthermore, direct enemy action is far from the only cause of death during, or as a later consequence of, war. The

absence of any considerable proportion of the working population is bound to have adverse effects upon production, including food production. Malnutrition opens the way to disease and, as technology improves, any shortage in the working force leads to breakdowns of all sorts. Disease rates, and with them death rates, rise, whatever the technological level of the society may be. Many peoples have, consequently, very sensibly refrained from hostilities until the harvest was in. And many have planned their strategy to attack just before or during the enemy's harvesting season: this was, for instance, the tactic of the Spartans during the Peloponnesian war (Thucydides, 411 B.C.). As a result, the indirect effects of warfare may bear especially hard upon non-warriors, since the warriors have facilities for insisting upon priorities. Contagions frequently sweep through the armed and the unarmed alike since crowded conditions and lack of sanitation always appear to become worse under conditions of war. These spare no one and, in organized states at least, casualties from pestilence seem, with few and very recent exceptions, to cause more deaths than battlefield slaughter.
Without being able to produce numerical data on a world-wide scale, it would seem reasonably certain that the direct and indirect results of warfare on sex and age distribution are, in the long run, negligible. We can turn, then, to the question of whether war might tend to increase population. Is there evidence, for instance, that it stimulates the birth rate to such a degree as to more than compensate for the higher death rate? A few years ago, this might have seemed a fatuous question. An examination of what actually took place during the last great war, however, shows that a continuous

188 Hülse

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

rise in the birth rate, in the United States at least, accompanied and followed the hostilities. Dare we assume that in other times and places, for which vital statistics records are either not so good or nonexistent, the same sequence of events occurred? Probably not, for we do not find such a rise in most of the cases on record. This recent instance, however, should caution us not to assume that warfare of necessity entails a reduction, or even a limitation, upon population. Warfare is waged under so many different circumstances, and with such varying degrees of ferocity, that the formulation of any general rule seems out of the question. The Chinese appear to have continued to increase in numbers during their most recent war with Japan; the Spaniards, during the Civil War of the 1930's, do not seem to have done so.
However, one population often, if not usually, has increased relative to another during and after warfare between them. In many cases this has taken place by the simple expedient of wholesale slaughter. According to A. P. Vayda (1959), in New Guinea some groups have been exterminated by others in the course of a few generations, and it is apparently quite common for a village to be decimated within a few years. Whether the activities of British settlers in Tasmania against the aborigines may be called warfare is debatable, but the Tasmanians were all killed. Genghis Khan's armies, in many cases, systematically massacred the entire population of a captured city, although he is alleged to have turned down the suggestion by some of his followers that all the North Chinese be liquidated, so that their farms might be turned into range land. The Athenians killed only the men after capturing Melos, taking the women and children as slaves, and this seems to have been a not

uncommon practice in the wars of the classical period, at least in the literate part of the world. The Yankee settlers in Connecticut killed all 700 Pequots, men, women and children, upon capturing their village in 1637 (Fiske, 1889). These are only illustrative examples to show that in almost all parts of the world, in almost all periods of history, the relative proportions of two societies or populations in conflict have been altered in the most drastic and direct way.
And, of course, nonbelligerent groups may be and have been done away with just as directly during warfare. The fate of Jews under the Nazi regime is a case in point. Other groups which have fallen under suspicion or been used as scapegoats in previous wars have not been eliminated so thoroughly, perhaps, as the objects of the Nazi's wrath, for the latter were most methodical. Whether or not to include such campaigns under the indirect results of warfare is doubtful, since they may be waged during times of peace as well. But the liquidation of potentially hostile groups, whether on so-called "racial" grounds or not, is far from a new practice.
Other indirect results of warfare upon the relative proportions of different societies are numerous. Economic advantages have often accrued to the winning tribe or nation, which make population expansion easier. The United States, for example, was able to open up great areas of land for settlement by the treaties concluded with defeated Indian tribes and bands, as were the British in New Zealand and other places. Since European technology was far in advance of that of the Indians or the Maori, the number of new settlers was from 10 to 100 times greater than the number of aboriginal inhabitants. So, too, whether or not treaties were made, the Spaniards and

Warfare and Genetics

189

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

Portuguese in parts of Latin America such as Argentina and Brazil, the Dutch and British in South Africa, the Russians in Siberia were able to seize and settle vast territories by waging war against the native populations of those areas. And their numbers, too, became much greater within a few years than those of the previous occupants of the regions in question. It is perfectly true that technology is primarily responsible for such closer settlement; nonetheless, without previous warfare, the more advanced technology would not have been effective in the same manner at all. The successful resistance of the Araucanians in southern Chile (Padden, 1957) to the continued attempts by the Spaniards to open up their land to economic development along European lines illustrates this point.
Even without actual settlement of conquered territories, the increase in population of the winning group at the expense of the loser has, at least in recent centuries, often taken place. Colonial exploitation has supported vast and growing numbers of Europeans since the 16th century. The sub-continent of India appears to have increased its population by not more than five times during the period of its subjection to the British, which was accomplished by warfare. During the same period, the population of Great Britain increased by at least eight times. Since methods of exploitation differ, this sort of result does not always come about: the population of the Netherlands does not appear to have increased as fast as the population of the Netherlands East Indies during the time that the latter existed. However, the industrialized nations of Europe do appear to have increased in population, as a whole, more rapidly than the colonial areas of the world during the heyday of

colonialism, most especially during the 19th century, and warfare was the technique employed by Europeans to open up areas for colonial exploitation. In warfare between societies having a much closer approximation to technology, one may question whether the advantages of conquest would result in differential population growth of this sort. The infliction of very severe penalties on losing societies has been far from uncommon, however, and these may have demographic importance. Captives taken in war may be used, as among the Aztecs, as sacrificial victims. The result of this practice, even if not the intention, is to reduce the population of the defeated tribe, village or nation.
Such cases are of course rare. Far more common has been the use of captives as slaves, not in their homeland, but elsewhere. This was the best fate which war prisoners might expect in classical times. The example of Melos has been mentioned: Athenians at Syracuse lost an army of 7,000 men to slavery. As the Roman empire expanded, the slave markets were constantly replenished by fresh supplies of Greeks, Syrians, Gauls, Illyrians, Germans, and the like. And, of course, slaves were always given the most perilous tasks: in the mines, in the galleys, and so on, where life expectancy was low. Even those lucky enough to escape such a fate almost never succeeded in rejoining their own societies, and, apparently, were quite unable to breed rapidly enough to supply the next generation's demands for slave labor. We have no figures from the classical period to quantify this statement, but as I pointed out in a previous paper (Hülse, 1957), such figures do exist for Cuba during the 19th century. They show clearly that captives, used as slaves for hard labor, are not at all likely to reproduce them-

190 Hülse

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

selves. During a period of 70 years, import duty was paid on 571,000 slaves, yet the total colored population at the end of this time had increased by only 438,000. The white population of Cuba had, in the meantime, increased from 107,000 to 793,000. It is true that one may question whether Negro slaves should be properly regarded as war captives. The circumstances of slaves who were war captives could scarcely have been better than were those of slaves who were simply kidnapped, however. In neither case would they have been available to contribute their reproductive potential at home, and in both cases their reproductive capacity in the place of their captivity is very greatly reduced. At times, of course, male captives are intentionally prevented from reproducing by castration. The number of eunuchs required in any society does not appear to have been great, however, nor is emaculation especially related to warfare, except in Ethiopia.
Without the imposition of slavery upon those defeated in war, and entirely aside from any such disastrous conditions as might raise the death rate, it is still possible that economic and cultural disorganization resulting from war might be discouraging enough to depress the birth rate. Indeed, Aristophanes wrote a play on this theme over two thousand years ago. Has Lysistrata's threat ever become effective? Certainly disorganized societies, from that of the later Roman Empire to those of the Marquesas (Linton, 1939), Yap (Hunt et al., 1954) and many other South Sea Islands in recent times have declined in population in part due to a lowering of the birth rate. Whether this may be attributed to warfare is another question. There were already bitter complaints about the falling birth rate in the Roman Empire during

times of relative internal peace. War on the border was, of course, constant before, during and after this period. The Marquesans appear to have been fully occupied in fighting each other long before the arrival of Europeans. Indeed, the degree of hostilities between Europeans and natives in the Pacific does not appear to be related at all to the extent of social disorganization and consequent population decline.
It would, on the other hand, appear that the recent dramatic decline in the Japanese birth rate may be directly attributed to the fact that Japan lost its last war. Here, however, we have an example, not of disorganization and discouragement, either on a personal or national level, but of a pragmatic approach to the problems imposed on Japan, not by warfare as such, but by defeat in war. Had Japan won, there would have been no incentive for the nationwide adoption of methods to prevent birth. Japan lost, and the situation thus created could only be met effectively by such action as has been undertaken. Such a rational attack upon a serious problem is rarely to be found by the student of human conduct. If wars in the past have affected demography in just this manner, I have found no evidence of it.
It may be noted that all of the examples cited above refer to particular situations. We have no evidence that the population of the world as a whole has been increased by warfare, nor can we be at all sure that it would be greater had warfare never existed. Rather, certain populations have increased, and others decreased, relative to one another. The demographic results of warfare appear to be of particular ethnographic rather than general ethnological interest. From a genetic and evolutionary point of view, however, the shift in relative proportions

Warfare and Genetics

191

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

between different populations may assume considerable significance. As I have pointed out in two previous papers (Hülse, 1955, 1957) such shifts have demonstrably altered the gene frequencies of the human species at a number of loci during the short span of history, and very probably did so in prehistoric times. While natural selection in the ordinary biological sense is no doubt at work within each particular population, the most obvious and marked shifts in gene frequencies have been due to the cultural advantages which some populations enjoy to a greater extent than do others. It is, then, of interest to see whether warfare is among the aspects of culture which have been important in stimulating or impeding such shifts in gene frequencies.
If the continued practice of warfare checks population increase which would otherwise occur, we should expect that societies which do engage in this practice would, as time went on, become proportionally less numerous than other societies, and that the meek would indeed, by now, have inherited the earth. This does not appear to have taken place. It is true that prolonged periods of internal peace in a populous society may be accompanied by still further population growth, but the case of Japan under the Tokugawa Shogunate is a well-documented proof that this does not necessarily occur. For two and one half centuries, with both internal and external peace, this country increased only from 23,000,000 to 28,000,000; while Great Britain, with a civil war, several rebellions, considerable emigration, and very frequent foreign wars, increased from 4,000,000 to 23,000,000. Whatever effect warfare has had in checking population growth has been far more than counteracted in these cases by other cultural factors.

If warfare is waged between two tribes or nations of rather equal populations and technology, either side may win one time and lose the next, so that no permanent advantage is gained. If, however, a technologically advanced and socially well-organized society wars against one less advanced or organized, it ordinarily wins. The benefits of winning, in a demographic sense, have been explored above. If, furthermore, there are genetic differences between the populations of the two societies in question, the demographic advantage may result in a shift of gene frequencies. There are quite a number of ways in which this can come about, and examples can be given for each.
The first anfl simplest, of course, is the shift in gene frequencies in the world population resulting from the extinction of certain distinctive groups, such as the Tasmanian aborigines, among others. Such groups have commonly been an insignificantly minute proportion of the world's population. Hitler's attempt to exterminate the much more numerous Jews, although efficiently organized and methodically prosecuted, was not successful. Insofar as this people have any genetic distinctions, a slight but still measurable shift in gene frequencies in the world's population did result from this massacre; however: they lost far more heavily than any other group in the world during the period of 1939-1945. As a rule, however, the victims of slaughters have not been genetically distinctive from their assassins, so far as we can tell --largely because the slaughters have been executed against neighbors rather than peoples living at a great distance. In modern New Guinea, as in classical Greece, wars between neighboring communities, no matter how ferociously waged, cannot be expected to affect gene

192 Hülse

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

frequencies to an appreciable degree, because of this. It has been suggested that the genetically quite distinctive Neanderthal population of Europe was killed off in warfare by technologically superior invaders, but we have no evidence of any sort that this took place.
When warfare has occurred between tribes or nations which were genetically quite distinct, as American Indians are from Northwest Europeans, direct slaughter has, as a rule, been much less effective than the introduction of new diseases in clearing the land. However, since warfare was in fact used to obtain land for European settlement from the Indians, we must include in our list of the genetic changes attributable to war, the substitution of many millions of genes for such characteristics as blondness, baldness, and fine hair, for an indeterminable number of genes for deeper pigmentation, retention of hair, and coarse hair. Populations of European ancestry have replaced non-European populations having alternate genetic characteristics, and extensive warfare was used to facilitate this process. This is one of the most important ways in which the genetic characteristics typical of Europeans have been enabled to attain their present frequency.
Although of course less dramatic, the more rapid rate of population increase among the industrializing countries of Europe in the century after the Napoleonic wars, as contrasted to the areas in Asia and Africa which they continued to seize as colonies during that time, was also a significant factor, in the shift in gene frequencies which has taken place since the Renaissance. War as such did not produce this shift, but war was used by European countries to lay the basis from which industrialization arose. The fact that there is now in the world's population twice as high a proportion of

genes of European origin as was the case 500 years ago is, in part, and indirectly, a genetic consequence of war.
More directly, the genetic system of any population may be altered by the selection for resistance to new diseases introduced by armies returning home from foreign adventures. The Crusaders are said to have introduced plagues into western Europe when they came back from the Near East. The same allegation has been made concerning Roman Legions which returned to Italy from Syria and Egypt. With the inadequate medical and sanitary conditions of the time, adequate immunity to these new diseases could have been developed only by natural selection. Nor do returning soldiers bring back with them only infections. On many occasions, they have introduced females from foreign lands, either as wives or as sexually available captives. The frequency of the genes for epicanthic eyefolds should be noticeably greater among the next generation in the United States, for instance, than in the past, because of the number of Japanese wives brought home by servicemen. This is a very direct result of war, and we may be sure that it has happened after other wars. The Baganda in East Central Africa made a practice of waging war against neighboring tribes for the specific purpose of collecting extra wives (Roscoe, 1901). Since some of their men must have been killed, but the expeditions were usually successful, a very large percentage of the men were able to be polygynous. If the ethnographic accounts are correct, the resulting gene flow must have been very considerable indeed. A simple calculation shows that if half of the Baganda males succeeded in collecting a foreign wife as well as a local one, and begot an equal number of children with both, it would take only four gen

Warfare and Genetics

193

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

erations before half of the genes in the Baganda tribe would be of non-Baganda derivation. Since, of course, the Baganda did not go far afield on these adventures, their genetic composition may not have altered to a great degree. Oschinsky (1954) shows that they are almost indistinguishable from their neighbors physically. Yet the extent of heterozygosity among them should have been enhanced, and in any case the potential results of such a social practice are made very evident by this model.
One may be sure that armies stationed for any length of time in foreign lands leave genes behind them when they go home, too. Insofar as warfare involves invasion rather than border forays, the genetic effect of this may also be quite considerable. Candela (1942) attributed the high incidence of blood group B in eastern Europe to the Mongol and other Central Asiatic invasions which were recurrent events for a period of 1000 years after the collapse of the Roman Empire. Certainly the allelic frequency of B rises sharply in the open plains areas where these Asians remained longest, and one also notes an especially high incidence of the same gene in the Andalusian Plain of southern Spain (Mourant, I954) which was long held by the Arab and Syrian fraction of the Moslem invaders of that country. The weight of the evidence would certainly incline in favor of the thesis that these gene frequencies were raised by the activities of conquering and occupying armies. It is of further interest to note that in most observable characteristics one cannot distinguish many traces of Mongol ancestry among such peoples as Poles, Magyars or Ukrainians. I have often wondered whether sexual selection might have operated against the survival of such Mongoloid traits as could be seen, and against which some prejudice

might have developed, whereas,no such factor could operate against such a trait as blood type, of whose existence no one was aware.
Armies in modern times have of course gone much further from home than was the case several thousand, or even a few hundred, years ago. The genetic results of soldiers' natural proclivities may therefore be more obvious to us nowadays than would have been the case in earlier times. But any occupation of an area by a group of young males will tend to break through endogamous barriers imposed by local custom, and be among the forces tending to delay or inhibit the establishment of a high degree of genetic homogeneity in any local community. If as has sometimes been the case, they and their offspring remain permanently as aristocracies, instead of going home, their genetic impact upon the areas which they hold will be increased. Bastards left by a departed enemy may be shunned, and find it hard to find mates. The offspring, legitimate or not, of the nobility find fewer difficulties in reproducing themselves. Higher caste and aristocratic groups have often enough owed their origin to conquest in historic times, and in legend as well. It is doubtful whether any of them date from earlier prehistoric times, inasmuch as caste distinctions depend upon a certain degree of technological development. In more recent centuries, however, a number of striking examples of the genetic results of such conquests are available for study.
The creation of the group classified by Coon, Garn, and Birdsell (1950) as the Ladino race is obviously the result of the successful warfare waged by the Spaniards against the Indians of Latin America. The opportunities for spreading the genetic characteristics of Europeans among the local populations of Middle

194 Hülse

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

and South America were ample, and within a very few generations many hundreds of thousands of Mestizos were in existence. Inasmuch as the genetic characteristics of Indians and Spaniards are in many ways quite different, this newly created group is in itself distinctive, although highly polymorphic. The relatively easy access to lower caste females by upper caste males which has existed is of course a function of the caste system itself, and has continued for centuries after warfare ceased. But since the upper caste was created by a war of conquest, we must regard the altered distribution of genetic characteristics, which distinguishes Latin America today from pre-Columbian Latin America as a genetic consequence of warfare.
The fact that actual though not necessarily legal polygyny is usually in practice under conquest aristocracy conditons tends to increase the amount of geneflow from the upper into the lower strata of society. The number of offspring of a single male having such opportunities may be in the hundreds and is often in the dozens. A relatively small group of conquerers, under these circumstances, may have a quite noticeable effect upon the genetic characteristics of a much larger subject population, while males of the subject population do not enjoy opportunities to contribute their genes to the upper caste. Not only in Latin America during the last few centuries, but in Europe after the disintegration of Roman power, in England after the Norman conquest, and undoubtedly in many other times and places, such situations have come into existence. The genetic distinctions which separated the relatively small bands and tribes from northern Europe--Goths, Franks, Lombards, Burgundians and the rest--from the earlier inhabitants of southern Europe

were certainly not nearly as great as those between Spaniards and American Indians. Blondness, however, was a notable difference, and even today one finds a greater frequency of this characteristic among the upper classes than among the lower throughout southern Europe, although the difference is not a very great one.
Actual migrations of whole populations sometimes are associated with war, or the threat of war. During the period of the so-called Volkerwanderung many tribes appear to have been on the move, yet Europe was already well enough populated so that this was not, as a rule, accomplished peacefully. Angles and Saxons met resistance upon settling in Britain, Franks when they moved into Belgium and northern France, and so on. They certainly were unable to replace the natives entirely, as happened later in the United States; but on the other hand, the newcomers were much too numerous to be merely a class of nobility. Unfortunately the data available to us are inadequate to demonstrate the extent of genetic change in the areas mentioned which can be attributed to these warlike tribal movements. Since, however, no two breeding populations are identical in their gene frequencies at all loci, any such movement, warlike or peaceful, must produce genetic change to some degree. And, much more often than not, if one tribe attempts to occupy the territory of another, a war will ensue. The spread of the Chinese throughout China, of the Thai into Siam, of the Aryans in India, of the Bantu towards South Africa, and of the Náhuatl into Central Mexico, would all appear to have been accompanied by warfare. But we know even less of what genetic changes resulted from these movements than we do about

Warfare and Genetics

195

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

the results of the Volkerwanderung in Europe.
Then, too, there have been movements of tribes, or parts of tribes, which have been driven into exile as a result of losing in war. The diaspora of the Jews is a notable example of this, and it certainly introduced at least some new genes into areas as widely separated as the Yemen, Morocco, Northern Europe, and Central Asia. That the Jews in each locality to which they were exiled acquired, by intermating, many of the characteristics of the local population does not alter the fact that their arrival introduced new genetic factors into that same local population. The exile from their homelands of hundreds of thousands of so-called displaced persons as a result of the last World War, of refugees after the previous one, and of other victims of war on many earlier occasions, are other examples, each having a genetic impact to a greater or lesser extent. As distinguished from the voluntary migrations of tribes, the flights of exiles, even in days when transportation was not well developed, often were to great distances, so that the likelihood of settlement among populations genetically very different from themselves existed. As distinguished from the members of a conquest aristocracy, on the other hand, refugees are typically unable to spread their genes at will among the local population. We must assume, I think, that they will produce fewer changes in the genetic system of the population among whom they live than either conquest aristocracies or tribal migrations.
Although a significant factor in reducing the size of the populations from which they were derived, and consequently, of any distinctive genetic contribution to be expected from such populations, captives and slaves will have an

even smaller genetic effect upon the area to which they have been taken than any of the three groups mentioned above. Possibly attractive young female captives will be an exception to this rule, but, as was pointed out in a previous section of this paper, the reproductive capacity of such a group is, on the whole, very low. Slavery has been practiced upon such a vast scale, however, first in the Roman Empire and much more recently in the Americas, that its over-all impact upon the distribution of genetic characteristics is very considerable. The fact that approximately one gene out of eight, in the present human population of the Americas, is of African origin is due entirely to slavery. The percentage of those originally enslaved who were war captives is unknown, but the alteration of gene frequencies in America is, to some extent, the result of wars between African societies. In the Roman Empire, too, the involuntary migration of slaves was among the forces which tended towards the creation of a unified gene pool, and it was by war that the slave markets were kept replenished.
The purposeful resettlement of veterans, upon their retirement from military service, in colonies widely distributed throughout the Empire was probably a more effective move in the same direction. From a vast number of mortuary and other inscriptions, we know that Italians were settled in Britain and Syria, Syrians and Africans in Gaul, Thracians in Spain, and Spaniards in Thrace, in settlements where they were able to marry local girls and contribute their genes to the local population. Since the term of enlistment was fourteen years, much of the reproductive potential of these legionnaires had doubtless been disposed of elsewhere. Nonetheless the creation of such colonies should have

196 Hülse

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

served as a means of reducing the extent of genetic differences within the Empire, which was itself the result of a series of wars of conquest.
The practice of resettling whole groups of peoplepas a precaution against rebellion after or during war, has been practiced on a number of occasions. The Nazi German and the Soviet Russian governments, during the last great war, both moved whole communities about in this way. Long before, the Inca rulers, as they spread their dominion throughout Peru and beyond, used this technique quite methodically (Bram, 1944). It was their habit to establish settlements of their own people at strategic spots throughout their empire, and transfer some or all of the newly conquered ayllus to new settlements at a considerable distance. Since, theoretically, ayllus were endogamous units, this practice ought to have had only a geographical rather than a genetic effect. How complete the endogamy actually was may be open to question. In general, when people are resettled in a new place, genetic interchange with their new neighbors begins to take place sooner or later.
I have listed above, with examples, but unfortunately with all too few statistics, a number of ways in which warfare has actually produced or promoted shifts in gene frequencies, directly or indirectly. Some of the effects have been world-wide, others of only local significance. It will be noted that at no point have I suggested that the practice of war promotes the survival of the fittest, or even serves in any way to select one body-type at the expense of another. Brues (1959) has recently published a paper in which she suggests that the use of some weapons rather than others may have had an effect of this sort. Since for the most part, the weapons concerned were used more

in hunting than in war, any selection of this nature which might have occurred cannot be attributed to the practice of warfare. Nor, as noted above, does there seem to be acceptable evidence that any tribe or population is genetically more predisposed to war than any other tribe. Rather, Man's shrewdness and technology have made him the most dangerous creature the world has ever known, but not necessarily the most ferocious.
Thus technology in general, of which warfare is only one aspect, has enabled small bands and whole nations to move and be moved widely over the face of the globe. Genetic adaptations to local environments, which may in early prehistory have led to diversification and the rise of geographic races among us, have become less and less important during the past few thousand years. With the resources of modern culture at his disposal, man can survive and reproduce even though lacking the characteristics which his ancestors would have needed. Warfare, among other cultural institutions, has served to spread genes to places far from the areas where they had positive selective value at one time. The major genetic effect of warfare, then, has been to reduce the degree of genetic differences between different populations.
REFERENCES
ARAMBOURG, C., M. BOULE, H. VALLOIS and R.
VERNEAU. 1934. Les Grottes Paleolithiques des Beni Segoual (Algerie). Arch. L'Inst. Paleon. Hum. Ment. XIII. ARISTOPHANES. 411 B.C. Lysistrata. Athens. BRAM, J. 1944. An analysis of Inca militarism. American Ethnological Society Monograph No. 4. BRUES, A. 1959. The spearman and the archer. American Anthropologist, 6 1 (3) : 457-69. CANDELA, P. B. 1942. The introduction of blood group B into Europe. Human Biology, 14: 413-443. COLOMBO, B. 1957. On the sex ratio in man. Cold Springs Harbor Sym. Quant. Biol., 2 2 : 193-202.
COON, C. S., S. M. GARN, and J. B. BIRDSELL. 1950.
Races. Thomas, Springfield.

Warfare and Genetics

197

FATHAUER, G. F. 1954. The structure and causation of Mohave warfare. Southwest Journal of Anthropology, 10 (1) : 97-118.
FISKE, J. 1889. The beginnings of New England. Houghton Miffiin, Boston.
HOEBEL, E. A. 1958. Man in the primitive world. McGraw-Hill, NewYork, pp.515-518.
HULSE, F. S. 1955. Technological advance and major racial stocks. Human Biology, 2 7 : 184-192.
HULSE, F. S. 1957. Some factors influencing the relative proportions of human racial stocks. Cold Springs Harbor Sym. Quant. Biol., 2 2 : 33-45.
HUNT, E. E., JR., N. R. KIDDER, and D. M. SCH-
NEIDER. 1954. The depopulation of Yap. Human Biology, 2 6 : 401-408.
L i n t o n , R. 1939. Marquesan culture, p p . 137-197.
In Kardiner, A. In: The individual and his society. Columbia University Press, New York. LOWIE, R. H. 1948. Social organization. Rinehart and Company, New York, p. 364.
MOURANT, A. E. 1954. The distribution of the human blood groups. Blackwell Scientific

Publications, Oxford.
MUSIL, A. 1928. Manners and customs of the Ruwalla Bedouins. Mon. Am. Geog. Soc., No. 6, New York.
NEWCOMB, W. W. 1950. A reexamination of the causes of plains warfare. American Anthropologist, 5 2 : 317-330.
OSCHINSKY, L. 1954. The racial affinities of the Baganda and other Bantu tribes of British East Africa. Heffer, Cambridge.
PADDEN, R. C. 1957. Cultural change and military resistance in Araucanian Chile, 15501730. Southwest Journal of Anthropology, 13(1): 103-121.
PENDLE, G. 1954. Paraguay. Royal Inst. of International Affairs, London.
ROSCOE, J. 1901. Notes on the manners and customs of the Baganda. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 3 1 : 117-130.
THUCYDIDES. 411 B.C. History of the Peloponnesian War. Athens.
VAYDA, A. P. 1956. Maori conquests in relation to the New Zealand environment. Journal Polyn. Soc, 65 (3): 204-211.
VAYDA, A. P. 1959. Personal communication.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

