Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Meetings and recent publications
Helen Hammons
To cite this article: Helen Hammons (1961) Meetings and recent publications, Eugenics Quarterly, 8:1, 42-44, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1961.9987461 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1961.9987461
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

MEETINGS AND RECENT PUBLICATIONS

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

ACADEMY OF MEDICAL SCIENCES OF THE USSR --History and Organization: Galina V. Zarechnak. Public Health Monograph No. 63. U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Public Health Service, 1960, 48 pp.
This monograph describes the greatest scientific medical institution of the USSR, the Academy of Medical Sciences.
Medical research in the Soviet Union is not only highly centralized but subject to strict governmental planning and control. Interestingly enough, radiation sickness is given top priority in medical research, then the persistent diseases such as influenza, rheumatic fever, malignant tumors, heart diseases, and diseases of the nervous system. More attention has been paid to physiology than any other branch of medicine. Pavlov remains the pillar of the materialistic viewpoint. The "reactionary tendencies" of the Western scientists are to be resisted who want "to revise Pavlov's theory about the higher nervous system, to replace it by the idealistic Freudian theories, or to reconcile the two." Dialectic materialism is still proclaimed as the basis of all scientific research, and scholars have to adapt themselves to variations in the "party line."
The development of medical publishing in the Academy of Medical Sciences has been very uneven. It reached its peak in 1950, then dropped to a low that lasted until 1956. The trend is now upward. Difficulties with the system of reviewing manuscripts and lagging printing schedules, however, have decreased the enthusiasm of Academy members for publication.
Scientists, artists, and writers, apart from Government officials, are the best-paid people in the USSR. A seven-year plan, from 1959-1965, provides for great expansion of the Academy both in publishing and research. Biology and genetics are marked for special interest. The author concludes that, as long as the desire to excel continues,

the Academy of Medical Sciences will be given enough support for significant accomplishment.
The author of this monograph administers the acquisition of medical publications in Russian and other Slavic tongues in the U.S. National Library of Medicine. Compilation of this work in the United States has made it possible to use sources additional to those of the Soviet Union.
PROBLEMS IN AFRICAN DEMOGRAPHY--A Col-
loquium: Paris, 1959. Union Internationale pour L'Etude Scientifique de la Population, Paris, 1960, 60 pp., $1.00.
This report of an international demographic seminar on Africa is of particular significance both because of the present world-wide concern with Africa and because of the scarcity of demographic material about this continent.
This conference, under the sponsorship of the International Union for the Scientific Study of Population, considered objectives and methods in the development of demographic material in Africa. Frank Lorimer acted as organizer and Dudley Kirk as rapporteur. It is impossible to obtain demographic data on Africa in the detail that it is available in other, more highly literate areas, and well-controlled, essential studies on African marriage and fertility were considered necessary by the conference. Lorimer reported that remarkable progress had been made in the last twelve years in demographic statistics in Africa but that information on . mortality, fertility, and migration is sadly deficient. The need for a new approach to dynamics of population in Africa was stressed, the next step being pilot studies in selected areas. Several forms of international cooperation were explored.
This report is useful to anyone wanting material on African demography or wishing to understand the problems of this continent.

42

Recent Publications

43

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

SEMINAR ON EVALUATION AND UTILIZATION
OF POPULATION CENSUS DATA IN ASIA AND
THE FAR EAST: Bombay, 1960. United Nations, New York, 1961, 93 pp.
SEMINAR ON EVALUATION AND UTILIZATION OF
POPULATION CENSUS DATA IN LATIN AMER-
ICA: Santiago, 1959. United Nations, New York, 1960, 98 pp.
The United Nations' Bombay seminar was organized to aid governments in Asia and the Far East plan their census program in order to provide the most information relevant to practical problems of policy making and planning in social and economic development. The Santiago seminar was planned to help Latin American countries utilize the population censuses of 1960 in economic and social-development planning and policy making.
Both conferences suggested that additional data on factors affecting fertility could be obtained by fuller tabulations of census items and that sample surveys of fertility in relation to economic and social characteristics could provide more information than the census, i.e., desire for children, attitude toward family planning, etc. It was agreed that great progress had been made in demographic research and training in Latin America and Asia, but that much remained to be done, especially in the application of demography to social planning.
AGE PROFILE:--U. S. A. (Prepared for the White House Conference on Aging): Population Reference Bureau, 1961, 15 pp.
This pamphlet, prepared for the White House Conference on Aging, is made up chiefly of explanatory charts portraying the age profile of the United States.
Contrary to the popular belief, the proportion of people over 65 has increased rather slowly, even though their absolute numbers have grown rapidly, according to Robert C. Cook, President of the Population Reference Bureau, in his Foreword. This curious situation can have profound social and political implications. We have a large percentage--40 per cent--of children and adolescents to make heavy demands on schooling, housing, and other essential amenities which provides competition for

funds for services to senior citizens. Our population will grow both older and younger in the next 20 years, predicts Cook.
HUSBANDS AND WIVES--The Dynamics of
Married Living: Robert O. Blood, Jr. and Donald M. Woolf. Free Press, Glencoe, 111., 1960, 288 pp., ?5.00.
This book is one of the first, according to the authors, to describe marriage relationships in a cross-section sample of an entire community--metropolitan Detroit-- and to give comparative data from a sample of farm families.
The chapter, "Having Children," is of special interest to students of fertility. Not less than two children, not more than four, was the popular desire, and above three satisfaction declines rapidly. The farm families tend to desire more children than the city families. By and large Americans say they want fewer children because they love them so much, not because they like them so little, the authors find. But the record of actual achievement of childbearing goals is comparatively poor; nearly all the misses fell short of the mark rather than exceeding it. The 909 American wives in this study remarkably often report failure in their childbearing goals. American marriages have a long way to go to achieve anywhere near general success in reaching childbearing goals, according to these authors.
Compared with the prophecies of doom about marriage, most American marriages sparkle, the authors conclude. They find little evidence from this study that marriage in our country is on the verge of catastrophe.
MEETINGS
New York: The Medical and Scientific Committee of the Human Betterment Association of America, Inc., is sponsoring a Conference on "Surgical Birth Control--One Answer to Involuntary Parenthood" to be held Thursday evening, April 13, 1961, at 8:00 P.M. at the Carnegie Endowment International Center, New York City. Dr. Alan F. Guttmacher, Chairman of the sponsoring committee and Director of

44 Recent Publications

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

Obstetrics and Gynecology at The Mount Sinai Hospital, will preside, and Dr. Ira DeA. Reid, Chairman of the Department of Sociology of Haverford College, will speak. Panelists include Mrs. Harriet F. Pilpel (Law), Dr. Mortimer W. Rodgers (Medicine), Dr. Robert W. Laidlaw (Psychiatry), the Reverend William Genne" (Clergy), Doris Siegel (Social Work), and Dr. Sophia M. Robinson (Sociology).
Newark: The Academy of Medicine of New Jersey will present a "Symposium on Congenital Defects" on Wednesday afternoon and evening, April 19, 1961, at the Essex House, Newark, New Jersey. Co-sponsors of the symposium are The National Foundation, The Medical Society of New Jersey, and the New Jersey State Department of Health. Moderated by Dr. Daniel Bergsma of The National Foundation, the program will include papers by Drs. James D. Ebert, F. Clarke Fraser, Elizabeth M. Ramsey, Alexander Barry, William J. Young II, and James L. Wilson.
New York: The 69th Annual Convention of the American Psychological Association will take place August 31-September 6, 1961, at the Commodore, Biltmore, and Roosevelt Hotels, New York City.
Rome: A Quarterly Bulletin, 1961 Rome Genetics Conference News, reports news of the 2nd International Conference of Human Genetics, to be held in Rome, September 7-12, 1961. A joint session with the 7th

International Congress of Neurology which meets in Rome at that time is being arranged. General sessions will be conducted both as lectures and round tables, with and without discussion. Simultaneous symposia will be held when it is unlikely that the subjects will overlap.
Pretoria: The 2nd Genetic Congress of South Africa will take place in July 1961 in Pretoria under the chairmanship of Professor J. D. J. Hofmeyr, head of the Department of Genetics, University of Pretoria, and President of the South African Genetic Society. The Society is working to establish a South African Anthropogenetic Institute which would organize studies in human heredity in South Africa.
FILMS
A new teaching film, Medical Genetics, Part 1, has been prepared by Victor A. McKusick, M.D., and his associates in the Department of Medical Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. It covers historical development, physical basis of inheritance, and some chromosomal abnormalities in man. The film may be obtained free of charge from The National Foundation (800 2nd Avenue, New York 17).
HELEN HAMMONS

