Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The need for parental counseling in pediatrics
Josef Warkany M.D.
To cite this article: Josef Warkany M.D. (1958) The need for parental counseling in pediatrics, Eugenics Quarterly, 5:1, 4-8, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1958.9987340 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1958.9987340
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:24

4 Eugenics Quarterly

levels of probability beset with uncertainties. It is this whole background of scientific knowledge and lack of knowledge, of qualitative information, and uncertainty as to the trend of conclusions which may be applicable to man, that the counselor must keep in mind. For he has essentially a second relationship --that of the physician to his patient --a responsibility for the accuracy of his advice and a responsibility for the results of his advice, in a matter which falls so intimately into the reasons why people make certain choices. The responsibility of the adviser here, I think, comes very squarely within the general responsibility of a physician to his patient.
I don't know whether the question of malpractice will ever come up in regard to genetics counseling, but it's not to be put aside lightly as a reminder--not of a legal responsibility but of a moral responsibility which the counselor has in this very intimate and privileged relationship.

I think that as the morning progresses and as the discussion extends from purely morphologic aspects of human genetics through more functional aspects to the purely functional problems as we find them in psychiatry, we will probably become more appreciative of the importance of more adequate knowledge; and the significance of the use of this knowledge in human relationships will tend to emerge.
I will ask each speaker to be prepared for questions and discussion of his paper at theend of the presentation, and we will have to be a little hard, perhaps, in regard to time, because of the number of papers to be presented.
The first presentation, on "The Need for Parental Counseling in Pediatrics," is by Dr. Warkany, who is Professor of Research Pediatrics at the University of Cincinnati, and, I believe, known to very many in this room for his long and distinguished career in this general field of pediatrics, and especially with relation to some of these very difficult problems.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

THE NEED FOR PARENTAL COUNSELING IN PEDIATRICS
JOSEF WARKANY, M.D.
Children's Hospital Research Foundation Cincinnati, Ohio

T JL O DISCUSS THE PEDIATRICIAN S POINT OF
VIEW on Genetic Counseling represents a great challenge and responsibility, especially if. this is to be done before expert geneticists by one who cannot claim to be a geneticist himself. A pediatrician interested in prenatal factors responsible for diseases and disorders of childhood has a great deal in common with those interested in human genetics. He believes, of course, in hereditary factors which cause or predispose to human illness and he knows that such factors must always be kept in mind when disorders of prenatal

origin are under consideration. He, like the geneticist, is interested in prenatal preventive measures which could reduce the suffering of children and their parents. At the present time parental counseling is among the few preventive measures available for this purpose. However, it is to be expected that the pediatrician's point of view will differ in some respects from that of the geneticist. The two specialties encounter different samples of children, of diseases and of questions.
In discussing the need for parental counseling, I could choose the easy way out

5

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

by emphasizing the role of heredity in disorders of childhood. It would not be difficult to enumerate a long list of disorders which are dominated in their etiology by genetic factors and which lend themselves well to genetic counseling. Such a discussion would probably guarantee general approval, but it would also guarantee a boring talk. On the other hand, stressing points of possible disagreement between the pediatrician and the geneticist may provoke a lively controversy and bring about a better understanding of the differing points of view. I am sure this will be a friendly controversy since we all have the same aims though we may disagree on methods, terminology or explanation of the facts.
There can be no doubt about the great need for parental counseling in the fields of congenital malformations, mental retardation, convulsive disorders, blood dyscrasias, diabetes and many other diseases. In spite of this need it is not always easy to give satisfactory advice under the circumstances encountered in a pédiatrie hospital or office. Since I see chiefly children with congenital malformations or mental retardation I shall illustrate some of the difficulties with examples of these two groups.
Chondrodystrophy or achondroplasia is, according to the textbooks, a Mendelian dominant with high penetrance, and many pedigrees have been published which support this conception. One can see sometimes one or two children with this disorder in one family in which one parent has also chondrodystrophy. In such a situation a reasonably reliable prognosis can be made for future children in the family and for the future offspring of the affected children. However, the majority of children seen with chondrodystrophy by us do not conform to this simple scheme. First, one sees children with typical chondrodystrophy whose parents are normal and who appear in the pedigree as sporadic cases. Of course, such sporadic appearance does not

rule out genetic determination. The sporadic case may be due to a new mutation and the affected child could transmit the disorder to his offspring, each child of the next generation having a 50:50 chance to be affected. It is very unlikely that the normal parents of the sporadic case will have another child with chondrodystrophy, since it is improbable that an identical mutation will occur in the same couple. Yet chondrodystrophy can occur twice in the offspring of parents who appear entirely normal. A child born at one of our hospitals showed short extremities and chondrodystrophy in roentgenograms. The parents and siblings were normal. If this case had been attributed to mutation, this would have largely precluded a repetition of the disorder in this family. However, one year later, a sibling of this child was born showing the same anomalies. Cases of recessive chondrodystrophy have been described, and we assume that our two cases in one family were also due to recessive inheritance. Some types of recessively inherited chondrodystrophy, such as the Ellis van Creveld syndrome or chondrodystrophia calicificans,are sufficiently distinctive to be separated from the dominant form, but others are not. These cannot always be recognized by clinical examination and may--in the case of the first affected child in the family--lead to erroneous interpretation and counseling. Morquio's disease, when fully developed, can be easily distinguished from classical chondrodystrophy. But even this well-established form may cause difficulties in parental counseling, since typical findings may be absent in early life. A baby born in one of our hospitals was suspected of chondrodystrophy because of disproportionate development of head, trunk and extremities. The arms and legs appeared short and fat, but X-rays revealed rather slender long bones. The parents were tall and well built and 4 older siblings were healthy and normal. When the roentgenograms were repeated 8 months later, changes in the spine and

6 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

the hip joints suggested Morquio's disease, which is attributed to a recessive gene. It seemed advisable then to warn the parents that the condition of the youngest child might be repeated in a subsequent child. The warning came late, since the mother was pregnant again. In this case, doubt about the diagnosis prevented a warning in time. Fortunately our omission was rectified by a favorable assortment of the parental germ cells at the right time and the sixth pregnancy ended happily with the birth of a normal child. I enumerated five systemic bone diseases which may have to be considered in the differential diagnosis of chondrodystrophy and know of others which have puzzled us at times. These forms represent entities of different etiologic origins. Yet chondrodystrophy is treated in some of the texts on genetics or genetic counseling as an etiologic entity permitting uniform genetic prognosis and eugenic advice.
It is almost certain that other congenital malformations which we consider as clinical entities are equally heterogeneous in origin. Hydrocephalus, microcephalus, oxycephalus, microphthalmus, cataract, cleft lip, cleft palate, dislocation of the hip, club foot, polydactylism and many others belong in this category. It seems that each of these malformations is merely a symptom which can be the result of different genetic mechanisms or the result of non-genetic prenatal disturbances.
Geneticists have recognized these difficulties of etiologic interpretation and have worked out empiric risk figures for various defects. Although the meaning of risk figures will be discussed by qualified members of the afternoon panel, I must mention here that they cannot be a substitute for specific etiologic diagnosis. The use of risk figures represents a definite step forward in genetic counseling, but it should not be considered a final method. If we admit that many o£ the malformations encountered are not etiologic entities but merely symptoms, then empiric risk figures

derived from pools of heterogeneous cases may be far off when applied to a specific case. It is said, for instance, that cleft palate (without cleft lip) in a child of normal parents represents a 2 per cent risk for a sibling. Does this risk figure also apply to the sibling of a child with cleft palate and mandibulo-facial dysostosis? In the family of one of our cleft palate patients mandibulo-facial dysostosis was inherited like a dominant trait. The chance for a subsequent child to have mandibulo-facial dysostosis is 50:50. From the literature and our small experience with this syndrome it would appear that cleft palate is not rare in patients with mandibulo-facial dysostosis and that the risk for a subsequent child in this family having cleft palate is greater than 2 per cent. In another case of cleft palate the risk figure for a sibling is probably zero. In this case we can attribute the cleft palate to a chemical substance, aminopterin, which the mother took as an abortive in the second month of pregnancy. Since the mother is not likely to repeat this experiment, the eugenic prognosis for subsequent children should be good. These examples show that cleft palate is not an entity as regards etiology and eugenic prognosis; they indicate that we must try to ascertain the etiologic factors in individual cases and to replace general risk figures by risk figures specific for every single entity. It is obvious that we are not yet able to do this and that we have a great deal to learn about diagnosis, classification and etiology of congenital malformations before we can give reliable advice in individual cases.
In the field of mental retardation the situation is even more complicated. Gone are the days when feeble mindedness was attributed to one genetic unit character and when it was discussed as a dominant or a recessive "taint." Several years ago Gibson enumerated about 70 separable types of mental retardation. This must represent an underestimate, since new syndromes are described annually and added to this list.

7

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

We now think that each of these syndromes or each causative factor must be evaluated separately and that in some of the cases a sound eugenic prognosis is possible. Mental retardation caused by inborn errors of metabolism represents a facet particularly favored by investigators at the present time. The adverse effects of the metabolic error that causes phenylketonuria, a representative of this group, may be alleviated and even prevented by dietary means. Since this metabolic disorder can be attributed to a single recessive gene, it would lend itself to eugenic counseling if carriers could be discovered by chemical methods. The phenylalanine tolerance test used by Hsia and coworkers showed that, in general, the parents and some of the siblings of the affected children have reduced tolerance for phenylalanine. These findings have been confirmed in other laboratories, but it has been shown also that a few of the parents have normal or nearly normal tolerance curves. This indicates that we are not ready yet to counsel with certainty prospective parents who are possible carriers of this abnormal gene, with the help of this chemical test. Nonetheless, the work on phenylpyruvic oligophrenia has justly aroused great hopes in the field of mental retardation and points the way for future investigations along these lines. At the present time, however, we are not able yet to diagnose and classify the majority of cases of mental retardation, in spite of the many types that have been established as separate entities. If faced with a congenital sporadic case of undetermined origin, we must not consider him uncritically as a "mutation" or as the result of recessive inheritance. We must take into consideration that prenatal infections with viruses or protozoa, prenatal physical or chemical disturbances, interruption of the blood flow or anoxia, hemorrhages or birth traumas can also account for impairment of mental development. Sometimes the history obtained gives no clue, and at other times the history supplies three or four pos-

sible causes of the child's retardation. Needless to say that in either situation the etiology remains obscure and counseling difficult.
I have stressed so far what Fraser has called the "darker side" of heredity counseling, since it seems preferable to emphasize in a symposium like ours what has to be done rather than what has been done. Although the pediatrician interested in prenatal factors may be critical of some oversimplifications expressed by genetic counselors, his attitude should not be considered as negativistic. He recognizes the need for rational parental counseling, but he also recognizes the need for better knowledge in the diagnosis, classification and causation of disorders for which counsel is sought. He welcomes the existence of clinics where parents can obtain counsel for family planning, but he wonders why such clinics are called "heredity clinics" or why the counseling should be limited to "genetic counseling." It seems there is now general agreement that many of the disorders discussed can be brought on by genetic or non-genetic factors or by both. Why then prejudice the case by calling an advisory clinic a "heredity clinic" although it will deal in many instances with non-hereditary conditions? The pediatrician suggests, therefore, that a "clinic for parental counseling" would be more adequate for the purpose than a "heredity clinic." He suggests that parental counseling should be done by a team that includes geneticists but also pediatricians well-versed in the diagnosis, variability and nosology of the disorders to be evaluated. The team should also contain other specialists who can be consulted in appropriate cases. Hematologists, virologists and immunologists could make valuable contributions. I believe that such teams will be research teams for some time to come. For the time being it would seem preferable to have a limited number of clinics with highly qualified staffs drawn from many disciplines than to spread the avail-

8 Eugenics Quarterly
able talent too thin. It should not be too netic and other prenatal factors among difficult to find pediatricians to join such pediatricians today than at any time beclinics, since there is more interest in ge- fore.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

DISCUSSION

CHAIRMAN BUGHER: This very interesting paper is now open for discussion and questions.
DR. GORDON ALLEN: Dr. Warkany, you said that the phenylalanine tolerance test had not proven entirely reliable in the laboratories. I ·wonder if they have used simple levels of phenylalanine, or have they used the phenylalanine-tyrosine ratio?
DR. WARKANY: I don't know all the details. My knowledge comes from the Cincinnati experiments winch will be published soon.
Most o£ the parents o£ the phenylpyruvic children that we could examine had higher curves in phenylalanine tolerance tests than the controls, but there was one father whose curve was within the normal range. And I heard that in another study both parents of a child with phenylketonuria had normal curves. I think the answer is that the phenylalanine tests do not yet go to the root of the abnormal metabolic error but is just one reaction we can measure.
DR. EDITH POTTER: I would like to comment on how well I think Dr. Warkany has set the stage for the meeting today. Certainly, the thing he has talked about this morning and so often in the past--the frequent inability to distinguish between genetic and environmental factors--is what we must all bear in mind.
Furthermore, the difficulty of diagnosis means that we should have more people who are really able to make a diagnosis attached to whatever counseling centers we have. I have been interested in the fact that many people feel able to make a statement in writing at a long dis-

tance on the chondrodystrophies that Dr. Warkany talked about, which seem to be currently of tremendous interest as far as genetic counseling is concerned. I have had a number of letters in the last few months saying, "What are the prospects for future pregnancies, with simply a statement that the chrondrodystrophy exists. Most people seem to think chrondrodystrophy is a single entity and that all cases could be expected to follow the same patterns of inheritance. I think it points out, too, the need for more dines of this sort over the country, so that people can really get what is sometimes comforting and sometimes disturbing advice and information.
CHAIRMAN BUGHER: That's a very useful
comment. I suspect that the matter of a team as against
a single individual trying to carry the advisory function could be debated, probably, most of the day, so I am not going to encourage anything of that kind. We will have occasion, I hope, at various times during the day, when we are meeting informally, to explore some of these things more or less directly.
May we turn from things of the type that Dr. Warkany has been discussing, which have been expressed in morphologic terms to a very substantial extent, to an area which is highly functional in its substance, and oftentimes less immediately tangible, the general area of psychic functions. Our next paper is "Genetics in Psychiatric Practice," by Dr. Whittier, who is presently Director of the Creedmor Institute for Psychiatric Studies.

