Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Genetics in public health nursing
Hazel R. Dyson R.N. , Carl J. Witkop Jr. D.D.S. & Shirley S. Butters R.N.
To cite this article: Hazel R. Dyson R.N. , Carl J. Witkop Jr. D.D.S. & Shirley S. Butters R.N. (1958) Genetics in public health nursing, Eugenics Quarterly, 5:1, 23-29, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1958.9987343 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1958.9987343
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:24

GENETICS IN PUBLIC HEALTH NURSING

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

HAZEL R. DYSON, R.N.
CARL J. WITKOP, JR. D.D.S.
SHIRLEY S. BUTTERS, R.N.
National Institute of Dental Research National Institutes of Health Public Health Service
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare

T.HE FUNCTIONS OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH
NJULRHSE have been defined in many ways. At a recent meeting of the American Public Health Association much time was devoted to the discussion of recent trends in public health thinking (McKeever, et al., 1956) and the role to be played by the nurse in the solution of the health problems now confronting us (Leavell, 1956). Intrinsic disease is assuming more importance in these problems as at least two per cent of the general population has serious genetic illness (Neel, 1956). Fleck (1956), in defining the duties of public health nurses, states, "They function as the eyes and ears of all health services," and are in "a strategic position to collect epidemiologic data and identify relevant factors or help eliminate irrelevant ones." In order to carry out these assigned functions the public health nurse will benefit by a knowledge of hereditary disease, the basic modes of inheritance, and the social factors in the community which may influence the prevalence and distribution of hereditary disease. This knowledge can be useful in case finding, referral planning, and locating situations in the population with potential research value.
Case Finding
A knowledge of inheritance patterns of disease may be helpful in a screening program. If an individual is found to have an inherited disease, examination of other members of the kindred may reveal additional examples of this disease, thus in-

creasing the effectiveness of the screening procedure. For example, if the mode of inheritance is recessive, at least the siblings of the initial case should be examined. If the mode of inheritance is dominant, the nurse can trace the affected individuals by history and home visits and help to establish the sibships that should be examined. These procedures can be modified for the sex-linked traits.
We have used this knowledge in an eyescreening program for chronic simple glaucoma. Studies on this disease have shown that there is an increased incidence of glaucoma among close relatives of affected individuals (Westerlund, 1947) and that it is usually inherited as an autosomal dominant trait (Sorsby, 1951). Two patients with chronic glaucoma were found during one of our routine eye surveys. The nurse then obtained a family history of eye disease, helped to establish the sibships in which glaucoma was most likely to occur, and arranged to have these people examined. Five additional cases · of frank glaucoma and one glaucoma suspect were found. Two of these patients were discovered before they were aware of any eye trouble. By finding glaucoma in its incipient stages, it may be more susceptable to treatment and the damaging effects of prolonged intraocular pressure avoided.
A similar procedure has been utilized in the detection of diabetes. Because the mode of inheritance of this disease has not been definitely established, history was obtained

23

24 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

from the initial patients about the occurrence of diabetes, or the symptoms of diabetes, among their relatives. All siblings of any person with a suspicious history were asked to report to the clinic for urine or glucose tolerance tests. At least one additional case of this disease usually was found in the families of the initial patients.
During the early stages of a dental examination program it was noted that some of the children were tongue-tied. The teachers in the community reported that a considerable number of these children also had speech difficulties. It is not known whether the speech disorders were the result of the tongue defect, but an examination of the siblings and parents of these children showed a high prevalence of tongue-tie. These cases were referred to the speech therapist for evaluation and further study.
Referral Planning
Kemp (1956) states, "It is important for the social and public health authorities to know the number of people in their communities, who, because of hereditary disease, are incapacitated and must be given social relief, to be treated, or to be placed in hospitals or institutions." A knowledge of which diseases are genetically determined is most useful in planning public health and public assistance programs because patients with these diseases usually require long-term treatment or social aid.
In one community six families have come to our attention where both parents are heterozygous for the sickle cell gene. Thirteen children in these families have been hospitalized for varying lengths of time because of this illness. Due to the frequent need for transfusions, all of these families have been forced to call upon public facilities for medical and social aid. Several of these families have more than one member affected with sickle cell disease. Fortunately, we have been able to refer these patients to a research facility or teaching hospital in the community for

care. In such instances, where several members of a family are affected with a hereditary disease requiring long-term treatment, it is advantageous to make arrangements with one facility for care of all the affected members of the family. This eliminates the need for repeated referrals. Such an arrangement is particularly desirable in cases of sickle cell disease, where the onset of a sickling crisis may be a medical emergency requiring immediate hospitalization.
In certain counties in the United States, the population is divided into more or less isolated social segments; therefore, marriages between persons with common ancestry is fairly frequent (Beale, 1957). Many of these counties have a considerable load of hereditary disease that require an expenditure of public funds. It has been reported that harelip and cleft palate are common findings in Barbour County, West Virginia (Walraven, 1957). Many of these cases were drawn from one group of families. At least twelve residents of this county, with the same surname, were treated for harelip or cleft palate during the past year. The use of public facilities and the expenditure of public funds contributed to the treatment of these patients.
The public health nurse may be the first professional person to approach a family in which hereditary disease exists. She may also be the first person to whom the family turns for information concerning hereditary illness. Because of the nature of hereditary disease and its transmission through the germ plasm, it frequently carries many emotional and psychological problems (Kallmann, 1955). A failure to understand this fact may lead to tragic results. The public health nurse, with knowledge of genetics, will recognize the need for special guidance in these situations. If an heredity counselor is available, she may refer the family to him for advice. In most communities this service is not available, so the family is referred to private physicians or hospitals for guidance in these matters.

25

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

Social Factors in the Community
Influencing the Prevalence or
Distribution of Intrinsic Disease
The public health nurse is in an ideal situation to observe the factors in her community which influence the prevalence or distribution of intrinsic disease. The longer she works in an area, the more familiar she becomes with a large number of family relationships, family dynamics, and the existence of particular sects or subgroups. These factors will be more apparent in a rural or suburban setting than in larger centers of population. Most hereditary disease is familial. In the community, therefore, the marriage patterns of the population will influence the distribution and occasionally the prevalence of intrinsic disease. Recessive traits usually are shown more frequently in marriages of near kin. As a result, factors that tend to limit the number of individuals among whom a person can select a mate will frequently increase the number of kin marriages in a community.
Certain generalities can be stated concerning these factors. If large metropolitan areas are disregarded, the following statements will generally hold true. Marriages between people with common ancestors will occur more frequently, the older the community; the smaller the community; the more stable the community as far as immigration and emigration are concerned; and the more geographically isolated the community (Cavalli-Sforza, 1957). Thus, in areas meeting the above criteria, recessive genetic diseases may emerge as the chances for marriages leading to homozygous offspring are increased. It does not hold true that all communities where the above conditions obtain will show this increase because there may not be deleterious recessive genes in the common ancestors. Dominant genetic traits may be prevalent in some of our older stable communities, provided they were introduced into the population by early residents of the area. Polydactylism in the newborn is

occasionally seen in Charles County, Maryland; however, in adjacent Calvert County, extra digits at birth are a common occurrence.
When marriage patterns become very restrictive in any area or for a given group of people, and these restricted patterns are continued over a period of several generations, an isolate results (Sutter, et al., 1957). In an isolate there is a chance that any two individuals who marry are related through some common ancestor, and, therefore, the possibility exists that they share common genetic material. Isolates are not uncommon in this country. As examples, there are numerous small religious groups that permit marriages only within that religion. These groups remain relatively small and retain approximately the same genetic composition, as only a few new converts are admitted each generation. Thus, after a time, nearly everyone is related to everyone else. The Hutterites of the western United States and Canada and the Dunkers of Pennsylvania are examples of such groups. In the latter some striking genetic differences from the general population of approximately the same racial stock have been noted (Glass, 1953).
Certain racial groups have formed primarily in the eastern part of the United States and are termed racial isolates. Some twenty-six of these groups have been identified (Witkop, 1956, 1957). Their marriage patterns are limited as they are outside the usual racial classifications of White, Negro, Indian, or Oriental. As a result these people have married within only a few families for generations and show a very high prevalence of intrinsic disease (Hursey, et al., 1956).
Public Health Nurses in a Research Program
The Human Genetics Section of the National Institute of Dental Research has been conducting an investigation into the dental, medical, genetic and social aspects of a population isolate residing in Mary-

26 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

land (Witkop, et al., 1956). This group consists of about 5,000 individuals of Caucasian, Negro and American Indian ancestry, who have been regarded as a separate racial class since before 1760. These people were not accepted into the white community and did not consider themselves Negroes. As a result, they marry, for the most part, within fourteen surnames, of which only seven are common. The purpose of this study is to find all of the hereditary disease present in this population.
This study is divided into three phases. In phase one, public health nurses obtain genetic, social, and medical histories from each individual by interviewing all persons over sixteen years of age. They arrange these data by family groups and by sibships. In phase two, each individual receives a medical, dental and eye examination in the field. Blood, urine and saliva specimens are obtained for various tests. In phase three, selected i n d i v i d u a l s are brought into the Clinical Center for detailed studies. Analyses of these data are to be made by I.B.M. tabulation.
Public health nurses were selected to participate in this investigation because their professional training and field experience could be utilized in all phases of the study. They had sufficient knowledge of the signs and symptoms of disease to obtain an adequate preliminary medical and dental history. They could utilize their clinical training during the field examinations and hospital studies. One nurse had worked with these people previously, had established a good rapport with the families, and provided the necessary entree into the group.
The nurses selected to participate in this program were given a four-week training course at the University of Michigan and the National Institutes of Health. This program included introductory genetics, medical genetics, elementary statistics and interviewing techniques. This program was followed with a two-month period in the field under the supervision of an experi-

enced investigator. The study required that the nurses obtain a kindred chart, a household census, and a medical and social history of each family. The medical history was taken in the form of a questionnarie covering 158 items. Because all the hereditary diseases of the people were not known at the beginning of the study, it was necessary that both the medical and social interview be as open as possible to allow additional information to be obtained from the informant and recorded on the questionnaire. The results of each pregnancy were recorded.
Interviewing
It soon became apparent that there were considerable variations in the economic and educational levels, even among siblings, in this group. The nurse endeavored to obtain the initial kindred and census data from the most responsible and bestinformed person in the family group. This method of approach was of considerable importance as the attitude of the initial contact often determined the degree of cooperation she received from the rest of the family. The objectives of the study and the method of recording the information in code to protect the identity of the family was explained. Each member of the family over sixteen years of age was interviewed separately, if possible. The information received from one individual was checked against that obtained from the siblings and parents. In this manner we frequently were able to obtain fairly reliable information on stillbirths, miscarriages and illegitimacy.
The social information was then verified from birth and marriage records obtained by the sociologist. The verified data was given to the geneticist who is constructing a kindred chart of the entire group. One of our most difficult problems is to identify individuals, many with the same given name, in a group with only fourteen surnames. The magnitude of this problem can be imagined when it is realized that in a

27

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

104-year period, in one parish, 129 family "A" men married a group member in all but ten instances. Of these marriages, 40 per cent were to family "A" women and 20 per cent to family "B" women. Thus 92 per cent of the marriages were endogamous. In this same 104-year period, 17 per cent of the group marriages required ecclesiastical dispensation for relationship (Harte, 1957). The large size of the families also makes it difficult to trace all lines of relationship. A direct estimate of family size from our sibship schedules indicates that the average woman had about 5.7 offspring between the years 1900 and 1950. These sibships ranged in size from none to twenty-two individuals.
Field Examinations
During the summer months field examinations were conducted. Two trailers were equipped for medical examinations and one for dental examinations. It was the responsibility of the nurses to equip and maintain all examination facilities. Six recorders were trained and supervised by the nurses. It was the duty of the nurses to make appointments for entire family groups, collect blood, urine and saliva samples, and administer phenylthiocarbamide taste tests.
The results of these investigations show a large amount of hereditary disease among these people. The three most common intrinsic diseases found to date are dentinogenesis imperfecta--171 cases, sickle-cell trait or disease--118 cases, and albinism-- 55 cases. Twenty-two other inherited conditions, or conditions in which genetic factors are suspected, occur in this group.
Heredity Counseling Problems
We would like to raise several questions for discussion at this symposium concerning heredity counseling in isolate populations. Since the initiation of this study the subjects of this investigation have be-

come aware that their hereditary diseases are somewhat unusual. Many questions are put to us by these people, the local physicians and the public health authorities.
In one family the parents are at least third cousins. The mother has an external ear defect and dentinogenesis imperfecta. She has had three children and is expecting a fourth. All three children have dentinogenesis imperfecta. Two have defects of the external ear which is transmitted as a dominant trait. Two are also deafmutes and require special schooling. Two of the father's maternal uncles are also deaf mutes. The county health officials ask us if the mother should have more children.
A 38-year-old woman in her eighteenth pregnancy asks our opinion about sterilization. Two of her children are albinos. The family is barely able to subsist on an income of $42.00 a week. The family physician recommends sterilization, but this conflicts with her religious teachings.
A mother with thirteen children decrys the fact that six of them must go through life with brown stubs in place of teeth.
In sharp contrast to the above situations, an albino woman confided to the nurse that her greatest desire was to have an albino child, but that matings with at least three spouses had produced only normal or deaf-mute children.
The questions we would like to raise are: Does the heredity counselor present the facts about the risks involved and let the individuals decide upon a course of action, or does he recommend that certain measures be taken? What advice is to be given to young people contemplating marriage within an isolate group? The answers to these questions involve counseling of an entire population rather than individuals when the facts of social and religious restrictions make it difficult to find an acceptable marriage partner outside the group. At least 77,000 people in this county are members of such racial isolates and are faced with this problem.

28 Eugenics Quarterly

REFERENCES

1. BEALE, C. L. 1957.American Triracial Isolates

Symposium (Part II) --Resolving the basic

Eugen. Quart. 4: 187-196.

issues. Am. J. Pub. Health, 4 6 : 408-426.

2. CAVALLI-SFORZA, L. L. 1956. Some notes onthe 10. MCKEEVER, N. and DERRYBERRY, M. 1956. What

breeding patterns of human populations. Proc.

does the changing picture in public health

First Int. Congr. Human Genetics, Acta Genet,

mean to health education programs and prac-

et Stat. Med., Basel, 6 : 395-399.

tices? Am.J. Pub. Health, 4 6 : 54-60.

ica et Statistica Medica, Basel, 6: 395-399. 3. FLECK, S. 1956. Role of the public health
nurse in mental health. Part I. H. Nurses' training in mental health aspects of public

11. NEEL, J. V. 1956.Personal communication.
12. SORSBY, A. 1951.Genetics in Ophthalmology. Butterworth, London.

health field work. Am. J. Pub. Health, 46: 13. SUTTER, J. and TOAN, T. N. 1958. The problem

748-754.

of the structure of isolates and of their evolu-

4. GLASS, H. B.1953. The genetics of theDunkers.

tion among human populations. Cold Spring

Scien. Am. 198: 76-81.

Harbour Symposium on Quantitative Bioligy,

5. HARTE, T. 1957.Sociological findings (in med-

22 : (in press).

ical, dental and sociological findings in a study 14. WALRAVEN, E. 1957.Crippled Childrens Pro-

of an inbred isolate. Witkop, C.J. moderator).

gram in West Virginia. Personal communica-

Trans, of the Meeting of the CombinedClinical

tion.

Staff, Nat. Inst. Health.

15. WESTERLUND, E. 1947. Clinical and genetic

6. HURSEY, R. J. et al. 1956. Dentinogenesis im-

studies on the primary glaucoma diseases.

perfecta in a racial isolate with multiple he-

Opera Ex Domo Biol. Her. Human. Universi-

reditary defects. Oral Surg., Oral Med., and tatis Hafniensis, Kopenhaven, 1 2 : 1-207.

Oral Path. 9 : 641-658.

16. WITKOP, C. J. 1956. A study of tri-racial iso-

7. KALLMANN, F. J. 1955.Psychiatric aspects of

lates in eastern United States. Proc. First Int.

counseling in human genetics. Abst. Eighth

Congr. Human Genetics. Acta. Genet, et Stat.

Ann. Meet. Am. Soc. Human Genet., East Lan-

Med., Basel, 6 : 410-412.

sing, Michigan.

17. WITKOP, C. J., DYSON, H. R. and SACKETT, L.

8. KEMP, T. 1956. Medical genetics in Denmark in

M. 1956. A study of hereditary defects oc-

recent years. Danish Med. Bull. 3 : 129-135.

curring in a racial isolate residing in southern

9. LEAVELL, N. R. (moderator), 1956. Where are

Maryland. Clin. Proc. Child. Hosp., Washing-

we going in public health? Am. Pub. Health

ton, D. C., 1 2 :29-33.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

DISCUSSION

CHAIRMAN BUGHER: This is a fascinating presentation of the most intriguing information. One can't help but reflect on the factor in this whole problem which has not previously been mentioned--that of the social values in a given society of what we call anomalies or defects which sometimes may not necessarily be disadvantageous to the individual, depending on the attitudes and the value schemes of his own society. I was thinking of an instance in my own acquaintance. In West Central Africa having twins is almost the ultimate family disaster, so you do not find twins. Invariably either

one or both will be killed immediately. On the other hand, among the tribes in Uganda, on the eastern side of the Continent, no greater distinction can befall the father of a family than to be the father of twins. If a man fathers twins, he may take the name of Asumani and may carry that name throughout his life as a great badge of distinction.
This paper is open for discussion and questions. I'm sure there are bound to be many questions which are suggested by this very interesting collection of data.

29

DR. JOHN D. RAINER: At the Psychiatric Institute under Dr. Kallmann we are making a similar survey of a different kind of isolate, made up of deaf people in New York State: people who have been born deaf, or people who have become deaf in very early childhood.
Of course this group tends to intermarry and tends to make a value out of a defect, and here we find some of the same problems that Mrs. Dyson found. I wonder specifically if she could tell whether there was a specific relationship between albinism and deafness in the group in Maryland.
MRS. DYSON: NO, there is none.
MR. FREDERICK OSBORN: I wonder if Mrs. Dyson got any impression as to whether the people in this group would accept advice and would be amenable to voluntary steps to act on your advice.

DR. WITKOP: One large group lives right next to Bowman Gray Medical School. Quite a few of these people that we're dealing with are not too far from Johns Hopkins. Part of the isolate we are investigating resides in the District of Columbia, but, for the most part, these isolates are fairly remote from any counseling facilities. Some groups are fairly close to Ohio State, and some near the University of Pennsylvania. In the southern part of the country the people frequently do not have adequate medical care, especially the Negro population. These people are often classified or lumped together with the Negro population. That is not invariably true, because some of them go as white in the census figure. However, for the most part, many of them in the Appalachian Chain are in remote areas. In no place do these populations constitute more than 10 per cent in one county except in certain areas in the Carolinas where they may be as high as 70 per cent.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

MRS. DYSON: Yes, I think so, in some cases, but actually we don't feel that we're qualified to give them definite advice. But we do believe they have confidence in us because they usually come to us first. We then like to follow through and go back to see them so we can establish good relations with them for further work.
CHAIRMAN BUGHER: I had the impression from the material of this presentation that these isolate societies, for the most part, tend to be in areas where the general level of medical care may be below that of most of the country, and certainly below that enjoyed by many urban populations.
Heredity counseling would seem to require a rather sophisticated medical and nursing profession, and I think it's not unfair to say that most of the practicing medical profession at the present time--those who graduated a certain number of years ago--do not have the technical background in genetics to appreciate all these problems. Perhaps the people who need counseling to the greatest extent are the ones who have the least access to such counsel. Is that the case, or not?

DR. ALAN F. GUTTMACHER: Of course, if
you are going to give advice and it's negative advice, that means sterilization or contraception. Are there facilities in these areas where such advice can be carried out?
DR. WITKOP: In some of these areas some of the people are not of an economic or cultural level to accept that advice. Also in some of the groups it will conflict with their religious teachings. So, rather than give them any positive advice, we have been referring them back to their physicians with whatever burdening questions they have. The trouble is that the physicians turn around and call us for genetic information.
CHAIRMAN BUGHER: We will continue with our next paper, which goes back into an area where morphology is present as a genetic manifestation, but we also have the intermingling of a great deal of the functional. Dr. Victor McKusick is here to present his paper on "Genetics in Relation to Cardiovascular Diseases."

