Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Blood groups and disease: A promising field of medical research
R. B. McConnell M.D., M.R.C.P.
To cite this article: R. B. McConnell M.D., M.R.C.P. (1957) Blood groups and disease: A promising field of medical research, Eugenics Quarterly, 4:4, 197-201, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1957.9987329 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1957.9987329
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:24

BLOOD GROUPS AND DISEASE A Promising Field of Medical Research

R. B. MCCONNELL, M.D., M.R.C.P. Heredity Clinic
United Liverpool Hospitals David Lewis Northern Hospital
Liverpool, England

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

Te.HE POSSIBILITY THAT AN INDIVIDUAL'S
blood group might render him particularly liable to certain common diseases has been causing much interest lately. Hitherto most doctors have been concerned with blood groups only because of their nuisance value when giving blood transfusions and their responsibility for haemolytic disease of the newborn. The influence of blood groups on other diseases is now being investigated by research teams in many parts of the world, and a number of reports have been published.
One reason why these reports have created such interest in the profession is that they may open up a whole new field of preventive medicine. It is significant that, when, in 1954, the Royal Society of Medicine arranged its first meeting in London to discuss this subject, that meeting was held under the auspices of the Section of Epidemiology. Since the introduction of hygiene laws, vaccines and antibiotics, the infectious diseases have become much less of a problem and the Public Health doctor is now turning his attention to such diseases as coronary thrombosis, cancer, diabetes and duodenal ulcer. It is likely that all these conditions are caused by the action of environmental factors such as smoking, diet or nervous strain acting on individuals who have inherited a constitutional susceptibility. It would be extremely difficult to protect the whole community from all such factors, but if the inherited predisposition to a disease could be detected in a child, steps could be taken to prevent at least that child from coming into contact with those factors which would

be particularly dangerous to it. It will probably be many years before these objectives of the research are reached. The present stage of the work can be likened to that phase in the prevention and treatment of the infectious diseases when it was first discovered that there were such things as bacteria.
If the nature of an inherited susceptibility can be elucidated, we may expect that this knowledge will throw light on the underlying pathogenesis of the disease itself. Doctors concerned with patients with these diseases are, therefore, watching the results of such investigations with interest, in the hope that new lines of treatment will be opened. In fact, the first applications of the new knowledge may well be in the range of curative medicine rather than in preventive medicine.
Blood Groups
Although we have known about genes for over 50 years, man has been a difficult animal to study genetically as so many of his characters are due to the action of several genes. Apart from abnormalities, almost the only genes that we can test for with certainty are those which cause antigens to appear on red blood cells. These antigens we call blood groups and we know of 9 blood group systems, each located, as far as we can tell, on different chromosomes. The best known of these systems is the ABO, and the work with which this survey is concerned has been directed to studying whether people with the different ABO blood groups differ in their liability to develop certain diseases.

197

198 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

Early Research
The ABO blood groups were discovered in 1900, and from time to time since then doctors have studied a group of patients with a disease to see if their blood groups differed from those of normal people. They usually came to no definite conclusion, either because the number of patients was too small, or they had not an adequate control group of normal people with which to compare the results, or, if they had controls, the mathematical techniques used were inadequate for true statistical evaluation. These early investigators also made the mistake of lumping together patients suffering from more than one disease; this is a mistake that is probably still being made and is very difficult to avoid. What we know as duodenal ulcer, diabetes mellitus or coronary thrombosis may very well be made up of two or more different diseases, but a worker in this field can subdivide only according to the present state of medical knowledge. It is important, for this reason, that those collecting such data should be doctors with considerable experience of the conditions under investigation.
For all these reasons work in this field was unproductive up to World War II, and it had almost ceased during the first seven post-war years. This was in spite of the fact that the geneticists, Sir Ronald Fisher and Dr. E. B. Ford, had demonstrated mathematically that the blood group genes were not neutral as regards survival value, each gene, as regards natural selection, having advantages and disadvantages which balance each other. Their work had not, however, reached many of the doctors who had access to patients.
Recent Work
Research into the relationship of blood groups and disease received its first major stimulus when, in 1953, the results were published of a survey of cancer of the stomach in Great Britain; great care had been taken with control groups, and a

first-class statistical analysis had been made. It had been known for a long time that both group O and cancer of the stomach were more common in the North than in the South of England. Professor Ian Aird of the Postgraduate Medical School, London University, thought that there might be a connection between them, and he and his colleagues collected data from seven different cities. The figures were analyzed by Dr. J. A. Fraser Roberts, and they were surprised when it was found that in each of these cities there were more blood group A individuals in the cancer series than in the control series. The results were statistically highly significant, and it appeared that blood group A people were 25 per cent more likely to develop cancer of the stomach than were people of groups B, AB or O. The importance of their finding was increased by the inclusion in their report of data from Switzerland showing the same excess of group A in a large series of cancer of stomach patients in that country.
This work of Aird and his colleagues can be regarded as the first firmly established association between a blood group and a disease. Because of its bearing on natural selection it excited geneticists even more than medical men, and it was largely at their instigation that many doctors in Europe and America started similar surveys. Since then, the best work has been carried out by teams which include doctors, geneticists and statisticians. Biochemists and serologists are also now joining the teams.
The results obtained so far with various diseases will now be summarized:
1. Cancer. Aird's finding of an association between blood group A and stomach cancer has been confirmed in other countries of Europe as well as in America and Australia.
Cancer of organs other than the stomach has been investigated but no definite association has been found; these include lung, colon, breast and uterus. In leukemia also

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

199

there does not appear to be an association with any of the ABO groups.
2. Duodenal and Gastric Ulcer. In 1954, Aird and his colleagues followed up their report on stomach cancer with the results of an investigation of patients with peptic ulcer. This condition they found to be associated with blood group O, and the correlation was even stronger than that between stomach cancer and group A. It applied particularly to duodenal ulcer though it was also present in the gastric ulcer patients of their series. The marked association between group O and duodenal ulcer has been found with great consistency by workers in many parts of the world, not only in many European countries and in America and Australia but also among Chinese in Hong Kong. From the analysis of these series it would appear that a person of blood group O is about 40 per cent more likely to develop a duodenal ulcer than is someone of groups A, B or AB.
There has not been such unanimous agreement with regard to gastric ulcer as there has been with duodenal ulcer. The majority of series collected, however, have shown a slight but significant association with group O. The cause of the differing results may be that there are several types of stomach ulcer and only one type is associated with group O; different series of patients containing different proportions of this type would therefore show varying degrees of the association. Taken as a whole, however, it would appear that gastric ulcer is about 25 per cent commoner in those of group O.
3. Pernicious Anemia. Both in Great Britain and in Iowa it has been found that there is quite a marked association between pernicious anemia and blood group A.
4. Diabetes Mellitus. Several series of patients with diabetes mellitus have been investigated. There have been some differences in the results, but it seems likely that these patients have an increased incidence of group A.

5. Pituitary Tumors. Professor Ernst Mayr of Harvard University has found a marked excess of group O with a certain type of pituitary tumor in a small series of patients from hospitals in Boston and New York. Though analysis of the figures shows that the excess is statistically significant, he only regards the finding as tentative and it is being checked by further series of patients elsewhere.
6. Cirrhosis of the Liver. Dr. B. P. Billington of Sydney University has found a highly significant association between liver fibrosis and group A. Here also the series of patients is small and the finding should only be regarded as tentative until confirmed by a similar finding elsewhere.
7. Pneumonia. To these diseases investigated since 1953, one association reported in 1951 should be added. Dr. D. Struthers found in Glasgow a very strong suggestion that babies of blood group A were more liable to die of pneumonia than were group O babies. No one has been able to establish this association more firmly as so few babies now die of pneumonia.
8. No Association with the ABO blood groups has been found in such diseases and conditions as bronchiectasis, asthma, thyrotoxicosis, aphthous ulcers, parodontal disease, ulcerative colitis and rheumatic fever. No doubt further investigations will lead to the establishment of more associations between blood group systems (including those other than the ABO) and diseases other than those already mentioned.
Summary of Associations Found The most marked association with the
ABO blood groups which has been found is that with duodenal ulcer. The association with cancer of the stomach and pernicious anemia can also be accepted as well established. There is almost certainly an association with some type of gastric ulcer and probably with diabetes.
Are These Associations Fortuitous? The fact that an association is found be-
tween a blood group and a disease does

'

200 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

not necessarily mean that there is any causal connection between them. For example, if we studied the cosmopolitan population of a European or American city we might find a higher increase of blood group B in those with dark hair than those with fair hair, because group B is much commoner in Asia than in Europe. No one would suggest that group B causes dark hair. A correlation between the two characters would be found, simply because of a racial group living within the general population but not mating at random with it. Except in the smallest human populations, marriages tend to be within racial, religious or social strata. Is it likely that the associations discovered between blood groups and disease are due to there being in the general population a racial strain, which is, for example, more prone to develop duodenal ulcer and, incidentally, has a higher incidence of blood group O than the rest of the population? The answer to this question is that it is very unlikely indeed as the correlation has been found in so many different countries and in Negroes and Mongols as well as Caucasians.
The possibility of an association being due to racial stratification would be ruled out if it were shown that, within families, members with one blood group are more prone to the disease than are their brothers or sisters with one of the other blood groups. The association of blood group O and duodenal ulcer has been investigated in this way in Liverpool by Dr. C. A. Clarke and his colleagues. Surprisingly enough they have found that, within ulcer families, those affected are no more likely to be group O than are their unaffected brothers and sisters. At present it is difficult to know the meaning of this result; it does not necessarily mean that the association found within the general population is due to an incidental racial association, but it does mean that, if there is a casual relationship between group O and ulcer, it must not be of a simple nature.

How Could These Associations be Working?
It may not be a coincidence that most of the diseases in which a relationship with the ABO blood groups has been found are diseases of the digestive system. This suggests that the ABO genes may be concerned in its development or functioning. In most people the digestive secretions such as saliva and gastric juice contain very large amounts of the ABO blood group antigens, and these people are called secretors. About 25 per cent of people, however, do not have these antigens in their body fluids but only on their cells, and they are called nonsecretors. Secretion and non-secretion are inherited characters.
Dr. C. A. Clark and his colleagues have studied 900 duodenal ulcer patients and found them to be about 35 per cent nonsecretors--a very highly significant excess over the 25 per cent of the controls. They have found this association between nonsecretion and ulcer also within families, a non-secretor being more liable to develop an ulcer than are his secretor brothers and sisters. This is further evidence against the associations with the blood groups being fortuitous, and it suggests that they may be due to the different antigens giving different degrees of protection against the stresses which cause diseases of the stomach and duodenum. It is still too early, however, for us to give a definite answer on the mechanism of the associations.
How Will This Research Progress? It is probable that the easiest part of this
research is now completed: finding out if there are associations by studying the case records of patients who have been blood grouped because they were going to have an operation. The discovery of further associations necessitates the blood grouping of patients with diseases not treated surgically, and this is now being done in several centers. More arduous and time consuming is the work which will have to be done to reveal the mechanisms by which the blood groups influence liability to disease.

201

In human genetics it is usual for several genes to work together to produce an effect. It is therefore probable that the inherited liability to develop a disease is dependent on the interaction of several genes. That this is so in the case of duodenal ulcer is suggested by the latest data from the Liverpool family investigation which demonstrate that the association with group O may apply only in those

families containing both secretor and nonsecretor individuals. It thus appears that two of the genes concerned in the inheritance of this disease may have been revealed. Other genes will have to be studied to see if they too are involved. As the human geneticists develop more and more techniques for the genetic study of man, doctors will be waiting to apply them to the study of the inheritance of disease.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

