Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Eugenic trends at midcentury: A note on eugenics and current census data
Helen Hammons
To cite this article: Helen Hammons (1957) Eugenic trends at midcentury: A note on eugenics and current census data, Eugenics Quarterly, 4:4, 219-221, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1957.9987334 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1957.9987334
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 6
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:24

EUGENIC TRENDS AT MID-CENTURY
A Note on Eugenics and Current Census Data
HELEN HAMMONS
American Eugenics Society

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

T LHE AVERAGE SIZE OF FAMILIES IS rising in the United States. Moderate-sized families are tending to replace small ones. Childless families are decreasing. Couples are marrying younger. A larger proportion of the educated are getting married and having children. More young heads of families now have a high school education. "American Families,"1 the new Census Bureau monograph by Paul C. Glide, Chief of the Social Statistics Division, presents these findings on American family life, based on 1940 and 1950 Census data and the annual surveys of families by the Census Bureau since 1940.
These trends in American family life are significant for eugenics. The eugenic

In the past, and until quite recently, better educated Americans have tended to have smaller families, the less well educated larger ones.3 Marriage has often been delayed for those who went on to college or graduate school.4 And the longer couples have to wait to get married, the fewer children they have by and large. These are dysgenic trends.
However, Census Bureau data since 1940 suggest that some of these non-eugenic trends are being partially reversed at least at mid-century. Apparently more people today who can provide wholesome home environments are being subjected to the social and psychological pressures which favor childbearing.

ideal has been stated as "The Eugenic Hypothesis"2 in the following terms: It Increase in Marriage Among the is possible to develop in the United States Educated

a social and economic environment in Marriage rates rose sharply in the United

which individual parents will plan and States between 1940 and 1950. Of partic-

have children in numbers proportional to ular interest has been the increase in

the ability of the parents to provide a marriage among the educated. The in-

favorable environment for child develop- crease during the 1940s in the proportion

ment. Such a situation would make for a married was much greater among the well

eugenic selection of births because parents educated than the poorly educated. Among

who provide a favorable home environ- persons in their early twenties in 1940, the

ment should tend on the average to increase during the ensuing years in the

possess and pass on a favorable genetic proportion married was highest among the

endowment.

college educated and lowest among those

American eugenics thus is concerned with without high school. There has been little

encouraging larger families among parents change in the proportion married among

of sound intelligence and character who can those with fewer than five years of school-

give their children affectionate attention. ing, the so-called functional illiterates. The 21OJoshbnornW, iFleryed&ericSko,nsP,rInecfa.,cNeewtoYEourkg,eNn.iYcs.,,19H5a7r.pelrargest increases in the proportion married

& Brothers, New York, N. Y., First edition, 1940, 3 Ibid. p. 181

Revised edition, 1951.

4 Ibid. p. 280

219

220 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

--with one exception--were among college graduates and high school graduates not attending college. Among both men and women college graduates in their early twenties, the proportion married doubled during the 1940s. Among persons 30-34 years old, the gain in per cent married was larger for college graduates than for any other educational level. The gain in marriage for women here has been especially outstanding. The gap now is considerably narrowed between the proportion of college men and college women who eventually marry.
We have more per capita income in this country than ever before in history, and this current prosperity is probably one of the biggest factors in encouraging educated persons to marry in larger proportions. Bad times seem to have the effect of cutting down the marriage rate. And college-educated parents usually want to give their children extra advantages which in turn strain the family budget so that fewer children can be taken care of. Our midcentury prosperity can therefore properly be considered a big boost to the marriage market, and especially to the marriage of the educated.
Younger Age at First Marriage
There is a definite trend toward marrying younger. In 1953 the median age at first marriage for the husband was about 23 years and for the wife about 20. The median age at marriage in the United States went down during the 1940s more than a year. This change was unusually large for a single decade, for during the entire half century before 1940 the age at first marriage of husbands declined only about two years and that of wives only about one-half year.
There was a marked increase in the birth rate in the 1940s and the early 1950s. The pattern of early marriage made parents out of several million young people who under previous conditions would have remained single and stayed at home for a

longer period. The proportion of families with two or three children increased from 1940 to 1953, while the proportion of both smaller and larger families decreased. And it is possible that the next census may show some rise in the proportion of families with four or five children as couples married in the 1940s move toward completion of their families. The last child is most likely to be born during the mother's twenty-sixth or twenty-seventh year. Thus today a majority of married women conclude their childbearing while they are still relatively young.
Younger Grandparents
Parents will be close to the half-century mark when their last child has left home today, by and large. Parents in 1890 were some six years older at this point in the family cycle. Having younger grandparents today means that they will have more energy and time to help their married children, both financially and by giving them assistance and encouragement. It has been pointed out that grandparents can play a real eugenic role by assisting their married children with their families.5 The midcentury trend toward early marriages creates a favorable atmosphere for grandparents to perform a eugenic function.
Eugenic Advances
We cannot test the Eugenic Hypothesis effectively until a much larger number of people are living under conditions of real freedom to have as many or as few children as they want and until a larger proportion of them are subject to the social and psychological pressures favorable to having children, but we seem to be getting away from the small family pattern which has been the fashion for so long and looking toward middle-sized families. This change has eugenic aspects. A eugenic selection of births requires that those most able to benefit from a higher education should
6 Ibid. p. 267.

221

have the most children. Big families are not yet the fashion with the educated and with those who have the potential for benefiting from higher education, but there is definitely a trend toward moderate-sized

families here. Such trends in the direction of eugenics
at mid-century give encouragement to those concerned about our most valuable asset: the quality of our population.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

HEREDITY COUNSELING SYMPOSIUM
The American Eugenics Society conducted a symposium on heredity counseling at the New York Academy of Medicine Building in New York City on Friday, November first, 1957. The proceedings are to be published in full in the March EUGENICS QUARTERLY. The program was as follows:

Morning Session

9:30 A.M.

GENETICS IN MEDICAL PRACTICE .
Chairman: John C. Bugher, M.D.
Director, Medical Education and Public Health The Rockefeller Foundation
The Need for Parental Counseling in Pediatrics Josef Warkany, M.D.
Children's Hospital Research Foundation University of Cincinnati
Genetics in Psychiatric Practice John Whittier, M.D.
Psychology Institute, Creedmore State Hospital
Genetics and Dentistry Carl J. Witkop, Jr., D.D.S.
National Institute of Dental Research
Genetics in Public Health Nursing Hazel R.Dyson, R.N. CarlJ. Witkop, Jr., D.D.S. Shirley S. Butters, R.N.
National Institute of Dental Research
Genetics in Relation to Cardio-Vascular Diseases VictorA. McKusick, M.D.
Johns Hopkins Hospital

Afternoon Session

2:00 P.M.

HEREDITY COUNSELING PANEL (Ten-minute presentationswithdiscussion)

Chairman: Bentley Glass, Ph.D.
Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University

