Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The evolutionary problem of genetic disease
Stanley M. Gartler
To cite this article: Stanley M. Gartler (1955) The evolutionary problem of genetic disease, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:1, 40-45, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987219 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987219
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

THE EVOLUTIONARY PROBLEM OF GENETIC DISEASE

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

STANLEY M. GARTLER
Columbia University Institute for Study of Human Variation

o."NE OF THE MOST important and inter-
esting phenomena in the field of human genetics is the persistence of genetic disease, despite the fact that affected individuals are generally severely hindered in survival and fertility. The explanation of this phenomenon must lie with the concept of the balance of evolutionary forces affecting the frequency of hereditary disease. The purpose of this article is to examine the consequences of upsetting this balance through the introduction of effective therapies for genetic disease (effective referring to the increase in survival and fertility of affected individuals). Since significant headway has already been made in the treatment of hereditary disease (e.g., diabetes mellitus and acholoric jaundice), the problem posed for examination is not entirely within the realm of speculation.
The major evolutionary factor involved in this phenomenon of the persistence of genetic diseases is that of selection pressure, which is the population geneticist's method of comparing the relative capacities of alternative types to leave viable offspring. For example, we speak of selection (selection pressure is selection quantified) against the hemophiliac, since he leaves less offspring on the average than the non-hemophiliac. We could just as accurately speak of selection in favor of the non-hemophiliac, since he leaves more offspring than the hemophiliac, which illustrates the simultaneous, positive and negative aspects of selection. However, in a eugenic sense, we do speak of selection as being either positive or negative, which in this case refers to the mode of implementation of an artificial selection program--

positive selection referring to the increase of reproduction of the desired type, and negative selection to the decrease in reproduction of the undesired type.
We can see then, that an effective therapy for a genetic disease either diminishes or eliminates the selection pressure acting against it. Prior to the diminishing of the selection pressure, some opposing evolutionary force, such as mutation, must have been operating to keep the disease reappearing in the population (balance of evolutionary forces). Now, with this force (e.g., mutation) unopposed, we can expect a general increase in the frequency of the disease. In fact, under such conditions we can conceive of the spread of a genetic disease through an entire population.
The first question that comes to mind with respect to this phenomenon is that of the magnitude and rate of increase of such treatable hereditary diseases. The rate and/or extent of the change in the frequency of an hereditary disease, after an effective therapy has been found for it, will depend on its frequency and on the evolutionary mechanisms maintaining it in the population. The higher the frequency of a lethal trait, the greater must be the magnitude of the evolutionary force keeping this disease in the population against the eliminating force of selection. When the selection pressure is diminished through the intervention of medicine, then the frequency of the hereditary "disease" will increase at a correspondingly rapid rate. Furthermore, if, for example, mutation is the evolutionary force involved, the rate of change will in general be very slow, while the extent of change might be 100

40

41

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

per cent establishment of the hereditary disease. On the other hand, if compensation (families producing affected offspring have more children on the average than families having only normal offspring) is the evolutionary factor concerned, then it is even conceivable that there would be no increase in the frequency of the hereditary disease following the introduction of the effective therapy. As was mentioned, population geneticists have been highly interested in these general questions. They have thoroughly explored the theoretical aspects of the evolutionary mechanisms involved in lethal or sublethal (hereditary disease) systems and they have made a good beginning in estimating the frequencies of various hereditary diseases. But they have barely scratched the surface in determining which evolutionary force or forces are involved in any specific disease. Although determining such evolutionary forces is empirically the most important for our purposes, we can still obtain a general picture of the magnitude of the problem through our theoretical knowledge of evolutionary mechanisms and what we know of the frequency of hereditary diseases.
For simplicity, we will consider the change in the frequency of a more or less hypothetical hereditary disease under the different evolutionary mechanisms possible and under the assumption that selection pressure has been removed from the disease. It will be best here to assume a simple recessive lethal disease (due to homozygosis for a single recessive gene and where none of the affected individuals reproduce) with a maximal frequency (.0025), since that will allow us to examine its change under all possible systems and will also give us the situation at its worst. The frequency (.0025) of the disease chosen here is one estimate given for hereditary sickle cell anemia in the American Negro population.
There are four general evolutionary systems which could maintain a lethal recessive in a population against the pressure of adverse selection, and these will be con-

sidered in the following order: (1) mutation, (2) selection in favor of the heterozygote, (3) gametic selection, and (4) compensation.
1. If the rate of mutation is the only force maintaining a recessive lethal in a population at a constant frequency, then the magnitude of the mutation rate is related to the frequency of the disease in the following simple manner: Mutation rate from normal gene to lethal recessive gene is equal to the frequency of the disease (homozygous recessive). This relationship holds very closely even under conditions of inbreeding, at least for the magnitude of inbreeding we can conceive of as occurring in man. So, for our example, where the frequency of the disease is .0025, the mutation rate would also be .0025, which means that 1 in 400 gametes (sperm and ova) will carry a mutation for the disease-producing gene. Although this may appear to be an inconceivably high mutation rate, it should be pointed out that comparable mutation rates have already been given as estimates for human genes (Goodman and Reed 1952).
Then, if the selection pressure against the disease is completely removed, the frequency of the disease will increase at a rate directly related to the rate of mutation. We need not go into the exact formula for this increase, but we will make a calculation here to see how many generations, or years, it would require under these conditions for the disease to reach serious proportions. A frequency of 10 per cent has been chosen (that is, one in every ten individuals would require treatment for this hereditary condition) as a figure of serious magnitude, and though this choice is arbitrary, it is doubtful if this value would be challenged, at least as a minimal one.
It will be assumed in this estimate that the back-mutation rate is insignificant (mutation from the disease -producing gene to the normal one) which is in accord with the general experience from experimental genetics. Even if a small back-mutation

42 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

rate is assumed, it will not alter the results value of the heterozygote will prevent this,

for this calculation appreciably. A back- just as it prevented the elimination of the

mutation rate would be of most significance lethal trait prior to the assumed medical

in preventing the complete spread of the intervention.

disease-producing gene through the popu- In fact, the most reasonable assumption

lation. That is, there would be a point at for such cases is that the frequency of the

which the opposing mutation rates would disease will not go beyond 25 per cent.

cancel out each others' effects, and no Estimating again the time required for the

further change in the frequency of the trait to increase to a frequency of .10--start-

disease would occur.

ing from an initial value of .0025 under

The time then for the hereditary disease the above conditions--the period calculated

under discussion here to reach a frequency will be approximately 75 generations, or

of .10, starting from a value of .0025, and about 2000 years. This is just half the time

at a mutation rate of .0025, would be ap- required for the same change under the

proximately 150 generations or about 4000 previous hypothesis discussed (mutation).

years. To most people this period is almost It is interesting to note that, for the case

certainly too long to be of any concern, of selection in favor of the heterozygote,

particularly in view of the fact that we are by eliminating this selective advantage

considering an extreme situation.

rather than introducing a therapy for the

2. In selection in favor of the hetero- recessive lethal condition, the evolutionary

zygote, which is the next evolutionary sys- consequences will be completely reversed.

tem to be considered, the carriers of a In fact, in the same period of time that we

single lethal gene for a particular disease calculated as necessary for the frequency

(they do not exhibit the disease them- of the disease to reach 10 per cent under

selves) leave more viable offspring on the the condition of an effective treatment for

average than those individuals who carry it, we find that the disease frequency will

none. Therefore, an opposing force is set be reduced to .02 per cent under conditions

up counter-balancing the selection pressure of equality of selective values for the

eliminating the homozygous recessives, and, heterozygote and homozygous dominant.

consequently, the lethal trait is maintained This aspect of the problem is particularly

in the population.

interesting, since Allison (1954) has recent-

For a rare recessive lethal disease, where ly brought forth convincing evidence that

selection in favor of the heterozygote is the this very phenomenon is occurring in the

only factor maintaining the gene in the case of sickle cell anemia. His work

population, the selective pressure in favor indicates that selection in favor of the

of the heterozygote is about equal to the heterozygote is the major factor accounting

frequency of the gene for the lethal trait. for the maintenance of the sickling gene

This means then, that for our example, in some African populations, and, further-

this selective value will be the square root more, that this selective advantage is due

of .0025 or .05, and when the pressure of to the greater resistance of the heterozygotes

selection against the lethal disease is re- to malarial infection than the normals or

moved, the frequency of the trait will in- homozygotes. With the introduction of

crease at a corresponding rate. Now, al- mosquito control programs (which in turn

though the frequency of the disease will control the malarial parasite) into these

increase at a much faster rate for this case areas, it is very likely that the selective ad-

than for the previous one considered vantage of the sickling heterozygote will be

(mutation), there will be no possibility eliminated and, consequently, the frequency

here of the disease spreading throughout of the sickling gene and also the sickling

the entire population. The higher selective disease rediiced. In fact, as Allison points

43

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

out, it is the relative -absence of the malarial parasite in America which is probably the major explanation for the lower frequency of the sickling gene in the American Negro population as compared with the African Negro population. In other words, the sickling heterozygotes in America would not have a selective advantage as they do in certain parts of Africa, which incidentally would be a most interesting and important possibility to check.
3. The next evolutionary system to be considered is that of gametic selection. Here one type of gamete has an advantage over the other or others in the process of fertilization (in our hypothetical case, the gamete containing the disease-effecting gene), and this behavior opposes the eliminating pressure of selection on the affected individuals, thereby maintaining the lethal trait in the population. For the example under consideration, a 5 per cent advantage of the lethal gene at the gametic stage would suffice to offset the lethal effects of this gene in the homozygous recessive genotype or the zygotic stage.
Then if the selection pressure against affected individuals is removed through the introduction of an effective therapy, the frequency of the disease would reach 10 per cent in about 45 generations, or around 1250 years. Furthermore, under these conditions the hereditary disease could conceivably spread throughout the entire population. Although specific examples of gametic selection are not known in man and indeed would be difficult to demonstrate conclusively, it is very likely that the surplus of males at birth are a result of gametic selection in favor of the Y-bearing sperm; this advantage being counterbalanced by the excessive mortality of the males in the zygotic stage.
4. Finally we come to the fourth and last evolutionary system under consideration: compensation, where families producing affected offspring tend to have more children on the average than other families. As-

suming an average family size of 2.5 (Osborn 1951), this would amount to approximately .5 offspring (average family size 3.0) more on the average per mating producing affected offspring than for matings not producing affected offspring. This will counteract the pressure of selection against affected individuals, thereby leading to the maintenance of the hereditary disease in the population. With selection pressure against affected individuals removed, as we are hypothesizing in this paper, the frequency of the disease would increase very rapidly, assuming that the compensating mechanism remained constant. In fact, it would take less than 20 generations, or less than 500 years, for the frequency of the disease to reach 10 per cent. However, it seems highly doubtful, at least to this writer, that this mechanism would remain, once the debilitating or lethal nature of the hereditary disease had been eliminated. This assumes, of course, that the compensating force is psychological in origin or, to put it more strongly, under willful control. The possibility must certainly be admitted, however, that this mechanism might not be willfully controlled.
It is of interest to note in concluding the discussion in this section that compensation has been considered as an important evolutionary factor in the persistence of more than one genetic disease (Lewontin 1953).
It can be seen, then, that the potential magnitude of this problem--the increase in the frequency of a hereditary disease once an effective therapy has been found for it --can range all the way from no increase in the incidence of the disease to a condition under which the disease could reach serious proportions in less than 20 generations. Some may argue that we are dealing here with a very extreme case, and therefore the potential seriousness of the problem is unduly magnified. It is certainly true, as was stated earlier, that we have chosen an extreme case for consideration, but it appears that for medical problems of such sig-

44 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

nificance, the only reasonable approach is to do just this. Certainly, in buying insurance, the average man will insure against the maximum hazards.
Furthermore, we must remember here that our calculations dealt only with changes in one disease at a time, when in actuality this general process will be taking place simultaneously for several such hereditary traits. This of course would greatly augment the magnitude of the problem in that there would be many more people requiring treatment for one disorder or another and some individuals would require therapy for more than one.
It seems clear, then, that the problem for any one case may be of serious proportions, depending of course into which of the previously discussed categories, if any, a particular hereditary disease falls. The first order of inquiry in any situation, then, is clearly the nature of the evolutionary mechanism maintaining the disease in the population. This information is necessary in order to determine the expected magnitude of the problem, which factor in turn will be the foundation for any discussion of what should and can be done about it.
The study of these evolutionary mechanisms has been, and still is, of great interest to the population geneticist. But unfortunately, it is not simple to discover which mechanism is responsible for the maintenance of a particular genetic disease in a population. For example, geneticists have spent considerable effort investigating this very problem in the case of Cooley's anemia, a lethal hereditary disease found in relatively high frequency among Mediterranean people. Consistently, there have resulted as many hypotheses as to the nature of the evolutionary mechanism involved as there have been investigations. Of course, it is quite possible that a combination of factors would be responsible for the preservation of a lethal disease in a population, and we must be prepared for such a possibility.
However, it is doubtful if this is the ma-

jor factor accounting for the lack of success in arriving at a definitive answer for a disease like Cooley's anemia. The real trouble appears to lie in the fact that, in order to distinguish with any reasonable degree of probability between the different possible hypotheses, very large numbers of individuals must be observed, and thus far this has been beyond the scope of any one investigation. In fact, for some of the rarer hereditary diseases, it is quite likely that surveys of nationwide scope would have to be conducted to arrive at statistically sound conclusions. However, despite this difficulty and others which we shall not go into at this time, sufficiently extensive studies seem possible in most cases which will permit definitive answers on this high important question.
The potential increase in the frequency of a treatable genetic disease has been discussed as an undesirable consequence of the phenomenon under discussion. The main argument for this view is the increasing medical burden that such a process would bring to bear on a society. There is also the argument that a society largely dependent on medical therapies for its maintenance would not be a very secure one. However, it should be noted that other viewpoints on this problem are conceivable. For example, in the case of a recessive lethal where selection in favor of the heterozygote is responsible for maintaining the gene in the population, the introduction of an effective therapy for the disease would not only lead to an increase in its frequency but would also increase the frequency of the favorable heterozygote. This would result in an increase in the adaptive value of the population, which essentially means an increase in its reproductive efficiency. However, whether this effect would counterbalance the medical, social, and financial problems arising from the increase in the incidence of the disease is certainly questionable. Furthermore, this is a statistical outlook attempting to evaluate the overall effect of this process on the

45

population and does not take account of the many individual hardships created by it.
Finally, the question of future action on this important question arises. There are only two methods we know of at present to counteract such increases in treatable hereditary disease, and one, the restriction of medical therapy and/or research, would probably be universally unacceptable. The other method, is, of course, a eugenics program which would require a great deal of public education before it would become widely acceptable. However, for some cases it would appear that a eugenics plan could be made workable. For example, where selection in favor of the heterozygote is the major evolutionary force involved in the maintenance of the lethal gene, reduction of the heterozygote's fertility by less than one offspring per family would most likely more than suffice for all situations. It seems conceivable that a voluntary reduction in reproductivity of this order of magnitude could be achieved.
However, such decisions as will be made

on these matters will depend largely on which evolutionary mechanisms are involved in any particular case, since only then will we have some idea of the time factors involved. Therefore, it seems highly desirable to set up extensive investigations capable of answering the question of which evolutionary mechanisms are involved in maintaining any particular hereditary disease in the population. It is only with such decisive information that we will be able to evaluate the nature of this hereditary dilemma and to consider fully the frustrating and interesting questions which it poses.
REFERENCES
ALLISON, A. C. 1954. Protection Afforded by SickleCell Trait Against Subtertian Malarial Infection. Brit. Med. Jour. No. 4857:298.
GOODMAN, H. O. and S. C. REED. 1952. Heredity
of Fibrosis of the Pancreas. Possible Mutation Rate of the Gene. Amer. Jour. Human Genetics 4:59-71. LEWONTIN, R. C. 1953. The Effect of Compensation on Populations Subject to Natural Selection. Amer. Naturalist 87:375-381. OSBORN, F. 1951. "Preface to Eugenics." Harper and Brothers, N. Y., 312 pp.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

