Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The human biology of academic potential: A proposed investigation
Jack B. Bresler , Frances E. Dunn , Helen L. Urquhart & Elmer R. Smith
To cite this article: Jack B. Bresler , Frances E. Dunn , Helen L. Urquhart & Elmer R. Smith (1961) The human biology of academic potential: A proposed investigation, Eugenics Quarterly, 8:1, 9-11, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1961.9987456 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1961.9987456
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

Vol. 8, No. 1, March, 1961

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

THE HUMAN BIOLOGY OF ACADEMIC POTENTIAL: A PROPOSED INVESTIGATION1

JACK B. BRESLER, FRANCES E. DUNN, HELEN L. URQUHART AND ELMER R. SMITH

Brown University Rhode Island

I T is ALWAYS fruitful to look for ways
with which to understand human intelligence and the influences which have shaped it. Insights into the problems of intelligence are not exclusive property of any one discipline, for knowledge on this subject has come from as diverse fields as philosophy and chemistry, psychology and literature.
Through a series of fortunate developments and an extraordinary degree of cooperation from many individuals, a group of us at Brown University will be able to explore some of the cultural and genetic conditions underlying the academic potential of entering college students. In view of this multidisciplined approach which will be taken, we have decided to call the over-all project "The Human Biology of Academic Potential."
1This investigation was supported by a research grant, B-2356, from the National Institute of Neuro1ogical Diseases and Blindness, Public Health Service.

DEVELOPMENT OF THE PROJECT
During the summer of 1958, while working on a study of ABO-Rh interaction, one of us (J.B.B.) had the occasion to examine the blood typings of the Providence Chapter of the American Red Cross. By chance a file of almost 1,000 Brown-Pembroke student typings was discovered. These students (classes 1952-57) had kindly donated blood during the Korean conflict.
It came to mind that these blood types could be related with the extensive battery of intelligence, achievement, aptitude, and interest tests regularly given to Brown-Pembroke freshmen. Twentyfive years ago, the idea of relating behavior characteristics to blood types, or of even postulating that behavioral characteristics had a considerable genetic basis, would have been rejected as rash assumptions. However, during the past 10 or 15 years studies have shown that human blood types are not neutral, as once was supposed, but are associated with various diseases (McConnell 1956).

9

10 Bresler et al.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

A large body of literature has been built up dealing with the selective advantages and disadvantages of human blood types.
Similarly, there are on record a substantial number of investigations relating intelligence and behavior to a genetic basis. This area has been summarized by Fuller and Thompson (1960).
The staffs of the Office of Educational Measurement and the Department of Education of Brown University approved of the plan and provided the test scores of all the students--now alumni--who donated blood. Various members of these staffs are now actively participating in the project. In time, as additional information on these alumni accumulates, other investigators from other disciplines such as psychology and sociology may join those conducting these studies.

At present, we have the alumni scores (taken as freshmen) on the tests shown in Table 1.
There is also available the 4-year cumulative academic average for each person.
We were aware that any association between blood types and test scores would have to apply generally to all ethnic groups in order to be accepted as a valid association. This criticism of ABO association studies is discussed elsewhere (Clarke and Sheppard 1956).
The next step therefore was to obtain detailed ethnic group information for each alumnus. This was lacking in any records available to us. Accordingly, with the approval and cooperation of the Brown and Pembroke Alumni offices, 920 alumni were solicited by mail for information on their background. We asked for the place of birth and racial designation of their parents and grand-

TABLE 1
NAMES AND SOURCES OF TESTS TAKEN BY BROWN-PEMBROKE FRESHMEN

NAME
1. Scholastic Aptitude Test-Verbal Section (CEEB)
2. Scholastic Aptitude Test-Math Section (CEEB)
3. Brown University Psychological Examination-Form MBE
4. Iowa English Training Test
5. Cooperative General Achievement Test--Part II Cooperative Natural Sciences
6. Cooperative General Achievement Test--Part III Cooperative Mathematics
7. Oil Personal-Social Occupational Interest InventoryAdvanced Form, Original Edition
8. Oil Natural 9. Oil Mechanical 10. Oil Business 11. Oil Arts 12. Oil Sciences 13. Oil Verbal 14. Oil Manipulative 15. Oil Computational 16. Oil Level

SOURCE
Educational Testing Service Princeton, New Jersey
Same
Office of Educational Measurement, Brown University (Not commercially available)
Bureau of Educational Research and Service, State University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa
Cooperative Test Division Educational Testing Service Princeton, New Jersey
Same
California Test Bureau Los Angeles, California
Same Same Same Same Same Same Same Same Same

Academic Potential

11

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

parents. We also asked for the religious affiliation of their parents and grandparents at the time these individuals were children. Accordingly we have obtained ethnic group data on at least seven individuals in each family group. Each of these family groups bridges three generations and covers very nearly 100 years.
The response of the alumni, shown in Table 2, was gratifying.

TABLE 2
ETHNIC QUESTIONNAIRES MAILED AND RETURNED

Question- Questionnaires naires % Mailed Returned Returned

Brown fmen)

780 668 85.6

Pembroke (women) 140 136 97.1

Total

920 804 87.4

By agreement with the alumni, names or other identifying features will not be presented in the literature. The emphasis throughout this study will be upon population characteristics.
Through the courtesy of other administrative officers, we are able to examine the entrance papers and records on academic achievements of each of the alumni. A number of items, such as mother's year of birth, father's year of birth, and number of siblings, were also accumulated for each individual.
Thus, from many sources wewere able to gather a substantial body of data on a large sample of Brown-Pembroke students.

THE HYPOTHESES
The data will be analyzed in the light of a number of hypotheses. These will be provided with the issuance of each report. However, the dominant and always pervading hypothesis will be that there exists a difference between the academic potential of the "hybrid" ethnic groups as compared to the"nonhybrid" groups. These ethnic groups will be defined in detail in each report.
THE PURPOSE OF THE STUDY
We would close this brief introduction by recalling the statement of S. J. Holmes (1924) which was made almost 40 years ago in his study on University of California students:
"Of course the group studied represents a selected class differentiated in several respects from the general population. But it is a very important class. It is a class which furnishes much of our intellectual leadership and its biological trend is a matter of some moment."
REFERENCES
CLARKE, C. A., and SHEPPARD, P. M. 1956. The
ABO blood groups in duodenal ulcer. Acta Gen. Stat. Med., 6 : 570-574.
FULLER, JOHN B., and THOMPSON, W. ROBERT.
1960. Behavior Genetics. John Wiley and Sons, New York. HOLMES, S. J. 1924. The size of college families. J. Hered., 1 5 : 407-415. MCCONNELL, R. S. 1956. Selection and the ABO blood locus. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 6 5 : 12-25.

