Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Individual differences in survival and reproduction among old colony Mennonites in Mexico: Progress to October 1966
Gordon Allen & Calvin Redekop
To cite this article: Gordon Allen & Calvin Redekop (1967) Individual differences in survival and reproduction among old colony Mennonites in Mexico: Progress to October 1966, Eugenics Quarterly, 14:2, 103-111, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1967.9987709 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1967.9987709
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 1
View related articles
Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:29

INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN SURVIVAL AND REPRODUCTION AMONG OLD COLONY MENNONITES IN MEXICO: PROGRESS TO OCTOBER 1966

GORDON ALLEN AND CALVIN REDEKOP 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

Approximately 11,000 Old Colony Mennonites in Mexico live in the geographical and church division that is known, because of its Canadian derivation, as the Manitoba Plan. These people speak a low German dialect carried with them through Poland, Russia, and Canada and have been a part of a nearly closed, though large, population for over two hundred years. They are all farmers, but many have additional occupational specialties such as carpentry, machinery repair, and store-keeping. They sell their principal farm crops outside in order to buy farm machinery, some modern conveniences, medical care, and land. Birth control is apparently not practiced and death rates are rather high because of little access to, or acceptance of, modern medical advantages. Their religion dictates separation from the "world" and forbids many things, including automobiles, radios, musical instruments, and modern education. Sweeping changes will apparently be forced upon them in the next two decades by population pressure, the Mexican government, and internal dissatisfaction with their way of life.
Contrast with the superficially similar Amish and Hutterites is seen in the Old Colonists' slower acceptance of medical help. They are more homogeneous than the Amish, but less inbred than the Hutterites. Their economic system has little of the communal features of the Hutterite culture; among the latter the indi-
 Respectively, U. S. Public Health Service, Bethesda, Md.; and Earlham School of Religion, Earlham College, Richmond, Indiana.

vidual is protected from economic and some biological consequences of variable family size. In contrast, in the Old Colony the biological advantages of early marriage or rapid family growth may be partly or completely vitiated by excessive mortality of parents or infants. Their vital statistics are readily accessible; village records for each family, giving births, deaths, and marriages, have been maintained continuously for the past four decades. In addition, it will be possible to take a complete census.
This project was originally conceived as a study of phenotypic selection with respect to human psychological characteristics. It now extends into certain areas of sociology and medicine, both because such data will strengthen the analysis of phenotypic selection and because the population in question presents unusual opportunities for research in cultural and demographic processes.
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
The primary aim of the research remains the detection and possibly the measurement of selection pressures for or against individual behavioral traits. Prevalent views of evolution require that any hereditary trait contributing to an organism's adaptation should have been subject to natural selection in the past. Human behavior is a critical aspect of human adaptation and both hereditary and acquired components can be assumed to affect the number of offspring brought to biological maturity. Our almost complete ignorance of this effect can be partly ascribed to the complex-

103

104

Allen and Redekop

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

ity of the social and economic matrix through which the most characteristically human traits influence human biological phenomena, and to the variability of the biological phenomena themselves. Although selection in our own society is an ultimate object of study, a simpler and more uniform society is more appropriate to begin with as long as such a society exists. After selection pressures have been identified in one population, both their consequences within that population and their generality for other societies will become fruitful lines of investigation.
Demographic trends of past decades can be read from the village records, and a longitudinal study begun now may reveal the significance of the trends. Such a rapid rate of population growth as our present data suggest (4% per year) cannot continue long in the midst of other expanding populations. It is in fact abnormal, like the world-wide population explosion, in the sense that no species can have expanded so rapidly during a significant fraction of its evolutionary history; such growth denotes the breakdown of normal stabilizing mechanisms. It is desirable to determine whether expansion of the Old Colony is a simple consequence of favorable economic and health conditions unbalanced by contraception, or whether natality is abnormally high, perhaps because of cultural influences. In either case, the demographic phenomena accompanying return to a more stable situation will be dramatic and probably instructive.
In its continuing struggle against worldly influences, the Old Colony antagonizes or alienates the individual members, many of whom would accept more rapid change. The resultant tendency to defect and the more natural forces for social unity are in a delicate balance under the scrutiny of the leaders,

who do not want to yield more than they must. At the same time, extreme religious and cultural differentiation from the world reinforces social cohesion. The extraordinary conservatism and isolation of this group over the past century and the prospect of imminent change make it a good testing ground for theories of social solidarity and cultural change. Areas in which study will probably be possible are religion, education, birth control, and medical care.
PRESENT PLANS AND OBJECTIVES
The preliminary phase of the research may be characterized as a three-year pilot study. This will provide a description of a population, but only as a by-product in attaining the main objectives. Chiefly, it will provide parameters for the design of the subsequent longitudinal study: age distribution of the population, family and village structure, and guidelines within which testing and interviewing may be planned. Secondly, the preliminary research is intended to define baselines from which future changes can be measured: medical and reproductive statistics, economic conditions, and level of culture. These two goals are to be accomplished mainly by a complete census and accompanying survey of certain medical, cultural, and economic characteristics. This information will be linked to that obtained from village records so as to specify the population in any desired past year with respect to the present inhabitants, their immediate ancestors and their collaterals: their residence and migration history, religious and political offices held, longevity, and fertility. The number of names is so small as to permit their digital coding in four digits, so that even when birth dates are included, a single IBM card can carry extensive historical and family data about one indi-

Vol. 14, No. 2

Differences in Survival and Reproduction

105

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

vidual for the purpose of linking records from multiple sources.
Another aim of the pilot study is to develop psychological and sociological instruments for the main study. In order not to complicate data collection for the census and surveys, these pretests will probably be delayed until late in 1967.
The theme of the main research is prospective study of survival and reproduction of people whose behavioral characteristics have been evaluated objectively. Hopefully, evaluation will be by means of psychological tests as well as by less structured procedures. Tests will be administered to intact couples at the end of their reproductive period and to their immediate children. The older persons will already have completed most of their family functions, but their parental effectiveness will not be entirely known until the children have demonstrated the effects of their early environment on reproduction in the next generation. The children can be studied at various early stages in the life cycle before all selective forces have determined survival or emigration and before their behavior has been altered by experiences of parenthood. Individual differences in the second generation can then be related to subsequent survival and reproduction. These data will provide information about the stability of traits over the life span, which might permit inferences about the earlier characteristics of persons tested at later ages.
Because psychological testing may not be permitted by all families in the sample, other parameters of individual behavior will be sought, such as school records, disciplinary action by the community, public offices held, economic success, secondary occupations, and preferences in type of work or recreation. These criteria are likely to have a more direct relation to survival and reproduc-

tion than psychometric criteria, but insofar as they may be farther from possible genetic control they will reveal genetically less interesting selection pressures. If both kinds of data can be studied, and reveal selective effects, some attempt can be made at tracing the causal pathways from psychological traits through social or economic status to biological success.
The assessment of fitness should ideally take account of total number of descendants in some fixed subsequent generation when all influences of the index case on his descendants have been dissipated. Because stability over several generations cannot be anticipated and for practical reasons, number of grandchildren will serve as the criterion in this research. Even this figure will be hard to obtain in some cases because of late reproduction by a person's youngest offspring, because of emigration, and because of undetected illegitimacy. Extramarital reproduction on the part of a male would, taken alone, make a rather simple positive contribution to his fitness; yet associated effects, such as marital discord that might reduce the number of legitimate grandchildren, may be observed in our study without our knowledge of the illegitimate descendants. The magnitude of the first two problems, late grandchildren and inaccessibility of emigrants, may be learned in the next two years. The amount of illegitimacy may be very difficult to estimate.
Besides overall fitness as above described, certain components of fitness will be worth studying. A person's ability to survive to maturity is in some degree dependent on his own behavior, but it is very doubtful if we shall be able to test a large enough series of children to detect a relation between their behavior and mortality. It may be possible to correlate defection or emigration with pre-

106

Allen and Redekop

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

viously measured psychological characteristics and, because of the generally drastic effect of defection on reproduction, this will represent one kind of selection pressure.
An important component of parental fitnessis probably death rate of offspring, and this may be easier to relate to behavior traits than overall, two-generation fitness;the latter is complicated by reproductive physiology, random events, and characteristics of offsprings' spouses. One example of the hypotheses that should be tested in this area is that childhood survival depends more upon mother's competence than upon father's. Parental competence can be assessed in several objective ways even without benefit of psychological tests.
Relations among the components of fitness will be instructive. If early marriage is associated with higher infant and maternal mortality, then the optimum marriage age for high total fertility may be close to the modal marriage age. This might be expected in a population whose cultural and biological traits were entirely congruent. Other interesting relationships that can be easily investigated include influences of number of sibs or birth rank on progeny number, reproductive compensation for infant deaths, and other evidence suggesting behavioral control over fertility in the alleged absence of contraception.
With only slight additional effort, retrospective estimates of selection pressure can be obtained in the course of the longitudinal study. It will be easy to assess the reproductive success of a deceased person, and it should also be possible to obtain retrospective information about his status in the community: offices held, size of his farm, new buildings or enterprises authored by him. These measures of behavior will be used in both the longitudinal and the retro-

spective studies, furnishing evidence of consistency or trends. If the population should for some reason undergo a rapid demographic transition, the retrospective studies may furnish the best evidence of selection effects.
FIELD WORK
Two visits were made to the colony in the summer of 1966, each lasting about a week, and profiting by the hospitality of one of the colonists who has known Redekop for many years. The first trip was made by Redekop alone; he renewed old contacts and obtained a favorable reception for the plans to take a complete census. He also made a trial of the first version of the census form and of certain psychological tests (vocabulary and dexterity). On the second trip Redekop introduced Allen to the previous contacts and made important new ones. In particular, four of the most literate men agreed to work as enumerators in their respective sections of the settlement. With the collaboration of one of the enumerators we tested the basic census form in seven more households and we left three to be filled out by another enumerator after he had helped us complete a form for his own family. At the suggestion of the second enumerator we drew up the following simple explanation of our work to assist the enumerators in gaining cooperation of the people:
The purpose of the census is to obtain family and health information and some other general information about all persons in the Manitoba Plan. Doctors Allen and Redekop are researchers who are interested in finding out how well people get along in terms of health, reproduction and overall success when they live in a simple and natural way. Some of the findings may be of interest to the Old Colony, for example in updat-

Vol. 14, No. 2

Differences in Survival and Reproduction

107

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

ing church records and in improving health and reproductive conditions.
A draft of the health, economic, and cultural survey was tried in November, I960, and then revised. In December a printed census form was used in a pretest of three villages. The final census form was printed in April and the census is now in progress.
The second important source of vital statistics will be the village records. These are conveniently arranged by family. Each page in a village ledger gives the wedding date of a married couple, their birth dates, the names of their four parents, and if either partner has died, date of the death. Next are listed all their children by name, date of birth, date of adult baptism, and death if any, and name of spouse if married. If the family moves from the village this is usually indicated with the year at the bottom of the record. Subsequent marriages of a partner after death of the other are usually on the same page if the family remained in the village. We obtained photographs of the complete records of one village, which documented some marriages contracted even before 1900. This record has been kept by our host, who is probably more careful than most of the village clerks, so that the record is remarkably legible and complete.
On his first summer visit Redekop and an interpreter interviewed the Municipal Secretary at the Presidencia in Cuauhtemoc, where all births and deaths in the Old Colony are supposed to be registered. The head nurse at the Cuauhtemoc Hospital was also interviewed about health conditions and the accuracy of death certificates filed at the Presidencia. It appears that useful medical information will be obtained mainly from records of the two hospitals and from the Mexican doctors who treat

members of the Colony. Further explorations on these lines are planned for the next visit to Cuauhtemoc.
ANALYSIS OF FIF.LD DATA ALREADY
OBTAINED
The Manitoba Plan consists of 42 contiguous villages spread in an irregular oval about 60 by 18 kilometers. A second, somewhat smaller settlement of Old Colonists adjoins the Manitoba Plan at the north end of the valley and there are three other settlements, two again of the Old Colony, still farther to the North. Official population estimates of the entire Old Colony compiled by the deacons from yearly church reports indicate a population of 27,967 at the end of 1965 for all the settlements together.
The fifteen completed census forms now in our possession already provide some measure of contact between villages and settlements. Twenty-seven marriages were documented as to birthplace of the partners. In five of these the partners were born in the same village; in four they were born in different provinces or countries. The last four represent, in part, migration of the whole population rather than of marriage partners, but in addition to these it is known that some of the couples were born in different settlements in Mexico. Geographic distances cannot yet be assigned.
The transmission of names from one generation to the next is very much like the transmission of genes. Simple methods developed by Crow and Mange (1965) permit the estimation of inbreeding from names in the village records already copied. On these pages, 201 of the offspring are listed as already married, 15 of them to persons with the same surname. On the assumption that each surname originated with a single male some time in the distant past, these

108

Allen and Redckop

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

15 isonymous marriages are indicative of consanguineous marriages equivalent to 60 first-cousin pairs, and yield an inbreeding coefficient of .019 (total inbreeding or FIT). An alternative approach is to determine how much inbreeding, as random genetic drift, would have produced the present irregular frequency of names. Fifty-five names were found in the records, 38 among the partners of these 201 offspring. The five most frequent names accounted for 59%. The sum of the squared frequencies of single names is, in theory, four times the accumulated inbreeding reckoned from the hypothetical generation in which the names had unique origins. This method yields an estimate of .017 for random inbreeding (FST). We can conclude from the last figure that there has been considerable genetic drift in this population, but the good agreement between total and random inbreeding indicates that, within the group, mating is almost random with respect to consanguinity.
One defect of these estimates is that the marriages occurred over 60 years instead of in the latest generation. It is nevertheless interesting to compare them with estimates obtained by the same methods, but on a single generation, by Crow and Mange (1965) with Hutterite data. Their figures were .0495 from isonymy (yielding FIT) and .0445 from name frequencies (F8T). Tracing o£ Hutterite genealogies through six generations detected only enough consanguinity to account for about half of the total estimated inbreeding. Inbreeding in the Old Colony appears to be about 0.4 times that in the Hutterites.
Another almost independent estimate for the Old Colony indicates perhaps even less inbreeding. When family names of all four parents of a marrying pair are known, any first-cousin relationship would be detectable by ap-

pearance of one name on both sides of the marriage. On the assumption, again, that each name was once unique, each such identity signifies cumulative consanguinity in the series of marriages equal to one first-cousin marriage. The village records give parental names for 117 marriages out of which came offspring including the 201 whose later marriages were analyzed above. In these 117 marriages, 25 instances were found of one name occurring on both sides of the marriage. This estimates the total inbreeding coefficient as .013, somewhat below the .019 obtained from more recent marriages.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Planning of the research on Old Colony Mennonites has been aided by a panel of collaborators and consultants who can be listed only partially. John Loehlin has been helpful, not only with the psychological aspects, but in improving the whole research design. Irene Taeuber has called our attention to social and demographic research opportunities that would have evaded us. Charlotte Silverman, John Hostetler, and members of the Laboratory of Socioenvironmental Studies, National Institute of Mental Health, have reviewed plans and have helped in design of the survey. Joseph Schachter has advised on a wide variety of problems and is participating in the demographic analysis. People in the Census Bureau (Daniel Levine and Earl Gerson) and in the National Health Survey (Elija White and Robert Fuchsberg) are helping us with the census and surveys on a continuing basis.
Field work in Mexico has been supported by a grant from the Population Council, which also made possible the participation of Calvin Redekop and John Loehlin.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

Vol. 14, No. 2

Differences in Survival and Reproduction

109

REFERENCE
CROW, J. F., and A. P. MANGE, 1965. Measure-
ment of inbreeding from the frequency of marriages between persons of the same surname. Eugenics Quart., 12: 199-203.

women born in 1928. The Old Colony appears to be remarkable because itcombines a very high mean fertility with a high variance in fertility.

APPENDIX A
From the records of one village, Hochfeld, crude estimates have been obtained of age-specific death rates and of completed fertility. These permit a first approximation to the index of total opportunity for selection, I, as defined by Crow (1958):
. , 1.

REFERENCES
CROW, J. F., 1958. Some possibilities of mea-
suring selection intensities in man. Human Biol., 30: 1-13. KIRK, D., 1966. Demographic factors affecting the opportunity for natural selection in the United States. Eugenics Quart., 13: 270-273.
SPUHLFR, J. N., 1960. "Empirical Studies on
Quantitative Human Genetics." : In World Health Organization Conference, Seminar on the Use of Vital and Health Statistics for Genetic and Radiation Studies. United Nations, Geneva, pp. 241-250.

where
· h=
In these formulas Pd is the probability of death before the childbearing period, Ps is the probability of survival to childbearing, Vf is the variance in number of children per parent and xs is the mean number of children per parent.
The following estimates for the village of Hochfeld are based upon deaths between 1930 and 1965 and on births in first marriages observed until death or the end of the reproductive period.

APPENDIX B
Joseph Schachter f
RATES OF REPRODUCTION AND NATURAL INCREASE
Using the Village records for Hochfeld as the source of information, measures of female reproductivity were calculated, and are presented in Table 1 in comparison with United States population data.
The measures for this Mennonite group were derived by indirect methods. The total number of women currently alive in the village is far too small to

Males Females

0.097 0.084

0.903 0.916

0.107 0.092

V
13.1 7.74 0.219 0.350 17.8 7.92 0.284 0.402

From data on the Hutterites, who might be expected to resemble the Old Colony, Spuhler (1960) estimated that, in females, 7m=.218, 7,= .136, and 7= .384. The relative roles of mortality and fertility in selection appear to be reversed in these rather similar populations. For Mexico, Spuhler's estimates were, respectively, .490, .613, and 1.405. Kirk (1966) found a value of Im of 0.03 in the United States now, and I¡ was 0.446 for U.S.

yield meaningful rates for any one calendar year. But a considerably larger amount of information, covering the experience of several decades, exists in the form of the village records. Using this source, age-specific years of risk were calculated for each individual. These data were then pooled, and related to the frequencies of births and death to
f U. S. Public Health Service, Heart Disease Control Program, Arlington, Virginia.

110

Allen and Redekop

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

TABLE 1
KSTIMATKU KKMALK REPRODUCTIVO Y

TABLE3
DISTRIBUTION OF WOMKN BY ACK AT FIRST MARRIAM.

Statistic

Hochfeld population
1966

United States popula-
tion 1964»

Gross reproduction rate
Net reproduction rate Average length o£ one
generation (years) Intrinsic rate o£ natural
increase True birth rate True death rate Wife's mean age at first
marriage (years) Coefficient of variation
ofwife's mean age at
first marriage
(Percent)

5.258 4.261 31.082
.0484 .0590 .0106
20.9
13.1

1.564 1.507
.0085 .0156 .0242

* Vital Statistics of the United States, 1964, Volume I.

provide estimates of period rates (Table 2). In implementing this method, two sets of punched cards were prepared: one for each marriage, and another for each birth. Each set was used independently to get rates for defined segments of the life cycle: the child cards covered the period from birth to marriage; the marriage records represented the period from wedlock on.
The fertility rates so derived were for married women only, and had to beconverted to rates for all women in order that the Table 1 measures could becomputed. This was accomplished by multiplying them by the proportion of

Age at
marriage (years)
17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 and over

Frequency

Cumulative fre-
quency

Cumula-
tive percent

44 15 19 24 43 27 70 12 82 12 94 5 99 3 102 7 109

3.7 17.4 39.4
64.2 75.2 86.2 90.8 93.6 100.0

women married in each 5-year age group. The latter figures were estimated from information on age at first marriage for all women in the marriage file who had been born prior to 1941. Table 3 shows the data collected and cumulative percentages.
The cumulative percentages may be regarded as providing a measure of the

Type

TABLE 4
SUMMARY COUNTS

Number of
persons

Years at risk

Deaths

Marriage cards Child cards Total

126 325 451

1,825 3,529 5,354

51 18 33

Note: It will be observed that there are only 51 deaths in the sample, and of these, 29 occurred at ages under 5 years. As a result, some interpolation was necessary to provide at least a rough approximation of the mortality schedule.

Rate

TABLE 2
DATA SOURCKS FOR COMPONENTS OF SPECIFIED RATES
Numerator

Denominator

Birth rates for married women
Death rates for married women Death rates for unmarried women

Child cards: Count of births by age of mother *
Marriage cards: Count of deaths by age at death Child cards: Count of deaths by age at death

Marriage cards: count of years from date of marriage to terminai date f
do Child cards: count of years from birth to terminal date %

* These represent only children born to the woman entered on the marriage cards. t Date of death, outmigration, or I960, whichever occurred first. J Date of death, marriage, outmigration, or 1966, whichever occurred first.

Vol. 14, No. 2

Differences in Survival and Reproduction

111

proportions married at specific ages. Since the experiences of different cohorts were pooled, it was necessary to assume that these cohorts constitute samples from a common universe. It was also assumed that differences in the survival

rates of single and married women in these ages would have little effect on the estimates.
An accounting of the female records used in preparing the estimates for Hochfeld is presented in Table 4.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

