Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Applications of genetics in psychiatry and neurology
Arnold R. Kaplan Ph.D. & Jan A. Böök
To cite this article: Arnold R. Kaplan Ph.D. & Jan A. Böök (1962) Applications of genetics in psychiatry and neurology, Eugenics Quarterly, 9:2, 98-100, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1962.9987511 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1962.9987511
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

Communications

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

APPLICATIONS OF GENETICS IN PSYCHIATRY AND NEUROLOGY

The June, 1961 issue of Eugenics Quarterly included an extensive review article by Dr. Lewis A. Hurst, Applications of Genetics in Psychiatry and Neurology (vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 61-80). Without detracting from the value of Dr. Hurst's review and stimulating evaluations, several statements in the article invite comment.
The conclusion, quoted from Newman, "that the genetic constitution contributes twice as much as the environmental factor of cultural stimulation to test intelligence" is an oversimplification and not an objectively validated generalization. The meaning of any stimulating conditions for a particular individual depends on the meaning of the stimulus events, the meaning of the background factors and expectancies aroused, and the mediation of residual forces in the individual's context and experience. Measurable variables such as intelligence test ratings are indices of products of the combinations of manifold external (i.e., cultural, experiential) and internal (including genetic) influences. The above arbitrary assignment of relative values to the groups of interdependent variables ignores their complexities and interdependent variabilities.
A reference to the "classical sagas of the Jukes and Kallikaks" does not indicate the extent to which these alleged pedigrees are discredited and invalid. Unfortunately, some writers still refer to them as if they were authenticated histories. The present opportunity may be utilized to stress the error (e.g., occasionally manifest in eugenically-oriented writ-

ings) inherent in employing the Jukes and Kallikaks as scientific examples.
Dr. Hurst's "important conclusion" which "emerges from a consideration of sex ratios in the sibships of homosexuals" --i.e, "that adult male homosexuality is a biologically determined phenomenon on a genetic basis"--may not be entirely justified. Depending upon the interpreter's bias, one might conclude from Dr. Hurst's observations that the socio-environmental and psychological aspects of predominantly male sibships might cause the statistically significant correlation which he observed. The assumption of a cause-and-effect relationship, based on the observation of a simple correlation between two variables, remains controversial.
ARNOLD R. KAPLAN, PH.D.
Laboratory of Medical Genetics Cleveland, Ohio
The paper with the above title by Professor Lewis A. Hurst in the June issue of Eugenics Quarterly (vol. 8, no. 2, June, 1961) should not pass without comment. A few examples should suffice to show the reader that criticism is not out of place.
Dr. Hurst states that the pedigree or family history method "is mainly of historical interest." Everyone who has passed an elementary course in human genetics knows that no genetical analyses are complete or even possible without extensive and unbiased family studies. It is possible that Dr. Hurst does not realize that family studies can only be effi-

98

Communications

99

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

cient if precise and objective diagnoses can be made, which, of course, is not often the case in psychiatric work. As I have pointed out elsewhere (Book, Milbank Mem. Fd Quart. Bull. 38: 193-212, 1960) many of the psychotic syndromes, although clinically useful, could be subsequent and late effects of gene or chromosome mutations which primarily and on another level cause clear-cut changes of normal metabolic pathways.
The calculation of morbid risk figures is called "the more precise and statistically adequate method," while actually, this method is highly provisional pending improved gene identifications. Such figures are often genetically fairly meaningless. However, in selected instances and if used discriminately, they may be of practical value in genetical consultation work.
For several well-known reasons the twin method has its lowest efficiency when applied to mental traits. This significant criticism is almost omitted with the words "but the phenomena are too rare to invalidate the main premise involved in twin studies." In fact, they occur in every twin pair.
The following sentences with reference to schizophrenia are incorrect and unfair to an extent not often seen in contemporary scientific writing: "In Germany during the 1930's a simple dominant mode of inheritance was favored and became the basis for eugenic sterilization laws. Lenz, Roller, Slater and Book still support the dominance theory as covering some or all the cases" (italics mine).
The conclusions of these authors have nothing whatsoever to do with Germany or sterilization (some people, at least, will get the impression that this is what Dr. Hurst insinuates), but were discussed on the basis of facts. My own investigation on the neuro-psychiatric morbidity in a

North Swedish population (Book, 1953), which is not quoted among the references, was undertaken during 1946-52. I have strongly emphasized that the epidemiology and the manifestations of the schizophrenic psychoses were unusual in this population. I have furthermore warned against generalizations and stressed that the predominance of catatonic symptoms (not catatonia) could have a main genetical as well as a main environmental explanation, while critical data for deciding one way or the other could not be obtained. Moreover, the calculations for testing the likelihood of a major heterozygous versus a major homozygous gene difference are, quite obviously, speculative and have rather an academic interest. The same goes for all other calculations of this kind. My tentative explanation, on the basis of the only existing reasonably homogeneous material of schizophrenic phychoses (all the patients did in fact belong to the same very extensive pedigree), was actually one of intermediate inheritance with manifestations occurring in homo- as well as heterozygotes. Even if "intermediate inheritance" was not stated explicitly in my monograph, it takes very little understanding of genetics to discover this. Professor Hurst's distortion of this explanation and his way of misrepresenting one of the relatively unimportant discussions while omitting the significant epidemiological features is remarkable for a reviewer of neuro-psychiatric genetics.
While the problem of a genetical heterogeneity of the schizophrenic syndromes and the possible existence of specific major single gene differences is important and meaningful, the resort to polygenic explanations is a commonplace. All geneticists know that the genes work in dynamic conjunction. The claim of Dr. Hurst that a homozygous

100 Communications

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

major gene constellation incorporated in a polygenic system should constitute a more fruitful hypothesis than a major heterozygous constellation in the same setting is, of course, nonsense.
It is well known that many important and extensive investigations of neuropsychiatric genetics and epidemiology have been made in the Scandinavian countries, starting with Herman Lundborg's work on myoclonic epilepsy early in 1913. Significant and extensive contributions have been published by Sjogren, Dahlberg, Essen-Moller, Hallgren, Tage Larsson, and others in Sweden; by Stromgren, Fremming, Smith, Svendsen, Oster and others in Denmark; by Foiling, Gjessing, Remsum, Odegaard, Bremer, and others in Norway; and by Kaila, Borgstrom, and others in Finland. The only Scandinavian publications quoted among the references are Alstrom's investigation of epilepsy of 1950 (not of 19001) and a relatively limited and less important study by one of Professor Sjogren's students, Dr. A. Stenstedt, on manic-depressive psychoses.
Professor Hurst's understanding of clinical cytogenetics (cf. Book, 1961) is revealed by the amazing statement that chromosomes from connective tissue cultures are different from the somatic chromosomes on which Jacobs et al confirmed Lejeune's and co-workers' first discovery of trisomy 21 in mongolism.
With the present wide acceptance of medical genetics as a specialty by its own merits, one would have thought that we had seen the last of this kind of "do it yourself" job. Writings of this sort, apart from the fact that they contain neither original data nor original thinking, are certainly not contributing to the prestige and professional standards of medical genetics.
Scientific research has to be based on

mutual confidence and respect. This, the eradication of assessments of values and the use of objective and factual criticism, has made possible the enormous developments and discoveries in the natural sciences and in medicine during this century. Only rarely does one find insinuations like the one to which I have referred here. In my opinion, this sort of writing, as exemplified by Dr. Hurst's review, does not belong in a respectable scientific journal.
JAN A. BÖÖK
Uppsala, Sweden
Hurst's Reply
I value Dr. Kaplan's remarks as elaborating and highlighting portions of my review, and am grateful for the generous appreciation of the article as a whole in his first paragraph.
Turning to details, I agree that Newman's formulation as to the relative contribution of genetic constitution and the environmental factor of cultural stimulation to test-intelligence is a generalization, a statement of statistical averages, which is meaningfully amplified by Dr. Kaplan's exegesis. Furthermore, I am delighted that he so vigorously endorses my deploring the use of the "classical sagas of the Jukes and Kallikaks" in scientific genetic argument--a point of view no less vigorously implanted in me in the late twenties during my genetic tutelage under Lancelot Hogben. Dr. Kaplan's final comment relates to the explanation of the disturbed sex-ratio in the sibships of adult male homosexuals (reported independently by Kallman (1, 2), Lang (3), and Darke (4) in socio-environmental and psychological terms, as an alternative to that stressing the contribution of genetic and biological factors to the whole complex, as formulated by Kallmann and espoused by the present

