Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Population policies in developing countries and related international attitudes
Dorothy Nortman
To cite this article: Dorothy Nortman (1964) Population policies in developing countries and related international attitudes, Eugenics Quarterly, 11:1, 11-29, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1964.9987571 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1964.9987571
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 8
View related articles
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

POPULATION POLICIES IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES AND RELATED INTERNATIONAL ATTITUDES

DOROTHY NORTMAN
Population Council New York, New York

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

The rate at which a population grows is affected by the laws and regulations it adopts to govern many areas of its affairs. For purposes of the present discussion, however, population policy is viewed as a conscious attempt to influence population size by altering the rate of population growth. In particular we are concerned with the development in many emerging countries of policies directed at reducing the rate of population growth in an effort to maximize the rate of economic development. This idea of reducing population growth is novel, for modern economic growth in the presently developed nations was accompanied in almost all cases by a sustained and substantial increase in population (Kuznets, 1959). Moreover, because per capita product also increased, often impressively, population growth came to be viewed not only as good for a nation, but even as indispensable for continued economic progress, power, and prestige.
This is not to say that in the course of their development the Western nations did not experience population pressures. The great waves of European emigration testify to such pressures. However, they stemmed from social, religious, ethnic, and adventurous stimuli as well as from purely economic considerations. For the most part, the Western nations observed a laissez-faire policy toward their population growth. When concern was expressed, it was over rates regarded as too
 I want to express my appreciation to the staff of the Population Council to whom I am indebted for much of the information contained in this article.

low, generally considerably less than one per cent per year. Thus, after more than a century of slowly declining birth rates, French anxiety over a net reproduction rate that by the 1930's was below the level of population replacement culminated in 1939 in a "Code de la Famille" that provided "economic aid to the family, protection of maternity and infancy, the suppression of abortion, the encouragement of marriage and parenthood, and the restriction of the traffic in contraceptive devices and birth control propaganda" (Eldridge, 1954, p. 10). To implement its conclusion that "a replacement size of family is desirable in Great Britain at the present time," the United Kingdom Royal Commission on Population proposed a series of family welfare measures in 1944 (Eldridge, 1954, pp. 12, 13). Other European nations adopted similar health, family, and welfare measures to bolster their sagging rates of population growth; and the prewar pronatalist policies promoted by Germany and Italy (and Japan, the only developed Asian nation) during their totalitarian regimes are well known.
Population policies specifically intended to reduce rates of growth are a post World War II phenomenon. To achieve this end, three choices are theoretically possible: external migration, a decline in the birth rate, or a deliberate increase in the death rate. To discuss why the first is not generally considered a feasible solution would take us beyond the scope of this paper. Suffice it to say that the magnitude of the problem of

II

12

Nortman

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

rapid population growth renders emigration an unrealistic solution. Of the two remaining alternatives, a deliberate increase in the death rate is universally unthinkable. Nations faced with too rapid rates of population growth therefore have only one choice--to reduce birth rates. How to do this is the population problem of today's developing countries.
In the Western nations voluntary action alone on the part of thousands of individual couples, often in the face of organized opposition from church and state, proved sufficient to effect a long slow decline in the birth rate that followed in the wake of slowly declining death rates. In today's developing nations, death rates are coming down too rapidly for concomitant changes in attitudes and ways of living that impel people to modify long-standing conjugal habits, family relations, and traditional pride in many children. With birth rates at traditional levels--generally 40 to 55 --per thousand population, and death rates plunging to current Western levels of 9 or 10 per thousand, the countries of Asia, Africa, and Latin America are growing at 2 to 3.5 per cent per year; that is, 2 to 4 times more rapidly than Europe in its comparable period of development. On the threshold of modernizing their economies, the developing nations are finding these rates incompatible with the growing aspiration of their people for an adequate level of living.
With the impeding of economic development plans by high rates of population increase, more and more governments of developing countries are expressing concern over their population problems. This concern now ranges from explicit national policies to promote widespread contraceptive practice to

what may be considered an emerging interest in population matters. Between the two extremes are countries permitting or involved in some way in the distribution of contraceptive information and supplies and another group whose national governments either support or at least permit experimental, pilot family planning programs which may or may not eventually lead to the adoption of a national policy. A review of the specific countries that fall within this classification follows:
COUNTRIES WITH NATIONAL POPULATION
POLICIES
India
With a population of some 460 million people, India, the second largest country in the world, has taken the lead in providing central government support of a National Family Planning Programme. Precise estimates of birth and death rates are lacking, but the intercensal growth rate of 2 per cent between 1951 and 1961 plus other considerations suggest that India's population is currently growing by 2.2 to 2.5 per cent per year, rates at which numbers double in 31 to 27 years, respectively.
India's national population policy dates from 1951 when the Panel of Health Programmes of the Planning Commission appointed a committee to report on population growth and family planning (Mauldin, 1960, p. 14). According to Lt. Col. B. L. Raina, present Director of Family Planning, "After independence, it became obvious that family planning was not only necessary on the basis of humanitarian concern for individuals, but was also of the most fundamental importance to the plans for over all economic development of India" (Raina, 1963, p. 3). The current Devel-

Vol. 11, No. 1

Population Policies

13

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

opment Plan regards the Family Planning Programme as "at the very centre of planned development." (Raina, 1963, p. 45). Although expenditures have been considerably below allocations, the estimated expenditure during the single year 1962-1963--259.34 lakhs of rupees ($5.4 million U. S.)--exceeded the total spent during the whole five years of the Second Plan1 (Raina, 1963, p. 45).
Under the National Family Planning Programme, by January 1963 some 25,000 medical and social workers had been trained in regular and short-term courses, and 6774 rural and 1667 urban family planning service centers had been opened. Thus far the family planning clinics have been the main channel for distribution of supplies to the people (Raina, 1963, p. 22). However, since the clinical approach concentrates on individual contact between doctor and patient and "most people do not, and need not, use the clinic as a regular contraceptive supply source" (Raina, 1963, p. 22), future plans envisage a public health and community distribution system whereby simple supplies will be available within easy geographic distance, "without questions being asked, and without other psychological barriers such as inconvenient time of day, having to wait, or lack of privacy" (Raina, 1963, p. 34). At present contraceptive supplies imported by the Government of India are despatched from regional to district medical stores and thence distributed to peripheral clinic units. State health authorities may also purchase supplies on the open market. The most serious bottle-
1Allocations for family planning have been stepped up from 65 lakhs o£ rupees (about $1.4 million) in the First Five Year Plan (1951-56) to 497 lakhs of rupees ($10.5 million) in the Second Five Year Plan (1936-61) to 2697.57 lakhs of rupees ($56 million) for the Third Five Year Plan, 1961-66 (Raina, 1963, p. 5).

necks are at the point of peripheral distribution.
Emphasis on method has been shifting from rhythm in the early 1950's to foam tablets after the Ramanagram-Lodi Colony Study--in which the field work was performed during 1952-54 (Mauldin, 1960, p. 17)--and more recently to condoms and foam tablets. A school of thought exists in India that regards sterilization of appropriate persons-- that is, those of suitable age with an adequate number of living children--as the solution to India's population problem.2 According to Lt. Col. Raina, "voluntary sterilization far exceeded the expectation" (Raina, 1963, p. 11). Free facilities are available on a fairly wide scale, in hospitals and maternity and health centers in the States and Centrally administered areas. The State of Maharashtra has initiated sterilization camps and some States provide financial compensation of from 10 to 30 rupees per sterilization in addition to free transportation and time off from work. Female sterilization has also been well received. For example, in Bombay City it is estimated that five per cent of all deliveries are followed by voluntary sterilization. The reported number of sterilizations through February 1963 is 334,000, almost § on males (Raina, 1963, p. II). The number of unreported sterilizations has not been officially estimated.
Among the many research projects under way, the Singur program in West Bengal has produced the most encouraging results. Births per 1000 population fell from 45.2 in 1956 to 36.9 in 1961, compared with 45.0 and 42.9 respectively in the control area. (Population Council, July 1963, p. 4). Experts and Govern-
2Its chief spokesman is R. A. Gopalaswami, former Registrar-General, until recently Adviser and Programme Administrator of the Madras State Family Planning Board.

14

Nortman

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

ment officials realize, however, that it may well be some years before the National Planning Programme of India makes its impact on the national birth rate. The reasons are suggested by the difficulties of launching and implementing a program among masses of illiterate and rural people involving changes in their most intimate and personal relations and attitudes. According to Col. Raina:
The accomplishments, for a programme having no simple precedents to follow . . . have been many. These include the setting up a basic organizational structure at Central, State, and, in some places, at District levels. A large number of centres for training personnel have been rapidly organized. The overall programme is in balance, it is based on firm scientific research, is well developed in medical aspects, and is now in a position to extend the educational and supply wings (Raina, 1963, p. 45).
The target of the Family Planning
Programme is ambitious; namely, to re-
duce India's current birth rate of about
40 to 25 per 1000 population by 1973
(Raina, 1963, p. 32). Parallel with the
official health structure from the Na-
tional Health Ministry to the State Plan-
ning Boards down through the block
levels, the programme calls for volun-
tary educational workers or advisory
groups at different levels. Community
educational work, to produce the group
support necessary for successful contra-
ceptive practice, is recognized as a basic,
integral aspect of population policy.
Other vital functions include statistical
evaluation of the impact of the program
on the birth rate, administrative co-
ordination, training of personnel, and
research projects to determine the means
by which goals may be most readily
achieved (Raina, 1963, p. 38).

Pakistan
At the Asian Population Conference in New Delhi this past December, it was reported that for the Third Five Year Development Plan, 1965-70, the Planning Commission was using 2.6 per cent as the current annual growth rate of Pakistan's 97 million people. This contrasts sharply with the 1.4 per cent assumed for the First Five Year Plan, 1955-- 60, a figure adopted, in the words of Mr. Said Hasan, former Ambassador to the U.N. and now Vice-Chairman of the Planning Commission, "to keep despair away. We are all convinced that population is growing faster than that" (Qureshi, 1959, p. vii). Population projections in the Second Five Year Plan implied a 1.7 per cent average annual increase between 1960 and 1965.
Pakistan's population policy to reduce the national birth rate may be said to date from 1960, but serious interest was displayed in February 1958 when the Director General of Health convened a special meeting to discuss plans submitted by the Family Planning Association and 500,000 rupees were authorized for family planning (Mauldin, 1963, p. 66). By September 1959, Brigadier M. Sharif, then Director General of the Health Ministry stated:
In view of the rapid rate of population increase which may become very alarming, Pakistan's Second Five-Year Plan has strongly advocated a policy of family planning and has made adequate provision for a family planning programme. (Qureshi, 1959, p. 351).
The program is administered by a Director of Family Planning under the Director General of the Ministry of Health. Two family planning officers-- one in East and one in West Pakistan-- are responsible for implementation and execution. Brigadier M. Sharif de-

Vol. 11, No. 1

Population Policies

15

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

scribed the design of the program at a
conference in New York in 1960 as follows (Riser, 1962, p. 145).3
1. Through a health approach, to provide a family planning service from all existing medical centers.
2. To teach the virtues of family planning through simple written or spoken words, pictures, etc., and through the example of successful experience.
3. To provide mobile teams of jeepvans furnished with audio-visual equipment, first in urban areas and moving progressively into rural areas, for education and motivation.
4. To concentrate, at least initially, on the simplest methods, all contraceptive supplies to be provided free in rural areas, at a token charge in urban centers; with gradual introduction of male sterilization as motivation increases.
5. To establish training and research centers and provide intensive training for medical and paramedical personnel, as well as village and community workers.
6. By means of an action-cum-study and research program in selected areas, to collect vital statistics and ascertain acceptability and success of the program.
Existing hospitals, dispensaries, and
maternal and child health centers are
expected to add family planning advice
and supplies to their services. For rural
areas, where 85 per cent of the people
live, village workers are to share respon-
sibility for family planning with the
rural health centers. An interesting study
currently in progress is that of the intra-
uterine plastic coil, launched by the Na-
tional Research Institute of Family Plan-
ning in Karachi in October 1962. Three
important action research programs are
3The Second Five Year Plan, 1960-65, allocated rupees 30.5 million (a little over §6 million), for family planning expenditures out of a total health budget of rupees 400 million.

now under way which may show favorable results in a year or two.
As in India, success measured by a decline in the national birth rate is not to be expected in a short period of time. Experts consider that some of the requirements are an administrative structure under the direction of full-time, high-status health personnel, an effective public information program, removal of import restrictions on contraceptives, and family planning training in the medical centers.
Korea
The Revolutionary Government of the Republic of Korea came into being on May 16, 1961, prior to which time there had been no family planning program. After discussion by the Supreme Council for National Reconstruction of the necessity to control population to achieve economic goals, the Ministry of Health and Social Affairs proposed a Family Planning Policy which the Council approved in November 1961.A month later the Health Ministry removed the ban on the importation and home production of contraceptive supplies (Rep. of Korea, Oct. 1963).
The target of the Family Planning Program4 is to reduce the annual rate of natural increase of Korea's 27 million people from an estimated 3 per cent in 1963 to 2.5 per cent by 1966 and to 1.82 per cent by 1971. According to the Health Ministry, to achieve this goal requires the prevention of about 1.5 million births in a ten-year period.5 The Economic Planning Board estimates that
4The National Budget provided 42 million won for family planning in 1962, 83 million ($664,000 U. S.) in 1963 (Rep. of Korea, Dec. 1963).
5Examination of the data suggests that this figure is predicated on prevailing mortality rates, a further reasonable decline in which would necessitate the prevention of 2 million rather than 1.5 million births in the next ten years.

16

Nortman

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

by 1980 implementation of the Population Policy will result in a growth rate of 1.16 per cent per annum compared with 3.15 per cent under a laissez-faire situation and will produce a per capita income 36 per cent above a laissez-faire level (Rep. of Korea, Sept. 1963).
The Korean Government is pursuing its family planning program with vigor. In addition, Korea is favored by relatively high literacy and school attendance for that part of the world as well as increasing urbanization. To implement the program, the Prime Minister has instructed the Economic Planning Board to establish a "Population Policy Council" as an advisory organ. He requested the Ministry of Justice to consider whether to enact a Eugenic Protection Law (similar to Japan's) which would permit abortion for economic as well as hereditary considerations. The Defense Ministry was requested to establish a plan whereby doctors in the armed services will educate the soldiers in contraceptive techniques. Research and training projects, as well as improvement in vital statistics, are also considered basic by the Health Ministry although it has yet to implement these aspects into its Family Planning Program.
The major research undertaking to date is a pilot project under the direction of the Yonsei University Medical College Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, in a rural area of about 9000 population, 13 miles north of Seoul. The objective is to assess the possibility of reducing the birth rate through family planning education and services. Preliminary results indicate 35.8 pregnancies per 100 women years for the group accepting the services compared with about 56-58 for noncontraceptors in the area. A full report is due

in February 1964 (Population Council, Dec. 1963, p. 8).
COUNTRIES WITH LIMITED INVOLVEMENT IN
FAMILY PLANNING
Although the countries in this group do not have a national policy to reduce rates of population growth, most of them have encouraged private efforts to promote family planning, offering some combination of financial assistance, medical facilities, services, and supplies. Private efforts stem mainly from family planning associations motivated by concern for individual family welfare, not the need to reduce national rates of population growth. The increasing identification of the two, however, has led these governments to support the activities of the Family Planning Association, even though no ministry or planning commission has announced an official policy to lower the birth rate.
Malaysia
Singapore's Family Planning Association is one of the most successful in the world. In 1960 the Government promoted a family planning campaign, the success of which taxed all of the Association's facilities. In his Foreword to the 1962 Annual Report of the Association, Singapore Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew stated:
Every year as we draw up our budget we are faced with a terrifying increase on education and health services, the need for more jobs, the need for more homes, all because our rate of population expansion is about 4% per annum. . . . All those entrusted with the business of government in any of the countries in Asia are acutely aware of the enormous problems of economic imbalance and impoverishment as a result of rapid growth in population. (Singapore, 1962, p. 3).

Vol. 11, No. 1

Population Policies

17

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

The favorable climate of opinion toward the practice of birth control has undoubtedly been an important factor in the notable decline in Singapore's crude birth rate, from 45.4 in 1952 to 34.5 in 1962.« (UN, Oct. 1963). In addition to support of the Family Planning Association, the Government offers contraceptive advice and supplies in its hospitals and clinics. Singapore was host to the Seventh International Conference on Planned Parenthood on February 10, 1963, at which Prime Minister Yew delivered the opening address.
Although Malaya has no official policy for moderating fertility, it does support the family planning clinics run by the Family Planning Association. With the formation of three new Associations in 1962, every State in the Federation now has an Association. The President of the Federated Associations stated recently, "the aim is to train every doctor, nurse and midwife in Malaya in family planning methods and to incorporate family planning into the Government Rural Health Development programme" (Singapore, 1962, p. 29).
Hong Kong
As in the case of Singapore, the mode of living has created a public sentiment that favors family planning. The Government's contribution to the Association during the fiscal year ending March 31, 1963, was $42,000 (U. S.), about 70 per cent of the Association's total income (Family Planning, 1962-63).
By Asian standards, Hong Kong's crude birth rate is low, 32 for 1962, but its economic and social problems are strained by the influx of refugees from mainland China. The Family Planning
6The latter suggests a 3 per cent rate of natural increase, with immigration adding perhaps another 1 per cent to yield the 4 per cent growth rate mentioned by the Prime Minister.

Association is seeking more clinic facilities and greater financial assistance from the Government.
Ceylon
The Ceylon Government accepted the offer of the Swedish Government to undertake a pilot project to study the implementation of family planning in Ceylon. The Project began in 1959 in two areas, one rural, one suburban, and has since been extended to two additional areas.7 Preliminary results in one of the village areas suggest a sharp drop in the birth rate, from 31.2 per 1000 population in 1959 at the start of the project, to 21.9 in 1962. The village is considered somewhat atypical, however, in that its rate was already about 20 per cent below that for Ceylon at the start of the program (Pop. Council, Dec. 1963, p. 11). The present agreement between the two Governments terminates in 1965, after which it is problematical whether the Ceylon Government will continue the program.
Other Government activities include financial support of the Family Planning Association which derived more than half its income from the Government in the fiscal year 1961-62, and the use of Government hospitals and clinics for contraceptive advice and supplies. As in other countries, the clinics are poorly attended and are not a suitable medium for a mass promotional effort.
Puerto Rico
Puerto Rico's 2.5 million people are growing at the high rate of 2.5 per cent per year despite a birth rate (31.4 in 1962) that is low for underdeveloped nations. To what extent the relatively low birth rate results from migration of young couples and husbands to the
7Its 1963-64 budget is estimated at 770,000 Swedish Kronen (about U. S. $145,000).

18

Nortman

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

United States or economic ties with the mainland that somehow are conducive to contraceptive practice, is not clear. Whatever the reason, Government attempts at family planning in Puerto Rico are unprecedented for Latin America and much older than in Asian countries. The earliest action was the establishment of clinics in 1935 by the Puerto Rico Emergency Relief Administration (Duke, 1960, p. 563). While the Government encountered public apathy, Catholic opposition, and disfavor from Washington, under pro-birth-control administrators, "population control as a policy was advocated by local officials" (Duke, 1960, p. 565). The result is that Puerto Rico surpasses most countries of the world in government facilities dispensing birth control information and supplies. (Riser, 1962, p. 310). Nevertheless, the clinics are not popular, they receive little publicity, and it cannot be said that family planning has become a governmental policy or is a positive part of the culture (Duke, 1960, p. 565).
Because of the limitations of the clinics in reaching the mass of the people, the Family Planning Association of Puerto Rico has designed a unique program "to bring contraception to the people." Since 1958 volunteers chosen for their good name in the community have been distributing a vaginal foam contraceptive free of charge to potential users willing to accept a bottle. A survey of 253 women in the program indicated that 60 per cent were practicing some form of contraception compared with 47 per cent prior to enrollment.
Barbados
With a density of some 1400 persons per square mile, Barbados' 232,000 people constitute one of the world's most densely populated agricultural econo-

mies. In recognition of this situation, the Legislative Council and House of Assembly appointed a Joint Committee to make recommendations. Its report, published in 1954, stated:
After most careful and exhaustive consideration, the Committee is satisfied that a system of Family Planning under the aegis of the Government is a solution that offers some hope. . . . It is recommended that Family Planning Clinics should be set up and be operated directly by the Department of Medical Services and with the assistance of other Departments. (UN Technical, 1957, pp. 2, 3).
The clinics are private organizations run by the Family Planning Association with a grant from the Government of about $20,000 (Barbadian). The President of the Association has recently proposed that the Minister of Education undertake to teach "senior" children the responsibilities of family life "including knowledge of family planning" (Family Planning, 1960).
COUNTRIES WITH EXPERIMENTAL OR PILOT
PROJECTS
The implementation of a formal policy of population control requires detailed knowledge of prevailing mores, modes of living, marriage patterns, attitudes toward family planning, literacy levels, and other social, economic, and demographic characteristics of the population. Will the people accept birth control? If so, what methods are most likely to be accepted? What are the effective means of communication? What are the best channels of supply?
With the growing concern over rapid rates of population increase, these questions are interesting governments in experimental or pilot projects in advance of any formal decision to adopt or declare a national policy on population.

Vol. 11, No. 1

Population Policies

19

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

This is not to say that official expressions of concern over high growth rates are lacking. The economic development plans of developing countries usually emphasize the difficulties posed by rapid population increase. The point is that the countries in this group are in an exploratory stage. Governmental advocacy of family planning is a new and novel concept, not to be hastily declared, but to be preceded by careful scientific study and investigation.
Taiwan
Taiwan's statement prepared for the Asian Population Conference held in New Delhi last December sums up the attitude discussed below:
Although our cultural, social and political background does not at the moment permit the government to formulate and declare a clear population policy, yet the government is deeply concerned with the problem. The actions on the improvement in population registration and studies on population are all in line with government policy. The setting up of Family Planning Association by social organizations, represents the awareness of the importance of population problems by social leaders and the general public.
The action program undertaken by the Maternal and Child Health Institute of the Provincial Government in February 1963 to implement prepregnancy health and family planning is probably one of the most extensive and elaborate social science experiments ever carried out in a natural setting (Berelson, 1963). The scene of the program is Taichung city with a population of about 300,000 people.8 According to the program's technical advisor, the findings indicate that "such a program can implement
8Details are described in the July 1963 publication o£ the Population Council, Studies in Family Planning.

family planning economically" and "so far as the central question is concerned, about the implementation of family planning in such a society, the important answer is: it can be done."
The birth rate in Taiwan as a whole has been falling, from a level of 45.3 per 1000 population as recently as 1955 to 37.4 in 1962 (U. N., Statistical, 1962). In other respects, too, Taiwan is different from the rest of Asia. Outside of Japan, it is perhaps the most economically developed area of its size, and in Taichung City, the program's survey found that 90 per cent of the men and 70 per cent of the women over age 11 were literate, at least in an elementary way.
Official interest in population matters can be gauged not only from the action program but also from the fact that in 1961 the Provincial Government established the Taiwan Population Studies Center for social-demographic research and action on a practical basis. The Provincial Department of Health is now providing contraceptive information as part of its prepregnancy health program.
Tunisia
Tunisia has initiated an experimental family planning program. The central purpose of the study is to experiment with different ways of implementing family planning to determine the most effective and efficient means of establishing the program on a broader basis. If the results are successful, the Tunisian Government hopes and expects to incorporate family planning services as part of the regular services of the Ministry of Health (Pop. Council, Dec. 1963, p. 3, 4).
The program began with a mission of Tunisian representatives in the latter part of 1963 to the United States and certain Asian countries to observe family

20

Nortman

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

planning activities and consult with technical experts. Following this, a seminar was held in Tunis in January 1964 for training on modern contraceptive methods and involvement of the medical community, leaders of women's movements, and others who logically have a stake in the enterprise. Experts estimate it will take about two years for results to develop that can be assessed for a broadly based program.
Turkey
Turkey's First Five Year Development Plan 1963-1967 proposes to adopt a population policy "to slow down the rate of population growth (now estimated at about 3 per cent per year), as well as the ratio of child population to active population" (Turkish Rep., 1963). The goal is a 10 per cent decline in fertility every five years for the next 15 years. The Plan advocates:
a. Repeal of laws that prohibit spreading contraceptive information and importing and selling supplies;
b. Education of public health personnel in population planning;
c. Provision of free information and where necessary, supplies;
d. Use of existing facilities for mass education;
e. Home production and import of contraceptives at low prices. (Ibid).
Turkey's assets are its homogeneity in nationality and language, suggesting a more rapid cultural diffusion once family planning practice begins to take hold. Also, it is in a more favorable economic position compared with other underdeveloped nations. Its per capita income is one of the highest in the Middle East, and it is not currently dependent upon outside sources of food supply to feed its population. Nevertheless, "In a country such as Turkey, where the giv-

ing of birth control information has been illegal, it is evident that education in the essentials is needed by nearly every category of worker" (Pop. Council, Dec, 1963, p. 5).
United Arab Republic
A statement on population incorporated in a major official document gave encouragement to family planning efforts in the United Arab Republic. President Nasser declared in the May 1962 draft of the Charter:
Population increase constitutes the most dangerous obstacle that faces the Egyptian people in their drive towards raising the standard of production in their country in an effective and efficient way. . . . Attempts at family planning . . . deserve the most sincere efforts supported by modern scientific methods. . . . (UAR, 1962).
The family planning movement dates from 1955 when the National Population Commission, (which had been formed in 1953), opened four planned parenthood clinics. Typically, the clinics were poorly attended, the total number of visits not exceeding 6000 per year, a third of whom came for sterility treatment. The next major development was a conference in May 1962 sponsored by the Egyptian Medical Association on Social and Medical Aspects of Family Planning, attended by the Vice President of the United Arab Republic and the Minister for Public Health. Both spoke of the importance attached by the Government to family planning (Rizk, 1963).
The Egyptian Association for Population Studies, whose budget includes a 50,000 pound (Egyptian) grant from the Government, has recommended that a national program of population planning be adopted and implemented. About 100 centers are scheduled to be set up during the year to give premarital

Vol. 11, No. 1

Population Policies

21

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

examinations and advice on planned parenthood.
COUNTRIES WITH EMERGING INTEREST IN
POPULATION MATTERS
To limit this group to two countries is obviously to draw an arbitrary line between what is the natural interest of all nations in the size of their populations and what may be regarded as an emerging interest in determining that size for the future. Among Latin American countries Chile seems to be most conscious of the difficulties created by population growth. Thailand also differs from countries not otherwise specified in that it is taking a conscious look at the implication of its population growth.
Chile
Motivated by concern over the high abortion rate, estimated at 35 to 40 per cent of pregnancies, the Health Services of the Government are now providing birth control services in some hospitals and clinics (New York Times, Oct. 1963). They have also created a National Committee for Family Protection to consider problems of action and policy in this sphere. Inasmuch as 90 per cent of Chile's eight million people are Roman Catholic, these developments have aroused considerable interest. However, it should be stressed that these actions are regarded as health measures and not a national policy to regulate the rate of popualtion growth.
Thailand
Thailand's 28 million people have a proud history free from colonial rule. In fact, it was in recognition of this heritage that in 1939 the official name of the country was changed from Siam to Thailand, "land of the free." At the

same time, however, Western manners and dress were encouraged (Hall, 1955).
Today discussion of the problems posed by rapid population growth is at the Cabinet level. As an outgrowth of a Population Seminar held in March 1963, the National Research Council submitted a national population program to the Prime Minister. Although it is too early to say how far this will be implemented, the Prime Minister has already endorsed a family planning pilot project. Other proposals are to improve the collection of vital data, to study and ascertain the attitudes of people toward family planning, and to train medical and paramedical personnel in family planning techniques.
Thus far we have discussed existing or emerging attention to population problems in some 14 developing countries. Their population rates of growth range from about 2 to 3.5 per cent per year, rates at which numbers double in 35 to 20 years respectively. With a combined population exceeding 700 million, this group of countries constitutes onethird of the more than 2 billion people who inhabit the underdeveloped areas of the world.
COMMUNIST CHINA
Another third of the underdeveloped world lives in Communist China, which, according to recent newspaper accounts, is trying to reduce fertility by encouraging later age at marriage and reviving its birth control campaign. In an interview last January with the writer Edgar Snow, Premier Chou En-Lai is quoted as saying: "with improved living conditions over the past two years our rate of increase again rose to 2.5 per centt Therefore our emphasis on planned parenthood is entirely positive; planned

22

Nortman

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

parenthood, where there is increased production of goods and services, is conducive to raising the people's standard of living" (New York Times, February 3, 1964).
China's intensive birth control campaign first undertaken in the mid 1950's caused considerable speculation in the Western World because of traditional Marxist opposition to Malthusian concepts. Premier Chou En-lai declared to the Eighth National Party Congress in 1956:
To protect women and children and bring up and educate our younger generation in a way conducive to the health and prosperity of the nation, we agree that a due measure of birth control is desirable. Health departments should, in cooperation with other institutions concerned, carry out intelligent propaganda and adopt effective measures toward this end. (Aird, 1962).
Still the Health Department hesitated to act in this matter. Then, in February 1957, Mao Tse-tung was reported to have said: "Steps must be taken to keep our population for a long time at a stable level, say, of 600,000,000. A wide campaign of explanation and proper help must be undertaken to achieve this aim" (Tien, 1963, p. 276). In March, an editorial in the People's Daily criticized the Health Department for failing to meet this urgent need of the masses. Immediately thereafter, until June 1958, the birth control campaign was put into high gear (Mauldin, Milbank, 1960).
By 1958 the political winds had begun to shift. China was engaged on her Great Leap Forward and the birth control campaign slowed to a standstill. It is not clear why or whether the two were regarded as incompatible. Western scholars have speculated that perhaps the Great Leap forward "pointed to a

quick transition from an agricultural and backward nation to an industrialized and advanced state, implying the automatic emergence of the practice of fertility control at no extra cost" (Tien, 1963, p. 288). Other possibilities were the prospect of a bumper harvest, the expediency of abandoning a difficult campaign that at best would not produce results for years or the re-emergence of traditional theorists within the Party circles.
In any event, although the birth control campaign was halted in 1958, contraceptive devices were not banned, were generally available in the cities, and "although during the 1959-61 period almost no mention apparently was made in the press of abortion and sterilization, as far as we know these operations were not made illegal and were available to those who requested them" (Orleans, 1962).
Recent developments suggest a resumption of the birth control campaign. In January 1962 the State Council revised import duties to permit contraceptive supplies to enter China duty free. At the end of the year the People's Daily began to print advertisements to promote the sale of publications in which birth control is advocated (Tien, 1963, p. 290). More recently the Government has been advocating later age at marriage. These are not unexpected developments. A growth rate in the past two years of 2.5 per cent as stated by Premier Chou means a net addition to the population of about 17.5 million people a year, an increase the Government is not likely to ignore, Marxist anti-Malthusianism notwithstanding.
OTHER COUNTRIES
Another country deserving discussion is Indonesia, not for any policy in the

Vol. 11, No. 1

Population Policies

23

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

sense under review, but because it is a nation of 100 million people. Population density varies widely, from intensely populated Java with one of the highest densities in the world, to the sparsely settled outer islands. Government interest to date has been in resettlement projects to effect a more equitable distribution of the population. Statements by the Indonesian delegates to the Asian Population Conference in December 1963 emphasize that resettlement is the government policy on population, but it was pointed out that the population is permitted to practice, and private organizations may disseminate contraceptive information. The Family Planning Association, formed in 1957, includes many influential persons.
The Indonesian Council for Sciences is interested in research and testing and since 1960 has collected demographic and economic data from several sample surveys. A more intensive survey including experimental introduction of birth control is the Tjermee Family Life Study in East Java (Balfour).
As an economically developed nation with a low birth rate, Japan does not belong in a discussion of underdeveloped countries. It is included for two reasons: (1) it is an Asian country; (2) it achieved within an unprecedented short period a reduction in fertility that many of the countries discussed would like to emulate.
Japan is credited with a permissive population policy that resulted in a dramatic reduction in births, from a postwar high of 34 per 1000 population in 1947 to 17 in 1957. As far as official statement is concerned, the essence of Japan's policy is the Eugenic Protection Law passed in 1948 to replace the National Eugenic Law. The main feature of the new law was to permit induced abortion

for economic reasons as well as for physical considerations to protect the mother's health. The liberal interpretation of economic difficulty and the designation of doctors to perform the abortion at low cost in order to drive out black market operations appeared to give official sanction to a practice to which Japanese women were resorting in increasing numbers. The point is that industrial and literate Japan, caught in the throes of economic collapse after the War, was highly motivated to limit family size. The Government's major concern was to guard against unsafe abortion and to try to replace abortion by contraception. Thus there are important differences, but Japan is of much interest to the rest of Asia because of likenesses in moral values, customs and religion.
Conspicuous by their omission from this listing of underdeveloped nations are two vast areas: Africa south of the Sahara and most of Latin America. In the former, nations are in the throes of political birth, with various factions vying for position and the powers that be involved in formulating administrative machinery to run the everyday affairs of government. These countries are too new to deal with any but current, pressing problems.
Latin America has the fastest growing population of any continent, over 2.7 per cent per year. As part of the New World, its history until now has been as an area of immigration, not one experiencing population pressure. High birth rates are only partially explained by the prevalence of Catholicism. Like Spain, Portugal, and Italy, Europeanized Argentina and Uruguay have low birth rates, while their Northern neighbors, whose peoples are varying mixtures of European, Amerindian, and Negro backgrounds, have high birth rates. Although

24

Nortman

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

contraception is neither encouraged nor widely practiced, the extensive resort to induced abortion is recognized as a problem.
INTERNATIONAL ACTION AND ATTITUDES
Repercussions to the population developments in the emerging countries are resounding around the world. By 1963 birth control, a subject hitherto discussed in hushed tones, had become a topic of open debate in the great forums of legislative bodies and the mass media of world news and opinion. The argument still centers on the necessity, desirability, or morality of adopting measures to reduce world fertility. On the other hand, responsible opinion now generally concedes that increasing growth rates, ranging at present from 2 to almost 4 per cent per year in the developing nations of the world compared to an average of 1.2 per cent in the technically advanced countries, are incompatible with political stability and efforts to eradicate poverty.
UNITED NATIONS
Population matters reached the floor of the United Nations General Assembly for the first time in December 1962. The discussion and debate culminated in the passage by 69 to 0 with 27 abstentions, of Resolution 1838 (XVII), Population Growth and Economic Development at the 1197th plenary meeting of the Seventeenth Session on December 18, 1962. The Resolution requests the SecretaryGeneral
to conduct an inquiry among the Governments of States Members of the United Nations and members of the specialized agencies concerning the particular problems confronting them as a result of the reciprocal action of economic development and population changes,

and recommends that the Economic and Social Council, in cooperation with the specialized agencies, the regional economic commissions and the Population Commission . . . should intensify its studies and research on the interrelationship of population growth and economic and social development, with particular reference to the needs of the developing countries for investment in health and educational facilities within the framework of their general development programmes.
The interesting aspects of the debate concerned the clause that the United Nations "give technical assistance, as requested by Governments, for national projects and programmes dealing with the problems of population." Technical assistance was generally interpreted to incorporate family planning. The clause was rejected by a vote of 34 in favor, 34 against and 32 abstentions. The United States, which voted for the final resolution, voted against the technical assistance clause on the ground that "operative paragraph 6 does not add or subtract from the authority which the United Nations already possesses as a result of resolutions of the General Assembly and of the Economic and Social Council concerning the granting of technical assistance upon request to Member States. In our view, the paragraph is therefore superfluous" (U. N. Gen. Assemb., 18 Dec. 1962).
To carry out the Assembly's Resolution, an "outline of inquiry on problems resulting from reciprocal action of economic development and population changes" was sent to all member states of the United Nations in June 1963. The results will provide the basis for a comprehensive analysis of existing population knowledge, problems and policies.
The complexity of the subject as well as the attitude of various nations to-

Vol. 11, No. 1

Population Policies

25

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

ward the question of world population
control are discernible in the statements
of their United Nations representatives
during the course of the discussion on
the Assembly Resolution. With this in
mind, some brief excerpts from the para-
phrased statements of the Provisional
Summary Record of the December 1962
Meetings are quoted (U. N. Gen. As-
semb. 7-17 Dec. 1962):
Sweden (Mrs. Lindström): If the coming generations in Asia, Africa and South America were to attain a level of living comparable with that of the other regions, much more economic and technical assistance would have to be given to the less developed countries, and Sweden was fully conscious of its share of the responsibility. . . . It was a matter not of choosing between a more energetic food policy and a wise population policy, but of applying both.
United States (Mr. Gardner): In his Government's opinion, progress could not be measured merely in terms of increases in gross national product, for the object of economic development was the welfare and dignity of the individual human being. The United Nations must therefore concern itself with population trends. . . .
United Kingdom (Mr. Unwin): The whole question was as yet too little explored, and the United Nations had its part to play in promoting and assisting the preparation of studies and statistics in that sphere. The draft resolution seemed likely to strengthen that role of the Organization.
France (Mr. Viaud): The draft resolution envisaged the planning of population expansion under State control, but birth control could be effective only when it was the result of a free choice by individuals. . . . Another danger of that policy was that it might lead to an aging of the population.
Ireland (Mr. Cullen): Study of the population problem should . . . not divert attention from the fundamental causes of poverty and the real possi-

bilities of progress in economic development. . . . As to technical assistance in dealing with population problems, his delegation felt entitled to stand by its principles and not to supply technical assistance under a programme of assistance in artificial birth control.
Italy (Mr. Zadotti): So far as his delegation was concerned, it would categorically oppose any attempt to use technical assistance . . . for the purpose of initiating a birth control policy without stating explicitly how or where that policy would be applied.
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (Mr. Arkadyev): The socialist method of production offered a solution to the problem. . . . The Soviet Union and the other socialist countries drew up their plans so as to meet the needs of their growing populations by increased production. . . . Those methods should be used to cope with the problem of population growth. It was wrong to concentrate on a policy of family reduction.
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic (Mr. Kochubei): The theories of Malthus and their modern variants had been used as a pretext to distract attention from the abject poverty of the underdeveloped countries. The economic backwardness of those countries could not be explained away by such theories; it was the result of colonialist domination and exploitation.
Romania (Mr. Dimbu): The draft resolution . . . was based on the theory that mankind was faced with the dangers of the insurmountable gap between "limited" production capabilities and "uncontrolled" population growth. That theory had been disproved by history itself.
Yugoslavia (Mr. Cvorovic): His delegation would support any proposal which recommended the provision of technical assistance for family planning in close relationship with economic development. Each dollar spent on family planning should be matched by a much larger counterpart investment in economic progress.

26

Nortman

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Argentina (Mr. Bernardo): Argentina had always opposed the idea of using the United Nations to disseminate any artificial system of birth control . . . there were two possible attitudes to the relationship between population growth and economic development: a static attitude, of limiting the population, and a dynamic attitude, of increasing resources. . . . The United Nations, moreover, had no authority to take a decision with regard to birth control.
Ghana (Mr. Nylander): The rate of population increase in Africa was 2.2 per cent per annum. It was clear that a number of African countries would face the danger of a population explosion sooner than they had expected. . . . His delegation noted with interest that the population problem was now a matter of concern to the Roman Catholic Church. That being the case, it should be possible for the Committee to adopt draft resolution A/C.2/L.657 without giving offence to anyone. His delegation had therefore decided not only to vote for the draft resolution but also to become a sponsor.
Tunisia (Mr. Ayari): To say that nothing could be done about population growth was to take a fatalistic attitude; the sponsors, on the contrary, felt that population growth was a variable which could be acted upon like any other economic factor. Syria (Mr. Tomeh): Population growth might have a stimulating effect on economic development in the countries of Western Europe, but the question was whether the solutions found by those countries were applicable in the same degree to the underdeveloped countries.
Lebanon (Mr. Hakim): The present draft resolution made the implicit assumption that a lower rate of population growth would be a better condition for economic development; his delegation disagreed with that view. . . . His delegation also disagreed that the United Nations should provide technical assistance for family planning.

United Arab Republic (Mr. ElBanna): Some countries--the United Arab Republic for instance--had been successful in increasing their volume of production. . . . But the pressure of population impeded their development plans. They must tackle the problem immediately and should be helped by the United Nations, upon request, to draw up family planning programmes.
India (Mr. Anjaria); Although the aggregate national income of India had increased according to plan, the per capita income had not risen at a corresponding rate because of the steady expansion in the population. Family planning must be viewed in the wider context of general education.
Pakistan (Mr. Karim): His country faced an alarming growth in population and had to fight desperately for its economic development. . . . His delegation was happy that the United Nations was at last discussing the part it could play insofar as the problem affected economic development.
In addition to a consideration of population matters in connection with its usual work, the United Nations sponsors from time to time regional and world conferences on population. The last World Conference was held in Rome in 1954; the next one is to be held in Belgrade in 1965. References to the last regional conference, the Asian Population Conference, have been made elsewhere in this paper, but its over-all highlights are worth noting.
ASIAN POPULATION CONFERENCE, NEW
DELHI, DECEMBER 10-20, 1963
The Conference, at which about half the world's population was represented, was notable in two important respects. One, it was the first international conference on population that included representatives of governments, who alone

Vol. 11, No. 1

Population Policies

27

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

were entitled to vote, as well as individual experts. Second, its delegates voiced strong support for U. N. aid on population matters. The major accomplishment of the conference was agreement on organizing workshops on different aspects of action programs.
During the course of the Conference, no governmental or nongovernmental representative expressed opposition to family planning. In the field of policy only one country, Iran, stated that it "does not believe in birth control." No country raised any objection to family planning programs such as those in India, Korea, and Pakistan. As for the Catholic position, the statement prepared by Francis C. Madigan, S. J., Ph.D., Director, Research Institute for Mindanao Culture, Xavier University, Philippines, read: "I believe--although some might disagree with me--that the Church would not object to a familycentered program for responsible parenthood in which Catholic couples as well as other would be encouraged to limit the number of their children. . . ." No Catholic present voiced any objection to governmental programs provided "limitation methods proposed by government at least include such methods as Catholics--and others--could use without offense to their consciences, and that these latter methods be made as fully available as any other. . . ."
It should be noted that among the more than 2 billion people in the underdeveloped areas, the Buddhist, Hindu and Moslem religions predominate. In these religions interpretations are conveyed to the people by numerous priests and scholars, the force of the ruling depending upon the personal following of its conveyor. Their religious attitudes toward family planning are therefore

better sought in custom and tradition than in doctrine.
Among Hindus, several religious practices and values may reduce fertility considerably. These include the ban on the remarriage of widows, the custom for women to deliver their children in their childhood homes, long lactation periods, periodic abstinence from sexual relations during certain religious holidays, and so on. The intent of these practices may or may not be related to fertility, but the general concensus among Hindus is that their religion is free of any doctrine that would proscribe the practice of contraception. This is probably even more true of Buddhist society, which is secular and pragmatic and among whom religion appears to be a much less pervasive factor than among Hindus (Kirk).
Moslems characteristically have higher fertility than other religious groups. The institutions of polygamy, easy divorce, the inferior status of women, and the relatively few customs and taboos relating to sexual abstinence and the interval between births, may be factors. In 1937 a group of university professors in Egypt interested in family planning sought a Fatwa--that is a point of interpretation of Islamic Law--regarding contraceptive practice. The Fatwa declared that under certain conditions birth control was permissible with the consent of both partners (Rizk, 1963). In general, experience in the pilot and experimental projects has confirmed the general view that, outside of Latin America, religious doctrine in the underdeveloped countries is not opposed to modern techniques of contraception.
CONCLUSION
Recent developments relating to the current high rate of world population

28

Nortman

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

growth suggest a deepening appreciation of the effect of high fertility on efforts to raise living standards. Hampered in their economic development by their rapidly increasing populations, a growing number ofdeveloping countries have adopted orare considering the feasibility of adopting rational policies of population control. The problems of motivation, communication, and suitable family planning techniques are such that even with intense effort, a rapid decline in fertility is not likely. A world population of at least sixbillion in theyear 2000 seems inevitable. Thequestion is whether that figure is reached with reduced birth rates, reduced dependency loads and reduced poverty, or with spreading misery and anupturn in death rates.
Hope lies in the fact that latent among all people--in Asia, Africa, and Latin America, as well as in the Western world--is the desire to limit births to the number that can be adequately cared for andraised. Public opinion polls in various parts of theworld indicate that large proportions of all people have some concept of an ideal number of children. Not all know that they can restrict their births to this ideal, but there is sufficient evidence to indicate that people in the emerging countries can acquire and apply the necessary knowledge.
REFERENCES
AIRD, JOHN S., 1962. Population Policy in Mainland China. Population Studies (London), 16 (1):42. (July).
BALFOUR, M. C. Asian Representative ofThe Population Council, New York.
BERELSON, BERNARD, Vice-President of The Population Council, 1963. Speech delivered November 11, 1963, p. 1 (mimeo.).
DUKE UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF LAW, 1960. Law and
Contemporary Problems: Population Control, 25 (3). (Summer). ELDRIDGE, HOPE T., 1954. Population Policies: A Survey of Recent Developments. Interna-

tional Union for the Scientific Study of Population.
FAMILY PLANNING ASSOCIATION OF BARBADOS, 1960.
Annual Report 1st April 1959 to 31st March 1960: 2. (6 May).
FAMILY PLANNING ASSOCIATION OF HONG KONG,
1963. 12th Annual Report, 1962-63: 32-33. HALL, D. G. E., 1955. A History of South-East
Asia. St. Martin's Press, Inc., New York, p. 681. KIRK, DUDLEY, Director of Demographic Division, The Population Council, New York. KISER, CLYDE V. (Ed.), 1962. Research in Family Planning. Papers presented at a conference sponsored jointly byThe Milbank Memorial Fund and The Population Council, October 13-19, 1960. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
KUZNETS, SIMON, 1959. Six Lectures on Economic Growth. Free Press, Glencoe, Ill., p. 14.
MAULDIN, W. PARKER, 1960. The Population of
India: Policy, Action and Research. Economic Digest (Karachi), 3 (2). (Summer).
, 1960. Fertility Control inCommunist Countries. Population Trends in Eastern Europe, The USSR and Mainland China. Milbank Memorial Fund, N. Y., p. 199.
, 1963. Population and Population Policy in Pakistan. Marriage and Family Living, Journal of the National Council on Family Relations, 25 (1): 66. (Feb.).
THE NEWYORK TIMES, October 8, 1963; February 3, 1964.
ORLEANS, LEO A., 1962. A New Birth Control Campaign? The China Quarterly (London, W. 1): 209. (Oct.-Dec. 1962).
THE POPULATION COUNCIL, 1963. Studies in
Family Planning, no. 1, New York. (July).
THE POPULATION COUNCIL, 1963. Studies in
Family Planning, no. 2, New York. (Dec). QURESHI, M. L., ed., 1959. Population Growth
and Economic Development, Summary Report of a Seminar. Institute of Development Economics, Karachi. (September 8-13, 1959).
RAINA, LIEUT. COL.B. L., 1963. Family Planning Programme Report for1962-63. New Delhi (mimeo.). (April).
REPUBLIC OF KOREA, MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND
SOCIAL AFFAIRS, 1963. Population and Fam-
ily Planning in Korea, p. 1, 2 (mimeo.). (Oct.).
REPUBLIC OF KOREA, ECONOMIC PLANNING BOARD,
BUREAU OF STATISTICS, 1963. Statement of
the Republic of Korea for the Asian Population Conference, New Delhi, p. 53-58. (Dec).
REPUBLIC OF KOREA, ECONOMIC PLANNING BOARD,
1963. An Extract from Family Planning Encouragement Plan, p.4, 6. (Sept. 10).
RIZK, HANNA, I963. Population Growth and its Effect on Economic andSocial Goals in the United Arab Republic. Population Review (Indian Institute for Population Studies, Madras), 7 (1): 55. (Jan.).
SINGAPORE FAMILY PLANNING ASSOCIATION. 1962.
13th Annual Report, 1962.
TIEN, H. YUAN, 1963. Birth Control in Mainland

Vol. 11, No. 1

Population Policies

29

China: Ideology and Politics. Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, 4 1 (3). (July).
TURKISH REPUBLIC, PRIME MINISTRY, STATE PLAN-
NING ORGANIZATION, 1963. First Five Year Development Plan 1963-67, Ankara, p.69.
UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC, INFORMATION DEPART-
MENT, 1962. The Charter, Draft presented by President Gamal Abdel Nasser on 21st May, 1962, p.53.
UNITED NATIONS, DEFT, OF ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL
AFFAIRS, STATISTICAL OFFICE, 1962. Demo-
graphic Yearbook, Table 14.
UNITED NATIONS, DEPT. OFECONOMIC AND SOCIAL
AFFAIRS, STATISTICAL OFFICE, 1963. Statistical

Papers, Population and Vital StatisticsReport, Series A., 15 (4). (1 Oct.).
UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY, 7-17 Dec.
1962. Provisional Summary Record, Seventeenth Session, Second Committee, Meetings held December 7-17, 1962.
, 18 Dec. 1962. Provisional Verbatim Record of the Eleven Hundred and NinetySeventh Plenary Meeting, 18 December 1962, A/PV. 1197, p. 61.
UNITED NATIONS TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE PRO-
GRAMME, 1957. TheFamily Planning Service in Barbados. Prepared for the Government of Barbados byDr. C.Tietze, TAA/BAR/2, 3 July 1957, p. 2.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

