Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The human species
Sherwood L. Washburn , Marshall D. Sahlins , Charles F. Hockett , William W. Howells , Robert J. Braidwood , Edward S. Deevey Jr. & Theodosius Dobzhansky
To cite this article: Sherwood L. Washburn , Marshall D. Sahlins , Charles F. Hockett , William W. Howells , Robert J. Braidwood , Edward S. Deevey Jr. & Theodosius Dobzhansky (1960) The human species, Eugenics Quarterly, 7:4, 217-225, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1960.9987451 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1960.9987451
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 11
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

THE HUMAN SPECIES*

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

This special issue of the Scientific American contains nine pieces, each by an eminent authority; each is in itself a summary of recent thinking in the vast field which it covers. Together they present a vivid picture

of the derivation of man and his culture. Even in a summary form, and reduced to those aspects which bear directly on man's evolution, it is a picture immensely stimulating for our thinking about man's future.^

Tools and Human Evolution
SHERWOOD L. WASHBURN
A series of recent discoveries has linked prehuman primates of half a million years ago with stone tools. . . . Now it appears that man-apes--creatures able to run but not yet walk on two legs, and with brains no larger than those of apes now living-- had already learned to make and use tools. It follows that the structure of modern man must be the result of the change in the terms of natural selection that came with the toolusing way of life. . . .
The huge advantage that a stone tool gives to its user must be tried to be appreciated. . . . The utility of a mere pebble seems so limited to the user of modern tools that it is not easy to comprehend the vast difference that separates the tool-user from the ape which relies on hands and teeth alone. . . . It was the success of the simplest tools that started the whole trend of human evolution and led to the civilization of today. . . .
From the evolutionary point of view, behavior and structure form an interacting complex, with each change in one affecting the other. Man began when populations of apes, about a million years ago, started the bipedal, tool-using way of life. . . . Most of the obvious differences that distinguish man from apes came after the use of tools. . . . What evolved was the pattern of life of intelligent, exploratory, playful, vigorous
*A Summary from the Scientific American of September, 1960.
Reprints of the entire issue can be obtained
from the editor of the Scientific American.

primates; the evolving reality was a succession of social systems based upon the motor abilities, emotions and intelligence of their members. Selection produced new systems of child care, maturation and sex, just as it did alterations in the skull and teeth. Tools, hunting, fire, complex social life, speech, the human way, and the brain evolved together to produce ancient man of the genus Homo about half a million years ago. Then the brain evolved under the pressures of more complex social life until the species Homo sapiens appeared perhaps as recently as 50,000 years ago. . . .
Some of the early types of tools had lasted for hundreds of thousands of years and were essentially the same throughout vast areas of the African and Eurasion land masses. Now [with the advent of Homo sapiens] the tool forms multiplied and became regionally diversified. Man invented the bow, boats, clothing; conquered the Arctic; invaded the New World; domesticated plants and animals; discovered metals, writing and civilization. . . .
The long upper pelvis of the ape is characteristic of most mammals, and it is the highly specialized, short, wide bone in man that makes possible the human kind of bipedal locomotion. . . . The capacity for bipedal walking is primarily an adaptation for covering long distances. Even the aboreal chimpanzee can run faster than a man, and any monkey can easily outdistance him. A man, on the other hand, can walk for many miles, and this is essential for efficient hunting. According to skeletal evidence, fully developed walkers first appeared in the ancient men who inhabited the Old World from 500,000 years ago to the middle of the

217

218 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

last glaciation. These men were competent hunters, as is shown by the bones of the large animals they killed. But they also used fire and made complicated tools according to clearly defined traditions. Along with the change in the structure of the pelvis, the brain had doubled in size since the time of the man-apes.
The fossil record thus substantiates the suggestion, first made by Charles Darwin, that tool use is both the cause and the effect of bipedal locomotion. Some very limited bipedalism left the hands sufficiently free from locomotor functions so that stones or sticks could be carried, played with and used. The advantage that these objects gave to their users led both to more bipedalism and to more efficient use of tools. . . . The success of the new way of life based on the use of tools changed the selection pressures on many parts of the body, notably the teeth, hands, and brain as well as the pelvis. But it must be remembered that selection was for the whole way of life. . . . The skull of the man-ape is that of an ape that has lost the structure for effective fighting with its teeth. Moreover the man-ape has transferred to its hands the functions of seizing and pulling, and this has been attended by reduction of its incisors. Small canines and incisors are biological symbols of a changed way of life; their primitive functions are replaced by hand and tool. . . .
One of the essential conditions for the organization of men in co-operative societies was the suppression of rage and of the uncontrolled drive to first place in the hierarchy of dominance. Recently it has been shown that domestic animals, chosen over the generations for willingness to adjust and for lack of rage, have relatively small adrenal glands. . . . The skull structure of the wild rat bears the same relation to that of the tame rat as does the skull of Neanderthal man to Homo sapiens. The same is true for the cat, dog, pig, horse and cow; in each case the wild form has the larger face and muscular ridges. In the later stages of human evolution, it appears the self-domestication of man has been exerting the same effects upon temperament, glands and skull that are seen in the domestic animals. . . . The brain seems to have evolved rapidly, doubling in size between man-ape and man. It then appears to have increased in size much more

slowly; there is no substantial change in gross size during the last 100,000 years. . . . The indirect evidence strongly suggests that the first Homo sapiens was a much more intelligent creature [than Neanderthal man]. . . . The main point is that the kind of animal that can learn to adjust to complex, human, technical society is a very different creature from a tree-living ape, and the differences between the two are rooted in the evolutionary process. The reason that the human brain makes the human way of life possible is that it is the result of that way of life. Great masses of the tissue in the human brain are devoted to memory, planning, language and skills, because these are the abilities favored by the human way of life.
The emergence of man's large brain occasioned a profound change in the plan of human reproduction. . . . In all the apes and monkeys the baby clings to the mother; to be able to do so, the baby must be born with its central nervous system in an advanced state of development. But the brain of the fetus must be small enough so that birth may take place. In man the adaptation to bipedal locomotion decreased the size of the bony birth-canal at the same time that the exigencies of tool use selected for larger brains. This obstetrical dilemma was solved by the delivery of the fetus at a much earlier stage of development. But this was possible only because the mother, already bipedal and with hands free of locomotor necessities, could hold the helpless, immature infant. . . . The human type of motherchild relation must have evolved by the time of the large-brained, fully bipedal humans of the Middle Pleistocene. Bipedalism, tool use, and selection for large brains thus slowed human development and invoked far greater maternal responsibility. The slowmoving mother, carrying the baby, could not hunt, and the combination of the woman's obligation to care for slow-developing babies and the man's occupation of hunting imposed a fundamental pattern on the social organization of the human species.
. . . human society was heavily conditioned at the outset by still other significant aspects of man's sexual adaptation. In the monkeys and apes year-round sexual activity supplies the social bond that unite the primate horde. But sex in these species is still subject to physiological--especially glandu-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

lar--controls. In man these controls are gone, and are replaced by a bewildering variety of social customs. In no other primate does a family exist that controls sexual activity by custom, that takes care of slow-growing young, and in which--as in the case of primitive human societies--the male and female provide different foods for the family members. . . .
Complex and technical society evolved from the sporadic tool-using of an ape, through the simple pebble tools of the manape, and the complex toolmaking traditions of ancient man to the hugely complicated culture of modern man. Each behavioral stage was both cause and effect of biological change in bones and brain. These concomitant changes can be seen in the scanty fossil record and can be inferred from the study of the living forms. . . . In ourselves we see a structure, physiology and behavior that is the result of the fact that some populations of apes started to use tools a million years ago. . . .
The Origin of Society
MARSHALL D. SAHLINS
. . . No living primate can be directly equated with man's actual simian ancestor, and no contemporary people is identical with our cultural ancestors. . . . On the primate side one must rely primarily on the few field reports of free-ranging groups and on certain pioneer studies of captive animals. . . . On the human side the nearest contemporary approximations to the original cultural conditions are [the known] societies of hunters and gatherers, preagricultural peoples exacting a meager livelihood from wild food resources . . . the Australian aborigines, the Bushmen of South Africa, the Andaman Islanders, the Shoshoni of the American Great Basin, the Eskimo, and Pigmy groups in Africa, Malaya and the Philippines. . . .
Confidence in the comparative procedure which equates modern hunters and gatherers with the actual protagonists of the Stone Age is fortified by the remarkable social congruence observed among these peoples, even though they are historically as separated from one another as the Stone Age is distant from modern times. . . .
Comparison of primate sociology with the

219
findings of anthropological research immediately suggests a startling conclusion: The way people act, and probably have always acted, is not the expression of inherent human nature. There is a quantum difference, at points a complete opposition, between even the most rudimentary human society and the most advanced subhuman primate society. The discontinuity implies that the emergence of human society required some suppression, rather than a direct expression, of man's primate nature. Humon social life is culturally, not biologically, determined...
[The social behavior of the apes] is clearly the product of their nature, of animal needs and reactions, physiological processes and psychological reactions. Their social life, therefore, varies directly with the organic constitution of the individual and the horde. In an unchanging environment the social characteristics of a given subhuman primate species are unchanging, unless or until the species is organically transformed. The same cannot be said about human social arrangements. We are all one species, but our social orders grow and diversify, even within a constant environment, and they do so quite apart from minor biological (racial) differences that develop among different peoples. . . .
Yet the remarkable aspect of culture's usurpation of the evolutionary task from biology was that in so doing it was forced to oppose man's primate nature on many fronts and to subdue it. . . . primate urges often become not the secure foundation of human social life, but a source of weakness in it. . .
The powerful social magnet of sex was the major impetus to subhuman primate sociability. . . . Subhuman primates are prepared to mate at all seasons. . . . Among other mammals sexual activity, and likewise heterosexual society, is frequently confined to a comparatively brief breeding season. . . . Group existence confers advantages such as defense against predation. . . . [But] in the evolutionary perspective the intense longterm sexuality of the primate individual is the historic complement of the advantages of horde life. . . .
Sex is not an unmitigated social blessing for primates. Competition over partners, for example, can lead to vicious, even fatal, strife. It was this side of primate sexuality that forced early culture to curb and re-

220 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

press it. The emerging human primate, in a life-and-death economic struggle with nature, could not afford the luxury of a social struggle. Cooperation, not competition, was essential. Culture thus brought primate sexuality under control. More than that, sex was made subject to regulations, such as the incest tabu, which effectively enlisted it in the service of co-operative kin relations. Among subhuman primates sex had organized society . . . now society was to organize sex--in the interest of the economic adaptation of the group . . . in mankind . . . sex is controlled more by the intellect--the cerebral cortex--than by glands. Thus it becomes possible to regulate sex by morals; to subordinate it to higher collective ends. . . . In every human society sex is hedged by tabus; on time, place . . . on the sex and age of possible partners, on reference to sex in certain social contexts. . . . By way of an aside, it is notable that the repression of sex in favor of other ends is a battle which, while won for the species, is still joined in every individual to this day. . . . [Undoubtedly there has been some evolutionary trend toward a greater instinct for monogamy, especially among women, but it still has a long way to g°-]
. . . kinship, with its economic aspect of co-operation, became the plan for primitive human society. . . . Many hunters and gatherers carry kinship to an extreme that is curious to us. By a device technically known as classificatory kinship they ignore genealogical differences between collateral and lineal kin at certain points, lumping them terminologically and in social behavior. Thus my father's brother may be "father" to me, and I act accordingly. Close kinship may be extended indefinitely by the same logic. . . .
The primate horde is practically a closed social group. Each horde has a territory, and local groups of most species defend their ground or trees against encroachment by others of their kind. . . . The band territory is never exclusive. Individuals and families may shift from group to group. . . . a great deal of interband hospitality and visiting is undertaken for purely social and ceremonial reasons . . . a general notion of tribalism, based on similarity in language and custom and on social collaboration, develops among neighboring groups. . . . It does not seem unwarranted to assert that the

human capacity to extend kinship was a necessary social condition for the deployment of early man over the great expanses of the planet. . . . Warfare is limited among hunters and gatherers. Indeed, many are reported to find the idea of war incomprehensible. A massive military effort would be difficult to maintain for technical and logistic reasons. But war is even further inhibited by the spread of a social relation-kinship which in primitive society is often a synonym for "peace." . . . Bands lack true government and law; the rules of good order are synonymous with customs of proper behavior toward kinsmen. . . .
The primitive human family, unlike the subhuman primate mate group, is not based simply on sexual attraction. Sex is easily available in many band societies, both before and outside marriage, but this alone does not necessarily create or destroy the family. . . . Marriage and the family are institutions too important in primitive life to be built on the fragile, shifting foundations of "love." The family is the decisive economic institution of society. . . . Many anthropologists have testified that in the minds of the natives the ability to cook and sew or to hunt are much more important than is beauty in a prospective spouse. . . . Culture, reflecting the compulsions of economics, thus dramatically altered human mating and differentiated the human family from its nearest analogues.
"Peck orders" of dominance and subordination are characteristic of subhuman primate social relations. . . . Compared both to subhuman primate antecedents and to subsequent cultural developments, dominance is at its nadir among primitive hunters and gatherers. . . . The men who lead the band are the wiser and older. They are not, however, respected for their ability to commandeer limited supplies of desired goods. On the contrary, generosity is a necessary qualification for prestige; the man who does most for the band, who sacrifices most, will be the one most loved and heeded by the rest. . . . A second qualification for leadership is knowledge--knowledge of ritual, tradition, game movements, terrain and the other things that control social life. This is why older men are respected. In a stable society they know more than the others, and to be "old-fashioned" is a great virtue. The

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

headsman of a band can rule only by advice, not by fiat . . . the Shoshoni leader is "the Talker," and his Eskimo counterpart is "he who thinks. . . ."
The leveling of the social order that accompanied the development of culture is related to the fundamental economic change from the selfish--literally rugged--individualism of the primate to co-operative kin dealings. . . . Among primitives . . . food sharing follows automatically from the division of labor by sex . . . the family economy is a pooling of goods and services. . . . Mutual aid is extended far beyond the family. It is a demand of group survival that the successful hunter be prepared to share his spoils with the unsuccessful. . . . There was a time in human affairs when the only right of property that brought honor was that of giving it away. The economic behavior of primitives obviously does not conform to the stereotype of "economic man" by which we organize and analyze our own economy. . . . There is much to be learned about primitive economics here, and it would not be a mere exercise in analogy, for our kin life is the evolutionary survival of relations that once encompassed society itself.
In selective adaptation to the perils of the Stone Age, human society overcame or subordinated such primate propensities as selfishness, indiscriminate sexuality, dominance and brute competition. It substituted kinship and co-operation for conflict, placed solidarity over sex, morality over might. In its earliest days it accomplished the greatest reform in history, the overthrow of human primate nature, and thereby secured the evolutionary future of the species.
The Origin of Speech
CHARLES F . HOCKETT
. . . Nowhere in the world has there been discovered a language that can validly and meaningfully be called "primitive. . . ." The lowliest South African Bushman speaks in the forms of a rich symbolic system that is in essence perfectly comparable to the speech of the cultivated Frenchman. . . . Man is apparently almost unique in being able to talk about things that are remote in space or time (or both) from where the talking goes on. . . .

221
Human genes carry the capacity to acquire a language, and probably also a strong drive toward such acquisition, but the detailed conventions of any one language are transmitted extragenetically by learning and teaching. To what extent such "traditional transmission" plays a part in gibbon calls or for other mammalian systems of vocal signals is not known, though in some instances the uniformity of the sounds made by a species, wherever the species is found over the world, is so great that genetics must be responsible. . . .
The development [of human speech] must be visualized as occurring in the context of the evolution of the human horde into the primitive society of food-gatherers and hunters, an integral part, but a part, of the total evolution of behavior. . . . Children acquiring the language of their community pass through a stage that is closed in just the way gibbon calls are. A child may have a repertory of several dozen sentences, each of which, in adult terms, has an internal structure, and yet for the child each may be an indivisible whole. . . . The child takes the first crucial step, however, when he first says something that he has not learned from others. The only way in which the child can possibly do this is by blending two of the whole utterances that he already knows. . . .
These developments [in language] are also necessarily related to the appearance of large and convoluted brains, which are better storage units for the conventions of a complex communicative system and for other traditionally transmitted skills and practices. Hence the adaptive value of the behavior serves to select genetically for the change in structure. A lengthened period of childhood helplessness is also a longer period of plasticity for learning. There is therefore selection for prolonged childhood and, with it, later maturity and longer life. With more for the young to learn, and with male as well as female tasks to be taught, fathers become more domesticated. The increase of displacement promotes retention and foresight: a male can protect his mate and guard her jealousy from other males even when he does not at the moment hunger for her. . . .
Man's own remote ancestors, then, must have come to live in circumstances where a slightly more flexible system of communication, the incipient carrying and shaping of

222 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

tools, and a slight increase in the capacity for traditional transmission made just the difference between surviving--largely, be it noted, by the good old protohominoid way of life--and dying out. . . . Only after a very long period of such small adjustments to tiny changes of living conditions could the factors involved--incipient language, incipient tool-carrying and toolmaking, incipient culture--have started leading the way to a new pattern of life, of the kind called human.
The Distribution of Man
WILLIAM W. HOWELLS
Men with chins, relatively small brow ridges and small facial skeletons, and with high, flat-sided skulls, probably appeared on earth in the period between the last two continental glaciers, say from 150,000 to 50,000 years ago.
. . . our direct ancestor, like his older relatives, was at once product and master of the crude pebble tools that primitive human forms had learned to use hundreds of thousands of years earlier. His inheritance also included a social organization and some level of verbal communication.
Between these hazy beginnings and the agricultural revolution of about 10,000 years ago Homo sapiens radiated over most of the earth, and differentiated into clearly distinguishable races. The processes were intimately related. Like the forces that had created man, they reflected both the workings of man's environment and of his own invention. So much can be said with reasonable confidence. The details are another matter. The when, where and how of the origin of races puzzle us not much less than they puzzled Charles Darwin.. . .
Actually the most reasonable--I should say the only reasonable--pattern suggested by animal evolution in general is that of racial divergence within a stock already possessing distinctive features of Homo sapiens . . . such a stock had appeared at the latest bythe beginning of the last glacial advance and almost certainly much earlier, perhaps by the end of the preceding glaciation, which is dated at some 150,000 years ago. . . .
The Upper Paleolithic invaders of Europe (e.g., the Cro-Magnons) mark the definite

entrance of Homo sapiens, and these men were already stamped with a "White" racial nature at about 35,000 B.C. But a recently discovered skull from Liukiang in China, probably of the same order of age,is definitely not Caucasian, whatever else it may be. And the earliest American fossil men, perhaps 20,000 years old, are recognizable as Indians. No other remains are certainly so old; we cannot now say anything about the first Negroes. Thus racial differences are definitely older than 35,000 years. And yet-- this is sheer guess--the more successful Homo sapiens would probably have overcome the other human types, such as Neanderthal and Rhodesian men, much earlier if he had reached his full development long before. But these types survived well into the last 50,000 years. . . .
When we try to envisage the causes of racial development, we think today of four factors: natural selection, genetic drift, mutation and mixture (interbreeding). With regard to basic divergence at the level of races, the first two are undoubtedly the chief determinants. . . .
Both drift and selection should have stronger effects the smaller and more isolated the population. It is easy to imagine them in action among bands of ancient men, living close to nature. (It would be a great mistake, however, to imagine that selection is not also effective in modern populations.) Hence we can look upon racial beginnings as part accident, part design, design meaning any pattern of minor change obedient to natural selection. . . .
Man started as an apelike creature, certainly vegetarian, certainly connected with wooded zones, limited like all other primates to tropical or near-tropical regions. In becoming a walker he had begun to extend his range. Tools, social rules and intelligence all progressed together; he learned to form efficient groups, armed with weapons not provided by nature. He started to eat meat, and later to cook it; the more concentrated diet widened his possibilities for using his time; the hunting of animals beckoned him still farther in various directions.
All this was probably accomplished during the small-brained australopithecine stage. It put man on a new plane, with the potential to reach all parts of the earth, and not only those in which he could find food ready

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

to his hand, or be comfortable in his bare skin. He did not actually reach his limits until the end of the last glaciation, and in fact left large tracts empty for most of the period. By then he had become Homo sapiens,with a large brain. He had tools keen enough to give him clothes of animal skin. He had invented projectiles to widen the perimeter of his striking power: bolas, javelins with spear throwers, arrows with bows. He was using dogs to widen the perimeter of his senses in tracking. He had found what could be eaten from the sea and its shores. He could move only slowly, and was probably by no means adventurous. But hunting territory was precious, and the surplus of an expanding population had to stake out new preserves wherever there was freedom ahead. So this pressure, and man's command of nature, primitive though it still was, sent the hunters of the end of the Ice Age throughout the Old World, out into Australia, up into the far north, over the Bering Strait and down the whole length of the Americas to Tierra del Fuego. At the beginning of this dispersion we have brutes barely able to shape a stone tool; at the end, the wily, self-reliant Eskimo, with his complicated traps, weapons and sledges and his clever hunting tricks.
The great racial radiation carried out by migratory hunters culminated in the world as it was about 10,000 years ago. The Whites occupied Europe, northern and eastern Africa and the Near East, and extended far to the east in Central Asia toward the Pacific shore. Negroes occupied the Sahara, better watered then, and Pygmies the African equatorial forest; south, in the open country, were Bushman only. Other Pygmies, the Negritos, lived in the forests of much of India and southeastern Asia; while in the open country of these areas and in Australia were men like the present Australian aborigines, brown, beetle-browed and wavy-haired. Most of the Pacific was empty. People such as the American Indians stretched from China and Mongolia over Alaska to the Straits of Magellan; the more strongly Mongoloid peoples had not yet attained their domination of the Far East.
During the whole period the human population had depended on the supply of wild game for food, and the accent had been on the relative isolation of peoples and groups.

223
Still close to nature (as we think of nature), man was in a good position for rapid smallscale evolution, both through natural selection and through the operation of chance in causing differences among widely separated tribes even if selection was not strong.
The Agricultural Revolution
ROBERT J. BRAIDWOOD
. . . About 250,000 years ago wide-wandering bands of ancient men began to make remarkably standardized stone hand-axes and flake tools which archeologists have found throughout a vast area of the African and western Eurasian continents, from London to Capetown to Madras.... By about 75,000 years ago the tools became sufficiently specialized to suggest that they corresponded to the conditions of food-getting in broad regional environments. . . .
Perhaps 50,000 years ago the modern physical type of man appeared. . . . By perhaps 30,000 years ago they spread to the New World. The successful adaptation of human communities to their different environments brought on still greater cultural complexity and differentiation. Finally, between 11,000 and 9,000 years ago some of these communities arrived at the threshold of food production. . . .
The first successful experiment in food production took place in southwestern Asia, on the hilly flanks of the "fertile crescent." (The fertile crescent is bounded on the west by the hills of Lebanon, on the north by the mountains separating Syria from Turkey; and in the east by the range between Iran and Iraq. It includes the headwaters of the Euphrates and the Tigris.) Here in a climate that provided generous winter and spring rainfall, the intensified food-collectors had been accumulating a rich lore of experience with wild wheat, barley and other food plants, as well as with wild dogs, goats, sheep, pigs, cattle and horses. It was here that man first began to control the production of his food.
There are still today a few relict groups of intensified food collectors--the Eskimos for example--and there were many more only a century or two ago.

224 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

The Human Population
EDWARD S. DEEVEY JR.
[Over the ages], . . . as I calculate, 36 billion Paleolithic hunters and gatherers, including the first tool-using hominids, [came and went on this earth]. One begins to see why stone tools are among the commonest Pleistocene fossils. Another 30 billion may have walked the earth before the invention of agriculture. A cumulative total of about 110 billion individuals seem to have passed their days and left their bones, if not their marks, on this crowded planet. Neither for our understanding of culture, nor in terms of man's impact upon the land is it a negligible consideration that the patch of ground allotted to every person now alive may have been the lifetime habitat of 40 predecessors.
These calculations exaggerate the truth in a different way by condensing into single sums the enormous length of prehistoric time. To arrive at the total of 36 billion Paleolithic hunters and gatherers I have assumed mean standing populations of half a million for the Lower Paleolithic and two million for the Middle and Upper Paleolithic to 25,000 years ago. For Paleolithic times there are no archeological records worth considering in such calculations. . . . It is only because average generations of 25 years succeeded each other 39,000 times that the total looms so large. . . .
If number is the criterion, the human species is [now] making great progress. The population, now passing 2.7 billion, is doubling itself every 50 years or so. To some horrified observers the population increase has become a "population explosion." . . . Before accepting the implications of the population explosion it is well to set the present in the context of earlier human populations.
. . . the population curve has moved upward stepwise in response to the three major revolutions that have marked the evolution of culture. The tool-using and toolmaking revolution that started the growth of the human stem from the primate line gave the food-gatherer and hunter access to the widest range of environments. Nowhere was the population large, but over the earth as a whole it reached the not insignificant total of five million, an average of .04 person per square kilometer, or .1 person per square

mile of land. With the agricultural revolution the population moved up two orders of magnitude to a new plateau, multiplying 100 times in the short span of 8,000 years, to an average of one person per square kilometer. The increase over the last 300 years, a multiplication by five, plainly reflects the first repercussions of the scientific-industrial revolution. There are now 16.4 persons per square kilometer of the earth's land area. It is thus the release of restraint that the curve portrays at three epochal points in cultural history.
But the evolution of the population size also indicates the approach to equilibrium in the two inter-revolutionary periods of the past. At what level will the present surge of numbers reach equlibirum? That is again a question of restraint, whether it is to be imposed by the limitations of man's new command over his environment or by his command over his own nature. . . .
The Present Evolution of Man
THEODOSIUS DOBZHANSKY
. . . It has . . . been argued that Homo sapiens has already emancipated himself from the operation of natural selection. At the other extreme are those who still assume that man is nothing but an animal. The second fallacy is the more pernicious, leading as it does to theories of biological racism and the justification of race and class prejudice which are bringing suffering to millions of people from South Africa to Arkansas. Assuming that man's genetic endowment can be ignored is the converse falsehood, perhaps less disastrous in its immediate effects, but more insidious in the long run. . . . For bet ter or worse, biological evolution did not stop when culture appeared. . . .
The impact of human works on the environment is so strong that it has become very hard to make out the forces to which the human species is now adjusting. . . . [Natural selection] goes on, however, always within the context of environment. As that changes, the Darwinian fitness of various traits changes with it. Thus by his own efforts man is continually altering the selective pressure for or against certain genes.
The most obvious example, and one with disturbing overtones, is to be found in the

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

advance of medicine and public health. . . . It was pointed out earlier that one effect
of civilization is to increase mutation rates and hence the supply of harmful genes. A second effect is to decrease the rate of discrimination against such genes, and consequently the rate of their elimination from human populations by natural selection. In thus disturbing the former genetic equilibrium of inflow and outflow, is man not frustrating natural selection and polluting his genetic pool? The danger exists and cannot be ignored. But in the present state of knowledge the problem is tremendously complex. If our culture has an ideal, it is the sacredness of human life. A society that refused, on eugenic grounds, to cure children of retinoblastoma would, in our eyes, lose more by moral degradation than it gained genetically. Not so easy, however, is the question whether a person who knows he carries the gene for retinoblastoma, or a similarly deleterious gene, has the right to have children. . . .
In any case, although we cannot see all the consequences, we can be sure that ancient genetic patterns will continue to shift under the shelter of modern medicine. We would not wish it otherwise. It may well be, however, that the social cost of maintaining some genetic varieties will be so great that artificial selection against them is ethically, as well as economically, the most acceptable and wisest solution.
Selection in modern societies does not always encourage characteristics that we regard as desirable.... Much has been written about the differential fertility that in advanced human societies favors less intelligent

225
over more intelligent people. . . . We cannot put our finger on the forces responsible for this presumed selection against intelligence. As a matter of fact, there is some evidence that matters are changing, in the U.S. at least. . . .
If this article has asked many more questions than it has answered, the purpose is to suggest that answers be sought with all possible speed. Natural selection is a very remarkable phenomenon. But it does not even guarantee the survival of a species. Most living forms have become extinct without the softening influence of civilization, simply by becoming too narrowly specialized. Natural selection is opportunistic; in shaping an organism to fit its surroundings it may leave the organism unable to cope with a change in its environment. In this light, man's explosive ability to change his environment may offer as much threat as promise. Technological evolution may have outstripped biological evolution.
Yet man is the only product of biological evolution who knows that he has evolved and is evolving further. He should be able to replace the blind forces of natural selection by conscious direction, based on his knowledge of nature and on his values. It is as certain that such direction will be needed as it is questionable whether man is ready to provide it. He is unready because his knowledge of his own nature and its evolution is insufficient; because a vast majority of people are unaware of the necessity of facing the problem; and because there is so wide a gap between the way people actually live and the values and ideals to which they pay lip service.

