Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
III. Needed research
Curt Stern
To cite this article: Curt Stern (1954) III. Needed research, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:3, 161-165, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987186 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987186
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

III. NEEDED RESEARCH

CURT STERN
Department of Zoology University of California

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

. HE RESULTS OF HALF a century of intense studies on the behavior of genes in individuals and in populations have provided a theoretical framework which often permits exact statements about the effect of population changes upon the distribution of genes. We know that in any natural population many, if not perhaps most, genes occur in several varieties or alíeles usually present in various frequencies. Therefore the individuals of a population form a considerable array of different genotypes in relation to any specific genie locus. Since the different genotypes at one locus become recombined in all possible ways with those at other loci, the total number of possible genetically different types is immeasurably larger than that of any actually existing group of. individuals. Therefore, with the exception of identical twins or multiples, no two individuals are ever genetically alike.
If all genotypes endowed their carriers with equal reproductive ability, if all individuals actually did reproduce at the same rate and if genes were completely stable, then in an infinitely large population the proportions of the different kinds of alíeles would remain unchanged from generation to generation. In reality none of these conditions are fulfilled. We know of many genes which lower considerably the chances of their carriers to survive and reproduce the average number of offspring, accidental and systematic differences in the fertility of individuals exist independently of their genotypes, genes mutate, and, obviously, infinitely large populations are never encountered. Any one of these attributes tends to shift the proportions of different alíeles from one generation to the next. While in many cases the simultaneous action of such factors as differential fertility

and mutation may be opposed to each other and result in a dynamic equilibrium, in many other cases no constancy in proportion of alíeles can be expected.
The different alíeles are not distributed evenly over a whole species. Various genetic and evolutionary processes bring it about that every group, within which mating occurs more frequently than with outsiders, accumulates certain alíeles and becomes deficient in others. In man, prehistoric, geographic, national, religious, social, and other factors have led to the establishment of numerous groups which on the average are genetically different from one another. Within each one of these groups only a fraction of the total array of genetic combinations is possible.
The knowledge required for an intimate understanding of the interrelations between demographic processes and changes in the proportions, combinations and distributions of genes consists primarily in specific items. If we knew enough about the genetic basis of relevant traits or combinations of traits, about the range of phenotypic expression of the relevant genotypes under the most diverse circumstances and about the average selective advantages or disadvantages of the various combinations of genes as they affect both the individuals and the population group of which they are a part, if we knew these and similar facts, then we could apply to them known genera] concepts and formulae. As it is, information is still incomplete on the relatively few traits, such as blood properties and specific abnormalities, which have formed the backbone of knowledge in human genetics, and it is all but absent for variants within the normal range of physiological, emotional and intellectual characters.

161

162 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

A well-known demographic phenomenon is the so-called breaking up of isolates. Often in history large-scale mixtures of previously relatively separate groups have taken place, in consequence of wars and conquest, of peaceful migrations and of the breakdown of religious, social or caste barriers. In recent decades two factors have facilitated the breakdown of isolates; namely the increased motility of individuals within many populations and, to a lesser extent, the approach, in many Western populations, to numerical stability. The increased motility has made possible a large proportion of marriages between persons from different localities thus breaking down isolates which often were the result of distance rather than of more complex geographic factors. The approach to numerical stability has resulted in a decreased number of first cousins and other close relatives who are potential marriage partners. For example, with an average of 3 children per family, an individual has 3 first cousins of the opposite sex. With an average of 2 children only a single first cousin is of the opposite sex. The changes in motility and average family size are in several countries reflected in a decrease of cousin marriages during the last century, from about 1 per cent to perhaps as little as 0.1 per cent.
The breakdown of isolates results in an equalization of the proportions of those alíeles which were formerly different in the separate groups, in the disappearance or at least decrease in frequency of genie combinations which depended on the established alíele frequencies within the isolates, and in the production of new genie combinations made possible by the intermixture. Only one, partial aspect of these classes of phenomena is sufficiently understood to be useful for a specific statement. This refers to the incidence of hereditary, physical and mental abnormalities which depend on recessive genes. If the frequencies of these genes vary in different isolates,

then their frequencies take on intermediate values in the mixtures. Since it takes two recessive alíeles to produce an affected individual, the frequencies of such individuals are functions of the square of the alíele frequencies. From this it follows that the total number of affected individuals in the mixed population is less, and often very much less, than the sum of the affected in the original isolates. Thus the breakdown of isolates wherever it occurs should have led and continue to lead to a sizable reduction in the incidence of individuals with genetic diseases due to recessive genes. If this fact is not yet substantiated by data on vital statistics, then this is probably only the result of improved ascertainment; the increasingly greater portion of cases which becomes registered obscures a decrease in actual cases.
This decrease in frequency of homozygotes cannot be restricted to strikingly abnormal traits. It must likewise occur for those other homozygotes which are involved in the determination of various degrees and kinds of normal form and functions. But what are these? Do mean genetic differences in nutritional requirements, range of climatic tolerances and mental attributes exist between different major races, different populations, different minor partial isolates? We have good reason to suspect their existence but need facts instead of suspicions. If such genetic differences exist, do they rest upon homozygosity at single Joci or interaction of different loci? Experiments with animals and plants show increasingly that many traits established by evolutionary processes depend on complex heterozygosity of genes at many loci. Is this true for significant human traits? If so, does the increased heterozygosity which results from isolate breaking lead to greater frequencies of desirable traits? Or is the heterozygosity within each isolate of a different kind than that resulting from mixture--the first adaptive, the second untested?

163

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

These questions not only touch upon the problem of evaluation of traits in terms of desirability and adaptiveness; they also cover a variety of cases each one of which will require a separate answer and raise additional questions. Thus during the last generations, mean stature has increased in many populations. It is likely--but not proven--that apart from improved nutrition and public health, increased heterozygosity is responsible for this change. Is larger mean size a desirable trait? Is the incidence of various causes of death or illness the same in people of different stature? What are the economic consequences of the changing food requirements in populations with changing body size? And what is the effect of increased heterozygosity on other measurable traits? May not some increase, like stature, while others decrease? Where do different mental attributes belong? Is, for instance, high intelligence performance favored by homozygosity, by specific heterozygosity or by heterozygosity in general? In the first and second alernative the breakdown of isolates may result in a lower frequency of the trait, but in case of the third alternative, in a higher frequency.
In a natural species the short-range effects of the breakdown of isolates are likely to result in reduced mean adaptiveness. This is the price paid for the creation of new genetic combinations, some of which may be the basis for new evolutionary trends. Is the domesticated species Homo sapiens subject to the same forces? Is genetically based specific human adaptedness still an important feature or does man's control of the environment--taken in the widest meaning of the term--tend to minimize the significance of genetic differences?
Many of these questions will receive different answers according to the genetic differences between the isolates. What effects the breakup of old-established genotypic arrays within major races will have may be different from the effects of the breakup of recent class and socio-economic groups.

Differences between major races may involve striking differences in alíele frequencies at many loci, while differences between isolates of recent origin may rest on lesser differences of few loci. We need data on the old question of the frequently ascertained and equally frequently denied origin of genetically conditioned disharmonies resulting from isolate-breaking!
The breakdown of isolates often consists not in a large-scale obvious intermixing of different groups--as for instance between Polynesians, Mongolians, Caucasians and others in Hawaii, or between different Caucasians in North America--but, in a more subtle fashion, in the "diffusion" of a relatively small number of genes from one group into another. This occurs particularly when the hybrids intermarry primarily with members of only one of the original groups. In this way an "introgression" of genes from one group into another is initiated. Plant breeders make good use of such a system of crosses. It has enabled them to transfer specific desirable genes, such as providing resistance to a certain pest, from one strain to another without destroying the over-all genetic integrity of the formerly susceptible strain. It is possible that a similar transfer has occurred in various parts of the world where the white man brought measles and tuberculosis to native populations which lacked genetic resistance to these infections. There, the survival of part of the native groups may have depended on the invader's resistance genes whirh he left within some of the hybrids whom he procreated. The often suggested genetic basis for the apparent inability of the European to establish permanent self-reproducing settlements in the tropics could conceivably be overcome by introgression of genes from climatically well-adapted populations, and the future of the tropics may possibly be influenced by the origin of new combinations resulting from the opposite intro-

164 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

gression of foreign genes into the native populations.
It is reasonable to assume the existence of genotypes conferring climatic tolerances or specific nutritional properties. Yet research is needed to support such assumptions. The study of well-defined physiological responses in the populations of first and later generation inter-racial hybrids which have originated in diverse parts of the world promises significant new insights.
Profound changes in the distribution of genetic factors occur as the result of differential fertility of groups with different corporate genie content. On the largest scale such changes have been brought about, and are still occurring, owing to differences in the reproductive rates of the major races. On a lesser scale differential reproductivity occurs between subgroups of relatively more homogeneous populations. When these subgroups are genetically different, differential fertility may lead to changes in the proportions of alíeles in the whole group. It is well known that in many industrialized societies an inverse relation has existed recently between the socio-economic level of a subgroup and its reproductive rate. Since mean differences in mental test performances have been found to be correlated positively with socio-economic level, and since differences in genes are usually regarded as partly involved in differences in test performance, it has been postulated that changes occur at present in the frequencies of such genes. The undesirable direction of these changes has been characterized by the term "gene erosion." Actually, the effects of this group of phenomena can not be appraised at present. The result of differential fertility in terms of changes in genie frequencies depends not only on the average fertilities of different subgroups but also on the distribution of fertility within each subgroup. If genetically different individuals within subgroups also should exhibit significantly different fertility then, depending on the direction of

intragroup differentials, the effect of intergroup differences may be either fortified or counteracted. Data on intragroup fertility are scarce, and the few available ones are restricted to the upper socio-economic layers. More complete information is greatly needed for all subgroups. Particularly, countries now entering an era of industrialization and increased birth control have a vital interest in an elucidation of these phenomena within their own populations.
Even if the facts regarding fertility were better known, the genetic effects of differential fertility in regard to mental traits would be difficult to evaluate. The heritability within the normal range of mental traits is still obscure. Moreover, it is to be expected that the genetic endowment of a group may show relatively high values for certain traits and low values for others. This statement not only involves the problems of evaluation of individual traits on scales but in addition those of evaluating the different traits in relation to each other. It should be possible, however, to assemble data on the genetic component of various mental traits and then, without value judgments, to determine the genetic consequences of differential fertility.
The presumed mean genetic differences between subgroups are partly due to social mobility which attracts genetically "preadapted" individuals to a subgroup as well as discharges from a subgroup individuals who are not adapted to it. Where social mobility is high, greater genetic differences may be found than where low mobility keeps most genes from selectively leaving a subgroup or being added to it. Information on social mobility is available for only a few societies. More is clearly desirable. The increased mobility in many societies may have important genetic consequences. It may lead to better use of the divergence of genotypes, but it may also expose certain alíeles and combinations to the effects of selection in terms of reduced reproduction

165

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

from which they had been shielded in times of low mobility.
Reduced biological fitness due to genie causes is a potent factor which has counteracted the increase of abnormal traits which would result from new mutations. Preventive medicine and therapy have made possible the survival and normal mean reproductive performance of carriers which were formerly subjected to strong negative selective pressures. It is perhaps not too early to start compiling careful records of the total numbers of each kind of affected individuals in order to establish base lines from which to judge changes in later generations.
In this survey we have repeatedly referred to the problems of mental traits. The old problem of the relative roles of heredity and environment, and of their interaction in determining the range of variability is still with us, even though much progress has been made. The modern approach in animal experiments to learning ability and behavioral traits is contributing new concepts and, by the use of different breeds and different species, teaches us the existing variety of inborn attributes and the way in which they become pheno typically apparent--some in highly fixed patterns, others in equally highly plastic responses. More research in this field, on mammals,

birds and other animals will help in the understanding of the interpretation of human mental traits. Specifically, however, man will. have to provide his own data. Some of the methods which have been defined and applied to the study of twins and sibs reared apart, to half-sibs and foster children are limited primarily on account of the paucity of cases available in a single country. If worldwide studies were undertaken in these basic areas, many new relevant cases would become accessible and our knowledge would be greatly increased. In addition, a clarification of present arguments and counterarguments on the role of genetic and non-genetic factors in the expression of mental traits could be expected if long term and statistically satisfactory studies were made on the relation of pre-, peri-, and neo-natal experiences on the emotional and intellectual development of children and later, adults. Such studies seem to me eminently called for.
Research needed in the field of demography and population genetics will not soon lead to results which can be used for active interference with the uncontrolled forces which incessantly influence the distribution and frequencies of genes. They will, however, help us to understand what changes are occurring and what the genetic results of demographic trends may be.

