Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Heredity and environment reexplored
Lewis A. Dexter
To cite this article: Lewis A. Dexter (1956) Heredity and environment reexplored, Eugenics Quarterly, 3:2, 88-93, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1956.9987272 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1956.9987272
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT REEXPLORED Specification of Environments and Genetic Transmission*

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

LEWIS A. DEXTER

GlENETICISTS NOWADAYS GENERALLY a c c e p t

The difficulty we face is that we have

in principle some such formulation as the only vague and general bases for specifying

following: "A trait is an abstraction. . . . the "existing variety of environments."

What is actually inherited is a dynamic There is therefore a strong tendency to

pattern of developmental processes which omit from consideration any specification

directs the course of the body. . . . Develop- of environments at all; and this is particu-

ment at any stage is a function of the larly true when we come to the distinc-

environment in which the process has tively social aspects of environment. Sociol-

taken place." (1)

ogists have been concerned particularly

But the application of this approach to such psychogenic phenomena as schizophrenia, mental deficiency, neurosis, accident-proneness, and allergy is very unusual. Geneticists mislead non-technical readers by falling back on such phrases as "The Inheritance of Personality" to quote the title of a recent article in the American Journal of Human Genetics, (2) which then goes ahead to discuss the so-called "inheritance of neurosis"; and of course we are all familiar with attempts to trace the pedi-

with the identification of "culture" and of "primary group" constellations2 as determinants of behavior. They customarily use these factors to "explain" psychosis, neurosis (7), criminal tendencies, and sometimes psychosomatic disorders, and personality traits such as genius, mental defect, and the like. Freud, Charles Horton Cooley, William Graham Sumner, Ruth Benedict, A. Kardiner: these names indicate the sociological explanations referred to.3

grees of schizophrenics (4) and mental de- To be sure, most sociologists, if pressed,

fectives (5) and draw rather sweeping con- would admit that "constitutional" and clusions from them.1 There is every reason "genetic factors" may play a part; and pre-

to trace such pedigrees, but reason also sumably, if pressed, most geneticists would

to express caution in drawing conclusions admit "sociological" factors may play a

from them.

part. But the clinician or student who

reads one group of writings will find their

*This paper was prepared under a grant from the Estate of K. J. Anthony of Lewiston, Maine, "to be used for the benefit of those of God's Children known as the feeble-minded." It was read at the meeting of the American Society of Human Genetics, East Lansing, Michigan, September 1955.

"explanations" of the phenomena almost unconnected with the "explanations" advanced by the other. Students in medical genetics might be taught a "hereditary" explanation of schizophrenia or mental de-

1 I may add that a distinguished geneticist, promi- fect, which would be pooh-poohed in an-

nent in the American Society of Human Genetics, perfectly seriously proposed as late as 1951 that

other course or school where maternal

historians take census records for 1850 for a par- overprotection or social isolation would be

ticular state and collaborate with psychologists

in estimating the intelligence of those recorded in the records, whereupon geneticists would trace the

2 I use the term "constellation" here in lieu of

pedigrees. As late as 1940, a distinguished geneticist the more conventional "interaction" for methodo-

published a book in which he indicated that the logical reasons indicated in (6).

differential fertility of the mentally deficient was 3During the last ten years the "culture-and-

an importance factor in leading to deficit spending personality" school has attempted to integrate the

upon the Keynesian model. For this and other culture and primary group constellation approaches.

somewhat similar assertions see (3).

See (8), (9).

88

89

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

regarded as the etiologically significant fac- we need to specify environments as care-

tor. fully as we can. Now the great difficulty

Basically, the need is for a rigorous speci- with genetic studies as contrasted with so-

fication of environments. No such specifi- cial scientists' level of observation is that

cation is offered here, for the task is too geneticists and clinicians are observing and

large for the present occasion, but some reporting on the level of development of

suggestions are made which are useful in individuals organisms when studying such

working toward such specification.

phenomena as mental defect; whereas so-

1. Sociologists generally, I judge, tend to feel that "genetic" explanations have a racist or aristocratic taint attached. Myrdal in the book which has probably been more influential than any other single sociological treatise of the last fifteen years says: "It is hardly possible to be a true biological determinist and yet a political liberal,"4 and most sociologists have read or misread writings by geneticists as implying biological determinism. Pastore (11) in a rather careful study has in fact shown that among American scholars genetic explanations are more apt to be correlated with "conservative" or "reactionary" political views and sociological ones with "liberal" or "radical" views. (10) Of course if this is true, it has nothing to do with the merits of analysis, report or experiment, provided that we content ourselves with exploration on the scientific level, and distinguish that sharply from political and social inferences. Nevertheless, advocates of genetic determination have this obstacle to overcome in being accepted--nowadays one might almost say against being heeded -- by social scientists. Hitler is still working in mysterious ways to influence human affairs, and this is an example.
2. Both geneticists and social scientists need consistently to talk and write as though they took seriously this proposition (unless of course at some time it is disproved): "We cannot predict what phenotype a given zygote will develop into unless we know something about the environment in which it is to develop."

cial scientists frequently talk about "culture" and "social environment" in gross, general, average, statistical terms applying to populations. "Culture" does not as such directly affect a person; the person is brought up in a particular environment, and in the present state of sociology it is difficult to find sociological literature which carefully indicates the level of abstraction used in describing environments.
4. A good deal of writing on genetics-- and much clinical genetics--is of course concerned with predicting the risk involved in certain kinds of matings. But so far as the more complex and difficult-to-observe psychological factors are concerned, when we introduce the phrase "the environments remaining constant," we really -- in the present state of our knowledge--throw out much possibility of making any long-range prediction. Capable sociologists, psychiatrists, and psychologists maintain that a good many psychoses or neuroses develop because of the stress of environmental factor, as a result, for example, of the inability to reconcile conflicting role or status demands, and that these psychoses or neuroses are in a sense "adaptive," viz., they are said to be means of reconciling or evading the conflicts involved in the situation. If this be so, then the issue is to determine which human organisms, granted the presence of equally conflicting status or role demands, will find psychosis or neurosis "adaptive" and which ones will not. Now this means that we have first to develop a criterion for "measuring" role conflict which is independent of the psy-

3. If such a statement is accepted, then chosis or neurosis. For, in fact, the environ-

ment of the person who is suffering from a

4Contemporary sociologists are usually "political
liberals." See (10).

severe role conflict is different

from

the

90 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

environment of the person who is not. If we take a pedigree where several persons appear to have suffered from psychoses of one sort or another, we have to rule out the likelihood that all these persons suffered from such role conflicts, for instance, before we can make any reasonable prediction about the risk that their descendants will experience similaf psychoses or we have to show their descendants are equally likely to experience such role conflicts; or alternatively we have to show some aspect of constitutional development which makes persons far more prone to find psychosis or neurosis adaptive than others with equally great role conflicts.
Let us give a few examples of the difficulty of segregating the effect of environment on all the members of a kinship group from .the effect of possible genetic transmission. There is nothing new in the point that it is difficult to distinguish the effect of "heredity" from that of "environment" on the individual; but less has been done than we might wish in exploring the possibility of differentiating the effect of "culture" or "social status" upon groups of related individuals from that of genetic transmission. Suppose, for example, the family in question is Jewish. There are fairly obvious reasons why recent generations of Jews--as a result of breaking away from the Ghetto, as a result of the high degree of social mobility in many Jewish families, and of what we cay call "conscientiousness" instilled in many Jewish children in early familial training, and finally as a result of the covert and overt manifestations of prejudice many Jews are exposed to--might have produced more persons suffering from role-status conflicts, who find neurosis or psychosis adaptive that would recent generations of, say, French-Canadians. I have no idea whether Jews do differ statistically from FrenchCanadians in this respect, and because of the absence of trustworthy statistics on any of these matters, neither has anybody else. The point is merely that the social environ-

ment of Jewish professional men in, say, New England, has been different from that of a French-Canadian family in Quebec, but--and this is crucial--differences which have existed in the past between these groups may, and probably, will, diminish in the future; discrimination against Jews in this country appears to be less destructive in its psychological consequences than it used to be, and more Canadians are breaking away in adolescence or adulthood from a group and family system of values (or so it is alleged by the French-language press of New England). So the environments are not constant and prediction rests upon very dubious ground.
Or take "mental deficiency," particularly the 80 per cent of the so-called "familial" mental deficients, who show no clear constitutional differentiation for the rest of the population, except that they are mentally deficient. (Persons with visibly defective nervous systems, or those with rather rare constitutional conditions, which can be recognized fairly readily, such as phenylpyruvic amentia, fall into a different category.)
How do we identify high-grade mental defect? By determining in effect the degree of aptitude persons show for performing certain types of operations. Generally, the operations which they are asked to perform consist of "intelligence tests" of one sort or another. We know that "culture," "social status" and "motivation" all play a considerable part in determining the seriousness with which such tests are taken, and the degree of ability shown in manipulating them. Unless we succeed in specifying that culture and social status and motivation have not entered into the grading of test results, we can not arrive at any very solid genetic conclusions.
An additional point should be made here. Frequently, we can quite usefully predict what persons will do in one situation on the basis of their skill or behavior in another; motivation in an individual personality has a tendency to remain con-

91

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

stant in a wide range of situations and ing ignorance. Whereas if we keep on

few personalities completely revise their obstinately trying to formulate what we

"definitions of situations" once these are don't know, we may discover a way of

acquired, even though the external social getting around the difficulties.

"reality" may change considerably. Consequently, intelligence tests or other tests of intellectual aptitude may be "true," that is, have an extremely high predictive value, for an individual without necessarily having any bearing on the transmission of developmental potentialities from one generation to another.

One favorite method of present-day geneticists for exploring the problems here referred to is the study of twins. Quite likely, such study may throw light on important issues of genetics and development; but in view of present-day failures to specify, it does not have great value for the study of psychogenic conditions like

Naturally, clinical psychologists are try- mental deficiency, schizophrenia, or related

ing to develop better instruments for the disturbances. First, no study of twins to

identification of "true" mental defect8 and my knowledge suggests that some of the

the measurement of intelligence generally. co-twins studied were placed in vquite dif-

But no matter how valid the instruments ferent cultures or subcultures from the

which may be developed, all they can show other member of the pair. The presump-

is that persons with a certain developmen- tion in most cases is that, although in some

tal potentiality, genetically acquired, can reported instances, the twins studied were

develop into what we call "mental defec- brought up at somewhat different socioeco-

tives," under certain environmental condi- nomic levels, they were brought up within

tions, and that the problem is to specify the the same general culture, (12) with the

environmental conditions under which same general practices in regard to wean-

such development is (or is not) likely. ing, toilet training, classroom frustrations,

5. This means that we have to develop a series of hypotheses which, directly or indirectly, can be tested about environment and development. The practical difficulty is, of course, that we do not have available to us the kind of controls which laboratory conditions, for example, permit so that we can quickly and readily specify the full total of relevant environmental conditions. No doubt one reason we have failed to formulate useful principles about development is precisely the difficulty suggested; but the fact that we have not been

and so forth. Now the significance for our purposes of sociological theory or of psychoanalytic theory is that these practices are crucial in determining how the personality develops; e.g., a person exposed to the certain deprivational practices in weaning, toilet training, or schooling is likely to develop the same deficiencies in motivation or intellectual skill as another person exposed to the same deprivational practices. This is the meaning of the use of "complex" and "type" in psychoanalytic and personality theory.

able to resolve these is no excuse for not specifying what we don't know. For if we fail to specify what we don't know, and just take it for granted, there's a tendency to forget that we don't know it, and characteristically to formulate principles and laws which give no indication of our underly-

If this is true, it is probably true only if the persons in question have similar constitutional predispositions to begin with, for example, if their kinaesthetic responses resemble each others'. But twins do have such resemblances, so the fact that they are brought up apart, in the "same" cul-

5 A particularly promising attempt in this direction is the Family and Health Study at the Uni-

ture, does not really enable us to segregate "hereditary" from "environmental" factors

versity of Delaware under the direction of Joseph Jastak.

in the developmental processes which may

92 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

lead to states defined as "psychosis" or "mental deficiency."
On the other hand, studies of culture differences, so far as I know, fail to take into account that co-twins reared apart often may have a social environment more similar to each other than co-twins reared together. This arises out of the following set of circumstances: any set of like persons living or working together tend to develop some specialization of role. Observers have reported this as characteristic of twins; one becomes "the ambassador" to the outside world, the specialist in social relations, for instance, and the other does not. Such specialization is in fact an almost inevitable consequence of the latent competition for the same attention, space, etc. between twins.
Twins reared apart, however, face. no alternatives of specialization and differentiation on the one hand or competition on the other. If, as is more often than not the case, they are brought up in the same general socio-economic level by much the same sort of people, it can be anticipated that because of their constitutional similarities their development may be very much alike. One reason for such development is the role appearance and constitution play in social development; red-haired people in many environments will respond, either positively or negatively, to the social expectations about red hair. But red-haired twins may find it difficult or impossible for both of them to develop the quick temper, for instance, characteristically expected of the red-haired, if they live together; and in any case, being twins will be a dominant social experience for them. Reared apart, they may both respond similarly to the characteristic social expectations in our society about red-haired people.
Of course, if one twin is brought up as the youngest of a large family of fostersiblings and the other is brought up as an only child, one might expect differences to develop; but so far as I know observations and experiments in the field have not

been focused on such factors which constitute such "real" differences in the social environment. And, obviously, if a redhaired twin of Angle-American ancestry were to be brought up in rural Japan by Japanese foster-parents, social expectations about red hair would be far less significant than other visible differences between that person and other persons in his environment.
None of this is to assert firmly that mental defect or schizophrenia may not be well explained in terms of genetic transmission. It is merely to assert firmly that no one at present knows whether this is the case or not; because no specification of environments adequate for the purposes of analysis and observation has as yet been developed. For example, some of the familial "mentally defective" might in fact be so almost entirely because of certain factors in weaning, toilet training, etc., combined with exposure to the educational experiments and skill of our society. (13) If the educational techniques and requirements to which they are subjected were modified in terms of their aptitudes, (14) (15) it could conceivably turn out that a large part of what we now call "mental deficiency" would not become developmentally manifest. In the "mental hygiene" area many practitioners preach a similar premise, and sociological rather than rational reasons explain why we regard "mental defect" as more inherent and therefore less modifiable than psychosis or neurosis.6
Present-day knowledge can be used to support unfamiliar and seemingly bizarre conclusions such as that just stated, just as Woodworth used present-day knowledge
6The major social reason appears to be this: Psychosis has been of considerable, and neurosis of great, interest to social scientists during the last twenty years, and they have applied their newly acquired insights to these fields. But there has been a continuous disinterest, if not resistance, by social scientists in consideration of mental defect, and this field therefore has not changed theoretically since 1935.

93

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

(for we know little more about the topic that other, less obvious differences, in

than we did twenty years ago) to report: climate, presence of industrial wastes, and

"On the strength of some . . . findings, the so forth, may also modify the development

suggestion has been made (impliedly by of developmental potentialities; and in any

qualified psychologists) that society, in- case, simply because we do not believe that

stead of seeking to minimize the fecundity such factors will make a difference, is no

of feeble-minded women, should utilize reason for refusing to consider them.

them as breeders of children for adoption into high-level homes.7

REFERENCES

We can more freely do one thing, however, which was not possible much before Woodworth made the report to the Social Science Research Council just cited. We can break down the almost unanalyzed conception "social environment" which he employed into a series of suggestions for specific observation about actual behaviors.8
Since my concern here is in the social science field, I have discussed the specification of social environments, but a similar specification of physical environments may be necessary. We know of course that under certain conditions, the biochemical and physical environment of the embryo can make an enormous difference in the development of mental defect; and that probably severity of certain disease in infancy can also materially affect the nervous system. But it is not inconceivable

1. DOBZHANSKY, T. 1950. Heredity, environment, and evolution. Science, 3:161-162.
2. CATTELL, R., BLEWETT, D. B., and BELOFF, JR.
1955. The inheritance of personality. Am. J. Human Genet., 7:122-146.
3. BURLINCAME, L. 1940. Heredity and Social Problems, McGraw-Hill, New York.
4. KALLMANN, F. J. 1954. Heredity in Mental Disorder, W. W. Norton, New York.
5. TREDCOLD, A. 1952. Mental Deficiency (8th Ed.), Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore, pp. 22-40.
6. BENTLEY A. 1954. Inquiry Into Inquiries, Beacon Press, Boston.
7. FRANK, L. 1948. Society as the Patient, Rutgers Univ., New Brunswick.
8. KLUCKHOLN, C. 1949. Mirror for Man, Ch. VIII.
9. DEXTER, L. 1949. A dialogue on the social psychology of colonialism. Hum. Rel. 2: 49-64.
10. MYRDAL, G. 1944. An American Dilemma. Harper's, New York, p.83.
11. PASTORE, N. 1949. The Nature-Nurture Controversy, King's Crown, New York.
12. WOODWORTH, R. 1941. Heredity and environment. Soc. Sci. Res. Council Bull. 47, 21-33.
13. DEXTER, L. A. 1955. Naming as a social process and the social classification of the mentally deficient; Toward a sociology of mental deficiency. Papers read at the meeting of the American Association on Mental Deficiency.

7 See (12) footnote 15. 8 The entire literature of the personality-and-culture movements, probably the most popular current field of social psychology, supports this statement.

14. KIRK, S. A., and JOHNSON, G. O. 1951. Edu-
cating the Retarded Child, Houghton Mifflin, Boston.
15. WALLIN, J. 1955. Education of Mentally Handicapped Children, Harpers, New York.

