Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Eugenics and the I.U.G.D.'s
R. H. Post
To cite this article: R. H. Post (1965) Eugenics and the I.U.G.D.'s, Eugenics Quarterly, 12:2, 112-113, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1965.9987613 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1965.9987613
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:28

Brief Report

EUGENICS AND THE I.U.G.D.'S

R. H. POST
Ann Arbor, Michigan

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

With the rapidly increasing use of intrauterine contraceptive devices, which occasionally result in the birth of a child through failure of function, two questions arise: (1) How might the individuals gestated with an I.U.C.D. differ from other individuals, as a direct result of its presence during uterine development, and how might their mothers be affected? (2) What are the forces of natural selection, if any, which differentiate some embryos for implantation and eventual delivery from other embryos which fail to develop? (The I.U.C.D. is a small plastic ring or coil placed in the uterus. The mechanism of its prevention of conception has not yet been fully explained.)
The first question relates to possible effects on the developing organism and/ or its mother which, however serious they might be for the individual, would presumably not be transmitted to future offspring, and therefore would have no eugenic significance. The second question concerns the possible genetic attributes of ova, sperm, and/or zygotes (embryos) which permit implantation, gestation, and birth despite the presence of an I.U.C.D. One might suspect, for instance, that embryos gestated with an I.U.C.D. would possibly have a greater capacity for implantation, or a greater resistance to the foreign body in the uterus, or some other sort of "vitality." On the other hand, their survival and development might be due to pure chance or, at least, might have no genetic

basis. To whatever extent these attributes might be genetically controlled or conditioned, they would be affected by natural selection; furthermore, the alleles by which they were differentiated might be expected to accumulate in constantly increasing frequencies among successive generations as long as I.U.C.D.'s continue occasionally to fail in function. These attributes might be genetically correlated with other attributes appearing at later ages, some perhaps beneficial to the individual, some perhaps harmful. Such a situation might have very important consequences in the remote future, and therefore become a proper concern of eugenics.
While it may be too soon now to plan a study of such a subject, or even to suggest how the attributes of I.U.C.D.gestated individuals might be investigated, it might not be amiss to indicate two points. Comprehensive medical and anthropological examinations could be given to samples of such individuals, employing as controls a sample of matched siblings who were gestated with no I.U.C.D. The first step, however, must be to ascertain the cases, and this can be done only at the time of delivery, through examination of the placental villi. The names and addresses of parents of prospective cases, if they appear cooperative, might be maintained and kept up to date during the several years which must elapse before the study can be commenced. Meanwhile, there would be time to plan the study.

112

Vol. 12, No. 2

Eugenics and the I.U.C.D.'s

113

Although no program of identification and registration would be worthwhile unless on a large scale, it does not seem likely that any governmental entity would undertake the task in the near future. Therefore, it is to be hoped that a private entity might become interested. Private entities sometimes have special advantages over governmental entities, to compensate for their more limited size.

The conception rate among uniparous women employing some type of I.U.C.D. may be estimated at about one to three per 100 woman-years during the first year at risk. This rate may well decline in the future. But if most uniparous women employ the I.U.C.D. and if appreciable numbers should have but a single I.U.C.D.-gestated child, the accumulative numbers of such offspring would be substantial in time.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

