Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Education for personal and family living
Frederick Osborn
To cite this article: Frederick Osborn (1955) Education for personal and family living, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:1, 46-50, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987220 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987220
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

Family Life Division

EDUCATION FORPERSONAL AND FAMILY LIVING*

FREDERICK OSBORN

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

U/NTIL RECENTLY, personal andfamily liv- children andmaking themselves andothers
ing was not considered the community's busi- generally miserable.

ness. A man could laydown his own rules, The fact is that the basic elements of taking into account the admonitions of the personal and family living are learned in

church. Hecould kiss his wife in themorn- the home and at a very early age. This is ing and be pleasant to the children at a generally recognized, and so we make an

leisurely breakfast, or he could leave the effort to educate parents on how to eduwhole house in an uproar as he ran for cate their children. But this effort comes

the 8:05 train; the choice was his and it pretty late. By the time they are parents

was no oneelse's business.

the personality difficulties which they ac-

Now rather suddenly, we've found out that personal and family behavior is the business of the whole community, because ultimately it reacts on the whole life of the community. Ill-adjusted personal and family lives provide the basis for the mistakes in social behavior which help fill our jails, crowd the divorce courts, and wreck the lives of so many of our children. So we have come to the very natural conclusion that weshould do something about

quired as children stand in their way. We have got to find a new approach.
There is a new approach to this problem of education forpersonal andfamily living. It is quite untried and may be disturbing to some people because of its novelty. I would like to explore it with you. First, let us look at some of theaccepted findings on which thenew approach is based.
Parents who are normal thoughtful people, responsible, sensitive in their relations

it, and we have lately been making quite to others, and who have conceived their

an effort in that direction. But, in general, the methods we have used in the past to control man's behavior in his social re-

children with a full sense of responsibility for their care, turn out better children on the whole than do parents who are ir-

lations don't seem to work as well in this responsible, lacking in kindness to others,

field of his personal life. We tried to regulate his personal life by prohibiting the sale of liquor. It didn't work. It is a

unstable in their affections and purposes. This is a matter of general observation. It is also the finding of the many studies

much more difficult job to make people which have been made in this field. If all

stop nagging their wives, neglecting their

children were brought up in homes where affection and kindness, steady and sensible

*Luncheon speech at the Annual Meeting of the American Eugenics Society in conjunction with a conference of the American Social Hygiene Association held at The Hotel New Yorker, New York City, on December 17, 1954.

authority and intelligent interest were the general rule, there would be little juvenile delinquency, and personal and family living would be immeasurably improved, im-

46

47

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

mediately and for each succeeding genera- perhaps other social and even psychological

tion. Obviously, there are many such homes factors can also influence the size of planned

today; perhaps a majority would fulfil most families. Perhaps the community itself can

of these requirements. But there are many create and develop conditions which will

homes which obviously do not measure up result in a larger proportion of the com-

to these standards. The community suffers, munity's children being born in the homes

now and in the next generation.

where they will get the most affectionate

Another set of facts which should in- and responsible care. Then we would have

fluence our thinking lies in the present an alternative to the almost impossible task

trend of births. In the old days children of teaching improper parents to do a better

came when people were married, regardless job for their children. If a larger propor-

of whether they were wanted or not. Size tion of children were born in homes which

of family was more a matter of luck or of fulfill generally accepted requirements for

biological possibilities than of anything a sound environment for child develop-

else. In England, women married at the ment, and a smaller proportion of children

middle of the nineteenth century bore, on were born in homes which do not fulfill

the average, six or more children. Today such requirements, we would be approach-

in the United States, in Sweden, and ing nearer the ideal of having all our

probably in most of the countries of western children well educated for personal and

Europe, a large proportion of, but certainly family living. The fact that people have

not all, married couples consciously limit now accepted the idea of family planning,

the size of their families. In the United even though they don't yet all practice it,

States, as in England, family limitation gives such a proposal a reality it did not

started in the upper economic classes and previously have.

worked down. This has made for so-called As yet we have no social experiments or

class differentials in births, the upper in- scientific studies which offer definite proof

come groups having fewer children than that such a plan would work, but it is a

the lower income groups. But recently a reasonable assumption that it would. It is

new and interesting trend seems to be de- a matter of common observation that peo-

veloping. When we study only those ple do not live entirely to themselves. They

couples whose childbearing is effiective- respond to the physical conditions of their

ly planned, we find that couples with environment. They are influenced, con-

the larger incomes have more children sciously or unconsciously, by what their

than do the couples with smaller in- friends think, by the attitudes of their

comes. This is a reversal of all previous doctor, their nurse, or of the social worker

trends. All recent studies, when limited to who pays them visits. These influences are

couples who plan their families effectively, indirect; people will still be making up

indicate such a trend; none that I know of their own minds as to how many children

show any different result. Unfortunately, they are going to have. But perhaps we

few of these studies relate size of family to could help them make up their minds by

the quality of the parents but only to their introducing social and psychological pres-

incomes, though some recent studies of sures of a sort to get more children born

college graduates indicate that the men in the home environments best suited to

more highly regarded by their classmates child development.

as good citizens have more children than Most community facilities, by their

their less highly regarded classmates.

absence or by their availability, come under

These indications have exciting implica- the head of social pressures. The availa-

tions. If, under effective family planning, bility of good schools is one of the more

income status reverses the old differentials, important factors entering into decisions as

48 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

to size of family. Housing facilities ap- they already have is straining their resources

propriate to a large family at not too high to the limit. The minister or priest, more

a cost may also be important. Nearby and perhaps than any other person, should be

attractive playground facilities, good and concerned that children should only be con-

not too expensive medical care, day ceived with a full acceptance of the re-

nurseries, the availability of baby sitters-- sponsibilities of parenthood and should en-

all the facilities which relieve the young courage large families in homes which

mother of the monotony and extreme follow the teachings of good personal and

weight of caring for several children at once family living.

must be influences of importance in de- Finally, the attitude of the community as

cisions as to whether to have another child. a whole will be perhaps the most important

These and many other things which will factor of all. There have been communities,

suggest themselves are already being done and there may still be some today, where

for the purpose of improving the health couples who had more than two children

and well-being both of children and of their were laughed at and made the objects

hard-pressed parents. They will get even of sympathy for their carelessness or in-

greater support when we also think of them competence. There are other communities

as means to encourage responsible parents where, especially since the war, it is the

to have larger families.

fashion to have families of three or four.

It is possible that, when the community It would be hard to believe that these

itself gives more thought to its children and community attitudes do not exercise a very

the encouragement of their parents, the less real influence on people's decisions to size

responsible parents will think more about of family.

their children and about restricting their The consideration of community at-

number. The less responsible parents may titudes emphasizes what is perhaps the

also be affected by other measures. They major difficulty in developing a practical

can be made to contribute more to their program for changing the proportion of

children's support in case of divorce. They children born in different kinds of families.

can be held to stricter accounting for We are not trying to increase the aggregate

their children's attendance and behavior at school, for their proper nutrition, for their medical care. It does not seem reasonable that irresponsible parents should have nothing to pay at free medical clinics while careful parents have to provide their own medical services.
Psychological measures may be even more important. Decisions as to whether to have another child are inevitably influenced by what the neighbors think, and by the attitude, felt if not actually expressed, of the advisors with whom the parents come in contact in the ordinary course of their lives. Their doctor may warn them of dangers of having another child, or, on the other hand, he may admire their large family, their health, their good bringing up. The nurse can encourage them in similar ways, or she can point out that the number of children

number of children born, nor are we trying to have fewer children born. We are attempting the much more difficult job of creating conditions such that children will be born in larger proportion in homes which will give them the most affectionate care. It is not enough for a community to provide the same facilities for all its children. It must seek to provide conditions which will make a special appeal to the most responsible parents. This is difficult but perhaps not so difficult as it might seem at first glance. We are not considering any form of coercion. Nor do we need to get any exact results. Nature does not work that way, nor need we try to. It will be enough if on the whole we reinforce and give direction to the trend which is already in a small way beginning to show itself. Every advance in the proportion of children

49

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

born into the homes where they will best facilities which make for the better develop-

develop will be a gain, and we need not ment of its children and for easing the

worry too much about the exceptions. But strain on young parents should be available

even taking all these things into account, to everyone, while the pattern of the ration-

it will not be easy to develop a public at- al planning of family size is earnestly en-

titude which will accept variations in size couraged. To some people the rational

of family. People like simple ideas. They planning of births may mean birth-control

enlist in movements for everyone to have clinics. But to many others it will mean

fewer children. Or, as in France they join simply a greater sense of responsibility

"La Ligue de Families Nombreuses." It toward getting and rearing children. We

would be harder to get people interested in should remember that when this responsi-

a more complicated idea, making size of bility is well recognized the means for

family appropriate to the child environ- planning or limiting size of family may be

ment offered by each particular home. found in many different forms. In Ireland

The idea that some couples should have for instance, where ever since the great greater freedom to have large families and famine the necessity for limiting the size of

other couples greater freedom to have small family has been universally recognized, the

families can be misunderstood to imply the means adopted has been that of late mar-

kind of personal judgment people do not riage. In England, when the birth rate

like to make. But we are proposing only dropped suddenly in the latter part of the

that every couple should pass their own 19th century after the Bradley-Besant trials,

considered judgment on what they them- it was not because new means of contracep-

selves want, in the light of their own values. tion were suddenly understood and used

We are proposing that every married couple but because many people for the first time

should have the size family they would realized that it was proper and right to

jvant to have if they had a full understand- limit the size of their families to those

ing of their responsibility to their children, children they could care for in decency.

of the sacrifices which will be expected of Every time there has been a rapid fall in

them, of the kind of patient and thoughtful birth rates, whether in Japan, or in Russia,

bringing up they will have to give their children if they are going to get happiness out of them. We are proposing that the community should make every effort to give all married couples an early understanding of the values and responsibilities which accompany parenthood.

in Catholic countries or Protestant, it has seemed to be caused primarily by the adoption of the culture pattern of family limitation, the particular means used to restrict the number of children born being secondary. When people find themselves free and responsible in regard to the number of

We are proposing that the atmosphere their children, they seem to seek a reasonaand environment of our communities be ble solution, whether by the means of
such that children would be conceived only continence, late marriage, contraception or

by couples willing and able to undertake other means. This needs to be pointed out

these responsibilities; that size of family because it should be perfectly clear that the

should be determined by the parents after proposal for a better distribution of births

fully weighing their desire for children, and does not involve approving or disapproving

the sacrifices which they will have to make any particular means of fitting size of family

in bringing them up, against other things to the home environment. There are moral

they want but will have to give up if they grounds for approving or disapproving one

have children or many children.

or another of the means. But the purpose,

We are proposing that all our com- the aim, a better distribution of births, has

munities should be so developed that the almost universal moral support, from that

50 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

of the Pope in some of his most recent anxious to do the right thing by its chil-

pronouncements, to that of the Protestant dren, with respect to both the atmosphere

clergy and of contemporary moralists. Only and the facilities of the community. But if

a few isolated sects still believe that men the community understands the larger re-

should be fruitful and multiply regardless sults, the larger meaning, of its efforts, they

of the consequences to themselves or to the will be better directed and more effective.

community. Of course, there is always the possibility

Summary

that with advance in medical science means Education for personal and family living

will be found for extending the periods of can be most advanced by working on it at

women's infertility or of producing an the early ages. There is little likelihood

easily reversible form of sterility in either that we can give young children such an

man or woman. This would make our education unless it is done in their own

proposal even easier to carry out, though it homes by their own parents. The very best

might require a special effort on the part way to give it to them is to have them born

of the community to encourage the birth in the homes where they will get it. It is

of enough children to provide for replace- the proper business of the whole com-

ment. But such a discovery may be some munity to see to it that the community

time off. We can cross that bridge when environment tends to get them born in

we come to it.

just such homes. We have already noted

The first and perhaps the most difficult that there are beginning indications

step in getting this proposal under way is of an improved distribution of births

to get the idea understood for what it really among couples all of whom practice family

is: the attempt to develop a community limitation effectively. Surely civilized man

environment in which, by an unconscious should have the wit to take advantage of

and wholly voluntary process, a larger pro- this trend and develop it in an even more

portion of children will tend to be born favorable direction.

in the homes most appropriate to child We do not know yet whether or how far

development. Along with this understand- such a development can take us toward

ing must go a recognition that there is no raising the genetic qualities of man from

standard size of family, no "ideal" size, ex- one generation to another. Scientific re-

cept in relation to a particular couple. search on this problem is urgently needed.

How many children a couple should have It would be hard to believe that the changes

is a matter of their own interests and in birth distributions here proposed would

preferences, just as is their choice of pro- tend to the deterioration of the race. In

fession. The couple with a large family any event, the improvement in the social

deserves no more approval or disapproval inheritance which would certainly result

from the community than does the couple justifies a great effort to bring about such a

with a small family, so long as the decision change.

as to size has been made with a sense of The rewards can be enormous. We are

responsibility. Once this apparently hard- entering the age of the rational control of

to-understand point of view is accepted, the parenthood. Like all great advances it has

practical applications become clearer and its dangers as well as its opportunities. If

easier. Actually, there should be little we can avoid its dangers and take ad-

difficulty in getting acceptance for most of vantage of its opportunities, our civilization

the things which would be required of the can be rapidly advanced. No other purpose

community. They are all things which are offers a greater challenge to our com-

already on the community conscience for munities or makes a greater call on our

quite other reasons. Every community is obligation to future generations.

