Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Kuru: An appraisal of five years of investigation
D. Carleton Gajdusek
To cite this article: D. Carleton Gajdusek (1962) Kuru: An appraisal of five years of investigation, Eugenics Quarterly, 9:1, 69-74, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1962.9987505 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1962.9987505
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 7 View related articles Citing articles: 8 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

KURU: AN APPRAISAL OF FIVE YEARS OF INVESTIGATION*
D. CARLETON GAJDUSEK
National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Blindness National Institutes of Health Bethesda, Maryland

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

K..URU PRESENTS a situation unique in
medicine of a place-limited, apparently genetically-determined disease in a human population isolate which has attained such proportions that it more than decimates the original population each decade. It is a rapidly progressive, acute, degenerative disorder of the central nervous system, new to Western medicine, causing death to most of its victims in less than a year. It presents an unprecedented situation of an entire population (a sub-culture of Melanesians) afflicted by a lethal disease reaching hyperendemic proportions, predisposition to which may be determined by a rather simple genetic mechanism. Thus, all family studies, as well as human ecological investigations, continue to support the hypothesis that predisposition to kuru is determined by a single dominant gene with incomplete expressivity. This gene produces fatal disease in homozygotes of both sexes in childhood, and in heterozygous female carriers in adult life, but is not usually penetrant in heterozygous male carriers. No outsiders have yet developed kuru after residence in the region, nor have cases occurred from contact with kuru patients and kuru-region natives outside the kuru-area.
* Presented at the Tenth Pacific Science Congress of the Pacific Science Association, Honolulu, August 21 to September 6, 1961.

Carriers of the kuru gene must possess a distinct genetic advantage in the region, for unless such carriers were more fit than non-carriers, loss of the gene through death of non-reproductive homozygotes would have prevented the attainment of its present high frequency in the society.
Kuru has now been under medical surveillance for a period of five years, and over one thousand patients have been studied from the time of onset of the disease to their death. Although its pathogensis and etiology remain a mystery, a vast amount of information has been accumulated about its epidemiology, clinical course, probable genetic predisposition, neuropathology and pathophysiology. The unusual sex preference of the disease suggests some underlying association between the central nervous system pathology and the endocrine system. The only alternative would be association with some direct chromosomal, non-endocrine, expression of sex, the trait, however, is not classically sexlinked. Ethnoenvironmental, clinical and laboratory investigations embracing the possibility of infectious, toxic, deficiency or hypersensitivity factors operating alone, or with genetic dependence, have not yet revealed any possible etiological mechanisms for kuru. Cytogenetic investigations of the chromosomes of kuru patients have not yet revealed a chromo-

69

70 Gajdusek
ba (a congenital tremor in New Guinea Highland natives), a rare unusual tremor syndrome akin to kuru in the Mendi and Wabag regions of Australian New Guinea, and our current investigations of congenital central nervous system defects associated with hyperendemic goiter in the Mulia valley of the Upper Ruffaer River drainage-of Netherlands New Guinea, are examples of investigations in neurology and human genetics which profit greatly from the unusual situation of the isolated populations of Melanesia.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

Figure 1. The linguistic groups of the kuru region and surrounding areas.
somal abnormality but we are seeking better preparations for more critical study. The principal investigative approach is the biochemical study of intermediate metabolism of kuru patients and normal natives of the kuru region, some destined to die of kuru. Such studies should advance our understanding of kuru etiology and pathogenesis and show whether or not it is a solely geneticallymediated disease. Kuru presents a remarkable opportunity for studies both of human genetics and of progressive heredofamilial degenerative disorders of the central nervous system, a field in which our understanding has made slow progress until recently.
In addition to kuru studies, the investigations of Dr. Leonard Kurland and his colleagues on amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in the Chamorro population of Micronesia, the progressive Parkinsonism dementia syndrome also seen in this population, our own studies of kogaisantam-

THE STILL UNDISCARDABLE POSSIBILITY
OF INFECTIOUS ETIOLOGY
In spite of all the genetic evidence, both the pathological picture and the epidemiological peculiarities of the disease persistently suggest that some yetoverlooked, chronic, slowly progressive, microbial infection may be involved in kuru pathogenesis. Similar suspicion prevails in our current etiological thinking about a number of less exotic and less rare chronic, progressive, degenerative diseases of the central nervous system of man. The possibility exists that there may be infections analogous to the slow infections of the nervous system of animals which were intensively studied by Björn Sigurdsson, the Icelandic investigator who formulated the concept of "slow virus infections," probably an example of a hypersensitivity phenomenon associated with a disturbance in the immune mechanism. Such diseases include multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Schilder's disease, leucoencephalitis, Koshevnikoff's epilepsy syndrome in the Soviet Union, the Jacob-Creutzfeld syndromes, acute and chronic cerebellitis, and even many forms of Parkinsonism.

Kuru: An Appraisal

71

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

Scrapie in sheep in England, Scotland, and America, and visna in sheep in Iceland are thetwomost dramatic and wellknown such infections. However, rida, an Icelandic form of scrapie; maedi, a lung disease of sheep in Iceland; and infectious adenomatosis of sheep's lungs, are additional examples of transmissible slow infections. In human virology we have not established a counterpart for these phenomena, unless it be theslowly progressive infection of lymphogranuloma venereum or the common wart.
Latency in virus infections is a wellknown phenomena from the temperate bacterophages existing as subdued and integrated provirus in the infected bacterial cells through herpes simplex virus in themucosae in man. The slow infections are different in character from other viral diseases in that the viral agent continually proliferates slowly, causing a progressive pathological lesion, either without eliciting an antibody response, or in spite of such a response. It is, thus, remarkable that Hadlow noted an extreme similarity between the epidemiology, the clinical, and the histopathological picture of kuru in men and scrapie in sheep (or in its transmitted form to goats). Since this at first seemingly highly unlikely analogy wasdrawn, the clinical, pathological, and epidemiological similarities have become ever more apparent. It isnow established that scrapie behaves asa genetic trait in sheep in the British Isles. Likewise, it is now established that a very unusual filterable, transmissible, remarkably heat-stable agent, which must beaccepted as a virus, is capable of producing thedisease when inoculated either into thecentral nervous system or, peripherally, into sheep or goats. Marked differences in genetic susceptibility of different breeds of sheep to

LHGUSTIC BOUNMRES-EASTERN HKSHLANOS DISTRICT TERRITORY OF NEW 6UWEA
Figure 2. Linguistic boundaries of the Eastern Highlands District, Territory o£New Guinea.
transmissible scrapie have been clearly demonstrated with susceptibility varying from 0 to over 80%; the goat is almost 100% susceptible. Thus, we have the strange phenomenon of a transmissible agent clearly fitting the definition of a virus, producing a disease which in nature behaves as a recessive genetic trait. In recent months the work of Gordon, Pattison and Chandler with scrapie has resulted in theestablishment of whatappears to be thesame infection in laboratory mice, with a much shorter incubation period than theone to five yearsencountered in sheep, or even the seven to twelve months in goats. Thus a laboratory model for study is now available. Likewise, in visna theviral andetiological agent hasnow been isolated and cultivated by Thormar in tissue culture of ovine choroid plexus cells or ovine and bovine kidney cells in which it behaves with a rapid, cytopathological effect.
In the study of bacterial viruses asituation somewhat analogous to that in scrapie is not unusual. Thus, in addition to the virulent viruses which, when entering a cell, pass to a vegetative stage in which replication of virus-genetic material and synthesis of viral-building

72 Gajdusek

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

Figure 3. Map of kuru region showing all census units. The cultural and linguistic group of each census unit is indicated in parenthesis: FN, Fore North; FS, Fore South; KE, Keiagana; KN, Kanite; KM, Kamano; A., Auyana; U., Usurufa; Y., Yate; YA, Yagaria. Italicized print indicates the native areas of major subdivisions of each linguistic group. Before civilized contact these were areas of transient political alliance, although warfare between member units was common. For the double census units of Erhiaiheto and Kedegera-Zakagi each component village is indicated on the map. In the cases of Kauna in the Yate and Tatura-Henegaru in the Keiagana three population centers are indicated for each.

Figure 4. Map showing regional prevalence of kuru. Kuru-affected census units are indicated by black dots, as they are in Figure 3, but they are not labeled. The prevalence of kuru is listed under the uative area designation in the Fore, Gimi, Keiagana, Kanite and Yate groups. In the more peripheral Auyana, Kamano, Usurufa, and Yagaria linguistic groups, prevalence has been calculated for all communities which are kuruaffected and is listed under the group name. Prevalence is recorded as the number of cases per annum per 1,000 population.

blocks proceeds without any control at all, so-called temperate viruses are well known. Inside the cell the genetic material of these viruses can follow one of two distinct roads depending upon the conditions of infection. It may replicate itself and kill the host cell just as the vegetative state of a virulent virus, or, it may locate and enter a bacterial chromosome where it behaves like an integrated constituent of the host cell, thereafter being transmitted for generations to the progeny like a true bacterial gene. Occasionally, a daughter cell of the host

lyses to yield a new crop of virus particles, as if freshly attacked by virulent virus. Ultraviolet or X-ray irradiation and certain chemicals such as nitrogen mustard and organic peroxides may activate (or "induce") a provirus to leave the integrated for the vegetative state.
In view of these stimulating successes in veterinary virology, we can no longer ignore the possibility that kuru, or the other syndromes mentioned above, might not be analogous slow infections. In spite of the convincing genetic model which can be constructed, this possibility

Kuru: An Appraisal

73

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

· t Ftme» Mtiftt

I

IS 20

30 40

ACE IN YEARS

5 10 15 20 25 SO 40 AGE IN YEARS

60

Figure 5. Age and sex distribution of804 studied cases of kuru.

exists, and we have launched an intensive program aimed at exploring it.As with the cancer-producing viruses, the possibility of a similar agent involved in human disease must be considered. In kuru, as in a number of other chronic, progressive, degenerative diseases of the central nervous system, weareconducting long-term transmission experiments to higher primates, andsimultaneously pursuing attempts atisolation of a transmissible agent in tissue cultures, embryonated hens' eggs and small laboratory animals. Furthermore, we are studying the virus causing slow nervous system infections in animals as models in our laboratory.

BIBLIOGRAPHY ANONYMOUS. 1958. Kuru. Lancet, 1: 7011, 92-93.
BENNETT, J. H., F. A. RHODES, and H. N. ROB-

SON. 1959. A possible genetic basis for kuru. Am. J. Human Genet., 11: 2, 169-187.
BENNETT, J. H. and C. O. AURICHT. 1961. Haema-
tology--Haptoglobin and transferrin types in the kuru region of Australian New Guinea. Nature, 1 8 9 : 4758, 68-69.
BENNETT, J. H., F. A. RHODES, and H. N. ROB-
SON. 1958. Observations on kuru. 1. A possible genetic basis. Australasian Ann. Med. J., 7 : 4, 269-275.
BENNETT, J. H., A. J. GRAY and C. O. AURICHT.
1959. The genetical study of kuru. Med. J. Australia, 1 1 : 15, 505-508. BENNETT, J. H. 1960. Kuru and sporadic tremor syndromes in New Guinea. Editorial, Lancet, 1:7119, 339. BERNDT, R. M. 1958. A "devastating disease syndrome." Kuru sorcery in the Eastern Central Highlands of New Guinea. Sociologos, 8 : 1, 4-28.
CURTAIN, C. C. and D. C. GAJDUSEK. 1961. T h e
nature of the elevated serum globulins found in some cases of kuru. Nature, in press.
CURTAIN, C. C., D. C. GAJDUSEK and V. ZIGAS.
1961. Studies on kuru. II. Serum proteins in natives from the kuru region ofNew Guinea. With a note on theabsence of abnormal hemoglobin in the native populations. Am.J. Trop. Med. Hyg., 1 0 : 192-209. DOBZHANSKY, T. 1960. Eugenics in New Guinea. Science, 1 3 2 : 3419, 77.
FISCHER, A. and J. L. FISCHER. 1960. Aetiology of
kuru. Editorial, Lancet, 1: 7139, 1417. FORTUNE, R. F. 1960. Statistics of kuru. Med. J.
Australia, 1 :20, 764-765.
FOWLER, M. and E. ROBERTSON. 1959. Observa-
tions on kuru. III. Pathological features in five cases. Australasian Ann. Med., 8 : 1. 17-26. GAJDUSEK, D. C. 1958. Kuru: an acute degenerative neurological disorder in Melanesian natives. Trans. Am. Neurol. Assoc., 156-158.
GAJDUSEK, D. C. and V. ZIGAS. 1957. Degenera-
tive disease of thecentral nervous sytem in New Guinea. T h e endemic occurrence of "kuru" in the native population. New Eng. J. Med., 2 5 7 : 974-978.
GAJDUSEK, D. C. and ZIGAS, V. 1958. Untersuch-
ungen über die Pathogenese von Kuru: Eine klinische, pathologische und epidemiologische Untersuchung einer chronischen und unter den Eingeborenen der Eastern Highlands von Neu Guinea epidemische Ausmasse erreichenden Erkrankung des Zentralnervensystems. Klinische Wochenschrift, 3 6 : 10, 445-459.
GAJDUSEK, D. C. and V. ZIGAS. 1959. Kuru. Ab-
stract, J. Trop. Med. Hyg., 6 2 : 10, 250-253. GAJDUSEK, D. C. and V. ZIGAS. 1959. Kuru: Clin-
ical, pathological and epidemiological study of an acute progressive degenerative disease of the central nervous system among natives of the Eastern Highlands of New Guinea. Am. J. Med., 2 6 : 3, 442-469.
GAJDUSEK, D . C. and V. ZIGAS. 1961. Studies on
kuru. I. Introduction: Ecology: The ethnologic setting of kuru. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg., 1 0 : 1, 80-91.
GAJDUSEK, D. C., V. ZIGAS, and J. BAKER. 1961.

74 Gajdusek

Studies on kuru. III. Patterns of kuru incidence, demographic and geographic epidemiological analysis. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg., 10: 4,599-627.
GAJDUSEK, D. C. and L. H. REID. 1961. Studies
on kuru. IV. An intensive study of the kuru pattern in a representative Fore village.Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg., 10: 4,628-638. HADLOW, W. J. 1959. Scrapie and kuru. Lancet, 1 1 : 7097, 289-290.
KLATZO, I., D. C. GAJDUSEK and V. ZIGAS. 1959.
Pathology of kuru disease. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol., 1 8 :2, 335-336.
KLATZ, I., D. C. GAJDUSEK and V. ZIGAS. 1959.
Pathology of kuru. Lab. Invest., 8 : 4, 799-847.
KLATZO, I., D. C. GAJDUSEK and V. ZIGAS. 1959.
Evaluation of pathological findings in twelve cases of kuru. Report--Symposium on Actual Encephalitides, Antwerp, Belgium, June. Elsevier Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 1961.
REID, L. H. and D. C. GAJDUSEK. 1961. Studies
on Kuru. VII. Nutritional status of the Moke Fore. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg., in press.
SIMMONS, R. T. and D. C. GAJDUSEK. 1960. Blood
group and genetical studies on kuru-afflicted natives of the Eastern Highlands of New Guinea, and comparisons with unaffected neighboring tribes in Papua-New Guinea. Proceedings of the Eighth Congress ofthe International Society of Blood Transfusion. Tokyo, 255-259 (1962).

SIMMONS. R. T., J. J. GRAYDON, V. ZIGAS, L. L.
BAKER and D. C. GAJDUSEK. 1961. Studies
on kuru. V.A blood group genetical survey of the kuru region and other parts of PapuaNew Guinea. With a summary of recently published blood group data forNew Guinea populations. Am.J. Trop. Med. Hyg., 1 0 : 4, 639-664.
SIMMONS, R. T., J. J. GRAYDON, V. ZIGAS, L. L.
BAKER and D. C. GAJDUSEK. 1961. Studies
on kuru. VI. Blood groups in kuru. Am.J. Trop. Med. Hyg., 1 0 : 4,665-668.
SIMPSON. D. A., H. LANDER and H. N. ROBSON.
1959. Observations on kuru. II. Clinical features. Australasian Ann. Med., 8 : 1, 8-15.
WILSON, K., ZIGAS, V. and D. C. GAJDUSEK. 1960.
New tremor syndromes occurring sporadically in natives of theWabag-Laiagam Kundep region of the Western Highlands of Australian NewGuinea. Lancet, 10: 31,699-702.
ZIGAS, V. and D. C. GAJDUSEK. 1957. Kuru:
Clinical study of a new syndrome resembling paralysis agitans in natives of the Eastern Highlands of Australian New Guinea. Med. J. Australia, 2 :21, 745-754.
ZIGAS, V. and D. C. GAJDUSEK. 1959. Kuru: Clinical, pathological andepidemiological study of a recently discovered acute progressive degenerative disease of the central nervous system reaching "epidemic" proportions among natives of the Eastern Highlands of New Guinea. Papua and New Guinea Med. J., 3 : 1, 1-24.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

