Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Inbreeding effects on man
William J. Schull
To cite this article: William J. Schull (1959) Inbreeding effects on man, Eugenics Quarterly, 6:2, 102-109, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1959.9987398 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1959.9987398
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

INBREEDING EFFECTS ON MAN
WILLIAM J. SCHULL
Department of Human Genetics University of Michigan Medical School

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

3ME FIFTY YEARS AGO, A . E. GaiTOd
(1902) observed: "The question of the liability of children of consanguineous marriages to exhibit certain abnormalities, or to develop certain diseases has been much discussed, but seldom in a strictly scientific spirit. Those who have written on the subject have too often aimed at demonstrating the deleterious results of such unions on the one hand, or their harmlessness on the other, questions which do not here concern us at all." As one peruses the literature on the subject of inbreeding effects on man in existence in Garrod's time, one can well appreciate the truth of these disparaging remarks; unfortunately, these comments would also apply to a portion of the literature which has accumulated since 1900. Happily, however, the last decade has seen this problem approached in a more critical and objective manner. It is the purpose of this presentation to consider briefly the present status of our knowledge in this area, and to indicate what would appear to be profitable avenues of investigation for the future.
The theoretical basis for anticipating an inbreeding effect appears to have been first advanced, at least in Mendelian terms, by Bateson (1902), and first applied to Garrod's findings (1902) with reference to the incidence of alkaptonuria. Numerous individuals (e.g., Robbins, 1918; Jennings, 1916; Wright,

1921; Fisher, 1949; and Malecot, 1948) have subsequently extended or given added mathematical sophistication to the argument. The most recent development in this area has been the demonstration by Morton, Crow, and Muller (1956) and Kimura (1958) of a means whereby one can estimate the burden of deleterious genes from data on inbred individuals. It is not our purpose to review these theoretical considerations nor to catalogue those rare recessive anomalies in man where it has been possible to demonstrate an increased frequency of consanguineous marriages among the parents of affected individuals as contrasted with the frequency of consanguineous marriages in the general population from which these individuals have been drawn. Rather we are concerned here with the modern studies bearing on the more subtle effects of inbreeding or, if you will, on those characteristics of the individual where the mode of inheritance is unknown or poorly understood.
One can hardly consider the problem of inbreeding effects on man without devoting some attention to the social or cultural factors which give rise to the opportunities for, and the attitudes toward, consanguineous marriages. Since all societies known to us are, to some degree, unique, we may assume that the factors which govern the frequency of

102

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

consanguineous marriages in different cultures and at different times will also be, to some degree, unique. That these factors in some instances may and in others definitely will influence the genetic variation in a population can hardly be gainsaid. Unfortunately, we know far too little about these factors to permit us to construct more realistic mathematical models of the inbreeding behavior of most human populations. Permit me to make a stab at illustrating how our lack of knowledge of what might be termed "patterns of mate selection" can lead us astray. In the estimation of "lethal equivalents" (a lethal equivalent is denned as a group of mutant genes of such number that they would cause on the average one death, e.g., one lethal mutant, or two mutants with 50 per cent probability of causing death, etc.), we generally are forced to treat the individuals through whom the relationship in a given consanguineous marriage stems as if these individuals were themselves not inbred. We know that this cannot always be true because the evidence points to the fact that in virtually every country inbreeding was, in the past, far more common than now. If, however, the amount of inbreeding which is undetected is uniformly distributed through the various types of matings, then no bias would be introduced into the estimate. If, however, the undetected inbreeding is a function, as it were, of the detected inbreeding, we could be led to rather erroneous notions regarding the number of lethal equivalents. To support this thesis, we have some evidence that the undetected inbreeding may not be uniformly distributed in Japan. That is to say, we have data which suggest that certain families now and in the past have practiced consanguineous marriages whereas

103
other families have a tradition of avoiding consanguineous marriages. We have no information on the frequency of these two patterns, but the effect of these contrasting patterns on the estimate of lethal equivalents can be easily demonstrated. I do not mean to imply, here, that undetected inbreeding is one of the major inaccuracies in our present estimate of lethal equivalents; this source of bias is advanced solely to illustrate one possible effect of our lack of knowledge of cultural factors on our estimates.
Let us turn now to matters more concrete, namely, the data which are available on pregnancies occurring to related parents. Since time will not permit a comprehensive review of all of the data collected in the various modern studies on inbreeding effects on man, we shall limit our attention largely to the data available on mortality between conception and the attainment of adulthood. The available data (Sutter and Tabah, 1953, 1955; Book, 1957; Schull, 1958; and Slatis, Reis, and Hoene, 1958) are summarized in Table 1. Before we consider these data, certain definitions and/ or explanations of the entries in this table seem in order. Firstly, the term "early fetal death" encompasses miscarriages and spontaneous abortions. A strict distinction between these two events (abortions occurring prior to the fourth month of gestation; miscarriages in the 4th, 5th, or 6th month) has not, in general, been maintained in the various studies. The rather low values observed in Hiroshima with reference to this variable are largely a result of two things. (1) These are terminations occurring prior to the 21st week of gestation, and hence not all miscarriages are included. (2) The data stem from an effort to contact every woman in Hiroshima who aborted a fetus and was seen

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015 AND
reproars)

104
CO
§
1«
a
I §S
W
a
o a
b O
z o
I
5 <
a;

Eugenics Quarterly

Ol IN
2 ' "55
2

0j tO ^ *O
8" -
ci

Nco-Hi

-OOCl00 <*

ss

^5 «fl C

".5

I!S 8-5! 3
· i l i S "g g S " ^ O

<S 60 x i ra.
·5i-g2- 3

by an obstetrician in the years 1948-1952. We know that we fell far short of this goal, and, moreover, that not every woman who aborts will be seen by a physcian. There is, however, no evidence that the frequency with which abortions were reported to us was a function of parental relationship. Secondly, the category "death between birth and adulthood" will cover somewhat different intervals of time. Thus, the data from Hiroshima actually span only the first eight years of life; in the data of Slatis et al. from the United States, only 10 per cent of the consanguineous children and 20 per cent of the control children had reached or passed their 20th birthday at the time of interview (c. 1957). In the Swedish data of Book, somewhat more than 60 per cent of the liveborn children of consanguineous parents would have attained their 20th birthday, but only about 20 per cent of the liveborn children of unrelated parents -would have reached this age at the time of examination (1947). In the French data of Sutter and Tabah, it is not possible to indicate the proportion of children who attained their 20th birthday. Some of the individuals recorded as dead in Loir-et-Cher and Morbihan are known to have died between the 20th and 30th years of life--one further difference among the observations on mortality presented in Table 1. Finally, the data from Finistere are classified only as consanguineous and unrelated, and not by degree of relationship. In the analysis of the latter data, we shall use the average coefficient of inbreeding among related marriages for marriages occurring in Finistere in the years 1919 through 1929 as a measure of the degree of homozygosity of the inbred children.
In Table 2 we give the intercepts and

105

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

TABLE 2

THE EFFECTS OF INBREEDING ON MORTALITY AT VARIOUS STAGES FROM CONCEPTION TO ADULTHOOD

Population

"Early Death" AB

Stillbirth AB

Later Death AB

Finistere Loir-et-Cher Morbihan
Hiroshima Nagasaki
Sweden* U.S.A.

.0499
.1392 .1289

0.066
--0.990 0.261

.0196 .0134 .0230 .0134 .0156
.0479 .0118

0.389 0.272 0.529 0.123 -0.026
-0.373 0.039

.1074 .0725 .1118 .0543
.2222 .0240

2.078 1.113 1.621 1.007
--1.542 0.917

·See text. A = intercept; B = regression coefficient.

regression coefficients obtained by fitting a weighted linear regression of the frequency of deaths on the coefficients of inbreeding. The values of A, the intercept, and B, the regression coefficient, given here will differ inappreciably from the intercepts and regression coefficients one would obtain by regressing the logarithm of the proportion of survivors on the coefficient of inbreeding. It need hardly be pointed out that because of the differences in the studies mentioned earlier, these values are of importance only as guides to our thinking, and cannot be viewed as strictly comparable.
As one scans Table 2, the similarity of the values of B within any given mortality category is, with the exception of the Swedish data, striking. In point of fact, the values are more similar, perhaps, than many of us would have anticipated in view of the marked differences in medical practice, nutrition, etc. in the areas for which the data are reported. An alternate, and perhaps more meaningful, way of looking at these values is through the ratio of B/A, that is of the ratio of the inbred to random load (see Crow, 1958). The same similarity persists with this approach. Before we launch into speculations on the significance of this similarity, let us examine the one exceptional body of data, namely, that from Sweden. These data

are perplexing, for if they are accepted at face value they suggest a definite advantage to marrying one's cousin. Personally, I'm inclined to doubt the representativeness of the control sample with respect to mortality in families where the parents are unrelated. This is certainly no reflection on the care with which the data have been collected but rather an assertion that sampling vagaries do occur. Since I have made this charge, I feel obliged to indicate at least one of the reasons why I believe this to be so, and why, consequently, one cannot place a great deal of confidence in the estimate of the lethal equivalents which one derives from these data. Among the 32 control marriages, 30 have produced one or more pregnancies. But among the 30 mothers, three would qualify as "habitual aborters" if we accept the common definition, namely, three or more consecutive abortions. Each of these three women has had four or more abortions, and more than 50 per cent of their pregnancies terminated in non-viable offspring. Moreover, these three women account for 48 per cent of the spontaneous abortions and 38 per cent of the stillbirths scored for the control. The bulk of the difference in "fetal deaths" and stillbirths between the consanguineous and control groups can be attributed to these three women. Along

106 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

these same general lines, it is interesting to note that a fourth of the 30 mothers has had 12 pregnancies of which 5 terminated in a stillborn infant and one in a spontaneous abortion. While this family is excluded, and perhaps rightly so, from Book's tabulations because of the occurrence of hemophilia and the possibility that this may be the cause of the numerous stillbirths (4 of which were male infants), we are concerned here with the likelihood of drawing a sample of 30 reproducing women of whom 4 would have the peculiar reproductive performances exhibited by the ones here enumerated. Pregnancy wastage of the order seen in these four women is not common in the United States, and I would imagine not common in Sweden. If, however, we accept this sample at face value, we would be led to conclude that something approximating 10 per cent of women lose 50 per cent or more of their recognizable pregnancies. This does not jibe with our knowledge; the simplest explanation is that the sample is not representative. Book's data point up the dangers in applying the method of Morton, Crow, and Muller (1956) to data on families of varying sizes where all of the pregnancies for each and every family are scored. Ideally, the method would be applied to data wherein each marriage was represented by one child randomly selected from the sibship. There is, after all, inherent in the regression technique the assumption that observations on the dependent variable are uncorrelated. When families are represented by more than one child and the dependent variable is under some genetic control, this assumption cannot be strictly satisfied because of the correlation in genotype of siblings. In large collections of data, the error introduced by failing

to satisfy this assumption will undoubtedly be trivial. In small samples, this may not be so.
As one continues to study the estimates of B, one cannot help but be impressed by how much larger the effects appear to be on the liveborn children as contrasted with those pregnancies which fail to give rise to a viable infant. It is true that if one introduced a time factor into these estimates then a relatively greater number of lethal equivalents would lead to death in the first nine months following conception than would appear to be true for any other ninemonth period in life. But if, now, one attempted to relate this notion of the time at which a lethal equivalent operates to the number of deaths (and here we would include spontaneous abortions as deaths) which occur in a given interval, one could be led to the conclusion that among fetal deaths far more are fortuitous than are genetically significant, in the sense of selecting for or against a particular gene or constellation of genes. At least two difficulties in the too ready acceptance of this conclusion present themselves. Firstly, this would assume that the average number of genes which one associates with a lethal equivalent was invariant. This may or may not be so; certainly at the moment we have no evidence one way or the other. Secondly, at a time in life when survival is as intimately associated with the mother as is true of a developing fetus, survival of the fetus may be as much, if not more, a function of maternal genotype than of the fetal genotype. One can readily enumerate reasons why the maternal phenotype could be of very great importance in fetal survival. Thus, it certainly does not require a stretch of one's imagination to believe that successful implantation of a zygote is markedly

107

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

influenced by the mother. Furthermore, we know that such critical items as electrolyte balance in the fetus is closely dependent upon maternal electrolyte balance, and that fetal exposure to rubella, toxoplasmosis, etc. are mediated through the mother. The data which we have presented thus far would not, however, be pertinent to this thesis since the importance of the maternal genotype would not necessarily be reflected in data on inbred children. It would, however, seem possible to test the dependence of fetal survival on maternal genotype. Data on the reproductive performance of women who were themselves inbred should provide evidence on the validity of this hypothesis. Such data could be obtained with not much more difficulty than one now obtains data on the outcome of pregnancies to related parents. We have, as a matter of fact, some data bearing on this from Japan. The numbers are small, however, and the only deaths which would be ascertained in the first nine months following conception are those which would occur after the 20th week of gestation, too late to include the bulk of fetal deaths. We present these data in Table 3. The

TABLE 3

THE EFFECT OF AN INBRED PARENT ON THE FREQUENCY OF STILLBIRTHS. A STILLBIRTH IS HERE DEFINED AS A PREGNANCY TERMINATING IN A NONVIABLE OFFSPRING AFTER THE 21ST WEEK OF
GESTATION

Births Stillbirths %

Spouses unrelated, wife

inbred

130

Spouses unrelated, hus-

band inbred

62

All unrelated spouses,

one or both parents

may be inbred

55,659

3 2.31 0
788 1.42

manner in which these data were collected has been described in detail elsewhere (Neel and Schull, 1956; Schull,

1958). Information as to relationship on the part of the spouses was obtained as a matter of routine on every registered pregnancy in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Information regarding whether the spouses were themselves inbred was obtained, however, only when a "long form" was used. This latter form was completed on every abnormal pregnancy and routinely on every tenth registration irrespective of whether the pregnancy terminated normally or abnormally. The observations presented in this table are drawn only from the data available on every tenth registration. Clearly one cannot build much of a case on these data; it is interesting, nonetheless, that limited as these data are they do not contradict the hypothesis that fetal survival is dependent to a large extent on maternal rather than fetal genotype.
In the remaining time, let us direct our attention toward the data available on the frequency of infertility in related marriages as contrasted with that in a suitable control. Only three studies provide evidence on this point. In Sweden, Book found one infertile marriage among the 34 first cousin marriages and two among the 32 control families. Clearly the numbers are too small to be particularly meaningful; however, Book did attempt to separate voluntary from involuntary sterility. In the infertile marriages which he reports, in two instances there was a clear organic basis for the infertility, namely, testicular atrophy, and, in the third, there was strong presumptive evidence of an or* ganic basis. In the United States, Slatis el al. report that in 17 of 109 consanguineous and 11 of 83 control couples the female was not known to have been pregnant. Somewhat more suggestive are their findings when attention is limited to those infertile marriages of

108 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

at least ten years' duration. In the latter instance, 15 of 107 consanguineous and 5 of 77 control couples were without known pregnancies. This difference is not significant, however. Sutter and Tabah (1952) find that in Morbihan 5.57 per cent of the control and 8.40 per cent of the consanguineous marriages are infertile, and in Loir-et-Cher 5.96 per cent of the control and 10.61 per cent of the consanguineous marriages are without known pregnancies. The latter difference is significant. Unfortunately, Sutter and Tabah, as Slatis and his coworkers, fail to distinguish between voluntary and involuntary sterility. I, personally, believe that it is quite possible that in Western countries a higher proportion of related couples deliberately refrain from childbearing than would be true for unrelated individuals.
While the evidence is far from conclusive that a higher proportion of consanguineous marriages are involuntarily infertile than is true of unrelated marriages, let us assume that this is so and explore several possible explanations. One possibility is that there is an increased incidence of sterility on the part of one or the other of the related spouses. At first glance, one is inclined to reject this notion on the ground that there is no reason to postulate a higher incidence of, say, anatomical impediments to conception. This is not necessarily so since as we have intimated, individuals who select relatives as their spouses may, on the average, be more inbred than individuals who marry individuals unrelated to themselves. There could, then, be a genetic basis for postulating an increase in parental sterility. Another possible explanation is an incompatibility between parents who are themselves physiologically normal. Specifically, I am thinking of the demonstra-

tion of Gershowitz et al. (1958) of the presence of hemagglutinins in cervical secretions. We would not, however, expect this to increase infertility on the part of related spouses since these individuals would be antigenically incompatible less frequently than unrelated individuals because of the correlation in genotypes of relatives. The same would appear to be true for histoincompatibility genes. A third possibility is that the apparent increase in infertility stems not from an inability to conceive but rather an inability to support the fetus. Otherwise stated, an increase in the probability of a pregnancy terminating very early, prior to the normal recognition of pregnancy, could account for the apparent infertility. This would be difficult to measure; however, Slatis et al. (1958) have suggested one possibility, namely, that the interval between cohabitation and the first recognizable pregnancy may be altered within those families where a recognizable pregnancy occurs. Unfortunately, Slatis' data do not clearly reveal that this occurs nor, for that matter, do the more extensive Japanese data (Schull, 1958) give strong support to this notion. Other more complex hypotheses can be constructed to account for the infertility, but it is questionable whether these would be supported by the limited data at hand. This is surely an area worth exploring, and perhaps from the increasing concern over pregnancy wastage in the United States may come clues to direct our activities.
To summarize these speculations, it seems fair to say that consanguinity studies have already contributed to our understanding of the burden of recessive deleterious genes in a population and may be expected to contribute more as the number of studies increases. One may also say that consanguinity studies

109

afford opportunities to explore the de-
pendence of fetal survival on maternal
genotype and a variety of other genetic
hypotheses.
REFERENCES
BATESON, W., and SAUNDERS, E. R., 1902. Report
to the Evolution Committee of the Royal Society, No. 1, p. 133,note. BÖÖK, J. A., 1957. Genetical investigations in a North Swedish population: The offspring of first-cousin marriages. Ann. Human Genet. 21:191-223. CROW, J. F., 1958. Some possibilities for measuring selection intensities in man. Human Biol. 30:1-13. FISHER, R. A., 1949. The Theory of Inbreeding. Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd. GARROD, A. E., 1902. The incidence of alkaptonuria: A study in chemical individuality. Lancet 1616-1620 (Dec. 13, 1902).
GERSHOWITZ, H., BEHRMAN, S. J., and NEEL, J. V.,
1958. Hemagglutinins in uterine secretions. Science 128:719-720. JENNINGS, H. S., 1916. Thenumerical results of diverse systems of breeding. Genetics 1:5389. KIMURA, M., 1958. Theoretical basis for the study of inbreeding in man. Jap. J. Human Genet. 3:51-70. MALECOT, G., 1948. Les Mathematiques de l'Hérédité. Paris: Masson et Cie.

MORTON, N. E., CROW, J. F., and MULLER, H. J.,
1956. An estimate of the mutational damage in man from data on consanguineous marriages. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 42:855-863.

NEEL, J. V., and SCHUTA, W. J., 1956. The Effect
of Exposure to the Atomic Bombs on Pregnancy Terminations in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Nat'l. Acad. Sci.-Nat'l. Res. Coun., Publ. 461, Washington, D. C. ROBBINS, R. B., 1918. Applications of mathematics to breeding problems. II-III Genetics 3:73-92, 375-389 (see also Genetics 2:489504 and Genetics 3:390-396). SCHULL, W. J., 1958. Empirical risks in consanguineous marriages: Sex ratio, malformation, and viability. Amer. J. Human Genet. 10:294-343.

SLATIS, H. M., REIS, R. H., and HOENE, R. E.,
1958. Consanguineous marriages in the Chicago region. Amer. J. Human Genet. 10:446-464.

SUTTER, J., and TABAH, J., 1952. Effets de la
consanguinité et de l'endogamie. Population 7:249-266.

, and

, 1953. Structure de lamor-

talité dans lesfamilies consanguines. Popu-

lation 8:511-526.

, and

, 1955. L'évolution des isolats

de deux départments français: Loir-et-Cher,

Finistère. Population 10:645-674.

WRIGHT, S., 1921. Systems of mating. I-V.

Genetics 6:111-123, 124-143, 144-161, 162-

166, 167-168.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

DISCUSSION

RICHARD LEVINS*

Dr. Schull has shown clearly that there is an inbreeding effect, a generally positive correlation between inbreeding and the frequency of defective development culminating in premature death at one or another stage of growth. The genetic mechanisms underlying this effect are not established, but certain general considerations can guide our speculation in this direction.
Death is not a simple phenotype. In other organisms, weknow of many lethal genotypes wpr ahritci.hcul,caaruseeendeesauth,bstii.ntutdi.oifnferceonntf,erwsaa;ysc.erItfa.ina
·Columbia University

probability of death, and a second dose of the same gene increases the probability by the same amount--that is, if there is no dominance--inbreeding will have no effect on the frequency of deaths. If the lethal is a single recessive, the frequency of death increases linearly with the coefficient of inbreeding. If lethality results from some incompatibility between fetus and mother, in-

b r e e d i n g w o u l d r e d u c e t h e frequency of

,d e a t h s F i n a l

there are kthal

t

i_- i_ j J u ·

·r

which genes,

sduecph,enads

th,oonsethsyentihn, etesir.zaecdt..io,bny

_Do,fob,mz,haanny-

sky (1959) by allowing recombination tooc-

