Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Discussions on the teaching of genetics to medical students
Sheldon J. Segal
To cite this article: Sheldon J. Segal (1961) Discussions on the teaching of genetics to medical students, Eugenics Quarterly, 8:4, 223-225, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1961.9987488 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1961.9987488
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3
View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

DISCUSSIONS ON THE TEACHING OF GENETICS TO MEDICAL STUDENTS
SHELDON J. SEGAL
The Population Council Rockefeller Institute

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

I N OCTOBER 1961 at the Rockefeller Institute a one-day conference was held on teaching genetics to medical students. The conference was organized by the medical genetics committee of the American Eugenics Society and sponsored by the Population Council. Invited participants represented 33 medical schools mainly in the northeast section of the United States. Those attending were appointed by the deans of the various schools and, in most cases, were the two individuals in each institution most directly concerned with the problem under discussion.
Opening the discussion, Dr. Helen Ranney, of the Albert Einstein Medical College, presented an analysis of responses to a questionnaire that had been completed by the participating institutions. The questionnaire pointed out the variety of approaches in handling the subject and the almost unanimous recognition that the need exists for improving the handling of the subject. Dr. Ranney indicated that several schools already include genetics in the curriculum and that many others are in the process of organizing courses.
The formal course given in the first year at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine was described by Dr. Salome Waelsch. She emphasized her belief that formal courses should be included with the pre-clinical curriculum. Dr. Waelsch told the conference that the idea in such a course is not to train geneticists but to

bring students to the point of understanding the problems of genetics. They should be introduced to the basic principles and taught how to handle the literature. In her terms they should be "sensitized" to genetics and introduced to the dynamic nature of the field. She indicated that in the practical problem of organizing course material, embryology and genetics form a very natural grouping and the combination provides many examples to illustrate the dynamic aspects of genetics. As long as pre-medical students are not expected to have a basic genetics course, she believes, it is preferable to teach mouse genetics rather than phage, maize, or drosophila genetics. In addition, Dr. Waelsch shows thefirst-semester students genetic cases. There is no laboratory but groups of ten are given projects to complete. The book used is Stern's "Principles of Human Genetics."
Dr. Werner Maas discussed the formal course that is given at New York University College of Medicine. It comes in the second semester of the first year which is after the students have begun biochemistry. Dr. Maas stressed that the primary purpose of the 13 two-hour lectures is to present basic principles of genetics. They are illustrated with experiments, some of which are done with microorganisms. For example, a pneumococcus transformation is used as an excellent means to illustrate that DNA is the genetic material; E. coli illustrates the linear nature and continuity of genetic material. Dr.

223

224 Brief Reports

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

Maas believes that the important concepts of mammalian genetics such as inborn errors of metabolism and geneenzyme relationships are best illustrated with the use of microorganisms. In brief, it may be said that the genetics of microorganisms plays an extremely important role in his method of teaching genetics to medical students.
Dr. William Young who teaches a formal course in the principles of genetics at Johns Hopkins Medical School described his approach. An objective in his course is to "sensitize" the students to the analytic method of genetics. He finds that 40% of his students have had a previous course of genetics in undergraduate school. Dr. Young uses a lectureseminar system which gives the students a total of 45 hours.
The course at Harvard Medical School was discussed by Dr. Claude Villee. In the past, they have had 12 hours to present Mendelian, population and biochemical genetics. Recently, Dr. Villee and Dr. Don Fawcett have started a 25hour integrated course in embryology and genetics. It is their experience that about one third of the students will have had a previous course in genetics. Like several other schools represented, Harvard uses Stern as the textbook. The students are not taught microbial genetics until the second year when the subject is handled in microbiology. It is Dr. Villee's strong conviction that a formal course in genetics should be given and that it should be in the first year.
In the discussion that followed several important points were raised. There seemed to be agreement that there is a problem in having genetics accorded proper recognition by the students. In other words, how can the subject achieve status so that the students will take the course seriously. There was general

agreement that although this is a problem it should not be necessary to create a new department. It was pointed out that if the various courses in the curriculum continue to teach their specialized aspects of genetics, the students will soon take the formal course seriously, particularly if it is helpful to them in performing better in other courses. On the prestige question, Dr. McKay of the University of Vermont suggested the interesting device of starting the medical school year with three to five days of concentrated genetics material which would be mainly an introduction to the terminology. Several of the participants suggested that if the school intends to teach a basic genetics course it should call upon an undergraduate school instructor for this purpose. It was pointed out, however, that this would act negatively in the prestige problem and that, in fact, the best way to add prestige to the course is to have the instructor lecture with a stethoscope hanging from his pocket. Dr. Johnson of Howard University raised the important issue of availability of instructors to handle a first-year formal course in genetics. He was advised that approaches could be made to departments of genetics in graduate schools and the few existing in medical schools. Dr. McCauley of the National Institutes of Health reported that this government organization now has 34 genetics training programs and that they will be producing trainees in a short time.
At the beginning of the afternoon session some comments were made on the series of genetics films distributed by the McGraw-Hill Company. There was some opinion that students do not react well to the films while others believed that the films could be helpful if used properly. There was no dissension to the principle that the films could not be used as

Brief Reports

225

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

a substitute for a live course but could be helpful for review. Most of the afternoon was devoted to the problem of linking the formal teaching of genetics with medical genetics of the clinical years. Dr. Victor McKusick of Johns Hopkins Medical School addressed himself to this point. He believes that pathology could contribute much more than it does now. Dr. McKusick pointed out that, "the mutant gene is one of the major etiologic factors in disease." At Hopkins, he gives two lectures in the pathology course. Although there are no lectures in the third and fourth years, clinics are held weekly in which the patients are presented by students. Much of the teaching of clinical genetics is done at the bedside which means that the problem of teaching may really begin with engaging the interest of the faculty. At Hopkins, they have given much status and prestige to genetics by bringing in a series of wellknown geneticists for popular lectures. This has been stimulating to the students and faculty alike. Both research conferences and journal club meetings are part of the genetics scene at Hopkins. Following Dr. McKusick's discussion, Dr. McKay emphasized that most schools are faced with an immediate problem in filling the gap between pre-clinical teaching of genetics and clinical application. He pointed out that one must not only make the students interested in the subject but must keep them interested throughout their medical curriculum and their medical careers. An important asset of having a first year course is that the students can be assured of someone ·with whom to consult on basic genetic matters when in the third and fourth years they are confronted with clinical genetic problems. At Vermont they maintain a lecture series for third year medical students and several of these are re-

served for topics in genetics. Dr. McKay raised the question of the role of hereditary counseling in the over-all approach to genetics teaching, and indicated that attempts are being made at his school to emphasize this aspect. It was generally agreed, however, that the extent to which genetic counseling is emphasized in various schools will depend on the interest and the approach of the various faculties.
In this connection, Dr. McKusick described the formal genetics course at Bar Harbor (described in Eugenics Quarterly, 8 [2]: 98-101,1961). The student body is drawn from faculties of medical schools. The objectives are to upgrade genetics, to stimulate research and to recruit talent. The faculty is composed of the Bar Harbor group of geneticists, some of the Hopkins faculty and six outside lecturers.
Finally, some important points were made which brought into perspective the role of genetics in the over-all medical curriculum. Dr. Nichols of Harvard reminded us that much is expected of students nowadays and each specialized interest can find enough justification to exaggerate the importance of its own topic. The medical educator must evaluate carefully just how far one can make inroads into the established curriculum as new disciplines emerge and reach a stage of development. Other participants raised the perennial problem that faces the teacher; does one direct his lectures to the potential researcher or to those who will devote their careers to clinical practice exclusively? Dean Hayman of Tufts advised wisely that students be taught and influenced without establishing rigid career patterns but so as to leave pluri-potentiality. The session closed with general agreement that a similar discussion might be useful at some time in the future.

