Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Materialist dialectics and biology today
I. Frolov
To cite this article: I. Frolov (1966) Materialist dialectics and biology today, Eugenics Quarterly, 13:3, 258-267, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1966.9987674 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1966.9987674
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:28

Brief Report
MATERIALIST DIALECTICS AND BIOLOGY TODAY

I. FROLOV
Submitted by Novosti Press Agency (APN)
Moscow, USSR

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

Biology is at present one of the most intensely developing fields of cognition. Various special aspects of biological problems attract the attention of chemists, physicists, mathematicians, and other natural scientists. The mysteries of animate nature fascinating every investigator and the extraordinary theoretical and practical prospects of the unravelling of these mysteries are not the only explanations. It is impossible to find clues to the enigma of life without integrating the efforts of many adjacent sciences; at the same time essential changes in the forms and methods of biological cognition itself are also needed.
On a broader plane, the advances of biology and the results of biological research have come to be of interest to sciences like cybernetics or bionics, having direct egresses into engineering. New approaches are in evidence in the application of these results in practical farming and medicine. This opens great prospects for the acceleration and intensification of the general process by which science is converted into a direct productive force of society.
The social significance of the cardinal solutions of basic biological problems is greatly enhanced as a result of their close connection with philosophical (gnosiological and methodological) problems which have not only special but also various socio-ideological aspects.

Therefore, the development and elucidation of the philosophical problems of biology today are vital not only for the progress of research but also for the correct orientation of public opinion, the establishment of a spiritual atmosphere which would be as favorable as possible for this progress.
Today biology has entered a period of major qualitative changes of its traditional forms. Biology is being equipped with new powerful means of experimental research, and the use of mathematical methods for describing and analyzing vital systems has been spreading. These processes lead to a deep differentiation, and simultaneously, integration of the subject matter and method of biological cognition. It would be safe to contend that, as a whole, these processes bear evidence of a new stage in the present-day revolution of natural science.
Biology has come to investigate microphenomena, biological systems and processes at the molecular level, just as physics earlier came to study, along with macroscopic bodies and processes, atomic-molecular and later intra-atomic phenomena, as a result of which a new type of physics began to develop at an explosive rate in close connection with its classical counterpart.
This is distinctly exemplified by that new trend in the investigation of vital systems known as molecular biology.

258

Vol. 13, No. 3

Brief Report

259

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

The origin and development of this field are known to have become possible owing to the synthesis of ideas and methods supplied by organic chemistry, biology, molecular physics, physical polymer chemistry, spectroscopy, X-ray analysis, cybernetics, cytology, genetics, microbiology, virusology, etc. This wide integration and purposeful concentration of many biological and nonbiological fields and their methods at one section of biological knowledge proved to be extremely effective. Several outstanding discoveries were made in molecular biology within a short time, above all in the investigation of the structure and functions of proteins and nucleic acids which belong to two major classes of polymer compounds in animate nature, the investigation of the mechanism of albumen synthesis, etc. This led to an extremely rapid advance of our knowledge of the basic processes of vital activity, and in particular the decoding of the physicochemical basics of heredity, which had a crucial effect on the development of genetics as well as other fields.
These new strides made by biology constitute a major advance on the previous stage of development. On the other hand, these are only bridgeheads partially seized and to be employed for a further offensive. Tremendous, almost fantastic prospects are open to biology. Characteristically, many scientists believe that at the new stage of the revolution in natural science we enter the "age of biology."
Biology is today at the stage of accumulating at an explosive rate new factual evidence, giving insight into the innermost recesses of life and shifting the emphasis on the investigation of the primary mechanisms and the most general--and in this sense most elementary --premises and components. Experimental investigation of the components

of the structure and functioning of animate systems, i.e., the empirical aspect of biological knowledge, is in the foreground now. This does not mean, of course, that theoretical generalizations are less important in biology now than they used to be. Suffice it to recall the importance of logical-mathematical methods in constructing the models of genetic systems and processes, for, example. However, even a superficial comparison of the results of experimental and theoretical investigations is by no means in favor of the latter. At first glance this may seem natural since the emergence of biology as a qualitatively new field is connected with an intense use of new experimental means (electron microscopy, X-ray analysis, differential centrifuging, etc.). However, this trend may impede the advance of biology to new goals. I refer to the dangerous trend of overplaying empirical research and underestimating the role of theory.
It is obvious that a higher stage of development in biology will involve a change of the present-day abnormal proportion between empirical and theoretical knowledge. It is important, therefore, even now to develop more intensely the problems of theoretical and mathematical biology and cultivate a "taste for theory" which has, unfortunately, been largely lost in recent years. As a result of this loss, some cardinal theoretical problems (in the theory of evolution, for example) in which the science of life was traditionally interested are not developed on the basis of latest results and methods of biology.
To be aware of general theoretical problems of science and to be able to think dialectically, to use the entire armamentarium of cognition, including methods of scientific analysis and synthesis, and to understand gnosiological

260

Brief Report

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

and methodological problems are especially important now that the character of research into animate systems is changing, becoming ever more complex and specialized. The dialectics of biological knowledge is coming to the fore. It is the direction of research as well as the forms and rates of obtaining ultimate results that largely depend on a thorough and adequate understanding of the dialectics of biological knowledge.
The essenceof life, its qualitative specifics and physical-chemical basics, is problem No. 1 in modern biology among other major philosophical problems, the solution of which essentially involves a dialectical approach. This is indeed the key problem integrating in the final analysis the results of research of the entire set of biological disciplines.
The philosophical analysis of this key problem of modern biology must not be a rehash of scientific research. This natural-philosophic approach is basically alien to the spirit of dialectical materialism and its relationship with natural science. However, this approach is still manifest in some philosophical works in which the "erudition" borrowed from natural science overwhelms or sometimes ousts completely gnosiological and methodological analysis.
It is this problem of the essence of life that shows an acute need for both positive investigation of its philosophical aspects and criticism of the metaphysical and idealistic speculations on difficulties involved in its solution. Here dialectical principles of thinking are especially vital. However, experience has shown that to proclaim them is one thing, and to apply them in specific research is something else again.
It is well known that some of our biologists and philosophers absolutized the qualitative specifics of organisms to such an extent that they opposed it to

material processes like physical-chemical processes. The qualitative specifics of organisms were thus converted into a certain incomprehensible "entity" inaccessible to experimental investigation. This interpretation of the qualitative specifics of vital systems, isolated from material processes, was sometimes declared "dialectical-materialistic," while the development of molecular biology and experimental research of the elementary structures and processes of vital activity by chemical and physical methods were condemned as "neomechanism." Without any argument or serious analysis it was taken for granted that in the latter case biology is simply reduced to physics and chemistry, as a result of which the specific essence of the organic is completely eliminated.
It is true that in precise investigation, vital systems (no matter at which level of structural organization) should not be reduced mechanically to elementary forms: molecular interactions. Though animate and inanimate nature is ultimately built of the same atoms and there are no special vitalist elementary interactions, animate nature is not a purely quantitative elaboration of the molecular organization and chemical processes of inanimate nature. Engels stated long ago that the "form of motion in an organic body differs from mechanical, physical, chemical motion which the former contains in a dialectically cancelled form . . . ." (K. Marx and F. Engels, Works, Vol. 20, p. 597, Russian ed.) Vital systems are organized in such a way that their properties cannot be explained if reduced to physical or chemical interactions. For example, even the basic functions of albumens and nucleic acids exist not as "pure chemism" but in their cellular organization, i.e., in specifically vital structural forms.
However, when we apply physical-

Vol. 13, No. 3

Brief Report

261

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

chemical experiment in biology, we do not simply investigate the "physics and chemistry of living matter," embracing all properties of vital systems. This is, in fact, a new kind of experiment which is part and parcel of biological research since it is in this way that many essential properties of vital systems' can be made accessible to cognition.
Physical-chemical experiment was first applied in modern biology not so long ago. It still is in its initial stage. However, new trends, approaches, and methods of research are already in evidence. In particular, the investigation of submicroscopic structures and processes in the living cell has made a substantial advance, owing above all to analytical experimentation in which whole entities are split up and the properties of isolated fragments are studied in vitro. This analytical approach in modern biology has been paralleled to an increasing extent by new methods of physicalchemical experimentation: integrated study of biological processes in vivo. This in vivo experimentation sprang up when the development of the technique and methods of electron microscopy had reached a certain stage, and it is closely connected with the progress of nuclear physics which provided the experimental biologist with isotope tracer technique and other methods. The same direction has been taken by the development of other methods of investigation in vivo (paramagnetic resonance, molecular spectroscopy, etc.) which, just as the application of tracer compounds, advance our knowledge of the innermost processes of the living, normally functioning organism.
Physical-chemical investigations have revealed new mechanisms of the functioning of organisms but at the same time they reemphasized the problem of treating them as whole systems of a

special kind. Without investigating this

aspect, no scientific dialectical-material-

ist explanation of the qualitative spe-

cifics of biological processes is possible.

However, the methods of this investiga-

tion, including the analysis of the pecu-

liarities of vital systems at different levels

of structural organization, have not yet

been developed adequately. Meanwhile

the structural-systematic approach has

been gaining ground in biology. This

method is not opposed to physical-

chemical methods and makes it possible

extensively to use mathematics and cy-

bernetics for'investigating the laws un-

derlying animate nature.

An important problem of biological

research today which also calls for a

dialetical-materialist solution is the in-

vestigation of the character of internal and external relationships of vital: sys-

tems, or, in other words, the specific

nature of determinism in biological

processes. Delving into the essence of

these processes (we mean not only their

investigation at the molecular, subcellular, and cellular levels, but also at1 the

levels of individual organisms, popula-

tions, and species),' science has come

across a special type of causal relations:

statistical regularity, and hence the need

for a new interpretation of the role of

accidentality.

]

In the framework of mechanical de-

terminism, accidentality was interpreted

as a phenomenon the causes of which

had not yet been cognized, i.e., subjec-

tively. It transpired that in the investi-

gation of vital systems science deals with

objectively accidental (random) processes

so that a system's subsequent state can-

not be derived completely and unambig-

uously from its previous state. However,

statistical processes are not based on

"pure," "absolute" accidentality consid-

ered in isolation from necessity. On the

contrary, accidentality figures as a form

262

Brief Report

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

manifesting and complementing necessity. Consequently, statistical research reveals objective laws, but they have a stochastic, probabilistic nature.
This interpretation of the interaction of vital systems and their relationships with environment is covered by the concept of organic determinism, taking into account the dialectics of accidentality and law-governed necessity. Organic determinism implies that an external agent is modified as it passes through the specific internal medium of a vital system which receives this agent, not passively, but through the processes of metabolism and responds to it in accordance with its hereditary nature. It is essential that this organic determinism of biological processes (inherent to both individual vital systems and populations within which they exist) is manifest as ambiguous (definite and indefinite) changes. Their result is complex and integral; it involves accidentality, indefinite variability, providing a basis for the statistical operation of natural selection.
This is observed in particular in genetic research (e.g., in the genetics of populations) which yields as a result, not unambiguous, "rigid," but probabilistic predictions. Having encountered this objective phenomenon (something similar happened before in the development of new physics), genetics began to make extensive use of the theory of probability, the methods of mathematical statistics, which enabled it to make essential advances. However, the trend soon displayed some untoward aspects in particular due to the inadequate development of the methods of such investigation and a failure to understand the specific organic determinism of biological processes and their dialectic nature.
This failure leads as a rule to relapses of mechanism and indeterminism. It

is this soil that nourishes idealistic and even fideistic speculations in biology today. Modern mechanism is manifest under different forms and originates as a result of the difficulties encountered in the investigation of various biological processes. Mechanism also shows in some unjustifiably inclusive interpretations of the results of the physicalchemical investigation of vital systems, in other words, the universalization of these results; as well as in the attempts at reducing biological processes to quantum mechanical processes; and finally in purely quantitative, additive approaches to organic entities at different levels of their structural organization.
As regards the specific nature of the organic determinism of vital systems in relation with environment, neomechanism is manifest in absolutizing both the indefiniteness and accidentality of genetic changes and universalizing their adjustive directivity, and hence denying their objective statistical nature.
In the latter case vital systems are regarded as passive "plastic material" shaped uniquely by guiding environmental factors. Though natural selection is in this case often accepted verbally, it is actually reduced to a "rudimentary appendage." These essentially mechanistic-Lamarckian concepts postulate methodologically that the hereditary variability of organisms is always strictly determined. Indeterminateness (which appears from the introduction of factors responsible for variability which are objectively accidental but which are determined directly and unambiguously by external environmental trends) is considered, in these concepts, as a certain anomaly, a temporary impediment to the conversion of biology into a precise science.
Mechanistic narrow-mindedness, nondialecticity, and the neglect of the quali-

Vol. 13, No. 3

Brief Report

263

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

tative specifics of life and organic determinism lead to general and special philosophical mistakes. This methodologically defective basis is known to support in biology today neovitalism, wholism, psycholamarckism, "organic indeterminism," neofinalism, and other idealistic concepts. These are penalties for mechanism and are actually a purely external antipode of mechanism since both "theories of life" have the same antidialectic nature: these are the two sides of the same medal.
Indeed, vitalism just bursts into that "breach" which mechanism creates because it reduces all processes of life to sum totals of physical-chemical quantummechanical processes and fails to detect the "residue," the qualitative specifics of life. On the other hand, vitalists believe this "residue" to be inaccessible for investigation with natural-scientific materialist methods which they identify with mechanistic approaches. Hence the spurious "need" of complementing the mechanistic "theory of life" with "immaterial forces." This "alliance" with mechanism is also in evidence in wholism, in which a purely additive approach to organically integral vital systems is "broadened" by introducing immaterial factors.
"Organic indeterminism," psycholamarckism, and neofinalism reverse the mechanistic interpretation of the internal and external interactions of vital systems and the failure to understand the dialectical connection between necessity and accidentality, manifest in the denial of statistical laws and hence natural selection, as well as in the view that the processes of vital systems (e.g.,' their hereditary changes) are definite and unambiguous.
The concept of "organic indeterminism" is based on the identification of determinism with cause-effect unique-

ness. Accordingly, the statistical character of processes is interpreted as a violation and transcendence of determinism in vital activity. It is assumed in particular that it is to this type of process that individual gene mutations belong.
However, "organic indeterminists" actually perpetrate an illegitimate operation, essentially similar to that once made by the "physical" Idealists. The latter are known to have identified the concept of matter with those notions of its structure which developed in classical physics and did not correspond to the data obtained by new physics. The "physical" Idealists contended, therefore, that "matter had disappeared." V. I. Lenin brilliantly demonstrated that this conclusion was unscientific and the logical operation which led to it, illegitimate. It is not matter which had disappeared, but only those limits within which it had been hitherto cognized, according to Lenin. Similarly, with respect to determinism in biology, it can be said that it is not determinism which has collapsed, but it has been found that its mechanical interpretation is too narrow because it fails to take into account the complex (and in particular statistical) nature of many micro and macro processes in vital systems. This nature can well be described, however, in the framework of the dialectic-materialist concept of organic determinism which is its highest form of development. ;
"Organic indeterminism" is intimately connected with psycholamarckism and neofinalism for which mechanism also paves the way in biology. Psycholamarckism puts finishing touches on the mechanolamarckist construction of unambiguous adjustive variations of the organism under the influence of external environmental factors by introducing a certain internal "driving factor" which is a "variety of the psychic." This follows

264

Brief Report

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

as a logical consequence of the denial of natural selection and the heterogeneity of that initial material of genetic variations that it deals with.
Something similar, though on another (also purely mechanistic) basis, is in evidence in neofinalism. Here the methodological shift towards idealism takes the form of complementing the "blind mechanism" of material causes by a certain primeval "purposefulness," "finality," allegedly inherent to vital systems. The point of departure for these teleological speculations are those biological concepts in which the indefiniteness and accidentality of genetic variations are absolutized. The statistical probability of events is interpreted here as indeterministic and based on "pure chance." Accordingly, it is assumed that the ambiguity of a statistical nexus rules out necessity, law, in probabilistic events.
It is just because the "absolute accidentality" of genetic variations makes impossible any adjustive effect, the neofinalist introduces a "teleological factor," regulating the reactions and behavior of organisms. Vital systems may derive benefit from accidental fluctuations by selecting them. However, to "channel accidents" it is necessary, in the opinion of neofinalists, to have consciousness at least at one point of the mechanical system (and this is what they consider the organism to be). Thus, mechanism is again transformed into obvious idealism.
The group of philosophical problems considered above dovetails with another complex of problems concerned directly with the method and logic of biological cognition today. Philosophical analysis of these problems is of special importance now since it is the development of traditional methods and the origin of new methods of research into vital systems that are directly connected with those changes which are at work in modern

biology and which make it what it is today and what it is likely to be tomorrow.
In this connection it is essential to analyze how the dialectical method functions in biology. Evidently, this problem is the initial point of departure, for the general orientation and approach to the development of the method of biological research depend on its interpretation.
Since the dialectical method is of scientific importance (which has been proved by specific results of research in different fields of science), it is evident that we can detect the mechanism of its functioning in the "body of science" itself and in particular in biology. Accordingly, one of the aims of the analysis of the method of biological research is the identification and development of philosophical problems inside science and not in the arbitrary construction of abstract truth which is supposed to be "applied" to science.
Philosophical analysis calls for determining the specific forms and methods of the functioning of the dialectical method in different fields of science as well as the investigation of the specific components constituting the constructive method of each specific field of research. It is necessary to study above all the actual use of the philosophical and gnosiological principles of research, the laws of materialist dialectics, and the entire wealth of its philosophical content, interpreted as an integrated general theory of development, logic, and cognition.
Obviously, these theoretical principles performing a definite "controlling" role ' in the process of cognition must be considered in close connection with the system of particular and special methods of biology which include various techniques of observation, description, and classification of vital objects; compara-

Vol. 13, No. 3

Brief Report

265

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

tive, historical, and experimental methods of research; as well as intensely developing logic-mathematical, physicalchemical, and cybernetic simulation of biological systems. In this case the dialectical interpretation of the interaction of different methods is also necessary.
The more specific the problems of biological research are, the more intrinsically differentiated biology becomes. As a result, certain aspects of an object are isolated as subject matter of each field of biology, and some methods predominate (which is gnosiologically justified and natural) in this field.
The correct dialectical interpretation of this process may essentially help to overcome the antiscientific trend to absolutize some methods of biology today, isolate them from other methods of biological research, and oppose them to theoretical logical analysis and synthesis of scientific evidence.
This correct dialectical interpretation is impossible, however, unless we take into account the processes opposite to differentiation and predomination of some methods, namely the processes of integration of biological knowledge and its consolidation as an integral though internally differentiated complex. Integration is a peculiar result of the development of biological knowledge in the process of the specialization of the problems solved, the differentiation and specialization of science as a whole and its different fields.
Quite recently, fields like morphology, biochemistry, and physiology acted in isolation as intracellular processes were studied. The situation changed essentially when science made (owing to the development of electron microscopy) a powerful breakthrough into the molecular organization of vital systems. Physiology now could express biochemically many vital processes; morphology dove-

tailed with biophysics and biochemistry; the latter proved to be intimately linked with the structural organization of cellular microprocesses, etc. As a result, the living cell is being studied not "in parallel" by different disciplines, but in an integrated way, from different angles, taking into account their interrelation and interdependence as a single organic whole.
Characteristically, these processes of integration which have been more and more pronounced as biology develops occur mainly on the borderline between adjacent fields. These processes are also based on some transformations in the methods of biological research. A major characteristic of them is the exhange of methods of research--cross-pollination between adjacent biological and other fields (physics, chemistry, mathematics, etc.). These processes set in comparatively long ago. However, only recently have they been developing in biology so intensely as to reconstruct the entire edifice of science, breaking down the traditional barriers between special fields and methods dominating in each of them.
Mutual penetration and mutual complementalness of different methods are not in evidence only along the lines dividing biological fields and methods of research dominating in each of them. Integrated approaches to the methods of observation are in evidence within special fields themselves. These approaches are not at present merely correct methodological requirements. Biologists realize in practical activity that when they absolutize or universalize some methods and techniques, the results of research are essentially impoverished, the possibilities of investigation are narrowed in advance, and its generalizations and conclusions become of necessity onesided.
For example, some time ago it was

266

Brief Report

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

assumed that physiological methods of research aimed at determining the relations between hereditary characters and genes take priority in the investigation of heredity. However, this approach left unexplored the in-depth material basics and mechanisms of the transmission of hereditary characters and their variation. The development of physical-chemical experiment in genetics and the application of various methods of simulation and mathematical methods brought down the narrow framework which was originally set for genetic research. At the same time it was found necessary not only to take into account the internal interactions of factors in evidence in the vital activity of the present-day vital systems, but also to consider all this in development and refer to the history of each species under study, i.e., to make an integrated use of experimental, historical, and other methods.
The fact is that none of the methods available to biology today can, in isolation from other methods, yield comprehensive results as the many-sided processes of vital systems are investigated. Each method concentrates on certain aspects and reveals some regularities. However, only the totality of methods may reproduce scientifically the whole object of biological research. It is this consideration that makes it imperative to take into account all methods of biological research as a definite integrated dialectical system.
This group of methodological problems of biology today includes the analysis of the heuristical possibilities of the
logical forms of investigation of vital systems. These imply not only the processes of induction and deduction analysis and synthesis with which particular and special methods of biology are closely connected and different "inclusions" of which determine to a certain

extent the cognitive effectiveness and the sphere of application of each method. The investigation of these and other logical processes as special (and in a sense independent) methods of biological research is also important. A case in point is the logical-mathematical simulation of vital systems as an important type of simulation in general.
New logical problems also originate in the investigation of the role of hypotheses and axiomatics in biological research. Today biological research makes use of hypotheses of widely different types: descriptive, explanatory, those developed on the basis of comparative and comparative-historical inquiry into the data of observation, those developed in the course of experimental research, and those obtained by a combined method (comparison, genetic analysis, and experiment), and finally mathematical and simulation hypotheses. The trend of development of biology today is such that mathematical methods of description, systematization, and investigation have been used on an expanding scale. Hence the increasing importance of mathematical hypotheses in the investigation of vital systems.
The method of simulation of biological systems and processes constitutes a special group of hypotheses. Simulation hypotheses developed, for example, in the application of cybernetics in biology are visualizable and lend themselves to experimental investigation and extensive mathematical treatment. Simulation hypotheses developed on the basis of the theory of information are not visualizable, but are accessible for experimental verification and make it possible to investigate the processes and functioning mechanisms of integrated systems.
The aim of philosophical analysis is to differentiate and specify biological

Vol. 13, No. 3

Brief Report

267

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

hypotheses, investigate the forms of their construction, and demonstrate their possibilities and limitations. This analysis will be of essential help to the progress of biological cognition provided it is based on the concrete data of investigation of the structures and processes of vital systems.
The exceptional importance of investigation of logical problems in biology today will certainly increase with the development of its theoretical fundamentals (and the mathematization of some fields). This enhances the role of the hypothetico-deductive and deductive (in particular axiomatic) methods of constructing biological theory and expanding the possibilities of acquiring new knowledge by logical methods and proceeding from axioms.
In what concrete forms and to what extent is the axiomatization of biological knowledge possible? How must it interact with empirical and other forms of theoretical investigation? These methodological questions must be solved if the investigation of vital systems is to develop purposefully and effectively.
The importance of development of

philosophical problems of biology in terms of materialist dialectics becomes ever more evident in scientific knowledge today. The aim is not only the philosophical generalization of new processes at work in biology today, which would be conducive to the further natural-scientific justification and development of dialectical materialism. It should also be borne in mind that the possibilities of logical anticipation of new knowledge increase as the experimental and especially theoretical funda-. mentals develop. The role of heuristically constructive ideas (in natural science and philosophy), derived on the basis of the available theoretical concepts, has been steadily increasing.
Fruitful contacts and joint efforts of large teams of philosophers and biologists are necessary for developing the philosophical problems of biology today and overcoming drawbacks. These problems must be solved by creative methods, in the atmosphere of free comparison of ideas and comradely discussions aimed at the advance of our biology and philosophy.

