Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN:
Traits, Factors, and Genes
William R. Thompson
To cite this article: William R. Thompson (1957) Traits, Factors, and Genes, Eugenics Quarterly, 00:00, 00-00

TRAITS, FACTORS, AND GENES

WILLIAM R. THOMPSON
Wesleyan University

I N THIS PAPER I WOULD LIKE t o disCUSS i n
some detail a problem basic to progress both in the field of psychology and in the field of behavior genetics. This is the question of finding rational units of behavior or unit traits that can be measured independently, and whose genetic causation can readily be traced. Several ways of approaching the problem will be examined, especially the method of factor analysis, and suggestions will be made regarding the possible relationships between traits, factors, and genes.

this should not be enough for those interested in a genuinely scientific approach to the definition and measurement of behavior. To deal effectively with psychological traits, we must be able not only to identify their essential dimensions and construct tests that measure these exclusively but also to relate these dimensions to suitable independent criteria. Only in this way will there be any possibility of developing a coherent description of behavior from which we may proceed to the study of its inheritance.

THE COMPLEXITY OF TRAITS

THE PROBLEM OF TRAIT DIMENSIONS

We may note, first of all, that so-called "molar" behavior, commonly studied by psychologists, whether by means of rat mazes or by means of psychometric tests, is highly complex. Usually it involves a number of components which are confounded in any single score used to represent it. For example, the exploratory activity of animals, behavior that one might suppose to be simple and basic, is probably extraordinarily complicated. My own observations of it in the mouse (18, 20) and in the rat (22, 23) give me the feeling that it should be broken down into much finer units if its genetic background is to be studied adequately. Similarly, at the human level, a test like the Stanford-Binet, while it is very popular and useful, uses essentially a "shotgun" approach to the problem of measuring intelligence by incorporating a wide variety of sub-tests, each of which probably measures a different aspect of intelligence as well as a common factor (2). It is all very well to say that it works. But
*I acknowledge with thanks the criticisms and suggestions made by D. Bindra, G. A. Ferguson, D. O. Hebb, and F. C. Fraser of McGill University, J. L. Fuller of Hamilton Station, E. Caspari of Wesleyan University, and Gardner Murphy, Menninger Foundation.

At least two main approaches have been made to the problem of specifying unitary behavior traits. One is an a priori, the other essentially an a posteriori method. The first of these can best be exemplified by the so-called "culture free" test. Observing the need for tests that are independent of culture variables and really measure abilities in their most essential form, a number of workers such as Cattell, Raven, Rulon, and others (2) have attempted to construct tests on which performance will not be affected by such environmental factors as education, upbringing, and local customs. These tests are composed of items that are supposedly either new or common to all cultures while still requiring what is hypothesized to be basic intellectual ability. Now while such tests may have some usefulness, it is unlikely that they are entirely culture-free and really get at a unitary intellectual process common to mankind. Numerous anthropological and sociological observations indicate quite clearly that even the way people look at and think about the world can be profoundly influenced by the culture in which they live. It is likely, for example, as Carrothers and others (4, 15) have implied, that the reasoning processes

8

9

of the average European and the average East African native are so entirely different that the two cannot even be adequately compared on the same scale. This being so, it is very doubtful whether the culturefree test is getting at anything we might label "pure intelligence" in its most unitary form. Furthermore, I rather doubt that such an approach will be successful in its aims, at least in the near future. From an a priori point of view, we can never really be sure that what we are trying to measure is really unitary and elementary. Much empirical work will first be necessary on the influences that can exert effects on the organism early in life before there will be any hope of finding some common base line or base lines of intelligence.
More promising is the a posteriori approach represented by factor analysis. It is to the great credit of those who have developed it that their specific aim has been to find basic dimensions of behavior. Thus Thurstone and many others have been able to offer parsimonious descriptions of a number of psychological domains, including intelligence, perception, temperament, and personality. These domains, or areas of behavior, at first only describable by means of a large number of experimentally independent tests, are eventually defined as the result of the analysis in terms of a few unit factors of which any one of the single tests is a function. The application of these techniques, laborious though they may be, has represented an enormous step forward in scientific sophistication. Unfortunately, there is one major difficulty involved. The great problem remaining is that of specifying which of the many methods of analysis available yields the most meaningful factorial solution.
To date preferences as to method have been somewhat arbitrary. For example, as Vernon has pointed out (26), English factor analysts, following Spearman's lead, have usually described their tests in terms of a general factor plus specifics; while American workers, after Thurstone, have

tended to prefer multiple factor solutions. Clearly, this is not a problem that is unique to factor analysis. In constructing any psychological test, the psychometrician must somehow decide which kinds of items are most meaningful to his purpose. Usually such a decision is made partly on an a priori basis and partly on the basis of the correlation of the test items with various criteria that are considered relevant. As in the case of factors, this procedure is bound to be rather uncertain. We can hope, for example, that an intelligence test really measures intelligence, but at present we can do little more than define intelligence in terms of the test itself.
The obvious question that arises at this point is whether any method can be found of specifying meaningful criteria for traits and factors. A parsimonious description of behavior by itself is not enough. It is desirable to have as well some means of knowing which of the possible factor solutions that can be obtained are the most meaningful, particularly, from the standpoint of the present paper, in relation to biological and genetic criteria.
THE CRITERION PROBLEM IN FACTOR ANALYSIS
Several approaches to the general problem of choosing a best factorial solution have already been attempted. One of the most celebrated of these is embodied in the "simple structure" concept of Thurstone (24). As Ferguson (7) has pointed out, this concept is based ultimately on the law of parsimony. When rotation produces a solution that is intuitively simple and psychologically meaningful, then this solution is regarded as particularly compelling. On account of some disadvantages inherent in the simple structure idea, however, Ferguson has attempted an ingenious explication of the criterion of parsimony by relating it to entropy in statistical mechanics and to information in communication theory. Rather than referring to "simplicity" merely, parsimony is now taken to refer to "degree of organization" or "degree

10 Eugenics Quarterly

of lack of randomness" of a test configuration.
This approach may well represent a genuine theoretical advance insofar as it indicates a more exact criterion for the meaningfulness of factors. It must be noted, however, that it tells us little about the relation of factors to any external criteria. The criterion used to justify this method of solution and the factors obtained is internal rather an external, and is mathematical rather than empirical. It is, of course, possible that there is some isomorphism between the mathematical and biological properties of factors. Factors which are maximally organized in a statistical sense may turn out to make the most sense biologically or genetically. At present, however, we have no way of knowing whether this is true or not.
Somewhat more to the point, perhaps, have been the approaches of Halstead (9) and of Eysenck (6). By using for his correlation matrix tests which reflect brain damage, Halstead has obtained four factors which he considers to represent different aspects of biological intelligence. This is a promising approach. But it should be pointed out that, assuming the validity of his study, it is Halstead's tests rather than his factors that make sense biologically. The actual factoring was done by conventional methods, and there are no a priori grounds for supposing that the factors so obtained best represent biological reality. Criteria should be sought not only at the level of testing, but also at the level of rotation.
In this respect, the procedures employed by Eysenck are more satisfactory. Basically, Eysenck's method, called "criterion analysis," involves the selection of factors that agree maximally with some criterion test or tests included in the correlation matrix. These criterion tests represent, as it were, psychological hypotheses about the nature of the domain under consideration, so that when a configuration is selected in accordance with them, then it is presumed that

this configuration makes some psychological sense. In this way, factors that maximally reflect heredity can be chosen by inserting an appropriate criterion in the test matrix. While the mechanism of the technique is of little concern to us here, its general rationale is of considerable importance, since it represents a genuine attempt to relate factors to psychological and biological facts arrived at independently. At the same time, it cannot be said that the method has yet been fully exploited, particularly in relation to the criteria used. There is clearly a need to explore more fully the criterion question, so that the essential nature of psychological factors and their relation to biological reality can be elucidated.
The approaches described above clearly do not solve the problem of choosing meaningful factors. At the same time they do suggest lines of attack that may eventually be successful, and they are worth following up for that reason. This brings us directly to the main issue with which this paper is concerned.
Whatever its present limitations, factor analysis is a method par excellence for specifying unit traits. The question we may now ask is this: Given a number of factors, what meaning can they have in terms of genetics? By examining this problem in some detail, we may be better able to assess the value of factors and unit traits in the study of behavior inheritance. Furthermore, we may also find ways in which genetics can furnish criteria for the selection of meaningful factors.
THE GENETIC MEANING OF FACTORS
The first point to emphasize is that psychological factors are inferred from correlation coefficients. A factor is simply a shorthand description of the fact that certain tests intercorrelate more highly with each other than with other tests. Consequently, to understand the relation between factors and genes, it will be first necessary to consider what possible meanings a phenotypic

11

correlation between two traits may have genetically. At this stage, no assumptions are made concerning the effect of environment or the specificity of the traits. We may start merely with an empirical correlation between two experimentally independent tests and ask the question-- what could this correlation mean in terms of genetics?
As Lerner (10) has pointed out, there appear to be at least four kinds of communality that could be responsible for the correlation. I have labeled these chromosomal communality, gene communality, selection communality and environmental communality. Each will be discussed in turn.
1. Chromosomal communality refers to genetic linkage. That is to say, the correlation may mean that the genes representing the two traits are linked by virtue of being located on the same chromosome or chromosomes. The phenotypic effects of linkage may be illustrated by a simple example from maize genetics (14). It is known that the two seed characters, "shrunken" and "colorless," and their opposites, "full" and "colored," are correlated in a non-randomly breeding population with high homozygosity. The fact was ascertained, however, not by measuring many seeds with respect to the two parameters and then calculating a correlation coefficient on the observed values, but by crossing the two types, colored-full and colorless-shrunken, and counting the frequencies of parental combinations and recombinations in the F2. It was found that the number of parental types (colored-full and colorless-shrunken) greatly outweighed the number of recombinations (colored-shrunken and colorlessfull) . In other words, the two traits showed, at the phenotypic level, a correlation which represented linkage at the genotypic level. Linkage, we know from cytological evidence, means that the genes representing the traits lie on the same chromosome and that the physical distance between them varies directly with the

proportion of parental combinations to recombinations in the F2--that is to say, with the magnitude of the phenotypic correlation (in this case, tetrachoric) between the two characters, shape of seed-pod, and color of seed-pod. The general case of chromosomal communality is shown diagrammatically in Figure 1.

Behavioral level

TRAITS

Gcnlc level
CHROMOSOMES
y/A Correlated variances
| I Specific variances
FIGURE 1--A CASE OF CHROMOSOMAL COMMUNALITY.
It is assumed that traits A and B are made up of variances specific to each and a variance common to both. The specificity arises from genes, a, b, c, e, 1, g, h, lying on different chromosomes, I-III in the case of trait A, V-VIII in the case of trait B. The covariance arises from the fact that genes d and d' both lie on chromosome IV and tend to assort together. Consequently, the traits vary together in magnitude in the same individual to the degree that the genes d and d' are linked.
It is possible that some psychological factors reflect genetic linkage. Let us suppose that Factor I represents the intercorrelations between several tests in a matrix, and that the abilities or traits measured by these tests are carried by a number of genes whose effects need not be equal and additive. It may happen that the genes contributing to a certain degree of ability in one test are linked with the genes that contribute a corresponding amount to the abilities required by the other tests. That is to say, the genes that give a person a score, let us say, of two standard deviations above the mean of the population on Test 1 are located on the same chromosomes as those genes that produce in combination

12 Eugenics Quarterly

a correspondingly high score on the other tests. In such a case, obviously, the probability is greater than chance that a person who has a high score on Test 1 will have a high score on the other tests. Other things being equal, Factor I will represent this covariation in genes, and hence scores, for all the tests with respect to each other. The agent responsible for this covariation will be the chromosome.
It should be mentioned, however, that rather special conditions are required for the operation of this case. The effects of linkage are maintained only in a nonrandomly breeding population. To illustrate this, we may return to our first example. It will be recalled that the model used involved a mating between two parents in which the traits were linked--that is, between the types colored-full and colorless-shrunken. With such a mating, a predominance of parental combinations appear in the F2. However, if mating subsequent to the F2 becomes random, so that there is an equal probability that any genotype will mate with any other, then the frequency of parental types in ensuing generations will diminish rapidly as the population approaches equilibrium. In the long run, the occurrence of crossing-over will build up the frequency of recombinations to a level equal to that of the parental combinations, so that, ultimately, the phenotypic correlation between the characters will vanish. As against this, at least two conditions may serve to maintain the correlation. One is the proximity of the genes concerned. If they are very close together on the same chromosome, crossingover may be so rare that the phenotypic correlation will not be abolished so quickly. Secondly, there may be some selection pressures in the environment that favor mating of parental types or that favor the viability of their offspring. For example, if anxiety and rigidity were linked traits, a preponderance of matings between anxious, rigid persons and non-anxious, nonrigid persons would serve to retain the

linkage. This would certainly require a very special set of circumstances. But if we consider the importance of social customs and mores and the extent of their influence on human behavior, perhaps we may be willing to admit that such circumstances could arise. In such a case, however, it would be most difficult to know whether the effects were due primarily to linkage or to selection.
2. The second meaning that a correlation may have, genetically, is that the two traits are each carried by one or more genes, some or all of which are common to both traits. Since genes rather than chromosomes are responsible for covariation here, I use the term "gene communality." Essentially, this is genetic pleiotropy, and it is illustrated quite well by the so-called Ellis-van-Crevald syndrome in which a number of abnormalities (dwarfism, ectodermal defects, polydactyly and others) all result from the action of one or a few recessive genes (12). The abstract case is diagrammed in Figure 2a. Whether there is really such a thing as true genetic pleiotropy is debatable. More common is physiological pleiotropy, exemplified by albinism, and illustrated in Figure 2b. In this syndrome, a single recessive gene produces lack of pigmentation--a single physiological effect which itself has a number of ramifications, such as pale skin, pink iris, light hair, oversensitivity to light, and others. It is quite possible that many psychological correlations and factors represent one of these kinds of pleiotropism. Perhaps it was something like physiological pleiotropy that Spearman had in mind when he called his G factor "general mental energy" (16).
3. The third genetic meaning of a correlation to be discussed is perhaps the most interesting and perhaps also the most plausible. In this case, covariation of two or more traits depends not on any genetic or chromosomal communality but entirely on selection pressures in the population. For this reason, it has been labeled "selec-

a

Behovicrol Isvel

TRAITS B
i t i x//////////\ V/////////A i i II

13

Genie level

CHROMOSOMES

CHROMOSOMES

V//\Correlated variances
i i Specific variances
FIGURE 2--A CASE OF CENE COMMUNALITY. In 2a,the
pleiotropic gene (d) results in covariation in the two traits A andB. In 2b,a physiological effect arising from oneor a fewgenes (c) has correlated effects onboth trait Aand trait B.

tion communality." It is a known fact

Porents

that mating in human populations is often

homogamous rather than random. That

is to say, people tend tomarry others like

themselves. Themost obvious exampleof

a trait forwhich this occurs is intelligence,

trait A traitB

traitB trait A

and Conrad and Jones (5) have calculated

that thehomogamy coefficient for intellec-

tual ability is of theorder 0.50. Now it

Offspring

may also happen that when two traits (in

the simplest case) assume cultural value

and correlate with various cultural varia-

bles {e.g., socioeconomic status), individ-

uals who arehigh in one trait will tend

to mate with individuals high in the other

trait, but randomly with respect to the same

DISTRIBUTION OF ABILITY

trait. This kind of mating is called cross-

FIGURE 3--A SIMPLE CASE OFSELECTION COMMUNAL-
ITY. A and B are uncorrelated ability-traits. Thus

homogamous, or more correctly, cross- an individual high in B may be low, medium, or

homophenogamous.

Under such mating

high in A, though on theaverage, he will bemedium. Thesame applies to trait Bwith respect to

conditions, it isobvious, asPrice (13) and A. If inheritance is polygenic andinvolves equal

Bartlett (3) have shown for the general

and additive genes, theFl will be about halfway between theparents in both traits. This means that

case, that a correlation will be generated the traits will coincide orcorrelate in the offspring.

between the traits, even though they were

uncorrelated to start with and completely To give a concrete example, letussup-

independent genetically. A simple illus- pose that we are dealing with a population

tration of selection communality is dia- of university graduate students eachpos-

grammed in Figure 3.

sessing a number of independent and un-

14 Eugenics Quarterly

correlated abilities. Let us also suppose that each individual is majoring in a subject for which he or she is especially well equipped by virtue of high endowment in one of these abilities, and also that matings tend to be inter-departmental rather than intra-departmental. Under such conditions, a male student who has, let us say, a high degree of ability in classics (assuming this is a unitary ability) may mate with a female student who has a high degree of ability in psychology (also assumed to be a unitary ability). Since the two traits are initially uncorrelated, the ability of each student in the other's field of specialization may be high, low, or medium. As far as each individual is concerned, the ability of the other in the secondary trait is random, which means that, on the average, it will approximate the mean of the whole population. Assuming polygenic inheritance and absence of dominance, their children, on the average, will possess each trait to a like extent (midway between the parental scores), depending on the value of the coefficient of cross-homogamy. In other words, ability in classics and ability in psychology will be correlated in the next generation. If this kind of mating is general, then the correlation will increase in subsequent generations, and the number of individuals who still show discrepancy between their ability in each trait will become smaller and smaller. It will readily be seen that the closer the correlation approximates 1.0, the more irreversible will the process be. If there are no individuals in whom the two abilities are uncorrelated, then they will inevitably be linked in that population. With a large number of such unit abilities, the same kind of selective mating will eventually give a general factor. However, such a factor will have no counterpart whatsoever at the genie level. It results entirely from selection.
I would hazard a guess that a good many psychological traits are precisely like this, and are mere cultural artifacts, or, one might say, artifactors. Conversely, it is also

possible that the lack of significant relationship between tests in some domains is due to the lack of selective matings with respect to that domain. It is interesting, for example, that motor skills do not seem to intercorrelate very highly in our culture (2, 17). Perhaps, were our society of such a character that motor abilities assumed great prestige value and became correlated with social position, then it is possible that the correlations between separate skills pertaining to the domain might increase strikingly in magnitude.
It might appear that cross-homogamous matings would be rare in practice. But it is the writer's opinion that, on the contrary, they are rather common. Psychologically, most people do not deliberately seek out a mate who is high in some abilities other than the ones in which they themselves are high. Usually they simply choose someone of about the same ability, or perhaps someone outstanding in an ability they value. But the important thing to remember is that their choice is broad and subjective, and is not usually based on the prospective mate's objective performance on a battery of aptitude tests. Thus, John Smith, who is a capable mathematician, may choose Mary Jones as a wife not specifically because she is a competent philosopher but merely because she appears to him generally intelligent and is a university graduate. Thus, if we recognize that the dimensions of human ability and personality as judged are rather broad but that these same dimensions may in reality be composed of a number of separate components, then it will be clear that, more often than not, mating will actually be cross-homogamous, with the results described above.
4. The three cases described above represent, very broadly speaking, genetic interpretations of psychological correlations or factors. The final possible interpretation is non-genetic. Given two traits that are genetically independent, they may become correlated if environmental factors

15

exert pressure on each (10). This case we may call "environmental communality." It is assumed, of course, that the traits involved are ones for which some nongenetic variation is possible. Relatively stable traits, such as pigmentation or other physical characters, are not easily changed in the individual. On the other hand, we have now plenty of evidence to indicate that many psychological traits can readily be altered by imposing different kinds of environmental conditions on the organism, particularly in early life. If two traits are radically effected by such conditions, then a correlation will be generated between them. For example, it has been found that dogs reared in conditions of severe perceptual isolation show later in life lowered ability in problem-solving on one hand, and hyperactivity on the other hand (19). Thus, activity and intelligence become correlated (negatively) in this particular population due to a common environmental influence. It is not difficult to imagine how correlations between various traits and abilities in human beings may be generated in the same manner. Such syndromes of correlated traits as in the "authoritarian personality" (1), or in the "high achiever" (11) may well represent the effects of certain forces in the family and in society, exerting an influence on characters that have no genetic relationship to each other.
IMPLICATIONS
I have outlined above four interpretations that may be given to psychological factors from the standpoint of heredity and environment. Rather than solving our problems, however, it is clear that this analysis gives rise to many new ones.
In the first place, it is evident that we must find some methods for deciding which interpretation applies in the case of any particular factor or set of factors. Appropriate techniques are available (10, 14), but their application in the present context will certainly not be simple. Secondly,

supposing we are able to decide what a certain factor means, what inferences can we then draw about correlations between factor analysis and the genetics of behavior? I indicated before that factor analysis, since it breaks down complex behavior into simple units, should prove a useful tool for studying the inheritance of behavior. It would now seem, however, that its usefulness may be limited depending on the kind of communality that underlies a certain factor. Factor methods will always give us parsimony at the behavior level. But they will not always do so at the genetic level. Thus, factors representing selection or environmental communality will, in all likelihood, have just as complex a genetic basis as the separate tests whose intercorrelations they represent. In these cases, we must conceive of the bases of abilities and traits as being, as Tolman (25) has put it, "multitudinous, highly specific, and relatively narrow." Covariations may be built up either through differential mating patterns or through such environmental effects as learning and transfer (8). With chromosomal communality much the same holds true. Although we have here a more incisive relationship between the behavioral and the biological level, the factors in this case do not necessarily represent a gain in parsimony at the genetic level. Only in the case of genetic communality, in fact, can we expect such a gain. Many common factors may well represent common genes, so that there is a isomorphism between the two levels. Whether this represents the rule or the exception is, at present, difficult to say. Only empirical work will provide the necessary answers.
It was suggested not only that factor analysis may be useful for psychogenetics but also that we might possibly find in genetics some criteria for choice of meaningful behavioral factors. Our discussion of the meaning of factors certainly does not supply any ready answers to this question. At the same time, perhaps it does indicate that such a possibility does exist. We have

16 Eugenics Quarterly

in formal genetics and in factor analysis
two closely analogous methods. In thefirst,
we attempt to explain the characteristics
of a population (usually an F2) by means
of a few biological constructs, that is to
say, genes, and there is a fairly exact rela-
tionship between the number of types that
appear in the F2 and the number of al�eles
involved. Factor analysis has a very similar
aim, insofar as it is a way of reducing a
large number of traits to a few underlying
unities. The path from characters to genes
seems closely analogous to the path from
characters to factors. How this analogy can
be satisfactorily explicated so that the
methods can prove mutually useful is a
problem that cannot be developed in this
paper. To my mind, there is little question
that this can be done. What we wish to
find are unit traits that have not merely
a definite genetic basis but also a genetic
basis that is as simple as possible. If tech-
niques can be found that bring out such
an isomorphism between the behavioral
and the genetic levels, they should prove
very valuable both to factor analysis and to
psychogenetics.
REFERENCES
1. ADORNO, T . W., FRENKEL-BRUNSWIK, ELSE, LEVINSON, D. J., & SANFORD, R. N., 1950. The Au-
thoritarian Personality, Harper, New York. 2. ANASTASI, A., 1954.Psychological Testing, Mac-
millan, New York. 3. BARTLETT, M. S., 1937. Note on the develop-
ment of correlations among genetic components of ability. Ann. Eugenics (Cambridge), 7: pp. 299-302. 4. CAROTHERS, J. C., 1951. Frontal lobe and the African. J. Ment. Sci.,9 7 : 12-48.
5. CONRAD, H. S. AND JONES, H. E., 1940. A
second study of family resemblances in intelligence: environmental and genetic implications of parent-child and sibling correlations in the total sample. Yearbk. Nat. Soc. Stud. Educ., 39: (II): 97-141. 6. EYSENCK, H. J., 1950. Criterion analysis--an

application of the hypothetico-deductive method to factor analysis. Psychol. Rev., 5 7 : 38-53. 7. FERGUSON, G. A., 1954. The concept of parsimony in factor analysis. Psychometrika, 1 9 : 281-290. 8. FERGUSON, G. A., 1954.On learning and human ability. Canad. J. Psychol., 8 : 95-112. 9. HALSTEAD, W. C., 1947. Brain and intelligence: a quantitative study of the frontal lobes. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago. 10. LERNER, M. I., 1950. Population Genetics and Animal Improvement. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge.
11. MCCLELLAND, D. C., et al., 1953. The achievement motive. Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York.
12. METRAKOS, J. D. AND FRASER, F. C., 1954. Evi-
dence for a hereditary factor in chondroectodermal dysplasia (Ellis-van-Creveld syndrome). Amer. J. Hum. Genet., 6 : 260-269.
13. PRICE, B., 1936. Homogamy and the intercorrelation of capacity traits. Ann. Eugenics (Cambridge), 7 : 22-27.
14. SINNOTT, E. W., DUNN, L. C., AND DOBZHANSKY,
T., 1950. Principles of Genetics. McGraw-Hill, New York. 15. SMARTT, G. G. F., 1956. Mental maladjustment in the East African. J. Ment. Sci., 102: 441466.
16. SPEARMAN, C., 1927. The abilities of man. Macmillan, New York.
17. AND JONES, W. L., 1951. Human Ability. Macmillan, London.
18. THOMPSON, W. R., 1953. The inheritance of behavior: behavioral differences in fifteen mouse strains. Canad. J. Psychol., 7: 145-153.
19. , 1955. Early environment--its importance for later behavior. In Hoch, P. H. and Zubin, J. (Eds.) , Psychopathology of Childhood. Grune and Stratton, New York.
20. , 1956. The inheritance of behavior: activity differences in five inbred mouse strains. J. Hered., 4 7 : 147-148.
21. , 1957. The significance of personality and intelligence tests in the evaluation of population characteristics. Thirty-third Annual Conference of Milbank Memorial Fund: Symposium. New York. (in press)
22. AND SOLOMON, L. M., 1954. Spontaneous pattern discrimination in the rat. J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol., 4 7 : 104-107.
23. AND KAHN, A., 1955. Retroaction effects in the exploratory activity of "bright" and "dull" rats. Canad. J. Psychol., 9 : 173-182.
24. THURSTONE, L. L., 1947. Multiple-factor analysis. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.
25. TOLMAN, E. C., 1951. Collected papers in psychology. Univ. of California Press, Berkeley, Ch. 18.
26. VERNON, P., 1950. The Structure of Human Abilities. Wiley, New York.

