Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Meetings and recent publications
Helen G. Hammons
To cite this article: Helen G. Hammons (1962) Meetings and recent publications, Eugenics Quarterly, 9:4, 247-251, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1962.9987533 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1962.9987533
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

MEETINGS AND RECENT PUBLICATIONS

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

HUMAN HEREDITY: C. O. Carter. Penguin Books, Middlesex, England, 1962, 266 pp. (paper, illustrated).
An explanation of human variation in simple language by one of the leaders in British eugenics. The latest information is here, and the book will be useful for those who want a non-technical presentation. In regard to the newly discovered chromosomal abnormalities, Carter states that the great majority of these patients do not reproduce. The main hope for eugenic action here is the discovery of factors leading to formation of abnormal germ cells. In some instances, it may be possible to recognize and warn those with unusually high risks of forming germ cells with an abnormal complement of chromosomes.
As the environment improves, hereditary differences become more important, states the author. Better education thus is already revealing inequalities in genetic endowment. Once all children are planned, even though parents have no deliberate eugenic policy, those likely to transmit socially valuable qualities can be expected to have the largest families. But parents' plans will be influenced by their community and governments will be well-advised to consider the effects of their policy on genetic structure of coming generations. A recent study of a group of families in England showed that the main anxiety is not providing material care but the best education.
Carter suggests these eugenic policies: 1) Better family planning and genetic counseling; 2) Investigation of circumstances which may lead good parents un-

willingly to have small families; 3) Better teaching of biological sciences. The most important future discovery in human genetics, he concludes, may be ways of ending at will mutations in any desired direction, making it possible both to change disadvantageous mutations and to induce new mutations.
FERTILITY CONTROL THROUGH CONTRA-
CEPTION--A Study of Family Planning Clinics of Metropolitan Delhi: S. N. Agarwala. Directorate General of Health Services, Ministry of Health, Government of India, New Delhi (Family Planning Studies No. 2), 1960, 85 pp.
Findings of a study by the Demographic Research Centre, Institute of Economic Growth, Delhi. Deals with persons who visited family planning clinics in metropolitan Delhi from 1955 to 1958. This study is the first of its kind in India, according to the author's best knowledge.
The most important finding is that even without clinical services pregnancies can be reduced if there is sufficient motivation. First priority in India, therefore, should be given to motivating people toward family planning rather than opening clinics, the author concludes. In this study pregnancies are effectively reduced through use of clinically prescribed contraceptives. The group was not typical of India's population, so general conclusions can not be drawn. But results give a measure of likely success for educated and urban India. More than half the patients had had pre-clini-

247

248 Meetings and Recent Publications

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

cal contraceptive experience and had in that way reduced the risk of their pregnancies by nearly 44%. Of those who came to the clinic, 45% could not be brought to use contraception, which does not speak highly of the persuasive power of the clinics, the author feels.
DOES OVERPOPULATION MEAN POVERTY?
Joseph M. Jones. Center for Economic International Growth, Washington, D. C, 1962, 64 pp., 1U (paper).
The author is a foreign policy writer and consultant with the Research and Education Committee for a Free World. This pamphlet is written in nontechnical language in question-and-answer form. It is not merely a demographic statement but relates population to the economic problems of various parts of the world and takes the position that individual countries must assemble the facts about their own populations and then plan health facilities in which family planning is an integral part.
The pamphlet argues that countries such as the United States should agree on the essentials of a public policy toward aid to other countries in solving the population problem. The technologically advanced countries must expand research and put their knowledge at the service of other countries.
Eugene R. Black has written an introduction.
INTRAUTERINE CONTRACEPTIVE DEVICES:
Preliminary Report Prepared by Warren O. Nelson, Christopher Tietze, and Kathleen Shafer. The Population Council, New York, 1962, 40 pp. (paper).
A preliminary report of a conference held under the auspices of the Population Council to determine if intrauterine

contraceptive devices are as valuable as they seem. Dr. Alan F. Guttmacher acted as Chairman, and physicians and others reported their findings. Christopher Tietze considered that the position of the medical profession is the greatest obstacle to the use of these devices and that careful clinical tests are now needed. The U. S. Food and Drug Administration now bans their sale. As yet there is inadequate information for satisfactory evaluation of them.
The consensus of the meeting was that intrauterine devices offer a completely reversible method of reproduction control and that its dangers have been greatly exaggerated. An appendix by Christopher Tietze proposes minimum standards for studies of these devices.
SINGAPORE FAMILY PLANNING ASSOCIA-
TION: 12th Annual Report, 1961, 48 pp. (paper).
Report of the Singapore Family Planning Association which shows increasing acceptance of its work after a slow start. The government of Singapore assists the Association by an annual grant. The government's Maternal and Child Health Clinics now include family planning education which complements the work of the Association.
A major family planning campaign was conducted by the government in 1960. As a result total clinic attendance increased from 37,965 to 43,974. The Singapore birth rate has dropped from 42.7 in 1957 to 35.5 in 1961. Opposition to family limitation has decreased, partly because the rhythm method, acceptable to certain religious groups, is advocated. The rate of natural increase for the first time in the postwar years dropped to below 3% in 1961. A further decline to 1.5% is deemed essential.

Meetings and Recent Publications

249

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

POPULATION REFERENCE BUREAU, INC.:
Annual Report, 1961. 16 pp. (paper).
Describes the population problem as the growing disparity between the rapidly increasing number of people and the means of providing acceptable minimum standards of living. In contrast to ten years ago, population is a subject now truly in the public domain, providing a solid base for future programs. But the process of education must be continued.
The gains of the Population Reference Bureau appear in the climate of thought in which free societies operate rather than in the printed page, the Report suggests. Of particular interest is the Bureau's mailing in 1961 to Latin America, to U. S. officials associated with the Alliance for Progress, and to ambassadors from Latin American countries. A special grant is making possible more Latin American mailings in 1962.
THE ECONOMIC HISTORY OF WORLD POP-
ULATION: Carlo Cipolla.. Penguin Books, Ltd., Middlesex and Baltimore, 1962, 117 pp. (paper).
Describes from a global point of view the historic economic growth of mankind and population problems. The author stresses investing more of our resources for the qualitative improvement of man, with a combined effort by both public and private sectors. What is needed is not merely more technical knowledge but the kind of education that allows us to use wisely the techniques we already possess.
Backward societies today are faced with demographic problems much more critical than those that faced old Europe. They must do things quickly and on a greater scale. Educational schemes must be developed for underdeveloped countries along with technical and economic

aid. Urgent action is needed lest the last state turn out to be worse than the first, the author concludes.
INTERNATIONAL POPULATION CONFERENCE
DISCUSSIONS: Vienna, 1959. Union internationale pour l'^tude scientifique de la population. Paris, 1962, 134pp. (paper).
Discussions in the original languages of the papers, published in 1960, of the proceedings of the International Population Conference held in Vienna in 1959. The use of more distinctive typography in identifying authors and discussants would facilitate reference.
ON CANCER AND HORMONES--Essays in
Experimental Biology. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1962, 346 pp., $8.50.
Twenty-seven essays by different contributors. The topics include nature and therapy of malignant disease, the basic metabolic lesions of tumor cells, and role of hormones in cancer. Biochemistry and mode of action of sex hormones are discussed, as are enzymatic pathways in biosynthesis of complex lipids and nucleic acids. A chapter of interest to geneticists is entitled "Alterations in Biological Patterns of Cells as Related to Genetic Enzyme Defects."
OTHER PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED
La Popolazione della Toscana dal 1810 at 1959: A Cura di Pierfrancesco Bandettini. Camera di Commercio, Industria e Agricoltura, Scuola di Statistica della Universita, Firenze, 1961, 390 pp. (paper). Gives the population figures annually from 1810 to 1959 of the different districts of Tuscany, with an introduction by the editor.

250 Meetings and Recent Publications

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

Annuario Statistico Italiano, 1961: The of psychiatry from the early days of

Italian statistical yearbook issued an- the English asylum Bedlam to 1917

nually by the Central Institute of Sta- when this book was written by one of

tistics in Rome.

the pioneers in psychiatry.

Highlights of Heart Progress, 1961: U. S.

Department of Health, Education, MEETINGS

and Welfare, Public Health Service, National Institutes of Health, Public Health Service, Publication No. 949, 72 pp., 30# (paper). A review of the

The Seventh International Conference on Planned Parenthood will be held in Singapore, February 10-16, 1963. Information can be obtained from the

1961 activities of the National Heart Associate Conference Secretary, IPPF

Institute with special emphasis on re- Southeast Asia Region, 10 Kay Siang

search.

Road, Singapore.

Progress Against Cancer--1961: U. S. De- The Council on Research of the partment of Health, Education, and American College of Preventive MediWelfare, Public Health Service, Na- cine has organized a National Confertional Institutes of Health, Public ence on Research Methodology and Po-

Health Service, Publication No. 914, tential in Community Health and Pre-

35 pp., 20(4 (paper). A review of re- ventive Medicine with the principal co-

search and related programs in cancer sponsorship of the New York Academy

by the Public Health Service prepared of Sciences. The conference will take

by the National Cancer Institute.

place in New York City, December 5-7,

Recentralization of Psychiatric Services 1962.

and Continuity of Care: Proceedings "Viruses, Nucleic Acids, and Cancer"

of the Thirty-eighth Annual Confer- will be the subject of the 17th Annual

ence of the Milbank Memorial Fund, Symposium on Fundamental Cancer Re-

September 26-27, 1961. Milbank Mem- search sponsored by The University of

orial Fund, New York, 1962, 197 pp., Texas M. D. Anderson Hospital and

$2.00 (paper). Report of a round table Tumor Institute, Houston, Texas. The

which reviewed present trend of state dates of the meeting will be February

mental hospitals to decentralize their 20, 21, and 22, 1963, according to Leon

functions and to extend their services Dmochowski, Chairman of the Symposi-

into the community; with a foreword um Committee and Chief, Section of

by Frank G. Boudreau and Ernest M. Virology and Electron Microscopy at

Gruenberg.

M. D. Anderson Hospital. The sessions

The First Nine Months of Life: Geral- of the Symposium will relate to: struc-

dine L. Flanagan. Simon and Schuster, ture of viruses; replication of viruses;

New York, 1962, 95 pp., $3.95. A biochemistry of virus-infected cells; prop-

beautifully illustrated volume which erties, structure, and mode of replication

gives the story of the baby in the of viral nucleic acids; early changes fol-

womb from a scientific point of view lowing viral infections; avian viruses and

but with telling simplicity. One Hundred Years of Psychiatry: Emil
Kraepelin. Philosophical Library, New York, 1962, 163 pp. A translation of a previously published history

neoplasia; viruses and interferon; biological aspects of tumor induction by viruses; and interrelationship of viruses, intracellular, and extracellular factors in neoplasia.

Meetings and Recent Publications

251

FELLOWSHIPS
The Social Science Research Council offers fellowships and grants for the advancement of research in the social sciences in 1962-1963. Those without restriction as to area of interest in social science include predoctoral and postdoctoral Research Training Fellowships, Family Research Fellowships, and

Grants-in-Aid of Research. Several additional kinds are offered to advance research and training in selected fields or on particular subjects. Applications should be submitted by December 15, 1962, to Social Science Research Council Fellowships and Grants, 230 Park Avenue, New York 17, N. Y.
HELEN G. HAMMONS

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

