Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Genetic factors affecting intelligence: Symposium
Frederick Osborn Chairman , John L. Fuller & J. P. Scott
To cite this article: Frederick Osborn Chairman , John L. Fuller & J. P. Scott (1954) Genetic factors affecting intelligence: Symposium, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:1, 28-43, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987161 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987161
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 6
View related articles Citing articles: 4 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

GENETIC FACTORS AFFECTING INTELLIGENCE
Symposium*
I. Heredity and Learning Ability in Infrahuman Mammals II. Fertility and Intelligence Among Families of the Mentally Deficient III. Intelligence in Family Groups in the Blue Ridge Mountains
FREDERICK OSBORN, Chairman
I. HEREDITY AND LEARNING ABILITY IN INFRAHUMAN MAMMALS
JOHN L. FULLER AND J. P. SCOTT
Roscoe B. Jackson Memorial Laboratory

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

INTRODUCTION
Scientific work on the relationship between heredity and human intelligence is by necessity largely descriptive. A great deal can be learned from studies on twins and other close relatives, but it is impossible to make experimental breeding tests of the theories which have been so obtained. Such work can, however, be done on other mammals, and it is the purpose of this paper to summarize the currently available information upon the subject.
At the outset we must recognize the limitation as well as the advantages of working with other species. It should be emphasized that findings on other animals cannot be directly applied to human beings, and it is only after careful study and comparison that we can draw even tentative conclusions about human nature. Certain

special human problems cannot be studied in other animals, particularly those which are involved with the use of human language. For this and other reasons it is difficult to study animal intelligence in the same way that we study human intelligence. Part of our understanding of ourselves is based on subjective information which we can never get from animals, and this makes it necessary to use new terms as well as new methods. The dictionary gives seven or eight definitions of the word "intelligence" of which "the capacity for knowledge or understanding, particularly with reference to meeting novel situations" is perhaps the most scientific. Obviously, we can never tell whether an animal "knows" or "understands" a situation except by inference and, in studying animal behavior, it is better to use the more objective term of adaptation.

*The three papers in this symposium were pre- Here the biologist finds himself on

sented at the annual meetings of the American familiar ground. From the time of Dar-

Society of Human Genetics and the American Eugenics Society at Boston, Mass., in conjunction with

Íwin

the

heritable

nature

of

adaptive

the meetings of the AAAS on December 29, 1953. , capacities has been one of the major tenets

Abstracts are being published in the American Journal of Human Genetics.

of the theory of evolution. In the study of

28

29

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

fossil records adaptation can often be inferred from structural characteristics, but actual adaptation consists of the behavioral and physiological reactions of living animals. This is something which can be studied by direct experimental methods, and the results may uphold or modify basic biological theory as well as relate to the special problem of human intelligence.
Heredity could conceivably affect behavior and adaptation in one or both of two general ways. In the first place, it might provide capacities for developing special methods of adaptation which would be useful in situations which are repeated generation after generation. In the second place, heredity might provide an individual or a species with a set of capacities for adjusting to many different and variable situations which are not necessarily repeated generation after generation. From a theoretical point of view it would appear desirable for an individual to have both kinds of capacities.
The objective facts which can be observed in connection with each kind are, respectively (1) patterns of behavior and (2) modification of behavior in various ways from which capacities for learning can be inferred. The available evidence concerning these two kinds of facts will be analyzed in the following sections.
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN SPECIES
Patterns of Behavior Comparative studies of the behavior of
animals have shown that each species has particular ways in which it adapts to the environment. These patterns of behavior, which may include integrated activity of all parts of the body, are closely related to the sensory and motor abilities of the animal and they tend to become more complicated along with the sensory and motor apparatus. The assumptions of the biologists that structure is a good index of adaptation are therefore justified.
Considerable variety is seen in the patterns of behavior shown by any one species

and a given environmental situation may evoke several reactions which tend to be used in a regular order. For example, if one mouse is attacked by another, it first fights back and, if this is unsuccessful, it starts to run away. If escape is impossible it may then stand still in a defensive posture or, in some situations, simply lie flat and passive in a manner which almost suggests death feigning (1).
It is seldom possible to test the inheritance of these patterns of behavior by experimental breeding as crossbreeding between most species is impossible. Evidence that behavior patterns are inherited comes from many species of lower vertebrates in which the parents never come into contact with the offspring and where biological heredity appears to be the only factor which could account for their persistence.
Tinbergen (2) has extensively studied the social reactions of lower vertebrates and finds that they are often evoked by very specific stimulation normally provided by some other member of the same species, so that an animal may be said to inherit the tendency to respond to a particular signstimulus. Relatively little work of this sort in mammals has been done, but the indications are that social behavior may be profoundly affected by a process of socialization (3) in which learning plays an important part.
The possibility of cultural as well as biological inheritance can be tested by raising animals either in complete isolation or in contact with a foster species with very different habits of behavior (4). The results of such experiments on birds have been described extensively by Lorenz who has found evidence of both cultural and biological factors. For example (5) jackdaws reared by hand gave the same reactions to human beings as they would ordinarily give to other jackdaws and showed no evidence of adopting human patterns of behavior. On the other hand, these same jackdaws showed very few avoidance re-

30 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

actions and would ordinarily not survive if tion, the possession of a trait or group of

released.

traits which made the animal highly adap-

Similar results have been obtained by tive under certain special conditions but

raising mammals apart from their own made it nonadaptive in others.

^

species, with perhaps more evidence of In general, the evidence on interspecific

cultural inheritance. For example, the differences in patterns of behavior indi-

sheep (6) which is raised on the bottle cates that the influence of biological heredi-

becomes closely attached to human beings. ty is very strong, particularly in basic pat-

Its characteristic patterns of vocalization, terns of social behavior. Individuals tend

butting and sex behavior are the same as to develop the characteristic patterns of be-

those of the native species. The following havior of their respective species in spite of

reaction may be developed toward people, profound modification of the environment.

but if not given the opportunity to do this At the same time much of the behavior of

the sheep becomes independent, neither highly social species, where the young have

avoiding nor closely following. Fear re- many contacts with adults, may on experi-

actions do not appear to be biologically in- ment turn out to be largely determined by

herited, and a bottle-reared sheep described cultural heredity. in an earlier paper was fearless of dogs and

-\^--·

was later the only one killed when theflock Learning Capacities

was attached by these animals.

The general role of heredity in determin-

There is also some evidence based on ing the learning capacities of a species may

naturalistic observations of species which be experimentally tested in one way by

have had the opportunity to change their drastically altering the environment. Hebb

habitats that certain mammals have a (9) found that albino rats raised in the

greater range of adaptability in behavior "rich" environment of the author's home

patterns than others. For example, the performed much better on mazes than

American elk was originally a plains-living those from the relatively "poor" environ-

animal. Later it was forced by hunters and ment of laboratory cages. Bernstein (10)

ranchers back up into the mountains where found that such effects could be obtained

it has adapted itself very well. Zoological simply by taking the rats out of their cage

parks report that these animals when taken and handling them, indicating that the

from the wild adjust themselves to condi- social environment was a very important

tions of confinement very readily and are, to factor as well as familiarity with the physi-

all intents and purposes, very tame after a cal environment. The results of rearing

few days. By contrast, the pronghorn chimpanzees in human homes (11, 12) can

antelope is never found in any environ- be interpreted in the same way.

ment except open plains and deserts and is very difficult to keep in confinement. One characteristic of these animals is their extremely speedy flight which is useful only in open country and which leads the animals to run into fences and injure themselves in captivity (7). Another case is that of the muskrat (8) which flourishes in any natural pond or stream but which has never yet been satisfactorily raised in captivity. Such instances could be multiplied indefinitely and they seem to be related to what the older naturalists called specializa-

At the same time biological heredity imposes definite limitations on learning capacities through sensory and reaction systems. Maier and Schneirla (13) have reviewed the animal kingdom from this point of view and find great variety in sensory and motor abilities even in mammals. The senses of vision, hearing and smell may be very acute or almost lacking in different species. A motor pattern like manipulation may be well developed in some mammals like raccoons and almost absent in the hoofed animals.

31

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Another limitation is placed on learning ability by genetically controlled patterns of behavior. Experimenters need to be extremely careful in assuming that an animal lacks a general ability to learn since such ability can only be brought out within the range of adaptability of the species. There is no doubt but that a great many of the early experiments on animal behavior came to false conclusions by attempting experiments which did not fit the animal's capability. For example, maze tests are very good for bringing out adaptation in the rat which in the wild lives in a system of runways and tunnels. Similar tests are very poor for sheep which naturally live in the open and whose safety depends upon avoidance of narrow enclosures. A maze for sheep which simulated the rocky cliffs used by these animals might be effective where the rat type maze simply makes them extremely fearful and timid.
Some of these difficulties may be avoided by studying only the simplest type of learning. There is some evidence that the ability to associate consecutive stimuli is a fundamental property of nervous tissue throughout the metazoa and may even exist in protozoa. Within the vertebrates, Nissen (14), Razran (15) and others who have studied simple learning have come to the conclusion that all vertebrates are basically similar. Until recently it looked as if invertebrates were relatively poor at forming associations and that the learning was relatively impermanent. However, recent experiments by J. Z. Young (16) on the octopus, which has a rather highly developed motor apparatus and an extremely well developed sense of vision, have shown that these animals can be easily conditioned and give the same kind of experimental results as vertebrates. It would appear that differences in learning abilities are associated with differences in sensory and motor capacities and the question may be raised as to whether they exist independently.
An effort has been made by comparative psychologists to test this by using methods

which make use of only simple sensory and motor capacities to solve complicated abstract problems. A great number of these experiments are suspect on the grounds that the tests used are unsuitable to the behavior patterns of the animal, that only one or two individuals were used in a species, and that the individuals used may not have been properly socialized and hence capable of being motivated. Nevertheless, such tests do appear to yield differential results.
Warden (17, 18) and Nissen (19) have described several kinds of tests which give species differences. One of these is the, delayed response test, in which the animal reacts to a signal after a considerable delay and must discriminate between alternate signals. Another is the problem of ^ingje and double alternation of correct pathways wiïïcir*iïâTTMEëeiî*used in connection with mazes. In the multiple plate apparatus an animal has to learn to step on three plates in order and then reverse the order up to its limit of learning. These three tests are essentially memory problems which can be easily solved by the use of human verbal symbols. Another type of problem is one in which the animal has to make a choice from a number of possibilities, the only clue being that the last choice was never right. Harlow (20) has recently suggested an "oddity" test for primates in which the correct choice is always an object which is visually different from the other two.
All of these tests produce better performance by primates than other mammals and better performance by college sophomores than other primates. Starting with the somewhat prejudiced notion that pri»»»mates are more intelligent than other animals, we may assume that these are tests of pure intelligence. It should be remembered that the monkeys have visual and manipulatory capacities which are closely similar to those of people, and the results may not be as independent of sensory and motor abilities as they seem.
It may be concluded that modifications

32 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

of the environment and particularly the social environment can produce important changes in learning capacities. Biological heredity produces great differences between species in learning capacities, operating through limitations of sensory and motor apparatus, as well as patterns of behavior. There is some evidence that certain abstract problems in which human and other primates excel are difficult for other mammals, but it has not been established that the ability to solve them is independent of the special visual and manipulatory capacities of primates.
DIFFERENCES WITHIN SPECIES
Patterns of Behavior
Within a species there should be some variability in genetically controlled patterns of behavior or there would be no opportunity for evolutionary change. Considerable literature has accumulated along these lines and while much of it is imperfect in method, all of it is consistent with the assumption of genetic differences in patterns of behavior.
The most extensive work has been done with sex (which is of course biologically inherited) and its effect upon reproductive patterns of behavior. Present evidence indicates (21) that in mammals both sexes may exhibit the patterns of behavior which are ordinarily considered to be characteristic of one sex. Under ordinary conditions one reaction tends to be favored over the other because of anatomical limitations and hormonal alteration of thresholds of stimulation which are ultimately determined by the segregation of X and Y chromosomes in the male parent.
Recently Young and his co-workers have found genetic differences within the male sex (22). Inbred strains of guinea pigs consistently differ in sexual behavior, and particularly in sex drive or motivation, from a heterozygous stock.
Hall (23) had previously made important genetic studies on the inheritance of a non-

sexual pattern of emotional behavior in the rat. Starting with a heterozygous stock he was able to select two separate strains of rats: one which defecated frequently when placed in an open area, and one which did not.
A large number of studies have been made on wildness and tameness, and fighting reactions of rats and mice (1). Most of these studies are connected with strain differences and there are very few on which good data on crossbreeding exist. Nevertheless, certain conclusions can be drawn. Wild rats and mice differ markedly from the tame strains, and the inbred strains of mice show large differences in fighting. Males are much more easily stimulated to fight than females. There is only one experiment which gives any clearcut genetic results since, in most cases, pure strains were not used in the crosses and complete experiments were not performed. The experiment of Dawson (27) is interesting in that he found that less than two genes would account for the differences in wildness and tameness which he tested. * At the present time Thompson and Fuller (24) are making a behavioral survey of inbred strains of mice and find wide differences in such traits as exploratory behavior. A program of crossbreeding is now under way.
Thus there is abundant evidence of the existence of genetic differences in patterns of behavior within species. These differences consist chiefly of variability in drives and emotions rather than any fundamental modification of the nature of the behavior patterns themselves.
Learning Capacities
Relatively few attempts have been made to study the variability of learning capacities within a species below the human level and one of the most ambitious of these was done by Tryon (25) in his experiment on the inheritance of maze-running ability in rats. Starting with a mixed stock of albino rats, he selected animals for good

33

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

and poor performances on a maze. This apparatus was entirely mechanical in nature so that human bias might be eliminated from the experiment, but the mechanism did make noise and caused other disturbances to the animals. After selection had gone on for several generations, almost complete separation was obtained between two groups of animals which were described as maze bright and maze dull. In a later experiment Tryon asked a graduate student to measure the ability of these animals in other mazes. Searle (26) tested the animals in thirty situations and found that the performance varied greatly on other pieces of apparatus and that the so-called dull animals performed better in about as many situations as did the so-called bright animals. He came to the conclusion that selection had largely operated through the emotional response of the rats, the dull animals being afraid of the maze and the bright ones not being alarmed by its mechanical clickings. The conclusion may be reached that the important genetic variability which existed in the stock was concerned with a pattern of behavior of timidity and its emotional causes rather than a direct modification of a general learning response.
At the present time Thompson (28) is attempting a similar experiment which involves selection for poor and good performance on the Hebb-Williams maze, which is nonmechanical in nature. Care is being taken to gentle the rats by handling before testing them. It is hoped that in this way selection will avoid fear reactions, and it will be interesting to see whether the differences obtained are less specific to the situation than in Tryon's work. However, at the present time the demonstrated intraspecific differences in learning capacities appear to be special in nature and produced through differences in emotional and motivational traits.

EXPERIMENTS ON THE INHERITANCE OF
BEHAVIOR PATTERNS IN THE DOG
Experimental Methods
With most of the above information at hand a large general experiment on heredity and behavior in the dog was set up at the Jackson Laboratory beginning in 1945. Breeds in this species have been selected over a period of centuries for differences in behavior, but very little scientific genetic work has been done because of the expense of rearing the animals. Humphrey and Warner (29) reported success in a selection program in German Shepherd dogs for performance as guide dogs to the blind, but the data given was insufficient for genetic analysis. James (30) found, as had Pavlov before him, that temperamental differences affected the performance of dogs in a conditioned reflex situation and that there appeared to be some breed differences of this sort.
With the advice and help of a number of leading scientists, the new experiment was set up to meet the following conditions: (1) The environment is kept as uniform as possible in order to magnify genetic differences between several dog breeds which were sampled from a wide variety of behavioral types. (2) An attempt was made to set up a favorable social environment and due emphasis was placed on the study of differences in patterns of social behavior. (3) The animals are tested in a large variety of situations with tests designed to bring out differences in both patterns of behavior and learning processes. Approximately a dozen tests of each sort are given to the animals. (4) The testing is carried on throughout the first year of life of the animal, since behavior in the same individual may change markedly with later development. It is also possible to study the animal's behavior at times when it has been modified by a relatively small amount of learning and a relatively large amount. (5) Two of the most different breeds are being studied by a crossbreeding program

34 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

including reciprocal crosses, backcrosses to the same mothers, and F2's. This and cross fostering makes it possible to study the effects of cultural as well as biological heredity.
Results* While it is not possible to give the final
results at the present time, several facts have been determined and can be reported. The work of Scott on genetic differences in patterns of behavior, and in particular social behavior, leads to the following conclusions. A comparative study of behavior patterns in domestic dogs and the wolf shows that there has been no basic change as a result of domestication and selection (31). Behavior patterns of the wolf have been suppressed or exaggerated by selection, but nothing essentially new has been added. It has been easy to find differences in patterns of behavior between the breed Samples (32). For example, when puppies are trained to stand quietly on the weighing scales for a period of one minute, more than 80 per cent of Cocker Spaniels will remain quiet by 16 weeks of age. At the opposite extreme are Wire-haired Fox Terriers which show an increasing proportion of animals which are continuously active and usually playfully aggressive as they grow older. The differences are statistically highly significant.
In most of the breeds tested, the majority of the animals show timidity reactions toward human beings in early puppyhood which rapidly disappear as they grow older. Such reactions are unusually prominent in the strain of African Basenjis tested. By contrast, Cocker Spaniels show only a small amount of timidity reactions which on the average do not decrease with additional human contact. This may be considered as a genetic difference in the process of socialization and as such has many implications
*One caution needs to be made in interpreting the results. Only small samples were taken of each breed, and while the differences observed demonstrate the range of variability in the dog they are not necessarily characteristic of the entire breeds concerned.

for human clinical studies of the effect of early environment (3).
Other examples which may be cited are the fact that Beagles show greater amounts of social investigation as puppies, that Fox Terriers show more aggressiveness than other breeds and that the African Basenjis show a lower amount of social attraction to people. A preliminary analysis of the number of genetic factors involved in the difference in attraction between Basenjis and Cocker Spaniels indicates that only a small number may be involved, agreeing with Dawson's work, although this conclusion may be modified with additional data and when additional tests are considered.
Large differences are also shown in physiological measurements which may be associated with emotional reactions. Fuller has found definite breed differences in the average heart rate, the degree to which heart rate is modified by environmental stimulation, and even in the average body temperatures (33). Such differences appear to be more definite and show less overlap than those involving patterns of behavior.
Royce (34) made a factorial analysis of 32 variables which were derived from tests of social, emotional and physiological reactions. He was able to find six well-defined factors, and it was indicated that further unidentified factors were present. Factors tentatively identified were behavioral timidity, psychophysiological timidity, hyperresponse of the heart to social stimulation, aggressiveness, activity level and audiogenic reactivity. It may be concluded that there are several identifiable traits of this type in the dog. While no factorial analysis has yet been made showing the relationship between these factors and tests of adaptability, the data indicate that emotional and physiological reactions have a profound effect on the capacity to learn and adapt in certain situations.
General adaptability. It has also been possible to study the general capacity for adaptability in the different breeds as studied under a standard environment.

35

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

This environment actually consists of many that seen in breeds like the Basenji and

specific situations, and Fuller (35) has Cocker Spaniel. If such a nervous individ-

shown that, while some breeds adjust very ual is given a great deal of security and is

well to most of these situations, other allowed to develop a close relationship

breeds and individuals may be limited in with a human being, he becomes observant,

their capacities. For example, the Wire- quick and retentive in learning situations.

haired Fox Terriers have been selected, Under other situations the animal may be-

like other Terrier breeds, for their ability come highly timid and easily distracted so

to fight. They show quick emotional re- that it is quite difficult to teach. In both

sponses and show little fear in most situa- this case and that of the Fox Terrier there

tions, and this may be helpful in some kinds appears to be a trait or group of traits

of learning. On the other hand, the ani- which make the animal highly adaptable

mals are very poorly adapted to living in in certain special situations, but which may

groups of their own kind. The normal limit adaptability in others. There is no

Jackson Laboratory environment duplicates indication that animals may possess a sin-

a natural situation in that the animals are gle trait of general adaptability.

raised within their own litters. Fox Terriers begin to be aggressive toward each other at 7 or 8 weeks of age and show an excessive tendency to attack one individual. These attacks become so severe that their object has to be removed in order to save its life, and we have been able only once to raise more than two or three animals together. The Fox Terriers are therefore very poorly adapted for living with other Fox Terriers.

Before going ahead to report on evidence on the ability of the dog to meet new situations, and which is more properly related to learning and intelligence, the available background information may be summarized. It has been easy to find differences between samples from the dog breeds in patterns of social behavior and the emotional and physiological reactions associated with them. Simple physiological measurements give the most clearcut differ-

A similar and perhaps more interesting result has been obtained with Shetland Sheepdogs. When these animals are raised in close association with human beings

ences. Certain emotional traits may make adjustment difficult in some situations, although they may facilitate learning of the type for which a breed has been selected.

from early puppyhood, they become ca-

pable of learning to carry out a very highly

TESTING GENETIC DIFFERENCES IN

complicated set of commands in connec-

LEARNING ABILITY

tion with sheep-herding and are very easily Learning in the dog has been tested in a

trained to the proper behavior for a house variety of problems. Some of these involve

dog. When raised under the Jackson Lab- overt and emotional patterns of behavior,

oratory conditions, which appear to be while in others an attempt has been made

highly satisfactory for most breeds, but in to eliminate these factors as far as possible.

which the contact with human beings is The results will be illustrated by a series

more limited, the animals adjust satisfac- of three tests which are regularly given to

torily to their littermates but perform very all animals.

poorly in many tests and training situations. The same characteristic appears to account for the failure in one environment and success in another, namely, a high degree of emotional sensitivity. This trait has been measured by Fuller as heart rate change and tends to be twice as great as

A description of test procedures has been published (36), and detailed accounts of the genetic results on each type of problem are in preparation. Evidence for hereditary differences in capacity to perform in a variety of situations is found in each of the three experiments. Our experience is that

36 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

almost any psychological or physiological The results for the first five days of train-

test is affected by the genetic background ing are summarized in Table 1. The data

of the subjects. The genetic contribution for this table were obtained from 142 dogs,

to variance is probably more striking in divided exactly equally between the sexes.

physiological and emotional reactions than In general, animals improve steadily with

in pure learning situations. The first test to be described, lead training, involves emotional training rather than high-level problem solving. The other two test series, discrimination-delayed response and spatial orientation, are simple problems in which an attempt is made to accustom each animal to the test environment before actually evaluating his performance.

training, although individuals do not show the beautiful regularity of the calculated curves. The average dog of our sample obtained 8.1 demerits on the initial day of training, and improved by 1.2 points on each day of training. No difference between males and females was found on total scores, but the sexes differed significantly in the kind of demerits which they acquired. Males were more vocal, and fe-

Leash Control Training

males tended to drag behind to a greater

Leash control training covers a ten-day extent.

period, five days during the 19th week of age and 5 days at 21 weeks. Dogs are individually trained to walk over a course which includes outside paths, entrance into a building, passing through doors and climbing stairs. The objective is to train each subject to run close to the left side of the trainer on a slack lead. Experienced trainers assign demerits to each dog in five categories: (1) Balking in the open or at doors; (2) Fighting the leash; (3) Position with regard to trainer; (4) Interference with trainer, and (5) Vocalization. A perfect performance would be rated as zero;

The breed group scores were subjected to analysis of variance and the individual means were compared by Tukey's (37) technique. We may conclude that the breeds fall into three distinct groups: a high group including Basenjis and Shetland Sheepdogs; a middle group consisting of Beagles and Basenji X Cocker hybrids; and a low group of Cocker Spaniels and Wirehaired Terriers. A more sensitive type of comparison involves the five categories of demerits which were recorded separately. Figure 1 shows the results. (See p. 43.)

the maximum number of demerits under From left to right the columns for each

the scoring system is 18. Trainers alternate breed represent total demerits in five cate-

in handling each dog so as to reduce pos- gories, fighting the lead, position, vocaliza-

sible observer bias. The correlation be- tion, balking and interference. Not only

tween odd-even trials, corrected for the re- do the breeds differ widely in total score,

gression of scores on days, is 0.856, indicat- but the part-score profiles are highly char-

ing that this is a reliable test of perform- acteristic. We have employed the relation-

ance.

i ship test of Osgood and Suci (38) to deter-

mine simultaneously the degree of profile

TABLE 1

COMPARISON OF BREED SAMPLES ON LEAD TRAINING

Breed

Initial Demerits Daily Change

and absolute score resemblance between breeds. By this method the Beagles, Cocker Spaniels and Basenji X Cocker Spaniel hybrids form a relatively close group; the other three groups are widely separated,

Basenji Beagle Cocker Spaniel Shetland Sheepdog Wirehaired Terriers
Bas. x C.S. AU dogs

9.2±.3 8.8±.4 5.5±.4 10.3±.8 5.2±.3 9.3±.4 8.1 ±.4

--l.l±.l --1.8±.2 - .5±.2 --1.4±.3 - .7±.l --1.6±.l --1.2±.2

both from this median group and from each other. The individuation of response patterns appears to be strongly influenced by heredity. The possible significance of this approach to the problem of how hered-

37

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ity affects intelligent behavior will be taken of correct responses in the 50-trial test peri-

up later.

od. The order of ranking of the breed

Discrimination and Delayed Response Lead training involves learning to in-
hibit non-adaptive responses and may be considered simpler than learning to solve

samples varies according to the measure we select. Analysis of variance has been used to evaluate the probability that the breed samples are really different in rate of train-

problems. The discrimination-delayed response series of tests requires that the subjects learn to associate a swinging panel with an open corridor leading to food. A stationary panel indicates a closed corridor.

ing and in consistency of response after being trained. Again using Tukey's method for comparing individual means, the samples of Beagles and Wirehaired Terriers appear as superior performers. The

The apparatus is T-shaped and contains a movable barrier so that subjects may be forced into one or another of the arms of the T as a part of the training process. Animals "pass" the test when they have a run of correct responses significant at the

results with the Basenjis, Cocker Spaniels and their hybrids show great overlap between genetic groups. Probably another hybridization experiment will yield more information on the hereditary factors in this particular performance than will the

1 per cent level (39), or when there is a Cocker-Basenji cross which has been prosimilarly significant preponderance of cor- ductive in other phases of the project.

rect responses over specified blocks of the Passing on to a consideration of breed testing according to the Chi-square test. A differences in the delayed response test, we dog is considered to fail if he does not must restrict our study to those subjects

meet either criterion within 158 training trials. Dogs which pass are given 50 additional trials and are then tested on delayed response. For this test the procedure is altered by dropping a screen over the starting box, thus cutting off the view of the

which have previously met the criterion for discrimination. This reduces the sample size and introduces a possible selective factor. Hence these results have not been subjected to detailed genetic analysis. However, the sample is large enough for us to

moving panel. The dog is released after various periods and must base his choice upon some sort of memory of the stimulus (or of his anticipated response).

make certain deductions regarding the relationship between the ability to respond correctly in a discrimination test and the ability to respond in the same situation

Three different comparisons of results when the delay factor is introduced. Table

on the cue response test are presented in 3 summarizes the relationship between the

Table 2. These are the per cent of subjects level of delay attained and the previous

meeting the criterion, the average number performance on the cue response test.

of trials needed by the successful subjects The dogs which failed to establish a satis-

to meet the criterion, and the percentage factory delayed response performance dur-

TABLE 2

A COMPARISON OF PERFORMANCE OF BREEDS OF DOGS ON THE CUE RESPONSE TEST

Breed or hybrid

N Passing Rank Trials tocriterion* Post-Criterion* Average Rank Percent Correct Rank

Basenji Beagle C. Spaniel
W.H. Terrier Bas. x C.S. C.S. x Bas.

17 12 3 68 5 74 15 13 2 24 1 88 15 10 5 53 4 77 15 15 1 39 3 84
18 11 6 37 2 71 22 15 4 87 6 76

·Values in these columns are based upon animals meeting the pass criterion.

5 1 3
2 6 4

38 Eugenics Quarterly TABLE 3

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ACCURACY OF CUE RESPONSE AND ABILITY TO PERFORM DELAYED RESPONSE

Level of delay attained. Sec.
Number Mean percent correct--C.R.
Range of percent correct--C.R.

0 33
73 50-94

1
19 84 56-100

5 13 77 56-92

10+
17
86
66-100

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ing their training period had the lowest that the correlation of delayed response average performance on the cue response performance, with a genetic difference on test, while the dogs with best performance one hand and a neurological deficit on the on delay were highest on cue response. other, does not lead to the conclusion that However, there is no clear trend in the fig- heredity operates by producing a neuroures for dogs with intermediate perform- logical defect. This is merely a lead which ance, and the range of response and per- must be investigated by direct methods. formance within categories of delayed response performance is very large. We con- Spatial Orientation clude that the two tests are related, but The final test to be considered has been that they measure somewhat different abil- called spatial orientation. This is related ities. to the multiple choice test which has been
At the present time the data is insuffi- previously used to study the intelligence cient to make definite conclusions regard- level of animals. The apparatus consists ing differences in the ability to delay re- of an elevated structure, accessible by sponse in our breed samples. It is probable ramps, which is placed in the animals' own that Beagles and Wirehaired Terriers are living quarters so that they have ample significantly better than the other animals, opportunity to explore it. There are three but we will need larger numbers before alternative pathways to the goal table. By making a definitive statement. The abili- rotating a cage on top of the table, all but ties involved in the delayed response test one approach can be blocked off. The have been widely studied by psychologists. same approach is never correct on two sucMost of the work has been done with pri- cessive trials. The problem differs from a mates. A high level performance seems to classical multiple choice test in having the depend upon the integrity of the cerebral three approaches quite distinct and in alfrontal lobes (40). However, even follow- lowing for the possibility of a completely ing destruction of these areas it has been visual solution. Errors in this test consist found possible to improve performance by of climbing the wrong ramp, attempting to means of sedative drugs or by reducing the get on the apparatus at points other than environmental stimuli so that no distract- the ramps, and any deviation from a path ing factors are present during the delay which leads directly from one ramp to period (41, 42). We have shown with dogs another. As in the other tests described, that success in the delayed response is there are differences between the genetic closely correlated with the ease of eliciting stocks in their ability on this test. Figure 2 the orientation reaction to the stimulus. (p. 43), summarizes the results for six conShould the apparent genetic differences in secutive trials on the first problem. Initial the delayed response ability be confirmed differences in performance persist throughwith larger numbers of subjects, there is an out the series. On a second similar problem opportunity to relate this difference to brain the Basenjis and Wirehaired Terriers conareas which are known to be of particular tinued to make more errors. The correlaimportance for it. It must be emphasized tion between error scores on the two prob-

39

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

lems is .60. This is indicative of a highly significant relationship between the two problems, but it is not high enough for a very accurate prediction of an individual's performance. The breed differences are significant on each trial except the last.
Table 4 summarizes some results of a correlational analysis of the spatial orientation test. The upper row of the table gives the intraclass correlation which is the ratio between the variance attributable to genetic effects operating within the breed samples to the variance of individuals picked at random from the whole population (43). The higher values indicate greater efficiency in bringing out genetic differences. The second row gives the correlation between adjacent pairs of trials for individual scores. There is no distinct trend in the value of the intraclass correlation coefficient. In other terms the test does hot increase nor decrease systematically in efficiency as a means of detecting hereditary differences. However, the efficiency of the test as a predictor of individual performance rises with repetition to a maximum of approximately 0.80. The interpretation of this paradox will require further research into the generality of the phenomenon.

TABLE 4

INTRACLASS CORRELATION (R^) AND BETWEEN
TRIAL TETRACHORIC CORRELATION (RTet)
FOR SPATIAL ORIENTATION TEST

Trial
Rj
RTet

Î 23456
.16 .18 .07 .19 .21 .06
-30 .51 .74 .79 .78

Correlation between Tests
Perhaps the most interesting question which may be asked at this point is whether the ability to do one test well is correlated with the ability on other tests. The three tests which have been described are quite dissimilar, and one might predict that there would be no relationship between them; on the other hand, one might suspect that some general factor, such as docility, timidity, or specific relationship

to the experimenter, might pervade all the
tests.
The scores for all three tests were converted to a standard 10-point scale on which 1 represents the poorest 2 per cent of the cases and 10 the best 2 per cent of the cases. Subjects are assigned intermediate scores so as to result in a normal distribution of scores in the population. This population will have a mean score of 5.5 with a standard deviation of 2. Justification for forcing scores arbitrarily into a normal distribution is based upon the fact that measurements of behavior do not have a firm physical substrate such as do weights and lengths. The difference between 100 errors and 150 errors is not the same as the difference between 5 errors and 55 errors. Most measurements of behavior are the resultant of numerous forces acting in various directions. In such cases one would expect the behavioral characteristics to be distributed into approximately normal distribution. Hence, when there is apparent discontinuity in the measurement of a behavior pattern the measurement scales should be carefully scrutinized. Transformation to a normal form of distribution will ordinarily facilitate analysis of results. Of course, either experimental and sampling procedures, genetic deviations or threshold effects may interfere with normality of distribution of the measured trait. In our experiments we have attempted to keep the environmental factors as consistent as possible for all animals and a standardization of scores has been based as far as practicable upon a population sample drawn from a diversity of genetic types. Tetrachoric correlation coefficients between these three tests were calculated by the method of Davidoff and Goheen (44). The Values are: lead training and discrimination, 0.37; lead training and spatial orientation, --.12; discrimination and spatial orientation, --.17. The low degree of association between scores indicates that no single factor of intelligence or docility can account for their distributions.

40 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

The specificity of learning ability in particularly amenable to physiological and

these three situations gives some clues to genetic interpretation.

the kind of factors which may be operating. Whenever the student of behavior has

Hall (45) states that many studies have looked for genetic differences in capacity or shown generality in maze learning ability, type of response, he has found them. It is

fearfulness, aggressiveness, and exploratory drive. Hunger and thirst drives, however, appear to be situation specific. Breed differences are more clearcut in the leash control test which includes many emotional responses, but they are also found in the two tests where an effort was made to eliminate emotional disturbance. Observation during testing suggests that residual emotional disturbance and low food motivation may account for some poor individual performances. When the genetic experiment is completed and the learning and emotional test results compared in detail, we may know more about the relation of hereditary differences in emotionality and drive specificity to learning in different situations.

likewise true that the physiologist who compares different species or different strains within a species finds that the genes have an influence upon diverse organic processes of the body. Since genetic effects can be demonstrated both on behavior and on physiological processes, it might be expected that correlations between events on the psychological and physiological levels within genetic strains would yield valuable information relating the two levels of integration. Attempts to make such correlations in humans have not met critical standards. In animal subjects spurious correlations may result from the chance isolation of two unrelated processes within the same line. However, the method appears to have usefulness, in spite of obvious difficulties.

Of course, the physical correlates of intelli-

How Does Heredity Operate?

gence and personality may be tucked away

What sort of general conclusions can be so deeply within the cerebral cortex that

drawn from this research? In the first place, they will evade our most persistent search.

it appears that hereditary differences are It must be admitted that except for Lash-

shown more clearly as one analyzes test re- ley (46), practically no one has looked very

sults in more detail. For example, the dif- hard in the nervous system for individual

ferences in leash control might be attrib- differences of organic pattern. It has been

uted to variation along a single scale of easier to study more accessible systems even

docility. An alternate view would be that though their relationship to behavior must

genetics works by increasing or decreasing be less intimate.

the probability of particular motor re- There is also a strong possibility that the

sponses under particular stimulus condi- structure of behavior is molded to the con-

tions. These responses are the fundamen- |tour of a very large number of organic

tal genetic traits, and their grouping into foundation blocks and bears no simple

such categories as docility, timidity, intelli-/ relationship to any organic characteristic

gence, and the like are artificial constructs! considered in isolation. The use of genetic

which are useful in certain experimental | techniques may aid in testing this possibil-

situations. It is not logically necessary that' ity, since individuals can be synthesized

the genetic organization of behavior corre- who will vary independently in each sepa-

spond with the organization which psycho- rate characteristic. The experiment which

logical science has constantly employed. It has been described in part in this paper

is possible that the analysis of the way in represents a modest beginning.

which heredity contributes to individual

differences in behavior can assist in the iso-

SUMMARY

lation of behavioral categories which are Genetics may conceivably affect adaptive

41

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

behavior either by providing the animal with fixed methods of adaptation for often repeated environmental situations, or it may affect the ability of the animal to learn to adapt to novel situations, or both. The evidence from studies of species differences in behavior generally confirms the theory that genetic differences in patterns of behavior exist, although in the species of mammals which have been thoroughly studied, there is also evidence of a cultural inheritance of behavior patterns. In any case, genetics does not put adaptive behavior in a strait-jacket, since in any species there is a variety of behavioral patterns which are tried out when adjustment is not immediately obtained.
Studies on differences between species in capabilities for learning and meeting new situations are not so satisfactory. There is evidence that the basic processes of learning are very similar throughout the vertebrates and probably the entire animal kingdom. There is also evidence for existence of complex learning abilities, but whether these exist apart from the differences in sensory and motor capacities and the limitations imposed by special patterns of behavior is still a matter of some doubt.
Within species there is again abundant evidence of genetic differences in patterns of behavior involving both voluntary and involuntary patterns of response. There is also evidence that the ability to learn in specific situations is strongly modified by differences in patterns of behavior, particularly those involving emotional reactions. So far, there has been no clear evidence of genetic differences in learning capacities which exist apart from differences in behavior patterns and their emotional and motivational causes, or which are associated with gross neurological defects.
Both between species and within species there is evidence of genetic differences in the ability to adapt to a wide variety of environmental situations. When such cases are analyzed, it is found that these are the

result of special patterns of response which tend to make the animal highly adaptable in certain situations but may limit its power of adjustment in other situations.
Genetic differences have been measured in the dog in a wide variety of situations which emphasize learning as well as those which bring out differences in patterns of behavior and motivational and emotional reactions. Certain general findings have been made. There are a variety of social and emotional traits which may affect learning, and which are related to the learning tasks for which the breeds have been selected. Genetic differences have also been demonstrated in a variety of learning situations. In any kind of test, part scores give more clearcut genetic differences than measures of overall adjustment. Likewise, there may be very little correlation between learning in one situation and another. All this is consistent with results on other animals and points to the specificity of genetic effects on behavior. The physiological and structural basis of this specificity is yet to be discovered.
A Program for the Future Animal research may be expected to
make significant contributions in the area of psychogenetics, since genetic techniques can be utilized at full efficiency only with laboratory animals. These studies can be continuously integrated with those performed on humans. The situation is something like that of relating brain function to behavior. Planned experiments are possible only with the lower animals, but accidental injuries to man allow us to make valuable comparisons. Nature performs genetic experiments with man also, in producing identical twins and in perpetuating mutations which are linked with specific metabolic errors. A program of research for the future must include:
1. Continued study of the heredity of specific simple elements of behavior. This is best done with pure lines of animals, but studies on twins can also contribute.

42 Eugenics Quarterly

2. Further research on the organization geneticists, physiologists, psychiatrists, edu-

of intelligence in both man andhis mam- cators andothers interested in human wel-

malian relatives. We must know more fare. There aresigns that thecold warbe-"~"\

about what kinds of differences to look for tween environmentalists and hereditarians I

between genetic groups.

is grinding to a halt, because neither side I

3. Continued search for structural sub- can support an extreme position. The time l

strates of behavior which are gene con- for a comprehensive theory of therelation- I

trolled. These may exist at the molecular ship between heredity and intelligence is i

level where they will be studied bythe not here, but we are in the best position I

chemist, or at grosser levels where the biol- ever to collect new facts, evaluate them in I

ogist will be in charge.

the light of other facts, develop limited I

4. Continued interest from psychologists, theories and putthem toexperimental test. J

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

REFERENCES

1. SCOTT, J. P. and FREDERICSON, E. The causes of fight- 24. THOMPSON, W. R. Differences in exploratory drive in

ing in mice and rats. Physiol. Zool. 1951, 24, 273-309.

fifteen strains of mice. Canadian J. Psych. (In press)

2. TINBERGEN, N. "The Study of Instinct." Oxford, Ox- 25. TRYON, R. C. Individual differences. In: "Compara-

ford U. Press, 1951.

tive Psychology," F. A. Moss, ed. New York, Prentice

3. SCOTT, J. P. The process of socialization in higher

Hall, 1946. See also detailed articles in J. Comp. Psych.,

animals. In: "Inter-relations between the Social Envi-

1930-1941.

ronment and Psychiatric Disorders, "New York, Milbank 26. SEARLE, L. V. The organization of hereditary maze-

Memorial Fund, 1953.

brightness and maze-dullness. Genetic Psych. Mono-

4. LORENZ, K. Z. The comparative method in studying

graphs, 1949, 39, 279-325.

innate behavior patterns. Symposia So.Exp. Biol.1950, 27. DAWSON, W. M. Inheritance of wildness and tameness

4, 221-268. NewYork, Academic Press.

in mice. Genetics, 17:296-326.

5. LORENZ, K. Z. Der Kumpan in der Umwelt des Vogels. 28. THOMPSON, W. R. Exploratory behavior as a function

Jour. f. Ornothologie, 1935,83, 137-213, 289-413.

of hunger in "bright" and "dull" rats. J. Comp. &

For English summary seeThe companion in the bird's

Physiol. Psych. 1953, 46,323-327.

world. Auk, 1937, 54,245-273.

29. HUMPHREY, E. and WARNER, L. "Working Dogs."

6. SCOTT, J. P. Social behavior, organization and leader-

Baltimore, Johns Hopkins Press, 1934.

ship in a small flock of domestic sheep. Comp. Psych. 30. JAMES, W. T. Morphological form and its relation

Monograph No.96, 1945, 18 (4) pp. 1-29.

to behavior. In: "TheGenetic and Endocrinic Basis

7. HEDIGER, H. "Wild Animals in Captivity." London, Butterworth,1950.

for Differences in Form and Behavior," C. R. Stokard, et al. Philadelphia, Wistar Institute, 1941.

8. ERRINGTON, P. L. "Personal Communication." 9. HERB, D. O. "The Organization of Behavior." New

31. SCOTT, J. P. Thesocial behavior of dogs and wolves. Annals N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1950, 51, 1009-1021.

York, John Wiley &Sons, 1949. 10. BERNSTEIN, L. A note on Christie's "Experimental
naiveté and experiential naiveté." Psych. Bull. 1952, 49, 38-40.
11. KELLOGG, W. N. and KELLOGG, L. A. The Ape and
the Child." New York, McGraw-Hill, 1933. 12. HAYES, C. "The Ape in Our House." New York,
Harper, 1951.
13. MAIER, N. R. F. and SCHNEIRLA, T. C. "Principles of
Animal Psychology." New York, McGraw-Hill, 1935.

32. SCOTT, J. P., and CHARLES, M. S. A case of genetic differences modified by thresholds and by habit formation. J. Genet. Psych. 1954 (In press)
33. FULLER, J. L. Genetic variability in physiologicalconstants of dogs. Am. J. Physiol. 1951, 166, 20-24.
34. ROYCE, J. R. "A Factorial Study of Emotionality in the Dog." U. of Chicago, Ph.D. Thesis, 1951.
35. FULLER, J. L. Cross-sectional and longitudinal studies of adjustive behavior in dogs. Ann.N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1953, 56, 214-224.

14.
15.
16. 17.
18. 19.

GARDNER, L. P. and NISSEN, H. W. Simple discrimination behavior of young chimpanzees: comparisons with human aments and domestic animals. J. Genet. Psych. 1948, 72, 145-164. RAZRAN, G. H. S. Conditioned responses in animals other than dogs. Psych. Bull. 1933, 30, 261-324. BOYCOTT, B. B., and YOUNG. J. Z. The comparative study of learning. Symp. Soc. Exp. Biol. 1950, 4, 432-453. WARDEN, C. J., JENKINS, T. N. and WARNER, L. H. "Comparative Psycholoey," Vol.III, Vertebrates, New York, Ronald Press, 1936. WARDEN. C. J. Animal intelligence. Scientific American, 1951, 184,64-68. NISSEN, H. W. Phylogenetic comparison. In: "Handbook of Experimental Psychology," S. S. Stevens, ed. New York. Wiley, 1951.

36.
37. 38.
39.
40. 41.
42.

SCOTT, J. P. and FULLER, J. L. "Manual of Dog Testing Techniques." R. B. Jackson Lab. Bar Harbor, Maine. 1950. TUKEY, J. W. Comparing individual means in the analysis of variance. Biometrics, 1949, 5, 99-114. OSGOOD, C. E. and Suci, G. J. A measure of relation determined by both mean difference and public information. Psychol. Bull. 1952, 49, 251-262. GRANT, D. A. New statistical criteria for learningand problem solving in experiments involving repeated trials. Psychol. Bull., 1946, 43, 272-282. JACOBSEN, C.F. Studies of cerebral function in primates. Comp. Psychol. Monog., 1936, 13(3): 1-68. MALMO, R. B. Interference factors in delayed response in monkeys after removal of frontal lobes. J. Neurophysiol., 1942, 5, 295-308. PRIBRAM, K. H. Some physical and pharmacological factors affecting delayed response performance of

20. Harlove, H. F., MEYER, D. and SETTLAGE, P. H. The

baboons following frontal lobectomy. J. Neurophysiol.,

effects of large cortical lesions on the solution of oddity

1950, 13, 373-382.

problems by monkeys. J. Comp.&Physiol. Psych. 1951, 43. SNEDECOR, G. W. "Statistical methods." 4th Ed.p. 243.

44, 320-326.

Iowa State Coll. Press. Ames. 1946.

21. BEACH, F. A. "Hormones and Behavior." New York, 44. DAVIDOFF, M. W. and GOHEEN, H. W. A table for the

Hoeber, 1948.

rapid determination of the tetrachoric correlation

22. VALENSTEIN, E. S., and YOUNG, W. C. Strength of sex

coefficient. Psychometrika, 1953, 18, 115-121.

drive in genetically homogenous and heterogenous stocks 45. HALL, C.S. Individual Differences. Ch.II. In: Stone,

of male guinea pigs. Anat. Rec. 1952, 113 (4), 39.

"Comparative Psychology," Prentice Hall, N. Y. 195I.

23. HALL, C. S. Thegenetics of behavior. In "Handbook 46. LASHLEY, K. S. Structural variation in the nervous

of Experimental Psychology," S. S. Stevens, ed. New system in relation to behavior. Psychol. Rev., 1947,

York. John Wiley, 1951.

54, 325-334.

43

F IpIv IB
Basenjis

F I P "V I B I I
Bas x C.S.

F IP 'V IB
Cocker Spaniels

F ip iv iBi i
Shetland Sheep

F Ip IV ·B ' I
Wire-Haired Terriers
FIGURE 1

F Ip IV ' B ' I
Beagles

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

FIGURE 2

