Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The path between genes and behavioral characters
John L. Fuller
To cite this article: John L. Fuller (1956) The path between genes and behavioral characters, Eugenics Quarterly, 3:4, 209-212, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1956.9987295 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1956.9987295
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

THE PATH BETWEEN GENES AND BEHAVIORAL CHARACTERS
JOHN L. FULLER
Roscoe B. Jackson Memorial Laboratory

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN PERSONALITY are
conspicuous in men, dogs, horses and even in such species as white mice or chicken. Geneticists generally accept the idea that part of this variation is the result of hereditary constitutional factors. There is much evidence to bolster this belief. An animal experimenter can produce aggressive or non-aggressive strains of rats by breeding selectively from a miscellaneous group of laboratory animals. The good disposition of present-day laboratory rats is the result of selection of manageable animals by a generation of biologists. If the experimenter is interested in intelligence, he can develop a strain of animals who quickly learn to negotiate a complicated maze. Selection in the opposite direction will produce another strain whose members find great difficulty in learning the maze. It is not intrinsically more difficult to develop stocks with a particular form of behavior than to develop stocks which are large or small, disease resistant or susceptible. In fact, comparative psychologists find that the different breeds of fowl or dogs show patterns of behavior which are almost as good identifying characters as are size, color, and body conformation.
An extreme example has recently been reported in bees. These insects are known to communicate with each other by means of dance activity. Von Frisch has shown that the form of the dances conveys information to other members of the hive regarding the direction and distance of a source of food. Recently it has been found that the style of dance differs in Italian and Austrian bees. The basic mode of communication, the grammar of the language, is the same for both races, but one

might fancifully say that the two groups inherit different vocabularies.
Learning probably plays a minor part in the development of bee "language." The situation is quite different in higher animals. Often it seems as though heredity played a part in determining which parts of the environment attracted most attention. This can affect the capacity to learn specific acts. The effects of heredity upon the final behavior are indirect, and predictable only for a particular environment.
The great bulk of investigations on the inheritance of behavioral characteristics in man have utilized the twin study method. Recently, Cattell and others have applied complex methods of analysis to the study of family resemblances in personality which have potentially broader significance than the twin investigations. Most readers are well aware of the difficulties in interpreting observations on humans, where the contributions of heredity and environment are difficult to disentangle. In spite of these difficulties, however, the general conclusion that heredity has a very pervasive effect upon human behavioral variability appears to be justified. The direct studies of family resemblances and the analogy with animal results point in the same direction.
As we become more sophisticated in our approach to the nature-nurture problem, we are no longer satisfied with demonstrating that genetics plays some part in the occurrence of a certain mode of behavior. Take schizophrenia, for example. Numerous studies on the relatives of schizophrenics show a concentration of this disease in families. Environmental causes can, of course, be found, but the same

209

210 Eugenics Quarterly-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

stresses in a less vulnerable family group do not appear to have as disastrous consequences. Thus, many psychiatrists accept the view that there is an inherited constitutional factor of susceptibility to schizophrenia. This does not rule out the importance of parental rejection or psychological trauma. Complicated diseases have complicated causes. Unfortunately, we have little idea of the nature of this vulnerability, and until some physiological basis is demonstrated the constitutional hypothesis must always be regarded as tenative. Perhaps, after all, there is some very specific combination of experiences not easily detectable in ordinary case histories which could and would produce schizophrenia in every individual exposed to these circumstances.
Since we do not know a physical basis for schizophrenia, we might turn to a consideration of other conditions which offer some clues to the gene-behavior relationship. One of the clearest examples of an interaction between a genetic deficiency and a behavioral character is found in effect phenylketonuria, fundamentally a disorder in the metabolism of the amino acids, phenylalanine. The abnormal metabolic products apparently produce a toxic state in which the brain does not function properly. Some success in the control of this disorder has been reported when individuals were fed diets so low in phenylalanine that fewer toxic products were formed. Knowledge of causes may lead eventually to a workable therapy. In this particular case a behavioral characteristic--here a specific form of mental deficiency--has been linked with an inherited enzymatic deficiency. It is well known that the control of enzyme activity is a major function of genes. In fact, some geneticists believe that all gene effects upon complicated processes will be found, upon close analysis, to depend upon enzymatic processes. One is tempted to consider phenylketonuria as a typical example of genetic effects upon behavior. The search for a pathway be-

tween genes and behavioral variability becomes, then, essentially a problem of biochemistry. We should look for metabolic deficiencies in other forms of mental disorders, particularly when they occur predominantly in particular families.
It is likely that this approach will pay dividends and that it will be especially important with regard to well-differentiated specific disorders of behavior. The range of genetic influences upon behavior is, however, much wider than this. Most of the differences between pure animal strains are not really behavioral deficiencies, rather they are matters of different strengths of response or levels of motivation. So-called dull rats, selected because they make many errors in a maze, are not imbeciles. In different kinds of tests they may even surpass the "bright" animals. In our psychological comparison of dog breeds at the Jackson Laboratory we have found no one breed to be consistently superior on all tests. Instead, there are characteristic patterns of abilities which seem to be dependent upon heredity. It may be that enzymatic differences will be found related to these patterns of abilities, but this approach does not seem at the moment to offer the greatest hope for advancement of knowledge. There are just too many possibilities and too few scientists. Instead, it seems that researches at a level between the biochemical and psychological are required. In other words, genetic differences between strains can be made into a tool for physiological psychology.
There has been so little done in this area that any statements must be more a program for the future than an account of established principles. We might start with the inheritance of variation in structure. A great deal is known about the development of the nervous system in men and animals suffering from major inherited deficiencies. However, we cannot point to any structural basis for the difference between "maze bright" and "maze dull" rats, between aggressive and non-aggressive

211

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

breeds of dogs, or between Phi Beta Kappas and high grade morons. Perhaps there are none; perhaps we have not looked in the right places. A great deal of new knowledge is available concerning localization of brain function, particularly with respect to emotional behavior whose neural mechanisms are probably similar in man and animals. Investigation into the organic basis of emotional differences in animal strains might throw a great deal of light upon constitutional factors in normal emotionality.
A related area concerns the pattern of emotional response in the periphery of the body. We know that "butterflies in the stomach," headache, high blood pressure, and other symptoms may follow a prolonged psychological stress. These symptoms occur in organs which are not under voluntary control and whose functions are integrated by the division of the nervous system known as the autonomic. Lacy at the Fels Research Institute and Wenger at UCLA have clearly shown that each individual has a characteristic autonomic response which appears to be stable over the years. Our experiments with dog breeds at Bar Harbor have shown that the pattern of autonomic reactivity is a characteristic for each breed, although some overlap is found. If we put all of these results together, we see the outlines of a concept of constitutional differences in physiology which might have a far-reaching effect upon personal adjustment. These effects are not highly specific. Life experience determines the kinds of things to which individuals react strongly. One can still believe in the environmental determination of attitudes. The role of physiological differences lies in the production of the psychosomatic disorders, and in the influence which these in turn have upon behavior. If exposure to stresses results in unpleasant physiological reactions, we learn to avoid stressful situations.
Another path which has been suggested for gene action upon behavior is through

the endocrine glands. The effect of hormones upon behavior can be clearly demonstrated in animal material. It is best defined in areas relating to reproduction and care of the young. In many animals the mating drive can be turned off and on by the application of hormones. Interesting experiments by Young at Kansas have shown that the strength of the mating drive is a characteristic of the genetic nature of a strain. Young worked with guinea pigs and developed quantitative methods for measuring the sexual activity of males and females. A certain amount of sex hormone is necessary in both males and females to arouse sexual activity, but additional amounts of hormone do not arouse high drive in a subject which has inherited a low capacity for sexual response. Hormonal effects upon behavior in man are less specific and learning seems to be much more important. The data as a whole suggest that genes may somehow regulate the ultimate level of motivation and that hormones and other chemical factors trigger off a response which has constitutional limits. We should like to see more research upon inherited differences in hormone sensitivity using behavioral measures of hormone effects. Some studies at this laboratory on the effects of cortisone showed that the strain-specific "personality" pattern of mice was very stable in spite of great variations in the amount of hormone.
We have some basis for believing that progress is being made in the analysis of the relation between genetic and motivational characteristics. Whether we are ready for a similar analysis with respect to intellectual capacities is doubtful. We no longer think of intelligence as a single trait, and we recognize it as an abstraction which may be useful for our predicting the success of students in college, or perhaps their likelihood of winning an award on "The $64,000 Question." Modern studies tend to emphasize the numerous factors which go into our concept of intelligence. (See, for example, a report in Eugenics

212 Eugenics Quarterly

Quarterly, June, 1956 by Vandenberg on the Hereditary Abilities Study at the University of Michigan.) We do not yet know enough about the physical basis of different intellectual abilities to predict what pathways may lie between the genes and these behavioral characteristics. At present, therefore, it would seem that such traits are best studied at a purely psyschological level. The investigation of the paths between genes and behavior should concentrate for the time being on the study of motivation. Here, experimental psychologists have many methods, and only a few have been actually employed in psychological genetic investigations. It would be extremely interesting to find out, for example, whether hereditary differences can be shown in the strength of motivations which are not as fundamentally biological as sex and hunger. What about curiosity and gregariousness, for example? Techniques are available which would permit an investigation of these problems in animals and in children.

Of course, the more we go beyond the biological motivations we find that we know less about the physiological basis. Hence, such genetic studies must go hand in hand with physiological investigations. There is a great unexplored area between the gene conceived as a biochemical agent and an organism conceived as an individual personality. We can be reasonably sure that the genes have something to do with personality, but the area between is only vaguely known. The author has tried to suggest some areas in which exploration at the present time might prove most profitable. Essentially, this is a plea for considering the physiological aspects of psychogenetics along with the statistical. We need to do more than count the number of individuals suffering from "inherited" psychological defects. We need to know how genes operate in a particular environment to produce healthy or defective personalities.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Of interest to social and biological scientists:

CONTEMPORARY PSYCHOLOGY

containing

A Journal of Reviews
Critical reviews of current books--reviews of scholarly value and literary merit
Reviews of films, with sources and prices listed A letters-to-the-editor department The editor's comment on psychology's current news in books

Single copy $1.00 Subscription $8.00 Foreign $8.50

Established January 1956 Edwin G. Boring, Harvard University, Editor

Order from.

American Psychological Association

1333 Sixteenth Street N. W.

Washington 6, D. C.

