Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Prospects in human genetics
N/A
To cite this article: N/A (1959) Prospects in human genetics, Eugenics Quarterly, 6:1, 36-39, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1959.9987389 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1959.9987389
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

PROSPECTS IN HUMAN GENETICS
EDITOR'S NOTE:

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

Where in human genetics can we hope to make the most progress in the next twenty years, both in regard to research and practical application? This question was asked of a representative group of geneticists and doctors. The replies are published below.

C. LEE BUXTON, M.D., Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical School, Yale University
The effect of radiation on chromosomal mutations in anthropoids, but twenty years may not be enough time to more than begin a genetic study of this sort.

GORDON ALLEN, M.D., National Institute of Mental Health

LEE R. DICE, Laboratory of Vertebrate Biology, University of Michigan

Selective agents acting on polymorphic traits (e.g., blood groups)
Mutation rates and effects of radiation on the population
Integration of human genetics with the medical disciplines
Useful empiric risk figures for genetic counseling
Detection of heterozygous carriers of hereditary disease
Estimation of human gene frequencies
Specification of human biochemical differences
Mapping of the human chromosomes Pathways of gene action in disease Elucidation of assortative mating pat-
terns Genetic race differences and conse-
quences of mixture Genetics of normal morphology Identification of genetic variables in
mental traits (Listed in order of quantitative progress relative to present status)

The great need in human genetics at the present time in my opinion is for more information about those factors that may be influencing differential fertility, especially for ability. Most of the studies that have been concerned with differential fertility have been inadequately planned. Fairly satisfactory measures of ability of various kinds have been devised by the psychologists. It is true that improved measures of ability are needed, but much use can be made of those measures now available. Improved statistical methods, especially those affecting sampling, also are needed, but again much progress can be made with the methods already at hand. Surveys of the distribution of ability and fertility in populations of various sizes and in all parts of the world are urgently needed. Such surveys will be expensive and will require high leadership and imagination to be successful, but we will never learn how to conduct such surveys until the attempts are made.

36

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

F. CLARKE FRASER, M.D., Department of Genetics, McGill University
Biochemical identification of mutant gene activity, including the detection of genetic carriers.
Evaluation of the extent and importance of heterozygote advantage and other phenomena that may influence gene frequencies.
Better understanding of the problems and development of better techniques in genetic counseling.
ALAN F. GUTTMACHER, M.D., Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Mount Sinai Hospital
Congenital Malformations--There is a rapidly developing body of knowledge that a high proportion of human congenital defects are not wholly germplasm foreordained but are environmental in origin. To be sure, some genetic influence may be involved even in environmentally induced abnormalities; it may be shown that some chromosomal complexes are more susceptible to deleterious influences and other chromosomal complexes are especially resistant.
FRANZ J. KALLMANN, M.D., Department of Medical Genetics, New York State Psychiatric Institute (Columbia University)
My hope is that the most satisfactory progress in the next twenty years will take place in the following two areas:
1. Identification and therapeutic control of gene-specific metabolic deficiency states in those pathological conditions which are manifested relatively late in life so that the pre-clinical symptoms can be studied systematically. Such conditions are Huntington's chorea, Friedreich's ataxia, the pre-senile brain atrophies, hypertensive disease, and perhaps

37
the cyclic and schizophrenic types of psychosis.
2. The development of counseling centers in medical genetics giving advice in the management of premarital and preparenthood family problems. In one way or another I believe that this development is inevitable, since its advantages are too obvious to be ignored much longer by interested professional groups.
TAKU KOMAI, Emeritus Professor,Kyoto University, Japan
Japan should be a center for genetic study. The Japanese belong to one of the major races of which very little genetic study has been made. They are genetically comparatively uniform, which makes some genetic studies with special objectives, such as determination of gene frequency and isolate effects, relatively easy. Japanese families are generally larger than in most European homes, while non-genetic perinatal and infantile deaths are probably less frequent than in some backward countries. Individual pedigrees are easy to follow because of relatively few emigrations and reliable official family records. The rate of consanguineous marriage is considerably higher than among Europeans, which is advantageous for studying recessive genes in the population. The Japanese are the only people who have been exposed to high-dosage radiation effects on a large scale; thus they afford unique material for studying the genetic and eugenic effect of such an agency upon mankind.
ROBERT W. LAIDLAW, M.D., Roosevelt Hospital
I would like to see further amplification of Dr. Kallmann's work, particular-

38 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

ly in the study of identical twins in the areas of mental illness. Such work should give us valid grounds to approach the question of heredity versus environmental factors in the psychogenicity of psychiatric disorders.
FREDERICK OSBORN, The Population Council
1. Discovery of the relationships between specific genes and individual biochemical and enzyme structures.
2. Discovery of means for identifying carriers of deleterious recessive genes, partly as a result of above.
Progress in practical application will be based on these discoveries and will not only put heredity counseling on a more exact basis, but even more important will enormously advance preventive medicine by early treatment among enzymatic and biochemical lines. These are the fields in which the younger men are working now, and they have appeal for the type of men going into human genetics today. The big jump to hereditary variations in the structure and functioning of the brain will require not only more knowledge but also more imagination, approaching perhaps on genius, as well as better tools.
I wish we could see some advance in our knowledge of the distribution and inheritance of familial traits of personality and intelligence, quite apart from their relation to specific genes. But this type of work, typified by twin and sibling studies, does not seem to have appeal for people in the field at present.
SHELDON REED, Dight Institute for Human Genetics
I think that the very broadest concept of counseling in human genetics includes educating the general public in an un-

derstanding of the goals of eugenics. Probably this work will be closely related to the counseling centers. Perhaps the greatest technical help that research can provide is in the field of the detection of the heterozygote, prior to marriage, for both dominant and recessive defects.
We are making an attempt to set up a Human Genetics Unit in the state of Minnesota Board of Health which would serve as an official counseling center and repository of data similar to the Genetic Hygiene Laboratory in Copenhagen. While we may be unsuccessful at this moment, I can predict that such centers will be established in some state governments during the next two decades.
J. P. SCOTT, Roscoe P. Jackson Laboratory
I believe that most progress in human genetics can be made in the following three areas:
1. The study of physiological traits which are basic to behavioral and temperamental differences.
2. The study of the development of these traits and also of behavioral differences.
3. The study of biochemical differences in metabolism, particularly those related to the metabolism of the nervous system.
These choices are concerned with application of heredity to behavior and do not consider the importance of studying physical traits, about which others are more competent to judge. My reasons for the above choices are as follows:
1. Gene action in behavior must take place through physiological reactions. These are much less affected by learning and experience than is overt behavior. In this way we may hope to arrive at a

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

description of the biological foundation for behavioral differences.
2. If the knowledge of the individual differences is to be successfully applied, it should be available as early as possible in human development so that a person could be provided with a favorable environment suited to his particular talents. More than this, the study of the development of behavior traits may give a clue to their nature. Studies on other animals show that behavior traits differ a great deal at different times in development.
3. Finally, the biochemical study of behavioral differences has many possibilities, both for therapy and for understanding basic nervous problems such as learning.
HARRY L. SHAPIRO, Department of Anthropology, American Museum of Natural History
In answering this question, so much depends on the unpredictable developments that are likely to give direction once they are found acceptable. For example, although twin studies at the present time have been somewhat disappointing, the fact is that if new methodologies or new insights are developed as a result of current work in this field the whole direction of interest might be very considerably affected.
I can more affirmatively say that, in my opinion, a promising field of study would be in connection with population studies as they are correlated with cultural factors. But this is an area which has hardly been touched by research.

39
LAURENCE H. SNYDER, President, University of Hawaii
The most progress in human genetics will probably be made in the field of biochemical genetics. A knowledge of the basic genie action underlying anomalies and diseases will facilitate diagnosis, treatment, and prevention. It will help to make it possible to identify heterozygotes and thus to elucidate precursory, preclinical and constitutional stigmata which can be employed in devising prevention and therapy.
It is becoming apparent that the primary activity of a gene is the control of the specificity of some substance, usually an enzyme. It is also clear that metabolism proceeds through a series of small sequential steps, each step catalyzed by an enzyme. Many enzyme dysfunctions have been shown to be referrable to specific mutant genes, and it is reasonable to presume that the production of normal enzymes is dependent on the activity of the normal unmutated alleles of these mutant genes. Enzyme dysfunctions, in turn, interfere with specific steps in metabolism and may lead to genetic disease.
An awareness of the foregoing facts makes it feasible to use mutant genes to identify the precise sequence of steps in various metabolic reactions, and to identify precursors, since in the absence of mutant metabolic blocks the intermediary products are generally converted in the cell as rapidly as they are formed and are thus difficult of detection. Thus the very mutant genes which result in disease are proving to be the keys of understanding, and thus, hopefully, of therapy and prevention.

