Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Psychophysiological reactions of twins: Hereditary factors in galvanic skin resistance, heartbeat, and breathing rates
Steven G. Vandenberg , Philip J. Clark & Ina Samuels
To cite this article: Steven G. Vandenberg , Philip J. Clark & Ina Samuels (1965) Psychophysiological reactions of twins: Hereditary factors in galvanic skin resistance, heartbeat, and breathing rates, Eugenics Quarterly, 12:1, 7-10, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1965.9987601 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1965.9987601
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 3
View related articles
Citing articles: 12 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL REACTIONS OF TWINS: HEREDITARY FACTORS IN GALVANIC SKIN RESISTANCE, HEARTBEAT, AND BREATHING RATES

STEVEN G. VANDENBERG, PHILIP J. CLARK AND INA SAMUELS 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Some years ago Jost and Sontag (1944) observed a marked similarity among siblings in measures of psychophysiological factors at rest, such as the skin galvanic reflex. Such similarity might be due to the fact that siblings are reared in the same family and therefore may be presumed to have very similar life histories (at least in early childhood) barring serious illnesses or socioeconomic changes in the family. Jost and Sontag interpreted their findings in terms of hereditary factors, since there was less similarity between half sibs reared in the same home.
As part of the Hereditary Abilities Study of the University of Michigan there existed an opportunity to study the importance of hereditary factors in psychophysiological reactions to a mild stress. The general design of that study has been described by Sutton, et al. (1962a), while Clark (1956) reported on the anthropometric data, Sutton, et al. (1962b) on the biochemical studies, and Vandenberg (1962) on the psychometric studies. Seventy pairs of twins from high schools in Ann Arbor, Ypsilanti, Dearborn, and Detroit participated in this aspect of that study during 1952-55. Zygocity determinations were based on a series of bloodgroup tests.
METHOD
The psychophysiological reactions measured were of three kinds:
1. Heartbeat was recorded by filming
 University of Louisville School of Medicine, Michigan State University, and Tufts University, respectively.

the output of an oscilloscope which was connected to a small microphone hanging over the subject's heart. Heartbeats showed as "pips" along a line on the film. The change in the frequency of the heartbeat after each stimulus was analyzed by subtracting the rate of the resting heartbeat (sampled twice) from the maximum rate after each stimulus.
2. Breathing rate was recorded on one channel of a polygraph with a DC amplifier connected to a pneumatic tube strapped around the subject's chest. Changes in breathing rate after each stimulus were analyzed by subtracting the average width of 10 inspiration-expiration cycles during the resting state from the average of 10 cycles after the stimulus.
3. Galvanic skin resistance in a constant current circuit similar to the one of Lacey and Lacey (1958) was recorded on another channel of the polygraph. Platinum electrodes of about the size of a penny, coated with electrode paste were placed on the palm of the left hand and the middle of the left inside forearm. The subject's arm rested on a stand to facilitate the recording of the galvanic skin resistance. Changes from the initial resistance after each stimulus were analyzed by measuring the width of the maximal excursion after each stimulus, correcting this for the attenuation setting used for that subject.
A third channel of the polygraph was used to mark the times at which stimuli were administered.

7

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

8

Vandenberg, et al.

Eugen. Quart.

The 5 stress-producing stimuli were a flash of light from a flash lamp directed at the ceiling, an electrical doorbell which rang three times with enough time in between to allow the recordings to return to their baseline and a raised hammer which dropped down when a solenoid was activated. This "falling hammer" was placed at a distance of about three feet from the subject. Of the five stimuli, the hammer caused considerably more startle in spite of the fact that it was the last stimulus administered.
While most subjects of the Hereditary Abilities Study participated, a large number of recordings could not be used for a variety of reasons. An attempt was made throughout to allow sufficient time between stimuli to allow the recordings to return to their baseline, but this was not always possible. Frequently, the pneumatic tube and/or the microphone could not be kept adjusted correctly so that no usable records for breathing rate or heartbeat could be obtained; the breathing rate of many female subjects, especially, showed no clear cycles. The statistical analysis was performed independently after it had been decided for each record whether it could be used. At the time of this decision it was not known whether the individual belonged to an identical or a fraternal twin pair. The subject was seated in a sounddeadened room which excluded outside noise of a normal sound level. The ob-

server and the recording equipment were in an adjacent room connected by a small window to the room with the subject.
RESULTS
Following the procedure of Dahlberg (1926), the within-pair variance of the fraternal twins was compared with the within-pair variance of the identical twins by the F-ratio, as a test of the significance of the hereditary components in these psychophysiological reactions. Table 1 presents a summary of the results obtained.
Sex differences are eliminated in this analysis of within-pair variances. It may be of some interest to report the results of a comparison of the scores of the male and female twins regardless of zygocity. Table 2 shows the results of the t-test between males and females. A minus sign preceding the value indicates that the mean for the males was lower than for the females.
It is clear that the males in this sample exhibited greater reactivity in heart rate and perhaps in G.S.R., while the females showed a trend toward greater reactivity in the breathing rate. It would have been interesting to repeat this analysis, using only those individuals for whom all three measures were available; however, this would have led to a number too small to be meaningful, since it was

TABLE 1

F-RATIOS OF D Z OVER M Z WITHIN-PAIR VARIANCES FOR THREE PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL REACTIONS TO FIVE STARTLE STIMULI

Nature of startle stimulus

No. of pairs

Nature of reactions

Flash

Belli

Bell 2

Bell 3 Hammer DZ

MZ

Heartbeat frequency Galvanic skin resistance Breathing rate
·p<.OJ. tp<.05.

2.38-f1.40 7.96*

1.70 .74 .52

1.96 1.65 1.39 .93 .88 . .81

2.93* 1.00 4.08f

16 26
8

22 34 13

Vol. 12, No. 1 Psychophysiological Reactions of Twins

9

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

TABLE 2

VALUES OF THE T-TEST FOR DIFFERENCES BETWEEN MALES AND FEMALES.

Nature of startle stimulus

No. of pairs

Nature of reactions

Flash Belli

Bell 2 BellS Hammer DZ

MZ

Heart rate G.S.R. Breathing rate

2.98*

3.69*

2.96+

2.391

1.46

30

46

.11 .79 .91 2.09 1.52 50 70

-1.56§ --.56

--.61 --1.94

--.48

28

14

* p<.001. fp<.01.
% p<.05. § Values with minus sign indicate that the mean for females was higher.

frequently not the same individual for whom data on heart rate, on breathing rate, or on G.S.R. was missing.
DISCUSSION
In spite of the small number of cases, several tentative conclusions can be drawn. There seems to be a significant hereditary component in the reaction of the heartbeat frequency and the breathing rate to a startling event, such as the unexpected flash of light, or the sound from the falling of a hammerlike device. The reactions to the bell were much smaller and show, in general, little or no hereditary component, within the limits of accuracy of our analysis.
No hereditary component is found in this study for the galvanic skin resistance. In observing the recordings, it appears that, at times, the pen had not returned to its prestimulus position when the next stimulus was administered. This would make the calculation of the change in resistance less meaningful, and may, in part, be responsible for the absence of significant findings. As it was, the session lasted between 50 to 60 minutes per subject. In future work it may be better to have fewer stimuli. If automated data processing were available, one could perhaps study the rate of change rather than the total change.
It appears, from the findings of this rather small group, that it will be valu-

able to repeat this type of study with a larger sample. Since this study was organized, improved equipment has become available which permits data reduction by analog to digital conversion either "on line" or later, after recording on magnetic tape. Such methods would permit one to experiment with various types of transformations.
In addition, the experiment should be repeated (with different stimuli perhaps) after a lapse of a suitable period, so that it will be possible to obtain an estimate of the stability over time of the reaction to stress. A more reliable estimate of heritability for these reactions can be obtained by averaging, or combining, in some other way, the values obtained on the two occasions.
There have been suggestions by Lacey and Lacey (1958), by Wenger, et al. (1961), and by Dykman, et al. (1959) that different personality types develop different kinds of psychosomatic disorders. If this idea turns out to be true so that, for instance, there are persons who predominantly show reaction to stress with cardiac symptoms, it would be interesting to determine whether such persons show a relatively greater reaction in a recording of heartbeat changes, after experimental stress conditions, than in skin resistance or breathing rate. Such an investigation would require a more detailed medical and psychiatric appraisal

10

Vandenberg, et al.

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

than was possible in thestudy reported here.
Since most of the attempts to relate, in adults, specific psychosomatic conditions or personality traits with psychophysiological reactions to stress have been equivocal, it would seem especially promising to conduct periodic followup studies of psychophysiological reactions to stress in twins examined at an early age, before imitation of parents could become a significant factor.
The findings of Lipton, et al. (1960, 1961) that reactions canbe obtained in the first few months of life, and that identical twins have highly similar reactions at that age would seem to lend further credence to the idea that there are hereditary factors in the reactionsof the autonomic nervous system to mildly stressful stimulation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The equipment was designed by Lee R. Dice, theDirector of theInstitute of Human Biology of the University of Michigan; Philip J. Clark was in charge of the data collection; Miss InaSamuels performed the counting and measuring necessary to obtain "scores" for eachindividual; while Vandenberg performed the statistical analysis. The data were collected under a grant from McGregor Fund of Detroit, while theanalysis was supported by grants M 1045, RG 5527, and MH 07033 of the National Institutes of Health. Without the cooperation of

the twins, their parents, and the officials of their schools, the study would have been impossible.

REFERENCES

CLARK, PHILIP J., 1956. The Heritability of Cer-
tain Anthropometric Characters as Ascertained from Measurements of Twins. Amer. J. Hum. Genet., 8:49-54.
DAHLBERG, G., 1926. Twin Births and Twins from a Hereditary Point of View. Tidens, Stockholm.

DYKMAN, R. A., W. G. REESE, C. R. GALBRECHT,

PEGGY J. THOMASSON, 1959. Psychophysio-
logical Reactions to Novel Stimuli: Measurement, Adaptation, and Relationship of Psychological andPhysiological Variables in the Normal Human. Ann.N.Y.Acad. Sci., 79(3): 45-107.

JOST, H., and L. SONTAG, 1944. The Genetic
Factor in Autonomic Nervous System Function. Psychosom.Med., 6: 308-310.

LACEY, J. I., and BEATRICE C. LACEY, 1958. Verifi-
cation and Extension of the Principal of Autonomic Response Stereotypy. Amer. J. Psychol., 71: 50-73.

LIPTON, E. L., A. STEINSCHNEIDER, and J. B. RICH-

MOND, 1960. Maturation of Autonomic Nerv-

ous System Functions in the Early Months

of Life. Psychosom. Med., 22: 325-326 (ab-

stract).

,

, and

, 1961. Autonomic

Function in the Neonate. IV. Individual

Differences in Cardiac Reactivity. Psycho-

som. Med., 23: 472-484.

SUTTON, H. E., S. G. VANDENBERG, and P. J. CLARK,
1962a. TheHereditary Abilities Study: Selection of Twins, Diagnosis of Zygocityand Program of Measurements. Amer. J. Hum. Genet., 14: 52-63.

, ELVIRA GIL DELAMADRID, and MARIE B.
ESTERER, 1962b. The Hereditary Abilities Study: Genetic Variation in Human Biochemical Traits. Amer. J. Hum. Genet., 14: 64-82. VANDENBERG, S. G., 1962. The Hereditary Abilities Study: Hereditary Components in a Psychological Test Battery. Amer. J. Hum. Genet., 14: 220-237.

WENGER, M. A., T. L. CLEMENS, D. R. COLEMAN,
T. D. CULLEN, and B. T. ENGEL, 1961. Auto-
nomic Response Specificity. Psychosom. Med., 23: 185-193.

