Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Genetic and eugenic aspects of early total deafness
Diane Sank & Franz J. Kallmann
To cite this article: Diane Sank & Franz J. Kallmann (1956) Genetic and eugenic aspects of early total deafness, Eugenics Quarterly, 3:2, 69-74, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1956.9987269 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1956.9987269
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3
View related articles Citing articles: 5 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

GENETIC AND EUGENIC ASPECTS OF EARLY TOTAL DEAFNESS*

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

DIANE SANK AND FRANZ J. KALLMANN
Department of Medical Genetics New York State Psychiatric Institute

T
JL HE CLINICAL SYNDROME KNOWN AS "DEAF-
MUTISM" is highly complex in its etiology and equally perplexing in its effects on individual and group patterns of adjustment. Whether it occurs sporadically or as a familial trait, it causes distress not only in the person affected, but in all the other members of his family, hearing or nonhearing. The ensuing problems are boundless and pose challenging tasks to various professions and scientific disciplines.
To the geneticist, the question most commonly presented is how to advise a hearing person with deaf relatives, who asks "is there a possibility that my children will be deaf?" Other difficulties arise when a deaf person contemplates marriage with a hearing partner and wishes to know whether they may have nonhearing children. Equally important are choices óf action in the areas of education, vocational guidance, and social integration.
One of the basic problems is prevention, which in turn depends on adequate knowledge regarding the etiology of the defect. In view of the fact that nearly 55 per cent of total deafness cases are assumed to have a nonhereditary basis (1), recent medical advances in the management of acquired types of deafness have underscored the need for similar progress in the genetically determined forms of the condition. Thus, although heredity is only one of the various
*This is the third report on a study of deafness, which is aided by a grant from the Office of Vocational Rehabilitation of the U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.

causative factors in early total deafness, it is likely to become increasingly important in the years to come.
Statistics
Total deafness has a world-wide distribution varying from 0.23 per 1000 population in Germany to a supposed high of 4 per 1000 inhabitants in the Cayman Islands (2). In the United States the frequency is estimated at 0.8 per 1000, placing the total population in the neighborhood of 128,000 totally deaf individuals. According to Kemp (3), the incidence of deafness is somewhat higher in males than in females. In the total deaf population of the United States, nearly 94 per cent are supposed to have been afflicted before the age of eight years (including 40 per cent with congenital deafness).
It has also been estimated that about 47 per cent of the American deaf population marry and, as a rule the mates come from the same group. Marriages in which one or both partners are deaf tend to be nearly one-half as productive of children as those contracted by a comparable group of hearing couples (1).
Terminology
Loss of hearing covers a wide range, from the mildest forms referred to as "hard of hearing" to that of total or profound deafness. When the latter develops after the individual has learned to speak, i.e., after age 7-8, it usually is not accompanied by subsequent loss of speech. The clinical

69

70 Eugenics Quarterly-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

picture of "deaf-mutism" results only when which equalizes pressure (on both sides

total deafness occurs prior to the age when of the ear drum membrane) and helps to

speech is learned. Such children are un- drain infections into the pharynx. The

able to acquire speech in the manner essential organ for hearing is found within

"normally" attained in our culture, i.e., the inner ear, an area including the spiral

through hearing sounds. They appear mute canal (cochlea) which differentiates the

although all their organs of speech are various sound tones and conveys them to

normal. To be sure, "deaf-mute" is a mis- the auditory nerve by way of the vital organ

leading term, traceable to an old misconcep- of Corti. The auditory nerve transmits

tion. It probably arose from the Aristo- these sounds to the acoustic center of the

telian belief in a common brain center for brain (temporal lobe) where they are

hearing and speech, an idea that persisted translated into meaningful sound. In ad-

throughout the middle ages. Total loss dition, the inner ear contains three semi-

of hearing as the primary feature of "deaf- circular canals, concerned mainly with the

mutism" was recognized only in the 16th sense of equilibrium.

century, by the Italian physician, Girolamo Conduction deafness results when the ex-

Cardano (4), although the same idea had ternal canal and middle ear are affected.

already been suggested by the ancient Perception deafness occurs when the sensi-

Roman naturalist, Pliny the Elder.

tive spiral canal, the organ of Corti, or the

The fact that the organs of hearing and auditory nerve is defective. Prognostical-

speech are anatomically and functionally ly, the conductive type of deafness is likely

separate has been confirmed by the results to respond positively to operative, tech-

of modern education, which enables ap- nologic (hearing aids), and pharmacologie

parently "deaf-mute" individuals to learn treatments. Perceptive deafness, on the

useful speech. Whether "deaf-mutism" is other hand, has thus far proven refractory.

due to environmental or hereditary factors, it is only deafness as such that has Causes and Transmission

a direct anatomical origin. "Mutism" As noted earlier, deafness is apt to re-

represents a cultural phenomenon. It is sult in "mutism" only if it is total or nearly

preferable, therefore, to refer to this con- so and occurs before the normal establish-

dition as congenital or early total deafness. ment of speech. Congenital deafness is

Those who have lost their hearing com- responsible for almost half of these cases.

pletely, after age 7-8 (when speech is usual- Partial hearing loss in childhood and total

ly established), may be designated by the deafness developed later in life are severe

term "deafened" (5) to distinguish them handicaps, too, but they rarely produce

from those with partial hearing losses "mutism."

occurring at all ages (hard of hearing) .

Environmental factors may produce

Anatomy and Function of the Ear

either conductive or perceptive deafness. The former type occurs especially in babies

The organ of hearing comprises, ana- born deaf to mothers who have had

tomically, the outer ear, the middle ear, metabolic disorders such as hypothyroidism

and the inner ear. The outer area consists or goiter. Other possible causes are infec-

of the large flap-like auricle that superficial- tious diseases during the pregnancy such as

ly collects the sound wave stimuli traveling scarlet fever, German measles or syphilis;

through the auditory canal to the middle severe injuries before or during birth;

ear. The latter structure includes the and ear infections during infancy. The

membranous ear drum plus a cavity perceptive form of deafness is observed in

which is bridged by three small bones. In individuals following infectious diseases

addition, there is the Eustachian tube such as meningitis, mumps, typhoid fever,

71

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

or syphilis; vitamin deficiencies (Vitamin D) ; injuries from explosions or blows on the ear; shock and other traumatic sequelae; and certain drugs (streptomycin, quinine, or arsenic).
In contrast with these acquired forms of deafness, the hereditary types are usually perceptive in nature. The exact mode of transmission of the genetic factors producing the conductive type of deafness is as yet unknown, probably in part because only a few forms of hereditary deafness have been described which affect the areas concerned with conduction. One of them is "endogenously" produced bilateral atresia of the external auditory canal. Another may be based on a genetic predisposition to bilateral chronic otitis media.
Otosclerosis, characterized by hardening of the tissues of the labyrinth, usually occurs after puberty and therefore accounts only for a very small proportion of cases of early total deafness. Genetically, the condition may be transmitted either as a simple recessive or an irregular dominant. According to Davenport et al. (6), two dominant genes may be at work, one carried by an autosome and the other linked to the sex (X) chromosome. This theory was devised in order to explain why otosclerosis occurs almost twice as frequently in women as in men.
Equally controversial are the genetic mechanisms producing the various types of perceptive deafness. One form is known as congenital hereditary-degenerative dominant inner ear deafness. The condition is characterized by incomplete development of the spiral canal with some changes in the sense elements and nerve. Although generally appearing at a later age, there are some reports of cases with early total deafness (7). As indicated by the name, it is considered to have a dominant type of inheritance. Hammerschlag (4), however, suggests that the condition is sometimes inherited in conjunction with three other disorders and may be transmitted by a polygenic type of inheritance or a

recessive triple allelic system. Sporadic recessive deafness, the most
commonly reported form, is associated with a defective development of the auditory nerve and is believed to be transmitted as a single-factor trait (3). The condition may occur together with several other disorders, indicating the possibility of a true genetic relationship. It is assumed, for instance, that sporadic recessive deafness when it occurs with retinitis pigmentosa is produced by pleiotropic gene action (4).
Early total deafness may also associate itself with mental retardation, but the genetic basis of this concurrence (due to the same or to different genes if both conditions are genetically determined) is not known. Equally unclear is the hereditary background of the syndrome distinguished by deafness, mental retardation, and retinitis pigmentosa. In the opinion of Hammerschlag and others, the three traits represent a clinical entity, while Steinberg goes further by attributing the syndrome (adding the condition of cerebellar ataxia and specifying amaurotic idiocy as the given form of mental retardation) to a genetically determined metabolic (lipoid) disorder (4). However, Albrecht negates these views by suggesting that the various afflictions are inherited independently.
Finally, the deafness group classified as apparently "exogenous" (nonhereditary) in origin may include some forms which are actually based on a genetic predisposition to environmentally induced deafness. Modern genetic concepts do not preclude such a close interrelationship between heredity and environment. The outward (phenotypic) expression of a gene may not manifest itself until the proper environmental milieu is present. Thus the problem of causation in this form of deafness is considerably complex and at present not readily amenable to analysis.
Theories of Gene Action
Contrary to earlier interpretations of the mode of transmission of early total

72 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

deafness as due to polygenic factors, it carriers of the gene showing either late

seems justified to think of deafness in the deafness or no effect of the presence of the

same way as of many other pathologic dominant gene. In one pedigree of domi-

traits of mutational origin. Hence, the con- nant deafness he found two examples dis-

dition may be produced either by a re- playing unilateral congenital deafness,

cessive or dominant factor affecting a par- which may be another form of incomplete

ticular area of the auditory apparatus. It expression.

would then be possible to assume in some cases a one-to-one gene action, but in most instances, the process of gene action is probably much more complicated. As to the primary question of mutations resulting in deafness, they may occur at one given locus with a single character effect, at various loci and in different families. A similar clinical picture of deafness may thus be caused by several genetic factors.
The following possibilities are indicated by family studies concerned with deafness:
1. A gene mutation occurring at one locus may be either recessive or dominant in expression. According to Waardenburg (8), there is fairly good evidence for the occurrence of a dominant autosomal mutation producing deafness. However, it is more difficult to demonstrate that deafness with a recessive autosomal inheritance arose by mutation. Family pedigrees must be traced to the original source, i.e., to the time of the occurrence of the mutation, and this has been done only in some isolated inbred families.- Various geographic foci have been unearthed in connection with these observations. (7) The mutation frequency at the particular locus may be high, as the genes, being unstable, tend to mutate.

Other variations in expressivity may be exemplified by a differential in the time of appearance of the character produced by the gene. It is known that there is an enormous spectrum or "reaction norm" of gene activity in the degree of hearing as related to both time of onset and intensity. When total loss of hearing occurs either congenitally or before speech is fully established, the phenotype will present the clinical syndrome of early total deafness (with inability to speak without special instruction). However, when either mild loss of hearing occurs during this period or mild or severe loss of hearing appears later in life, the result will be a picture of deafness without subsequent speech problems (deafened).
3. The gene may show variations in regard to specificity. The phenomenon of specificity refers to the qualitative nature of variations in gene action. The same gene may appear as a dominant, an irregular dominant skipping generations (pseudorecessive) , an intermediate, or a recessive gene. These differences may merely depend on the lapse of time from the appearance of the mutant gene in any one family line.

2. The gene responsible for a specific 4. Various other combinations may pre-

type of deafness may show much varia- sent themselves. Thus the syndrome of

bility in respect to its expression. It may early total deafness may represent paral-

be noted that two hereditarily deaf parents lelism of action of various independent

are known to have had deaf and nondeaf genes, with pedigrees showing matings be-

children. This finding may be attributed tween two deaf people, one with a reces-

to the variable expressivity of the recessive sive and the other with a dominant gene.

gene. Actually, Waardenburg (8) as- In this case, children with normal hear-

sumed a penetrance (frequency of gene in ing may be expected. In other instances,

a population) value of 20 per cent for where both parents are heterozygous for

dominant hereditary deafness, and he a similar recessive gene, hearing and deaf

theorized that another 80 per cent may be children may be produced.

73

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Pedigree Studies
The identification of those types of early total deafness which are genetically determined may be effected by the study of the incidence of the condition in family groups. Pedigree charts of such families are also helpful in recognizing cases of apparently exogenous causation, in demonstrating consanguinity, and in detecting that the legal parents may not be the biological ones. Other important factors to be determined are the mode of transmission (simple recessive, dominant, or polygenic) and the degree of expressivity. Genetically, of equal importance is the question of an inherited predisposition to ostensibly acquired forms of deafness. It is always advisable, of course, to evaluate pedigrees with respect to all of these questions. Unless the mode and degree of transmission of a given genetic factor have been adequately determined, the geneticist will not be able to answer the questions posed by interested families or their physicians.
Counseling Problems
The high proportion of genetically determined cases of deafness (45.5 per cent according to Lindenov) (4) serves to emphasize the need of understanding hereditary background factors in any program involving the prevention of this affliction. The prospects of achieving this goal are within the realm of future possibilities, despite the possible operation of a very high mutation rate in the etiology of this trait (Kemp) (3). A positive approach is possible, if only because it has been shown that consanguinity is a very important factor in raising the frequency of the condition in modern populations. If intrinsically-deaf persons would refrain from marrying near relatives, this factor alone would materially reduce the incidence of the condition.
Systematic efforts to integrate rather than to isolate the deaf (through encouragement of marriages between deaf

and nondeaf individuals) would also be of substantial help in lowering the frequency of deafness in the population. Though it might be theorized by some that this procedure would "spread" the genes throughout the population in a heterozygous form and eventually would produce more and not less deaf offspring, this threat does not seem to be of foreseeable importance. Since some cases of deafness are probably based on a hereditary predisposition to externally precipitated deafness, it is apparent that precautionary measures may serve to prevent the phenotypic expression (deafness) of the gene in predisposed persons.
The magnitude of the problems faced by the deaf in our society is seriously aggravated by the fact that they are unable to communicate with hearing individuals by speaking. It should be emphasized again that almost all of those classified as congenital or early cases of deafness possess both anatomically and physiologically normal organs for the production of sounds and that with special education the socalled "deaf-mute" individual can learn to speak. In addition, he may be taught to read lips, which also may partly compensate for his deafness.
Instead of being a burden upon our society, a "deaf-mute" capable of communicating through speaking and reading lips should be able to obtain various types of employment denied to him today. The prospect of a productive life could not fail to alleviate the severe emotional problems of the deaf (feelings of frustration and social isolation) and society would be certain to benefit as the deaf become more useful and better-integrated members of the community.
The most important eugenic problems of deafness are posed by marriages between deaf individuals and by those between deaf persons and close relatives ( whether hearing or deaf). Apart from discouraging consanguineous marriages in families with.

Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

cases of deafness, childless marriages (10)-(11) should help us to provide the

might beconsidered if one or both partners solution to these and many other problems.

are known tobegenetically deaf. This pro-

cedure would have the advantage of pre-

REFERENCES

venting both the spread of the genes in the population and the possible creation of emotional problems in families composed of both deaf and hearing individuals. Negative aspects of a eugenic program advocating childless marriages would be the emotional problems arising in a childless home, and the possible elimina-

1. BEST, H., 1943. Deafness and the Deaf in the United States. Macmillan, New York, pp. 675.
2. DORAN, E., 1952. Inbreeding in an isolated island community. J. Hered. 4 3 : 263-266.
3. KEMP, T., 1951. Genetics and Disease. Munksgaard, Copenhagen, pp.330.
4. LINDENOV, H., 1945. The Etiology of DeafMutism. Munksgaard, Copenhagen, pp. 268.
5. STRENG, A., et al., 1955. Hearing Therapy for Deaf Children. Grune & Stratton, New York, pp. 371.

tion from the population of advantageous genes carried by deaf persons. This dilemma iscommon toall cases ofgenetically determined traits when eugenically motivated solutions are sought (9), andrequires careful study andindividual evaluation.
It is justified to say, therefore, that the problem of deafness is a complex one. It is regrettable that today we are able only to answer a few of the questions posed by deaf families. However, progressive pro-

6. DAVENPORT, CH. B., et al., 1933. The genetic factor in otosclerosis. Arch. Otolar. 17: 503-48.
7. VAN GILSE, P.H.G., et al., 1942. Heredity in diseases in the field of oto-rhino-laryngology. Bibliogr. Genet. 13: 301-424.
8. WAARDENBURG, P. J., 1951. A new syndrome combining developmental anomalies of the eyelids, eyebrows, and nose root with pigmentary defects of the iris and head hair and with congenital deafness. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 3 : 195-253.
9. PENROSE, L. S., 1950. Genetical influences on the intelligence level o£ the population. Brit. J. Psychol. 40: 128-136.
10. KALLMANN, F. J., 1956. Objectives of the Mental Health Project for the Deaf. Proc. of 1955 Convention of American Instructors of the Deaf (in press).

grams of research leading to the establish- 11. KALLMANN, F. J., 1956. Psychiatric aspects of

ment of adequate counseling procedures

genetic counseling. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. (in press).

