Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Distribution of genes affecting characteristics of the population
Torsten Sjögren
To cite this article: Torsten Sjögren (1954) Distribution of genes affecting characteristics of the population, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:4, 225-229, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987199 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987199
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4
View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

DISTRIBUTION OF GENES AFFECTING CHARACTERISTICS OF THE POPULATION Probable Trends*
TORSTEN SJÖGREN
Caroline Institute University of Stockholm

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

I T HAS NOT BEEN possible to clarify the
mode o£ inheritance in many diseases, but considerable progress has been made by concentrating upon determination of the morbidity risks in the general population and in different categories of relations to probands with the same or another disease. In this way it has been possible to determine empirical risk figures, giving a quantitative picture of the heredity for a certain disease or affording a numerical index for the connection between different diseases.
In studying the way in which changes in the gene-mass and its distribution affect the characteristics of the population, different viewpoints may be applied:
1. From a purely biological viewpoint interest is concentrated upon reproduction, i.e., the way in which the gene-mass is changed from one generation to the other.
2. From a general medical and demographic viewpoint interest is focused also upon the structure and distribution of the gene-mass in the population and upon the effect exercised by the genes.
Thus, the generation is the time unit for the gene-mass in reproduction. In considering the effect of the gene-mass, however, a much shorter time unit often has to be used. In other words, changes in the genemass and its distribution are measured purely biologically by comparing a certain reproducing generation with the next reproducing generation. The gene-mass in the population, however, may be changed in other ways, e.g., by an increase in the mean expectation of life; and the effect produced by the genes may be changed by medical advances, shifting social conditions, etc. The
*Presented at the World Population Conference, Rome, September 1954.

latter changes may take place relatively quickly, and all these circumstances must of course be taken into consideration when attempting to assess probable trends.
In investigating the mode of inheritance in special diseases and anomalies, isolate research has been of great importance. In delimited groups or communities that are not too large a certain gene may by chance be considerably more frequent than is possible in a larger population. Through the inbreeding occurring in an isolate, there is a more pronounced homozygotization. In morbid states that may be provoked by different genes, there is more chance in isolates of finding clinical entities that at least, on the whole, have the same genetic background.
The successive breaking up of isolates, whether geographical or social, implies a certain drawback from the viewpoint of human genetic research. It is, however, worth pointing out that it affects the composition of the total gene-mass only to a relatively slight extent. The effect will be, first, an increased heterozygotization-- thus there will be an increase in frequency for dominant qualities though this grad*ually becomes successively weaker. In rare malign recessive genes the effect may relatively be very strong. The breaking up of isolates here produces an effect that overshoots the mark. In the long run, however, if other compensating factors do not appear, an increase in the frequency of the disease in question must be expected until a new equilibrium is reached.
With certain genes an effect may be produced similar to that due to the breaking up of isolates simply because the population learns how the genes exercise their

225

226 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

effect. Thus, those who know that they may should not jump to any hasty conclusions

be carriers of a malign recessive disposition for the future. Furthermore, an undeniable

will tend to avoid marriage with blood rela- tendency in the opposite direction must not

tives or other suspected carriers. An inter- be overlooked when we come to the very

esting instance of this is that Lundborg's low levels of intelligence. Both before and

great investigation on myoclonic epilepsy during the fertile age low-grade oligophren-

resulted in the disease practically disappear- ics have a markedly heightened mortality,

ing from the population.

and on an average their reproduction is

The majority of hereditary malign dis- considerably lower than that of the rest of eases in their expressed form entail a bio- the population.

logically conditioned reduced fertility as Differential fertility is of importance in

compared with that in the general popula- another, and in a certain way very essential,

tion, either because there is excess mortality respect. The genes which happen to be

before or during the fertile age or because represented in individuals with numerous

the disease in itself prevents marriage or descendants will of course have increased

makes it more difficult to get a partner. In frequency. If any delimited population is

diseases comparatively common in the analyzed and compared with the popula-

population there is often fairly precise com- tion from which it derives for a sufficient

pensation provided for this anti-selection number of previous generations, many in-

by factors tending in the opposite direction, dividuals are found in the earlier popula-

chiefly pressure of mutation or differential tion who are not represented at all by de-

fertility, which implies that carriers have a scendants, whereas other individuals have

higher reproductive rate than noncarriers. In certain cases compensation may also be provided, at least for a time, by assortative mating.
It has been asserted in some quarters that fertility is negatively correlated with intelligence, at least within a certain range; in other words that individuals with a level of intelligence somewhat below the average are supposed to have higher fertility than those with average or above-average intelligence, and that this causes, on the grounds of heredity, a successive lowering of the average level of intelligence. There is no doubt that for certain special groups or populations it has been possible to prove differences in fertility of the kind here referred to, but the problem is extremely complicated. The reduction in the birth

a large number of descendants. If one considers here a gene difference selected in advance, it is to be expected--if the population is fairly big--that the frequency will not differ too much in the new population from what it was in the old population. Here, however, many tens of thousands of gene differences are concerned, and it is thus obvious, statistically, that there will be very great displacement of a number of them. Even if, in relation to the total number of genes, only a rather small number of gene differences give rise to diseases and anomalies, the effects must not be overlooked that may be caused by displacement of this kind, e.g., in respect to changes of the gene-milieu that are necessary for the expression of a certain major gene.

rate that has characterized practically all For a general assessment of trends it is

western countries during this century has important to note that if the effect of malig-

taken a different course in various strata nant dominant genes manifests itself at a

of society. On the whole it may be said that relatively early age, these are exposed to a

the reduction has occurred earlier at the strong anti-selection. Even if by chance the

socially, economically, and educationally genes gain wider dissemination in one way

higher levels. Because of this, however, one or another, the anti-selection will soon

227

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

bring the frequency back to what corresponds to the pressure of mutation and the differential fertility. The only possible alternative is that the effect of the gene is successively weakened. Now for a gene with a certain effect to influence the characteristics of the population, it is not merely necessary that the gene shall have a certain frequency, which changes in the course of time, or that the distribution of the genes shall be changed. A further essential is that the gene shall have an effect that finds expression. To take as an example the monohybrid dominant genes for congenital dyslexia: it is almost a truism to point out that changes in the frequency of this gene are without significance in a population of illiterates, whereas such changes will become clearly apparent in a population in which literacy is the rule. But from a broad viewpoint such changes are not inconsequential. It may, for instance, be observed that the successive urbanization of modern times entails consequences of a similar kind. In a non-industrialized community certain forms of high-grade oligophrenia imply only a moderate social handicap. In such a community there are a sufficient number of occupations of such a nature that these oligophrenics are able to make a productive contribution. But the more industrialized the community becomes, the more such tasks are eliminated, and it is often a great problem to find a suitable occupation for these persons. It may be said, therefore, that these forms of oligophrenia--without any genetic change or any change in the clinical picture having taken place--have acquired an increased malignity. This trend may be expected to be accentuated further in proportion as manual labor is replaced by expensive and complicated machinery. Similarly, successive urbanization and the growing influx of female wage-earners on the labor market have brought about changes in the need for hospitalization or other medical care for certain categories among the sick. Further, the effect of the genes

may be influenced by medical advances without this entailing any change in their frequency and distribution, inasmuch as such advances shorten the duration of hospitalization or, in the most favorable cases, prevent the occurrence of the disease. But medical progress may also have a direct effect upon the composition of the genemass. Perhaps the best instance of this is diabetes mellitus, where the discovery of insulin will necessarily bring about a successive increase in the frequency of the gene or genes responsible for this disease.
There are diseases where the frequency is connected with the mother's age at the child's birth. This applies to mongolism. Whether this disease is genetically conditioned or not, it is to be expected that the reduction in the number of children per family will cause a reduction in its frequency.
For the very important diseases in the group of major psychoses, as also for the great majority of cases of low-grade oligophrenia, it has been clearly shown that hereditary factors play a considerable rôle. The mode of inheritance, on the other hand, has not been elucidated, which is largely due to the fact that we are dealing here partly with heterogeneous groups which at the present stage of scientific development cannot be clinically differentiated from one another. The morbidity risks both for the major psychoses and for low-grade oligophrenia are, however, so high that the random effects for the frequency of the conditioning genes cannot be very great. On the whole the breaking up of isolates cannot have any marked quantitative effect as regards the frequency of the major psychoses in the population.
Quantitative effects which cannot directly be said to be genetically conditioned must, however, gradually emerge as regards these diseases, especially on account of the successive increase in the mean expectation of life. We may, for instance, definitely expect that the frequency of senile psychoses

228
MAIN DIAGNOSIS
Psyrhnsps; AU forms Manir-rfpprpssive
Spnilp Prpspnilp
Low-grade Oligophrenia

Eugenics Quarterly

TABLE 1
Aggregate morbidity-risk upto 80 years of agein the general
population, %
Men Women
4.7 5.7 1.6 1.6 0.9 1.2 0.6 0.8
0.7 1.0
1.0 0.75

Remaining mean expectation of life compared with that fortotal
population of Sweden, %
Men Women
71 67 72 63 95 91 50 60
60 67
70 70

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

will increase in the population in propor- among the parents of psychotics. There

tion as there is an upward displacement of should thus be reason to expect that the

the preponderant age groups. But it is not successive increase of migration and the

likely that this increase will give rise toany thereby conditioned reduction in the fre-

effect worth mentioning for thereproduc- quency of consanguineous marriages will

tion of the genes conditioning this disease. bring about a trend of lower frequency of

For the affected persons have already passed low-grade oligophrenia for a number of

the fertile age, and it seems extremely im- future generations.

probable that theoutbreak of thedisease As may be seen in Table 1, there isa

should cause a tendency toreduced fertility very considerable excess mortality for both

in offspring and other relatives who are still schizophrenia and low-grade oligophrenia.

able toreproduce.

The same applies to senile and presenile

Morbidity risks for themajor psychoses psychoses, but this has, ashas already been

and low-grade oligophrenia in thegeneral mentioned, scarcely any real genetic effect.

population are shown in Table 1, which For manic-depressive psychosis, on the

also gives figures for excess mortality. These other hand, the excess mortality isrelative-

figuresare based upon the results ofa popu- ly inconsiderable. As regards schizophrenia

lation study andfamily investigation ofa and oligophrenia, theearly onset and the

West Swedish rural population which may excess mortality in themselves imply a

be regarded asrather typical for the Swed- strong anti-selection. This is accentuated

ish country districts. The investigation cov- by the high degree of social and medical

ers a long period of time (1900-1944) for a incapacity caused by these diseases.

population of about 25,000 inhabitants. A From many viewpoints schizophrenia

part of the investigation, dealing with-- may be designated as oneof the severest

inter alia--methods, material, and mortal- of all diseases. Of the total number of beds

ity and morbidity risks in the general popu- in somatic and mental hospitals and

lation, is already complete; in a later part, asylums in Sweden (around 110,000 for a

which will be published soon, the authors population of 7.1 millions), about 23.000,

(Torsten Sjögren and Tage Larson) discuss or 22 per cent, were occupied by schizo-

the results of the family investigation of phrenics in the year of 1951. The trend to

morbidity risks for parent and sibs of psy- be expected here is thus of great impor-

chotics and oligophrenics and give a clini- tance. A very interesting development has

cal and genetic analysis of the material. taken place in Sweden in regard to the

The investigation shows anincreased fre- number of first admissions 1931-1935,

quency ofconsanguineous marriages among 1936-40, and 1941-45, the numbers were

parents of low-grade oligophrenics ascom- 1,666, 1,771, and 1,280 as against a total

pared with the corresponding frequency in number of first admitted psychotics, 4,576,

the general population ofthe area. No such 5,455, and 5,392, respectively. This cannot

increase, on theother hand, was observed be dueto any change in diagnostic prin-

229

ciple. On the strength of these figures one would be inclined to draw the conclusion that the trend for schizophrenia is succèssive reduction in the frequency of new cases. As the genetic background for this

disease has not been clarified, however, it would be presumptuous to draw any definitive conclusions from this series of figures for the present,

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

GENETICISTS AND POPULATION STUDIES
"Several years ago I attended a Milbank Symposium concerned primarily with family studies as a method of public health research (1951 Annual Conference, Milbank Memorial Fund). I went there expecting to meet a good many of my fellow geneticists here today and was somewhat taken aback to discover I was the lone representative of our discipline. It was quite educational for a geneticist to see how many ways it was possible to study families in a non-genetic fashion, and also the magnitude of some of the studies in progress. I think it important that we realize that the epidemiologists and the physicians interested in health insurance plans who have been the prime movers behind many of these projects have a lot of very real problems they are trying to get at. Furthermore, the individuals comprising the populations under investigation in these family studies will not accept an unlimited intrusion into their private lives. Under the circumstances, I got the impression of considerable resistance to anyone--regardless of his interests--who wanted to step into some going study and graft one or two more questions on the questionnaire. I wonder whether we as geneticists--granting that the epidemiologist has quite a head start in the study of populations--aren't about ready to organize our own population studies. Such studies will be expensive, but are the only way to get a clear picture of the mortality and morbidity due to inherited disease." (James V. Neel, M.D., Conference on Problems and Methods in Human Genetics, Proceedings, American Journal of Human Genetics, Vol. 6, No. 1, March 1954, p. 120)

