Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Fertility control in the light of some regent catholic statements: This is Part Two of a two part article
William J. Gibbons S.J.
To cite this article: William J. Gibbons S.J. (1956) Fertility control in the light of some regent catholic statements: This is Part Two of a two part article, Eugenics Quarterly, 3:2, 82-87, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1956.9987271 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1956.9987271
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

FERTILITY CONTROL IN THE LIGHT OF SOME REGENT CATHOLIC STATEMENTS

This is Part Two of a two part article.*

WILLIAM J. GIBBONS, S.J.
Loyola College Loyola College, Baltimore

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

The secondary ends of marriage cannot
be ignored or disparaged without detriment
to doctrinal integrity. To do so would be
to revive the errors of the Montanists and
others whom the Church Fathers found
it necessary to condemn. Rather, the true
Catholic position is one of delicate balance
between the two extremes. Pius XII, in his
address to the Sacred Roman Rota (high
ecclesiastical court) on October 3, 1941, ex-
pressed the matter thus:
Two tendencies are to be avoided; first, the tendency which, in examining the elements which constitute the act of generation, consider only the primary purpose of matrimony, as though the secondary purpose did not exist, or at any rate were not a finis operis [essential purpose] established by the Creator of Nature itself; secondly, the tendency to regard the secondary purpose as equally important, and to divorce it from its essential subordination to the primary purpose. . . . In other words, if truth stands in the middle, two excesses are to be avoided: on the one hand, practically to deny or unduly to depreciate the secondary purpose of matrimony and of the act of generation; on the other, to dissociate or separate unduly the conjugal act from the primary purpose for which, by the whole of its intrinsic structure, it is primarily and principally intended.31
Catholic leadership, then, is not unaware
that in opposing the tendency to exalt
*Part 1 of this article appeared in Eugenics Quarterly, March 1956.
31Cf. Clergy Review 22:84-8, February, 1942, for English translation. Italian text in Acta Apostolicae Sedis, 33 (1941) 421-6.

unduly the secondary ends of marriage there lurks a danger some may go to the opposite extreme by undervaluing these ends. If at this time, great insistence is laid on the absolute primacy of the procreative purpose of sex, it is because so many are losing sight of the essential ordering of ends, and of acts in relation to these ends, in accordance with the nature of man.
While thus insisting on the primary end of marriage as deriving from nature itself, the Catholic position recognizes that in the concrete this is not always the end uppermost in the minds of those marrying or making use of marriage. Their immediate intent may be otherwise: the expression or fostering of mutual love, the relieving of concupiscence, the avoiding of irregular relations or perhaps personal unchastity.32 These are all legitimate purposes, the pursuit of which does not in itself imply any deliberate exclusion of the primary end. This fact the Church has long recognized, permitting and blessing the marriages of those incapable of reproducing because of age, or for some other reason, provided they are able to perform the sex act in a natural manner. The objective finality of marriage is preserved so long as the spouses take no positive action to exclude the primary end and hence refrain from interference with the processes
32For more extended discussion of the ordering among themselves of the ends of marriage, see E. C. Messenger, Two in One Flesh. Westminster, Md., Newman Press, [1948] Vol. III, ch.22, p.162-80. The author gives numerous references to the Fathers, theologians, and Roman documents.

82

83

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

of nature.33 Accordingly, not only may sterile and
over-age persons marry, but those who are fertile may use marriage on days when the woman is known to be sterile.34 Furthermore, for sufficient reason they may restrict the use of marriage to such days in anticipation that conception is less likely or unlikely to result. Their reasons should not be trivial, frivolous, or purely selfish, but significant, for example of a medical, eugenic, economic or social character.35
Nevertheless, because the primary end given by nature is of such preeminence, it would be wrong to enter marriage, except for good reasons, on the understanding relations would always be confined to sterile periods. Were a condition attached to the marriage contract to the eiïect mutual rights were exchanged only for sterile periods, then the marriage itself would be invalid.36 This is not to say that any particular marriage must be productive of a given number of children, but rather that if marriage is used it may only be with due regard for the essential order of nature. This order cannot be changed or modified by the will of the spouses. Nor may the Church herself change it. It is not a question here of ecclesiastical discipline or of manmade law susceptible of change, but of natural law which the Church defends but does not create.
This may appear as metaphysical hairsplitting to some less accustomed to distinguish sharply between essential finality and subjective purpose, between intent and effect, between means and end. But Catholic teaching regards it of major con-
33 It is basically in the direct interference with these processes, in the wilful distortion or perversion of a natural function, that the wrongness of contraception is to be found. Similarly, with other acts of unchastity, whether alone or with others. This is an important point which has a definite bearing on current proposals for the physiological control of fertility.
34 Cf. Pius XI, Casti Connubii, no. 60. Acta Apostolicae Sedis 22 (1930) 561.
35Address to the Midwives, no. 36. 36 Ibid., nos. 32-33.

sequence and a point not to be overlooked without threat to morality on a number of fronts, and not merely that of fertility regulation by the married.
Objectively, then, there is a qualitative difference between the limiting of family size by artificial contraception in its various forms, and the reducing chances of fertility simply by refraining from use of marriage on days when conception is likely to occur. In the former case man upsets the order of nature while achieving sexual satisfaction; in the latter he preserves this order, other things being equal, and must forego satisfaction to do so. In either case the number of children born to a marriage may be the same. In fact, the users of artificial contraception may actually plan and achieve a larger number of offspring than the spouses using natural means of regulation. But this is beside the point when it comes to appraising the inherent goodness or badness of means. The morality of individual sex acts derives from their being ordered according to nature, not in their occurring within a marriage which de facto achieves a given number of children.
III. Disapproved Methods of Fertility Regulation
From the foregoing it should be clear that any method of fertility regulation is regarded as morally wrong in Catholic teaching, if it runs counter to the processes of nature and natural function.37 Control of family size can of course be achieved by infanticide, namely the killing or exposure of an infant after birth. Suffice to say this would be objectively murder, whatever the motivation, and generally is regarded as
37 In his Standing Room Only (Beacon Press, 1955) Karl Sax seems to imply that the Church's objection to artificial control of fertility is directed solely against mechanical and chemical contraceptives. The sentence he quotes (p. 184) happens to refer to precisely this kind of contraception. In the original text the paragraph ends with the more general principle: "Rather the moral prohibition extends to each individual use of artificial means designed to frustrate the natural purpose of the act." (Cf. Gibbons, op. cit., p. 119.)

84 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

such by civilized peoples. It is not the issue here. Prior to birth the processes of nature can be interfered with either before or after conception has occurred. If it is the latter, then in addition to the interference with natural process there is also a question of destruction of life which came into existence with conception. Catholic moral teaching takes a position on each of these procedures; this will be indicated in what follows.
Abortion, or the artificial interruption of pregnancy as it is sometimes called, involves the deliberate and direct destruction of human life. If however, the death of the fetus is indirect, i.e., merely permitted as an unfortunate and incidental outcome of an immediately necessary operation such as removal of a diseased uterus, then it does not fall within the scope of our discussion. Catholic moralists would readily admit this is not a case of direct attack on innocent life nor the destruction of life as a means to an ulterior objective. It is precisely when the killing of unborn life is used as a means to another end: avoidance of a possibly dangerous childbirth, or limitation of family size, that objection is raised. Such an act is regarded as always and everywhere immoral, and from the nature of the case seriously so.38 Put briefly, Catholic teaching says it is murder.
Nor may public authorities undertake or legitimize such destruction of fetal life on the grounds the social welfare and the common good demand it. The unborn child is neither a criminal who has forfeited his life to society, nor an aggressor against which society must defend itself. He is an innocent individual whose very existence is not of personal choice, but the outcome of someone else's action. In this connection it may not be inappropriate to recall a reply of the Holy Office dated December 2, 1940. Asked about the morality of putting to death innocent per-
38Cf. Casti Connubii, no. 64 ff.

sons under the Nazi regime, the answer given was that such action is illicit and against the natural law.39 That the immediate occasion of the query was the extermination of psychic and physical defectives does not affect the principal involved, namely that the state cannot authorize the destruction of persons simply on the ground that they are superfluous, burdensome, or an obstacle to national vigor. The principle applies to fetal life as well as those already born.40
Subsequent to his 1951 addresses on marriage, Pius XII was severely criticized in some quarters for what was portrayed as his favoring of the life of the child over that of the mother. Actually, he was proposing no such choice but merely pointing out the traditional Catholic teaching that the death of the unborn child cannot be effected in order to achieve some other good, individual or social. In this instance, as also in the case of the ends of marriage, the Church merely was applying and defending the law of nature and hence of God. It had no choice but to act as it did.41
The argument has been advanced by some that since human life is not present during the first stages of gestation, to evacuate the embryo at an early stage, or to prevent implantation or development of the fertilized ovum, is not abortion but at most contraception.42 On the speculative level this is nothing but a revival of old theories on successive forms (vegetative, animal, rational) which are said to animate the embryo and fetus prior to birth.
39 Acta Apostolicae Sedis, 32 (1940) 553. English translation: Bouscaren, op. cit., II, p. 96-7. Pius XII makes explicit reference to this decree in the address to the midwives, no. 12.
40 Address to the Midwives, no. 12. 41Cf. Huerth, Litterae Encyclicae:De Matrimonio Christiano Rome, Gregorian Univ. Press, 1953. p. 105; Huerth, De Re Matrimonian, p. 84 ff. Both these discussions are in Latin. For a commentary in French, cf. S. de Lestapis, Les Vraies Valeurs de la Vie Conjugale (Discours de S.S. Pie XII aux Sages-femmes). Paris, Editions Spes, 1953; also L'Encyclique Casti Connubii. Paris, Editions Spes, 1955. 42Thus seemingly P. S. Henshaw, Adaptive Human Fertility. McGraw-Hill, 1955.

85

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

According to this theory, only in the last sexual indulgence without acceptance of

stage (rational soul) would a man strictly consequences ordained by nature. The

speaking be regarded as present. Whatever Catholic position is, and will remain, that

the speculative merits of such a position, the voluntary acceptance of sterilization,

in practice it cannot be accepted. For the act of sterilizing, and the promotion

strong arguments from both metaphysics of sterilization as a method of fertility

and empirical science exist to indicate regulation, are all morally unacceptable,

human life is present from conception, so and that no public authority or legislation

that to proceed as if it were not there can make them right.45

when it presumably is, would be equivalently murder. It is noteworthy that Pius XII in his 1951 address makes no distinction as to length of time from conception, but says that any attempt to dispose of unborn life is a violation of the commandment: Thou shalt not kill.43

What is said of permanent sterilization, applies also to temporary sterilization by whatever means induced. Asked whether the direct sterilization of man or woman, whether permanent or temporary, is licit, the Holy Office replied on February 24, 1940: "It is forbidden by the law of nature,

But quite apart from the presence of and, as regards eugenic sterilization it has

human life and the consequent right to already been condemned in the decree of

life, is a fact that abortion at any stage this Sacred Congregation, of 21 March, constitutes a perversion of human repro- 1931."46 The mention of temporary sterili-

ductive function and hence is sinful, more zation is significant in the light of some

so than simple contraception since it is recent proposals for using drugs ("the

a matter of arbitrarily disposing not merely pill") to regulate fertility by preventing

of semen but of embryonic life already in ovulation or otherwise forestalling concep-

process of development. Hence, on this tion by physiologic means. Except in the

score as well as by reason of the attack case where drugs were used merely to

on human life, prevention of development regularize the female period, so that it did

(contragestation) and hindering of im- not come at abnormal times, the procedure

plantation (contranidation) are complete- proposed can be judged as nothing but ly unacceptable in Catholic morality.44 a form of temporary sterilization whose

If abortion is wrong, so too is steriliza- morality must be judged accordingly.

tion as a means of contraception. It achieves its objective, the regulation or rather prevention of fertility, by mutilating the body and perverting a natural function. That the mutilation today is slight, especially in the case of the male, and is neither debilitating nor outwardly discernible, does not affect the essential morality. The wrongness springs not from the gravity of the operation or its painfulness, but from the wilful destruction of a natural function, not for immediate benefit of the whole body, but as a way of permitting

Contraception is sometimes taken to include all means of regulating fertility, including "rhythm," resorted to prior to conception. It has already been pointed out above that from the viewpoint of effect there are similarities between the rhythm and other means, but that in the light of method there is a qualitative difference which affects the morality. Here we do not include the use of periodic continence in what is said of contraception.
Any means adopted to prevent the semen from reaching the ovum comes under the

general heading, contraception. This ob-

43 Address to the Midwives, no. 12; Casti Con-

nubii, no. 64.

44 For a more detailed discussion of this subject, 45 Cf. Casti Connubii, no. 70 ff. See also Huerth,

see J. J. Lynch, "Fertility Control and Moral Law" De Re Matrimonian, p. 104-9.

and "Another Aspect of Fertility Control" Linacre 46 Acta Apostolicae Sedis, 32 (1940) 73; Bouscaren,

Quarterly, 20 (1953) 83-8; 118-22.

op, cit., II, p. 96.

86 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

viously differs from means taken after then it is illicit. Should the semen come

fertilization to prevent the development from another than the husband (donor),

or birth of the life which has come into then there is also question of violation of

existence. Contraception does not imply marital fidelity. That children are the

the sort of interference with life that is normal outcome of marriage, and procrea-

intrinsic to abortion, or to contragestation tion is a primary end, does not change

and contranidation. But it is a perversion the principle that fertility should result

of natural function, according to Catholic from natural process and not by acts which teaching.47 As such it is morally repre- are disordered.50 Pius XII has put the

hensible and cannot be approved as a matter thus: "To reduce cohabitation and

means of fertility regulation.

the conjugal act to a simple organic func-

Contraception is usually taken to imply some interference with the natural act of intercourse, whether by withdrawal, by only partial penetration, or by the placing of a mechanical or chemical obstacle which prevents the semen from reaching the uterus and Fallopian tubes, at least

tion for the transmission of seed would be converting the home, the sanctuary of the family, into a mere biological laboratory."91 Hence, even when fertility regulation means planning for children, it can only be by natural processes, associated with normal intercourse between spouses.

in a live state. Some have argued that

an oral contraceptive (the pill) would be qualitatively different as regards morality, Conclusions

since it implies no direct interference with Catholic moral teaching rules out abso-

the sex act performed naturally. Now lutely as means of fertility regulation any

whether this particular form of fertility suppression of life once conception has

regulation is properly called contraception taken place, whether this be by abortion,

is open to question. But one thing is contragestation, or contranidation. These

certain, its intent is contraceptive (as is are regarded not only as perversions of

the case with sterilization), and it is in natural function but also as unjustified

fact temporary sterilization. As indicated taking of human life.

above, it is morally unacceptable for that Prior to conception, any mechanical,

reason if for no other.48

chemical or other means is illicit which

There is a positive kind of fertility regu- has as its objective the prevention of con-

lation about which something should be ception by keeping semen from reaching

said, namely the use of artificial insemina- the ovum, interfering with the natural

tion to induce conception when this seems otherwise unlikely to occur.49 If it implies merely utilizing some mechanical or other means to facilitate the passage of semen into the uterus when intercourse has taken place in the normal manner between spouses, then it may be permissible. If, however, it means procuring the semen

process for this purpose.
Sterilization, whether permanent or temporary, and whether induced by surgical, physiological or other means, is unlawful when directly intended as contraceptive in purpose.
There remains, then, as an acceptable

from the husband apart from intercourse,

50 Cf. Pius XII, Address of September 29, 1949 to the Fouth International Congress of Catholic

Doctors. Acta Apostolicae Sedis 41 (1949) 557-61

47 Casti Connubii, no. 55 Address to Midwives, (French text). Major portion of address in Eng-

no. 24.

lish translation, Bouscaren, op. cit., III, p. 432. Cf.

48 Cf. Address to Midwives, no. 27.

Address to the Midwives, no. 51. See also address

49Cf. Gerald Kelly, "The Teaching of Pope of May 19, 1956 to Second World Congress on

Pius XII on Artificial Insemination." Linacre Fertility and Sterility; report excerpts to New York

Quarterly, 23 (1956) 5-17; Henry Davis, Artificial Times, May 20, 1956.

Human Fecundation. London, Sheed & Ward, 1951. 51 Address to the Midwives, no. 51.

87

means of fertility regulation only abstinence, either permanent or temporary, This latter, in the presence of sufficient reason, is certainly acceptable morally; its

effectiveness will of course depend on the technical efficiency of means for detecting approaching ovulation, and on the self discipline of the marriage partner.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

