Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Genetics and schizophrenia
Arnold R. Kaplan
To cite this article: Arnold R. Kaplan (1967) Genetics and schizophrenia, Eugenics Quarterly, 14:4, 296-298, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1967.9987740 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1967.9987740
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 9 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:29

GENETICS AND SCHIZOPHRENIA

ARNOLD R. KAPLAN Laboratory of Medical Genetics
Cleveland Psychiatric Institute Cleveland, Ohio

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

Kuttner and Lorincz (1966, 1967) believe that schizophrenia-prone individuals must display biological advantages. Otherwise, they argue--citing support for the concept from Huxley, Mayr, Osmond, and Hoffer (1964)--the lowered reproductive efficiency of schizophrenics would have eliminated the responsible genes from the population except for those that arise as new mutations. The above writers hypothesize that heterozygotic mothers who are carriers of the genes responsible for schizophrenia are "schizophrenoid and more protective than normal mothers and this is presumed to benefit the offspring." Kuttner and Lorincz (1966) emphasize, however, that disagreement with their theory regarding heterozygotic mothers would not invalidate the premise that "the schizophrenia carrier state" must be accompanied by some positive selective features. The more recently published comments by Alland (1967), and by Kuttner and Lorincz 1967), explore possible genetic and nongenetic influences on penetrance of the gene for schizophrenia.
The above references and others, and several recent important conferences on schizophrenia, have demonstrated the primary importance being ascribed to genetic factors by many investigators and theoreticians concerned with the transmission of schizophrenia. This trend of increasing emphasis upon genetic factors in schizophrenia etiology is not being matched by any significant increase in the number of geneticists involved in explorations of schizophrenia. The elimination of competitive inhibition and

professional chauvinism between psychiatrists and clinical psychologists engaged in schizophrenia research, and also the acceptance of sociologist and epidemiologist researchers as peers, have increased the quality of recent schizophrenia research endeavors and conference contributions. Future acceptance and attraction, into the fraternity of schizophrenia researchers, of more population geneticists, behavior geneticists, physical anthropologists, and human geneticists in general, could also do much to accelerate progress toward clarification of the biological aspects of schizophrenia.
The term "geneticists" has been employed by some writers and discussants to denote individuals who emphasize genetic factors in etiology--as opposed to environmentalists, who emphasize nongenetic factors in etiology. The same kind of semantic difficulty would occur if biologists or architects who strongly believe in psychoanalytic principles were described as being psychoanalysts. Thus, belief, philosophy, prejudice, and/or ancillary interest have been utilized by some as criteria for attaching the same label which others employ to designate trained primary practicioners of the specific professional discipline. Such unrestricted use, when it occurs, is confusing.
Descriptive terms such as "genetic" and "hereditary" are applied to traits which are associated with both specific and nonspecific genotypic differences. The descriptive association is used for traits clearly and directly associated with specific genotypes, as well as for traits in which different incidences have been

296

Vol. 14, No. 4

Brief Reports

297

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

shown to be statistically associated with genotypic differences. The broad ranges of semantic interpretation, and the variable applications of such terms, facilitate confusion and difficulties between communicants of different professional backgrounds as well as between communicants adhering to different concepts.
Strictly speaking, biological heredity or genetics involves only the genetic material--i.e., the genes and chromosomes --and not traits or phenotypes. The desireability of semantic conservatism-- particularly regarding human behavior genetics, including psychiatric genetics-- may be associated with the following two corollaries. Firstly, different combinations of different factors, genetic and nongenetic, may yield similar phenotypic results. On the other hand, secondly, the same particular genetic or nongenetic factor, in different genetic and/or nongenetic contexts, may yield dissimilar phenotypic results. The above corollaries are particularly relevant to concepts regarding schizophrenia, which diagnostic categories are based on symptom-oriented diagnostic schemes (Kaplan, 1965, 1966a, b). The concepts regarding variable genetic expressivity, incomplete or reduced genetic penetrance, and occurrence of phenocopies, in context with the above semantic restriction, are consistent with the different observations which have indicated various associations with particular nongenetic variables and/or genetic differences.
Discussions such as those in the articles by Kuttner and Lorincz (1966, 1967) imply the established occurrence of a simple genetic factor associated with the transmission of schizophrenia. There are, however, many different theories of genetic components relevant to etiology of schizophrenia. These include singlegene theories, two-gene single-locus theories, two-locus theories, and multiple-

locus theories. The various hypotheses involve both specific and nonspecific genetic factors, both homogenetic and heterogenetic genetic factors.
Vast quantities of accumulated data have demonstrated that schizophrenia etiology involves genetic as well as numerous environmental components. Nevertheless, a specific mode of genetic transmission has not been proved. The possibility of multiple etiologies also adds to the difficulty in evaluating the relevance of genetic variables. Before the role and transmission of genetic factors associated with schizophrenia can be established, it will be necessary to determine whether only a single genotype, or more than one, is involved in the (symptom-oriented) diagnostic category. If schizophrenic subcategories relevant to genotypic differences could be established, and tests could be devised for proper diagnostic categorization, then different genetic models would be appropriate for the different sub-categories which are now lumped together.
The various hypotheses regarding nature and mode of transmission of genetic differences relevant to different predispositions for schizophrenia are still unproven and open to conjecture and debate. The main directions for principal research efforts toward understanding the organic basis of schizophrenia etiology will largely depend upon the investigators' concepts regarding the nature of the genetic factors involved. For example, the approach based on the assumption that predisposition to schizophrenia involves a single specific gene would be markedly different from that based on the assumption of multiple nonspecific and heterogenetic genetic factors being relevant to multiple etiologies. The fact that the many available data are consistent with the several markedly different genetic concepts means that there

298

Brief Reports

Eugen. Quart.

are few restrictions regarding possible speculations and relevant intellectual calisthenics.
Such activities and contributions to the literature, however--actually, speculations based on speculations--do not contribute toward solving the basic problems regarding the number, nature, and mode(s) of transmission of the genetic variables relevant to etiology of schizophrenia. Speculations regarding heterozygotic mothers, selection, and evolution, would be appropriate if and when a single simple genetic etiology should be proved. Such speculations, however, might not be consistent with the concept of multiple nonspecific and heterogenetic genetic factors, or with other concepts involving multiple etiologies. At the present time, the attention and intellectual energy required for such speculative ex-

ercises might better be expended in ef-
forts devoted to clarification of the basic
first-degree problems, the nature(s) and
mode(s) of transmission of the genetic dif-
ferences relevant to different predisposi-
tions for schizophrenia.
REFERENCES
ALLAND, A., JR., 1967. A further note on evolution and schizophrenia. Eugenics Quart., 14: 158-159.
HUXLEY, J., E. MAYR, H. OSMOND, and A. HOF-
FER, 1964. Schizophrenia as a genetic morpism. Nature, 204: 220-221. KAPLAN, A. R., 1965. On the genetics of "schizophrenia." Eugenics Quart., 12: 132-136.
, 1966 a. A note on the genetics of "schizophrenia." Eugenics Quart., 13: 165-166.
, 1966 b. Biology and schizophrenia. Nature, 210: 870.
KUTTNER, R. E., and A. B. LORINCZ, 1966. Schizo-
phrenia and evolution. Eugenics Quart., 13: 355-356.
, 1967. Additional comments on schizophrenia and evolution. Eugenics Quart., 14: 160-161.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

