Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The BurgessWallin report: A contribution to eugenics through the improvement of marriage
Joseph K. Folsom
To cite this article: Joseph K. Folsom (1954) The BurgessWallin report: A contribution to eugenics through the improvement of marriage , Eugenics Quarterly, 1:2, 52-55, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987178 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987178
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 2
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

THE BURGESS-WALLIN REPORT
A Contribution to Eugenics Through the Improvement of Marriage.1

JOSEPH K. FOLSOM
Vassar College

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

According to a most distinguished viewerwith-alarm, one of the highlights of the sexdominated year 1953 was the immense sales of a book of statistics about the sexual behavior of less than .01 per cent of our female population. This reviewer would Jike to hear the comments of our scoffkiniseys upon another Great Report of depraved 1953. This is based upon a mere ,001 per cent of our female population together with their male partners. Like the ;Kinsey report it admits that its sample is overweighted, specifies precisely how, applies to itself critical internal tests, and modestly interprets its conclusions as befits scholars and gentlemen. However, it deals with the kinds of facts which are quite justly said to be more important than "mere statistics of sexual outlets."
The Burgess-Wallin evidence, supplementing but not contradicting Kinsey, also indicates a very real change in sex behavior in the last 40 years, involving women more numerously than men; and suggesting that this change is mainly in sexual stimulation, .dating, petting; and intercourse among more or less engaged couples, rather than toward overall promiscuity or sexual non-possessiveness.
Professors Burgess and Wallin are the first to study engaged couples and then to follow up these same persons after their marriages. They started with 1000 couples, reached 666 of them during engagement ;and again from three to five years after marriage to get completed questionnaires, and in addition got interviews, similarly timed, from 124 of the couples. Seventytwo per cent of the original sample were college graduates. The book very con-
1Burgess, Ernest W., and Wallin, Paul, Engagement and Marriage, Lippincott, Chicago, 1953, 819 pp., $5.50.

veniently brings in the comparable data from other studies: Burgess and Cottrell, Terman, Locke, Lang, Hamilton, Davis, Adams, Kirkpatrick, Karlsson, and others.
Prediction was a central objective of the study. As in the Burgess-Cottrell and Terman studies, data were weighted and combined in various ways until finally the correlation between a multiple prediction score and a multiple criterion of marital success was brought to the order of -)- .5. Success in engagement was also measured, independently of other predictive factors and of marital success; it correlated almost -\- A with marital success.
Yet as the authors themselves emphasize, prediction is not the only value of measuring marital or engagement success. First, such measurements made from time to time may indicate how a relationship is changing, and how much it is helped by counseling of this or that type and duration. Second, they enable us to spot the problem cases which most need counseling or other treatment. Third, the tests and interviews are educative to the subjects and may help them to make various decisions and adjustments without counseling. Fourth, for divers research purposes, the authors have constructed an index of marital success which seems to be applicable to widely different social classes, regions, races, and countries. They seem to think that the values measured by their index are the universal human values of primary group association, relatively independent of particular cultures (p. 506).
The reviewer, in addition, sees great importance in the study's numerous specific findings and its suggested hypotheses for further research. He would point out that fatalistic predictions of astronomical or even engineering certainty are neither pos-

52

53

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

sible nor really desired in medicine and ment sample, while giving a slight majority

psychology. When we send patients with of votes in both sexes for the two-child

bad X-ray findings to the clinic, or engaged family, gave enough votes to three or more

couples with low Burgess scores to the to overbalance by far those who wanted

counselor, we are in effect saying that we only one or none. During engagement the

should help people to upset predictions. majority intended to defer their first child

The scientist's job is to get his predictive till after three years of marriage. Those

correlations as high as possible, but he may who had during engagement expressed the

at the same time take comfort in the fact wish for three or more children actually

that he cannot get them any higher. What began their childbearing, on the average,

we most want is to know the relative proba- sooner after marriage.

bilities of success of the different policies Reviewing seven other studies in addition

and treatments which are open to choice. to their own, Burgess and Wallin find in

Among the most valuable results are each study a definite positive correlation

negative findings which debunk popular between marital success and the desire for

fallacies. These may help to divert public children but absence or inconsistency of re-

energy from alarmism and fanatical cru- lationship between marital success and the

sades to inventive work upon specific prob- actual having of children. A few studies

lems. One who digests the Burgess-Wallin show lower marital happiness scores cor-

findings will not be impressed by those who related with large families, but these re-

cry out that family life is going to the dogs, lationships may be due to inadequately con-

nor by those who would blame its failures trolled social class, income, or marriage

upon romantic overidealization, nor those duration variables. Other studies show that

others who would put the blame upon the divorce is much less probable for parental

fading ideal of virginity.

than for childless couples, but that this dif-

Eugenists will be interested in several ference declines with the duration of mar-

findings regarding children. Only 67 per riage (as declines also the absolute proba-

cent of these middle class, mostly college- bility of divorce for both groups). As

educated, engaged persons said that they Burgess and Wallin show, these facts do

wanted children "very much." Twenty- not prove that children act as a deterrent

seven per cent desired them mildly, and 6 to divorce. They may to a greater degree

per cent did not want children. The figures indicate (a) that the kind of people who

were the same for the two sexes. The some- do not want children are less likely to be

what reduced and selected sample ques- successful in marriage, and (b) that couples

tioned after marriage showed a sex dif- dissatisfied with their marriages are more

ference: 64 per cent of the men and 73 per apt to postpone and hence more frequently

cent of the women desired children "very to omit childbearing altogether.

much." When a sample, always composed Taken altogether these findings seem to

of the same 635 persons, were asked about suggest that eugenic propaganda should

the number of children they wanted, it was not stress the duty to have children, nor

found that the number wanted increased children as a calculated means to happiness,

after marriage among both men and wo- but rather the achievement of happy and

men, and that this increase in the goal ap- creative marriage as an end in itself. From

peared equally in those who had and those this, more and better raised children will

who had not already become parents (pp. be the natural outcome.

409, 705). After marriage, 52 per cent of The evidence from Burgess and Wallin

the men and 52 per cent of the women said generally refutes Waller's theory that sexual

they "finally wanted to have" three or more deprivation produces romantic love as a

children. Even the original large engage- sublimation, and that this intense state of

54 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

being "in love" produces extreme idealiza- say, "Broken engagements, which drew

tion, or overestimation of the virtues of the strong disapproval in the past, perform a

partner. The authors think that the lover's useful function in the present. . . . Further

self-esteem is a more potent force than his increase in broken engagements might well

sexual deprivation in fanning the flames of result in decrease in the divorce rate" (p.

romantic love, and that this love, even 302).

though intense, is usually coupled with a The correlation between the score

more realistic judgment about the partner measuring success in engagement and the

than much of the literature implies. People actual permanence of the engagement was

do love their fiancés and spouses for what positive but rather low. Only the extremely

they are. They rate their first, second, and high or low scores gave much indication of

third years of marriage happier in retro- whether the engagement would last. But as

spect than they do that dreamy, intoxicat- the authors imply, engagements persist or

ingly romantic year which is supposed to succumb for reasons other than their in-

precede the wedding.
There is a moderate correlation of premarital intercourse with lower scores for success in engagement and in marriage. The authors agree with Terman that "the relatively small prediction weights warranted by our data on sex experience prior

herent strength. The correlation between the engagement scores of men and the scores of their partners is only -j- .57. Other evidence showed that engagements and marriages are very common in which one partner is much better satisfied than the other.

to marriage are in striking contrast with the The most serious gap left unfilled by this

importance attached by moralists to pre- and all other studies is some statistical evi-

marital chastity" (p. 371). Ninety-three dence that would guide the matching of

per cent of the men and 91 per cent of the partners. In all these studies the scores are

women who had had intercourse with the earned by each partner separately. After

fiancé said the experience had strengthened much labor we are able to tell Helen that

the relationship. One per cent of the men she stands at the 25th percentile from the and 5 per cent of the women said it had top in her probability of happy marriage.

weakened their relationship. But as Burgess Yet we cannot tell her how her rank on this

and Wallin in strict scientific fairness point scale would be affected by marrying Peter

out, the conventional couples, if asked, rather than John. If John stands at the

might have said unanimously that their 10th percentile and Peter at the 70th, and

continence had strengthened their relation- Helen has an average amount of emotional

ship. When asked about the feelings and dependency, we might by a sort of me-

circumstances attending premarital inter- chanical common sense estimate that

course, only a few mentioned sexual com- Helen's happiness would be greater with

patibility and only one cited this as a John than with Peter. And so would any

motive for having intercourse. "Whether other girl's happiness. Our actual common planned or unpremeditated, intercourse oc- sense goes further, for it tells us that the

curs predominately as the culmination of result depends more upon what kinds of

couples' frequent and intensive erotic persons John, Peter, and Helen are than

stimulation" (p. 382). Putting many upon what their scores are. It is true that

things together, the authors suggest that Burgess and Wallin's predictive items in-

"the experience of intercourse could con- clude facts about the engagement and other

ceivably give a temporary and spurious joint behavior of the couple, and a few

solidarity to unions which might otherwise simple "combinations of personality" dis-

properly succumb before rather than after covered by a rather mechanical empiricism.

marriage" (p. 372). Elsewhere the authors But what we sorely need in this field is

55

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

hypotheses such as the theory of comple- its shortcomings. Yet the modern marriage

mentary needs developed by Winch, Gray credo stresses equality of sexual satisfaction

and the Ktsanes2 and a research design and makes the husband feel guilty if he fails

sharpened up to test these hypotheses. We to induce orgasm in his wife. This may

do know that similarity of religion, cultural lead to experimental remedies which some-

and social backgrounds, of intelligence and times do more harm than the disease. Ac-

education, etc., tend to favor success in cording to Burgess and Wallin, the pre-

marriage, but we have reason to believe sumption is that these difficulties of sexual

that homogamy in temperament and per- satisfaction in marriage are not biological,

sonality characteristics is not advantageous. but psychogenic, cultural, and social in

The favorable condition is not describable origin, and therefore .susceptible to treat-

as the "matching of opposites" (which may ment (p. 697). On the other hand, Kinsey

be a meaningless phrase), but more proba- sees the basic sex difference as the much

bly as matching of complementary needs. greater capacity of the male to respond to

Burgess and Wallin devote a chapter to "Forecasting Marital Success." This is distinguished from "prediction" in that the observers make overall estimates after studying case records and other available information about the subjects, instead of mechanically adding up a lot of scores. The

psychosexual (conditioned) stimuli, a difference extending beyond our culture and evene beyond the human species. Kinsey too thinks the resulting difficulties can be remedied, depending upon "our willingness to accept the realities which the available data seem to indicate."3 If Kinsey's

authors obtain rating scale "forecasting diagnosis is correct, it would seem to sug-

scores" correlating about -}- .4 with mar- gest that we should cease blanket condem-

riage adjustment. Although they did attain nation of the "double standard," and rather

one prediction score correlation of about try to devise a double standard that would

-f- .5, the general run of the correlations not be unfair like the traditional one.

fails to convince the reader of the authors' Perhaps the most promising correlation

general conclusion that statistical (i.e., me- discussed by Burgess and Wallin is that

chanically statistical) prediction is superior between marital satisfaction and the

to case study forecasting (p. 588).

adaptability of personality imputed to the

The authors find that sexual adjustment spouse. Such a correlation of -{- -64 to

in marriage is correlated about -f- .5 with + .67 was found by Karlsson (p. 639).

general marital happiness but varies accord- Burgess and Wallin then analyze adapta-

ing to a peculiar pattern. "Marital failure bility and find that it includes empathy and

is much more likely to be reflected in the "command of appropriate responses." The

sexual adjustment of men, whereas marital latter looks suspiciously like the kind of

success is more likely to be reflected in the thing taught by finishing schools and by

sexual adjustment of women" (p. 696). teachers of the arts, speech, and drama. It

Traditionally, and still actually on the might be that our Freud-reinforced ideals

average, women in our society, more than of sincerity, self-acceptance and naturalness

men, identify sex with marriage and look have misled us into neglecting the old-

upon sex as an expression of affection not fashioned cultivation of manners and other

to be enjoyed apart from it. Consistently behavioral skills. It might still be true that

with this, they expect less from the sexual in many situations the shortest way out of

relationship per se and are more tolerant of anger into love is to begin acting lovingly

no matter how one feels.

2See Winch, Robert F., The Modern Family, Holt, p. 404, and Ktsanes, Thomas and Virginia in Winch and McGinnis, eds., Selected Studies in Marriage and the Family, Holt, 1953, p. 435.

3See Kinsey, Alfred, et al., Sexual Behaviour in the Human Female, Saunders, 1953, pp. 649, 689.

