Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Reply to Garrett concerning Putnam's race and reason
Gordon Allen
To cite this article: Gordon Allen (1961) Reply to Garrett concerning Putnam's race and reason, Eugenics Quarterly, 8:4, 221-222, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1961.9987487 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1961.9987487
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

Reply to Garrett Concerning Putnam's Race and Reason

GORDON ALLEN
National Institute of Health Public Health Service

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

I MAY BEGIN where Garrett ended. Putnam's book is dangerous not because it may upset what Putnam fairly labels "equalitarian dogma," but for the opposite reason. Natural scientists in this generation are reexamining the question of genetic racial differences with new and more open minds. The glib propagation of specious arguments threatens to fog the issues again and to perpetuate emotional controversy at the expense of scientific investigation.
Garrett has raised eight points, some repeatedly, and I will take them up in logical order.
1. My use of an exclamation point following the names of the four scientists (Gates, Garrett, Gayre, and George) referred only to the strange alliterative coincidence.
2. The statement for which, according to Garrett's second paragraph, I offered no proof, was the theme and the introduction for my review, nearly all of which was offered as "proof" (in Garrett's usage) of that statement.
3. Putnam's so-called careful analysis showing that accidents of climate and geography do not explain cultural retardataion in Africa is confined to two paragraphs, although he repeats his conclusion again and again. Present knowledge bearing on this issue could easily fill a large volume. As long as alternative explanations can be raised, cultural retardation in Africa fails as a convincing demonstration, let alone proof, of racial inferiority.

4. The concept of averages could not be less appropriate than in just the context where Putnam uses it, and Garrett's football teams illustrate the point perfectly. In an integrated society, races are not pitted against each other like teams. Just to the extent that they mingle, their individual contributions rather than the averages determine the success of the resulting society. For example, segregation might serve an economic function if all Negroes were distinguished from all Whites by a difference in IQ as great as the reported average, but the frequency distributions overlap widely and any barrier to occupational mobility impairs efficient use of manpower.
My parallel phraseology in terms of average difference in receptivity and in terms of relative frequency of receptive individuals in Europe and Asia did use the words interchangeably just to emphasize the consequences. An "average" superiority" conveys the impression of universal superiority not required by the hypothesis. I might have added that, given a few key individuals and high variability, Europeans as a society could have been more receptive even if their average receptivity were lower, but this probably is splitting hairs.
5. As to the inferred difference in receptivity, the burden of proof is on Put nam if he asserts that his evidence dem onstrates a large difference. His position is untenable if his evidence can be satisfactorily explained by assumption of little or no difference.

221

222 Brief Reports

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

6. Garrett makes one rather telling point here. It does not really matter whether the genetic difference between Africans and Europeans was small or large. If a difference existed and if it explains the disparity in the two civilizations, then it was an important one. But this hangs upon two if's, and what was important in the gradual acquisition of civilization 4,000 years ago may not now be important in promoting evolutionary advance of civilization. Admittedly, race mixture is hazardous in the sense that we cannot predict all the consequences, but neither can we predict all the consequences of continued segregation in a changing world order.
7. To a nongeneticist there is doubtless something startling in my statement that, with respect to some variables, an individual's manifest traits are the best guide to his hereditary potential. Laymen are impressed by the mysterious way in which recessive hereditary characters crop out in offspring of normal individuals, but the sort of hereditary variations concerned with adaptability to civilization seem to be quantitative or continuous in character. With respect to such traits gene effects are mainly additive.
Consequently, a geneticist would have more hope of an intelligent third generation if shown a stupid father and a brilliant son than if shown a brilliant father and a stupid son. A child receives half of his father's genes, only a quarter of his grandfather's. This process, appropriately called dilution by Garrett, is irreversible, and unless the parents are related, the grandchild can never have

more of its grandfather's genes than the father had.
8. To focus this argument on interracial marriage: If a Negro lacks certain genes common in his race, and he and his descendants all marry Whites, those particular genes will not occur among his descendants unless contributed by the white marriage partners.
Admittedly, if blacks and whites marry in sufficient numbers, all racial traits will be blended in the resulting population. But in requiring "sufficient" numbers, Garrett is setting his conclusion as a condition. Actually, if only a few per cent of Negroes marry Whites in each generation, these marriages are likely to be highly selective. To the extent that unintelligent Whites may marry intelligent Negroes, the White race stands to gain by accepting the mulattoes.
Finally, on this point, Garrett says the best proof of the pudding is in the eating, and he quotes Putnam on this proof. The particular quotation is indeed "classic," but only for its vulnerability. It refers to cases on record of interbreeding white and black civilizations. Do the historical records he has in mind lend themselves now to time-sequence analysis of the essential steps, immigration, integration, intermarriage and deterioration? Were the matings assortative? These and other ambiguities are beyond resolution and it is impossible to transfer more than very tenuous inferences from the historical events to America's present problems. If this is the best proof for Putnam's case, then certainly the equalitarian cause will triumph.

