Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The disadvantaged child: A product of the culture of poverty, his education, and his life chances
Francis P. Purcell & Maurie Hillson
To cite this article: Francis P. Purcell & Maurie Hillson (1966) The disadvantaged child: A product of the culture of poverty, his education, and his life chances, Eugenics Quarterly, 13:3, 179-185, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1966.9987666 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1966.9987666
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:28

THE DISADVANTAGED CHILD: A PRODUCT OF THE CULTURE OF POVERTY, HIS EDUCATION, AND HIS LIFE CHANCES

FRANCIS P. PURCELL AND MAURIE HILLSON
Graduate School of Education Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
New Brunswick, New Jersey

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

The American dream of upward socioeconomic mobility and the improvement of one's relative position in life is not realized by large segments of the population. Social mobility and the good things in life are largely determined for children by the position or status of their parents. This position is largely, although not exclusively, secured through occupation. A successful business executive commuting from a parklike residence in a suburb to a well-fashioned office in a city has attained his position not only through his own effort, but because of the escalator effects of a burgeoning American economy. He was able to board the escalator by virtue of his education and the position his own parents occupied. A mother struggling to raise a family of children on miserly public assistance allowances feels a great burden just living. She experiences the lack of hope, diminished life chances, and normlessness which result in too little education. The nature of the socialization process is such that even her children will, in all probability, fail to achieve acceptable academic standards. A recent study of 5,000 aid-to-dependentchildren families disclosed the discouraging finding that the school dropout rate for these children is very high. Their school retardation rate is twice that of the national average. Children in these families grow up to hold lowstatus employment, if they are employed at all. In this study fewer than 7% at-

tained the level of skilled craftsmen. As a result, a second generation of aid-todependent-children families has risen, and a third one is emerging (Burgess and Price, 1963). What factors are operant in creating such widespread poverty and dependency? Surely today it can be accepted that huge learning deficits occur in the children of such families; and because of this, their assimilation into the mainstream of the American culture does not occur.
Concurrent with the attempts to mitigate poverty is the movement to obtain civil rights for the Negro minority in the United States. The latter, without doubt, has given tremendous impetus to the former. The educational establishment has become the focal point of concern in each instance. Failure of the educational establishment to enable and encourage youth from minority groups to take advantage of available opportunity is widely known. It is accepted by most that the royal road from poverty to affluence is through education. These two issues join as though they are a single problem; and while it may be necessary, it is nonetheless unfortunate that the problems of education for the disadvantaged have become identified largely as education of Negro children.
A substantial collection of evidence indicates that the phenomena of social class, not race or ethnicity, is the overriding factor to be considered in addressing this problem. Evidence gathered by

179

180

Purcell and Hillson

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

Sheldon and Glazier (1965) emphasizes the racial character of school failure. They note that in New York City not one school with a 90% minority enrollment (Negro and Puerto Rican) attained the average sixth grade reading scores, while 99% of the white schools were at grade level or above. Similar results were obtained when I.Q. scores were compared. Not a single "minority school" attained the mean I.Q. 100 or higher. Two-thirds of the schools fell between I.Q. scores of 85 and 94 and one-third, between 70 and 84. In comparison, 98% of the "white schools" had I.Q. scores of 100 or better. Among the junior high schools not a single "minority school" had a mean I.Q. score as high as 95, and 75% ranged between 70 and 84. In contrast, all the "white schools" averaged an I.Q. score of 100 or over. There was not a single "minority junior high school" where the eighth grade scored at the eighth grade level. But 94% of the "white schools" scored at the normal level. Wilson's comparative study in California (1963, p. 217) produced similar results with one major exception. The differences varied with social class. Thus, while it is true that predominantly Negro schools in New York City have lower achievement norms than predominantly white schools, these are, in addition to being Negro- or whitedominated, social-class dominated.
Wilson notes that "a continuously accumulating body of research over the past few decades has made it clear, however, that utilization of the educational opportunities follows, to a large degree, the lines of the stratification of the society." Furthermore, research has disclosed the mechanism that sustains "intergenerational inheritance" of positions within an educational system. Evidence that has been gathered supports the contention that social attitudes that produce

nonlearning by students are laterally diffused among their peers.
For example, Wilson found that college-aspiring students from similar family backgrounds corresponded to the mode of the school in which they were enrolled. Similarly, it is contended that other modal attitudes that alienate children from the classroom learning are diffused through peer group relationship. Additionally, it has been noted that among lower class children, the tendency is to be governed by attitudes that spread horizontally by one's peers. This is in contrast to middle-class children whose attitude adoption appears to be more determined in a vertical fashion with prestige-status adults in a deterministic role. Nevertheless, studies have indicated that peer attitudes profoundly affect the attitudes of all adolescents. Thus, while 93% of the sons of professionals in predominantly upper white-collar schools said they wanted to go to college, only 64% of their compeers who were enrolled in schools predominated by children of manual workers shared this aspiration. Only one-third of the sons of manual workers, on the other hand, in the latter school hoped to go to college; and threefifths of manual workers' sons attending the largely white-collar school wanted to enter college (Wilson, 1963, p. 218). In the same manner, then, attitudes that give rise to self-defeating patterns of behavior--in this instance low-level academic aspiration and a pervasive derogation of intellectual pursuit--became manifest.
Social attitudes that prevent academic achievement are easy enough to identify. But why do they withstand all ostensible efforts on the part of school and communities to modify them? Possibly, as Kluckhohn (1960, p. 304) points out, the school system in the United States is highly future oriented, while the life

Vol. 13, No. 3

The Disadvantaged Child

181

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

style of low-income people is often oriented to the present. Achievement beyond that of "a sense of being" also represents a value difference. Children reared in one value system find the whole set of teaching and learning expectations of another system alien and even hostile. Other findings indicate that while our society promises occupational reward for academic achievement, a person's social origin despite education depresses upward social mobility (Lipset and Bendix, 1959). Negro youth easily perceive that there are those among them who fail to compete successfully with white compeers with equal education.
Still other forces militate against academic achievement in low-income-area schools. Sexton (1961) notes that schools in low income areas are older. They have fewer facilities for both recreation and education. Despite greater need, they are less likely to have remedial facilities. A greater proportion of the teaching time is provided by substitute teachers. Teachers are often reluctant to teach in slum schools so that the turnover rate is high, which assures less experienced teachers. Becker's (1952) study documents the fact that in Chicago, public school teachers initiate their careers in low-income neighborhoods where there are more vacancies but transfer out as soon as possible. Cloward and Jones (1963, p. 190) suggest that because of the high turnover of teachers and their lack of experience, along with the high geographic mobility of low-income persons, the youth from low-income neighborhoods receive less instructional time. Deutsche's study (1960, p. 25) indicates that in certain deprived area schools, as much as 80% of the school day is devoted to discipline or organizational detail. Even the better teachers devoted 50% of their time to such activities.

If social class is a significant determinant in the cognitive processes of individuals, then it can be expected that measurable differences between children within an ethnic group from different social groups can be obtained. It can also be expected that as the age of the children increases, the measurable differences would also increase. John (1963, p. 814), in an effort to study the impact of early social environment on the patterning of intellectual skills in young children, produced findings that support this contention. Negro children from lower class, lower middle-class, and middle-class families submitted to a variety of intellectual measurements. Middle-class children surpassed their lower class age mates in vocabulary, nonverbal I.Q., and in a conceptual sorting activity. The differences in the performance of these tasks became statistically significant at the fifth grade level but by comparison were less than significant at the first grade level.
Countless studies have documented the eroding effect of slum life on the LQ. of young children. In a recent study, Keller (1963, pp. 823-831) notes that average LQ. scores decline from a normal 96.5 in the first grade to 88.5 in the fifth grade. These findings correspond to the findings in the Harlem schools. By the time the child reaches the fifth grade, his grade reading level is two grades retarded. Some people regard Negro reading retardation of "only" two years as remarkable. They wonder if some kind of superiority is not operant. What is it that enables these students to achieve so much in the face of the impossible obstacles that confront them? After reviewing the handicaps that Negroes face, Pettigrew (1964) muses whether Negroes are not actually intellectually superior to whites who with their environmental advantages do not achieve even

182

Purcell and Hillson

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

greater margins of success. He cites numerous studies that indicate the significance of social class variables in the comparison of Negro-white I.Q. scores. Other studies cited by Pettigrew indicate very strongly that I.Q. scores improve among all groups as the socioeconomic conditions improve.
Numerous other studies reinforce the belief that low-income children, regardless of ethnicity, can be expected to fare less well in the American school system.
What it is within the low-income culture which produces handicaps for learning is not entirely clear. Deutsch (1960, p. 26) states that in his experience, he has never seen a school curriculum specifically designed for the life styles and cognitive needs of low-income, socially deprived children. Schools organized, administered, and taught against a backdrop of middle-class focal life concerns may inadvertently establish a culture-conflict situation. This brings with it corresponding ingroup-outgroup hostilities and alienations. Teachers on New York's lower East Side were provided with seminars stressing cultural theory and social behavior together with visits to the homes of their pupils. They were reported as more accepting of suggested changes within the classroom. They were more appreciative of the severe problems families contended with in the inner city slum. On the other hand, teachers who were provided with only the didactic material appeared not to have varied their attitudes beyond that of their control group, who were provided neither the seminar nor the home visit schedule. While the controls that were instituted in this experiment were not sufficiently maintained to produce significant measurable attitude change, teacher testament indicated that distinct changes in feelings occurred which produced a reduction in social distance.

Moblization For Youth (MFY) nearly provoked an open conflagration with the school system in Manhattan's lower East Side when it attempted to induce the schools to modify curriculum and to institute changes that would take into consideration the cultural and environmental milieu of the population (Brager, 1964).
Furthermore, it is estimated that 95% of the school teachers in the United States are middle class in their orientation (Davis, 1951, p. 26). As a group, they achieve full-fledged middle-class status through professional teacher education (Super, 1957). Deutsche's study (1960, p. 27) indicates that "for the most part, the teachers felt alien to the community within which they worked, and with one or two exceptions, they themselves lived in other neighborhoods. Even though the teachers blamed the school administrators, charging that they had no appreciation of the special problems existing in the education of the lower-class, and most specifically, the Negro and Puerto Rican child and were always imposing an educational orientation which was exclusively developed for a middle class population who have very different preparations for learning."
The following description by a sensitive graduate student assigned to the MFY project in New York City lends substance to the foregoing abstractions. While this example is more clear-cut because of the language bias, similar culture-conflicts emerge when any lowincome children invade the classrooms of middle class teachers.
The purpose of the visit to this class was to listen to the children's oral language and read some of their written expression. The teacher attempted to evoke responses to an assembly program the children had just viewed, but was unsuccessful. In reacting to some responses, she indicated that

Vol. 13, No. 3

The Disadvantaged Child

183

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

there was a correct answer, predecided by her, and that approximations of it were unacceptable. This aroused hesitation and reluctance to speak on the part of many children, but the teacher's standard was maintained and, one might add, met, by her own responses to the question she posed.
It is evident that neurophysiological processes cannot be held accountable for the educational deficits that are accruing among America's low-income persons. The growth of the problem in the United States causes many to pause and contemplate the extent to which a society can accommodate contracultures within its midst without seriously vitiating the essence of the majority group. The preservation of the desirable genes may or may not be more crucial than the preservation of certain cultural forms such as highly complex educational and intellectual pursuits. The history of civilization is replete with examples of lost cultural capabilities and subsequent declines of societies. This is not a question of cultural assimilation; rather, it is a question of the failure of this timehonored American tradition to function in the lives of thousands of bypassed persons.
What is it in the life experience of the child from low-income areas which produces adaptive responses that lead to nonlearning in the classroom? Few studies are available which shed as much light on this cultural pattern as those that focus on the exotic cultures studied by anthropologists now and in the past.
A casual observation of the inner city slum reveals noise, high density of people, flagrant traffic violations, narcotic pushers, bookies, run-down shops, garbage-littered streets, and overwhelming evidence of all kinds of civic disinterest. The disregard of adolescents obviously under the influence of alcohol and often tragically under the effects of heroin at-

tests to adult indifference. Death on the
streets is not uncommon. Ambulances
and emergency vehicles rush to their
destinations and are so commonplace
that children do not look up from their
play. One can also be impressed by the
unlimited opportunity for social! inter-
course--untidy but cheerful children,
miraculously avoiding injury by speed-
ing automobiles; small coteries of peo-
ple talking with great animation; the
willingness to give directions or to ask
for them. In the midst of despair, one
can still easily perceive the warmth, spon-
taneity, and human directness of the
people.
Keller (1963, p. 826) notes that low-
income children have less interaction
with parents. They do not converse
much with other adults as do middle-
class children. Shared family activities
are rare:
Even at meal times, one-half of these children are alone or in the company of their brothers and sisters. It is interesting to note that though these children are poor, they are not starving--the list of foods typically eaten at breakfast and at dinner includes a considerable variety of nutritionally adequate food, although food amounts were not indicated. Poverty, today, probably extends more to housing, to lack of spending money, to lack of comforts, and to a constricted milieu for learning and exploring the world. A city, especially a metropolis, would seem to be a fascinating place in which to grow up, but one would not believe this from the accounts of restricted movement and the monotonous repetitiveness of activities--TV and more TV, play with other children, movies, and as the single organized activity besides school--Church on Sunday for one-half of the group. Their world seems to be small and monotonous, though not necessarily an unhappy one. i
This constriction of experience and the poverty of spirit it engenders may

184

Purcell and Hillson

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

account for the below normal I.Q. scores of this group of poor children by the time of the fifth grade (mean I.Q. is 88.57 on Lorge Thorndike nonverbal I.Q. test; in first grade, Lorge Thorndike I.Q. mean scores were 96.56) confirming countless other studies that have shown a similar scholastic and verbal inferiority for children from underprivileged environments. It may also account for the high degree of negative self-evaluation-- more than half of the children in each grade feeling ashamed, sad, or peculiar when they draw comparisons between themselves and other children. And perhaps their lofty occupational choices are a sign of their discomfort with their crowded homes, their uneducated parents, the hit-and-run quality of their relations with their families, and the absence of constructive and exciting things to do and to learn outside of school. In any case, it is quite clear that a low self-esteem and high occupational aspirations characterize these deprived urban children at this time.
There are many aspects that militate
against the success of low-income chil-
dren. One focal point of the problem
centers on their communication skills
and attendant language usage.
There can be little doubt that language
is an important determinant of culture.
The study of language as behavior is not
limited to the scholarly literature. It was
in George Bernard Shaw's play Pygma-
lion that we learn from Professor Hig-
gins "the great secret. . ..is not having
bad manners or any other particular sort
of manners, but having the same manner
for all human souls; in short, behaving
as if you were in heaven, where there
are no third class carriages, and one soul
is as good as another."
Bernstein, an English sociologist, of-
fers a viable sociolinguistic theory in
which he sees language as the pivotal
factor in socialization. He postulates the
existence of two linguistic codes: elabo-

rated and restricted. These, he contends,
regulate behavior. They are used dif-
ferently by social classes. Each code re-
quires distinct verbal planning. The mid-
dle classes manipulate the verbal symbols
successfully in the elaborated code.
Conversely, the lower classes operate in
a restricted code and are restricted by
it to a different level of opportunity
(Bernstein, 1961). Teachers generally
deal with or speak an elaborated code.
Theirs is a language or verbalization
scheme, representative of middle-class
society.
A simple nontechnical analysis of
what is normally done in the middle-class
home could serve as a teacher job de-
scription as it concerns some of the strat-
egies to employ in teaching the disad-
vantaged child. Bloom, Davis, and Hess
(1965, p. 15) reflect this idea clearly:
The child in many middle-class homes is given a great deal of instruction about the world in which he lives, to use language to fix aspects of this world in his memory, and to think about similarities, differences, and relationships in this very complex environment. Such instruction is individual and is timed in relation to experiences, actions, and questions of the child. Parents make great efforts to motivate the child, to reward him, and to reinforce desired responses. The child is read to, spoken to, and is constantly subjected to a stimulating set of experiences in a very complex environment. In short, he "learns to learn" very early. He comes to view the world as something he can master through a relatively enjoyable type of activity, a sort of game which is learning. In fact, much of the approval he gets is because of his rapid and accurate response to his formal instruction at home.
To move from a disadvantaged life,
the culture of poverty, failure, threat,
instability, and insecurity requires a self-
conceptualization that allows for insight,

Vol. 13, No. 3

The Disadvantaged Child

185

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

with careful sociologically based guidance, into functionally realistic aspirational levels for all phases of existence (Kvaraceus et al., 1965). The generic idea needs to be: if theyoungster tries and is given the opportunity for success, he can make it! He needs to be given the opportunities to rehabilitate all of the necessary personal equipment to handle his own life situation satisfactorily, with security, and with success.
Our life is encompassed bya complex culture and involved in an even more complex universe beset by many problems. Wasted lives, wasted resources, and wasted talents arealways frustrating. Faced by the complexities of life, this waste serves only to deprive the world of possible insights, answers, and opportunities hitherto unknown. Can anyone disagree that of all of the categories of wasted talent, "the one that must lie heaviest on our conscience is our disadvantaged minorities" (The Rockefeller Panel Reports, 1961,p. 380)?
REFERENCES
BECKER, HOWARD, 1952. The career of the Chi-
cago public school teacher. Amer. Sociol. Rev., 17 (7):470-477. BERNSTEIN, BASIL, 1961. "Social Class and Linguistic Development: A Theory of Social Class Learning." In A. H. Halsey et al. (eds.), Education, Economy and Society. The Free Press, Glencoe, pp. 288-314.
BLOOM, BENJAMIN S., et al., 1965. Compensatory
Education for Cultural Deprivation. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York. BRAGER, GEORGE, 1964. Influencing Institutional Change Through a Demonstration Project: The Case of the Schools. (Mimeographed) Mobilization for Youth, Inc., New York.
BURGESS, M.E., and D D. PRICE, 1963. An Amer-

ican Dependency Challenge. AmericanPublicWelfare Assoc., Chicago.
CLOWARD, RICHARD A., and JAMES A. JONES, 1963.
"Social Class: Educational Attitudes and Participation." In A. Harry Passow (ed.), Education in Depressed Areas. Bureau of Publications, Teachers College, Columbia University, New York.
DAVIS, ALLISON, 1951. "What are Some of the Basic Issues in the Relation of Intelligence Tests to Cultural Background?" In Kenneth Eells et al. (eds.), Intelligence and Cultural Differences. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
DEUTSCH, MARTIN P., 1960. Minority-Group and
Class Status as Related to Social and Personality Factors in Scholastic Achievement. Monograph No. 2. The Society for Applied Anthropology, New York.
JOHN, VERA P., 1963. The intellectual development of slum children: Some preliminary findings. Amer. J. Orthopsychiat., 33 (5): 813-822.
KELLER, SUZANNE, 1963. The social world of the urban slum child. Amer. J. Orthopsychiat., 33 (5): 823-831.
KLUCKHOHN, FLORENCE, 1960. "Variations in the
Basic Values of Family Systems." In Norman W. Bell and Ezra F. Vogel (eds.), A Modern Introduction to the Family. The Free Press, NewYork.
KVARACEUS, WILLIAM C., et al. (eds.), 1965. Negro Self-Concept: Implications for School and Citizenship. McGraw-Hill, NewYork.
LIPSET, S.M., and REINHARD BENDIX, 1959. Social
Mobility In Industrial Society. University of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles.
PETTIGREW, THOMAS F., 1964. A Profile of the
Negro American. D. Van Nostrand Co., Princeton.
ROCKEFELLER PANEL REPORTS, THE, 1961. "The
Use and Misuse of Human Abilities. In Prospect for America. Doubleday, New York.
SEXTON, PATRICIA C., 1961. Education and In-
come: Inequalities of Opportunity in our Public Schools. Viking Press, New York.
SHELDON, E. B., and R. A. GLAZIER, 1965. A Fact
Book, New York. Russell Sage Foundation. SUPER, DONALD, 1957. ThePsychology of Careers.
Harper and Brothers, New York. WILSON, ALAN B., 1963. "Social Stratification and
Academic Achievement." In A. Harry Passow (ed.), Education in Depressed Areas. Bureau of Publications, Teachers College, Columbia University, New York.

