Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Sources of great men
Stephen Sargent Visher
To cite this article: Stephen Sargent Visher (1955) Sources of great men, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:2, 103-109, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987232 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987232
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

SOURCES OF GREAT MEN

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

STEPHEN SARGENT VISHER
Department of Geography Indiana University

C./IVILIZATION'S ADVANCEMENT HAS BEEN
accelerated in several ways: by the increased
use of local natural resources of all sorts,
notably of the soil, minerals and fuels; by
using the resources of an ever larger share
of the earth; by increasing the productivity
of individual men and women through
education and better health, and by mak-
ing it possible for them to be productive
for a larger fraction of the time. Progress
has also been aided by the increase in the
number of productive people as, obviously,
a large number of workers can accomplish
more than can a small number. Undoubt-
edly a major cause of progress has been the
discoveries, inventions and other contribu-
tions made by exceptionally talented
people. Indeed many thoughtful people
declare that civilization's most valuable re-
source is the people who contribute notably
of new ideas and stimulation. Consider, and
refute if you can, the following three dec-
larations:
"The most creative one-tenth of the men are 1000 times as valuable as the average tenth, and more than 1,000,000 times as valuable as the least productive tenth." "The productivity of nearly every worker is vastly increased as a result of discoveries made by a very small fraction of the people who have ever lived." "The constructive contributions of a small fraction of one per cent of the total world population have made possible civilization's advances."
Leadership has been so highly significant
that a discussion of its distribution and
mention of various conditions which have
correlated with its presence is an appro-
priate subject of an article.
Of the many sorts of leaders, considera-

tion is given here to three: those of world renown; Americans who have won national recognition; and "local leaders," highly significant in their communities although not widely known. Of the latter type, the mothers of sons who later became renowned are perhaps most precious, according to the testimonials given by many famous men. Because information concerning this third group of leaders is quite inadequate, most of this article is devoted to the other two great groups.
The 1000 most eminent men and women of all history here considered are those who received extended biographical sketches in leading British, French, German, and American encyclopedias. Of the second great group, the Americans, three categories are considered; the 1000 most distinguished, the approximately 2500 scientists selected by secret vote of their fellow scientists as especially distinguished, and starred in one or more of seven editions of "American Men of Science" (starring done 1903-1943); the 30,000 or so American-born persons sketched in "Who's Who in America," 1920-1945.
Here the distribution of the birthplaces for the most world-renowned group is discussed rather broadly, by latitude, by large sections of the world, and by century of birth. For the American notables, some details are given, especially concerning the distinguished scientists, who have been the subject of a sizable volume. Still more detailed studies of notables born in the Midwest are presented in "Geography of American Notables" and in "Indiana Scientists." These three volumes are by the

103

104 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

present writer. The late J. McKeen Cattell, tivity, an ancient one, and one commencing

long professor at Columbia University, about 1200 A.D., but nearly ending by

laboriously compiled 50 years ago a list of 1700 A.D. Of the 102 from Italy, only 12

the 1,000 most eminent people of all time, came from the 18th or 19th century. In re-

and also studied extensively 1,000 distin- cent centuries, western Europe (notably the

guished American scientists. Much infor- British Isles) has been relatively produc-

mation concerning the 1,000 most eminent tive. In France, all of the 128 except 15

people of the world's history has been more were born after 1500 A.D. In the United

recently assembled by Walter G. Bower- States, New England, Virginia, and Caro-

man. The late Ellsworth Huntington of lina were more productive prior to 1800

Yale University made extended studies of than in recent decades.

eminent people of America and of the rest The westward and northward shift in the

of the world.

productivity of leadership is associated with

Of the 1,000 most eminent people of all the depletion of resources of soil and min-

time, six interesting generalizations as to erals, and possibly with a change in cli-

their birthplace can be made:

mate. Apparently southern Europe former-

1. Only five of the 1,000 were born be- ly had a more desirable climate than now,

tween the Tropics of Cancer and Capri- and northern Europe, a poorer one. Clearly,

corn, although that area presumably con- as civilization advanced, man became better

tained more than one-fifth of the world's able to live in cooler climates. Significant

population until recent generations. Born also was the shift in Europe in opportuni-

within the tropics were Kipling (in Bom- ties for commerce and industrialization.

bay, India), Mohammed (in Mecca, Ara- After the discovery of the New World, Eu-

bia) , Bolivar (in Caracas, Venezuela), Al- rope "faced the Atlantic" instead of the

exander Hamilton and J. J. Audubon (in Mediterranean. Moreover, the greater de-

the West Indies). (Buddha, Gandhi, and posits of coal and iron in the North than in

Tulsi Das were born in northern India, be- the South favored industrialization in the

yond the Tropics.)

North. In China and India, the decline in

2. Of those born in ancient or medieval productivity of outstanding people may

times, relatively many were born in a fairly have been partly associated with increasing

mild climate, about 160 near the Mediter- poverty. E. V. McCollum, the distinguished

ranean Sea. More recently, most were born physiologist, pointed out that, after the

in a relatively cool climate: nearly 400 in populous part of China became so densely

the British Isles, 260 in Germany, Holland, peopled that few cows were kept and very

Scandinavia, etc., 120 in France, 20 in Rus- few children had cows' milk, China almost

sia and Poland, 108 in the U. S.

ceased yielding inventive people and lead-

3. Areas which were the birthplace of ers of other sorts. Deterioration in the

several notables yielded diverse sorts; for average quality of the people presumably

example, authors, artists, and statesmen. occurred also in various other areas. For

4. Regions which produced relatively example, in ancient Greece, most of the in-

numerous leaders at one period may have tellectuals considered it undesirable to

produced few or none at a later period. For marry one's intellectual equal and not

example, nearly all the famous people born worthwhile to carefully rear a sizable fam-

on the lands bordering the eastern Mediter- ily. In Italy, also, the individual's personal

ranean Sea (Greece, Egypt, and southwest- achievements were rated important rather

ern Asia) were ancients. Of the 44 espe- than offspring who might be qualified to

cially famous people from Greece, only 2 advance civilization. In New England, the

are later than the 4th century A.D. Italy decline in the production of eminent peo-

had two periods of considerable produc- ple per million of population reflects a

105

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

sharp decline in the birth rate of the Yan- of those sketched at length in "Dictionary

kees since about 1800 and also the immigra- of American Biography." He reports four

tion of many "lower class" people, includ- chief centers or "foci" of origin: New Eng^

ing French Canadians of peasant ancestry, land, New York, Virginia, and Carolina.

Portuguese, and humble Irish. Significant Of these, the Carolina focus was least pro-

also was the migration westward of many ductive and declined earliest; the Virginia

ambitious Yankees.

focus was highly significant before 1800

5. A predominant share of the famous and yielded some of the most distinguished

people of the world were born in or near Americans. The New England focus has

cities. The most notable exceptions to this been much the most productive; indeed, a

generalization were in the U. S. and Can- large share of the distinguished Americans

ada when many "city people" were "home- are of at least half Yankee ancestry. This

steading" or otherwise settling new land, includes many born in New York, Ohio,

especially in upstate New York, Ontario, and elsewhere in the Midwest, in the West,

the Midwest, and West.

and even in the South. The New York

6. Most of the world's famous people focus has gained progressively in impor-

were reared in communities where their tance partly because of immigrants from

special talents were appreciated by at least Germany and Poland, etc., especially those

some people, and where their development of Jewish ancestry, as many Jews have be-

was encouraged in various ways. Con- come prominent.

versely, a large share of the exceptionally Of the nation's 33 presidents, 8 came

talented people, "geniuses," born in un- from Virginia, 7 from Ohio, 5 from New

favorable communities have been killed or England, and 4 from New York. Only 4

otherwise prevented from rising to the came from farther west than Ohio; namely,

heights of which they were capable.

Lincoln (Ky.), Hoover (la.), Truman

Studies of the place of birth have been (Mo.), and Eisenhower (Tex.); only 3

made of numerous famous Frenchmen by came from south of Virginia, namely

Odin, and of many famous British by Have- Johnson and Polk (N. C.) and Jackson

lock Ellis. Odin found that Paris and vicin- (S. C.). The remaining 2 came from Penn-

ity had yielded relatively many eminent sylvania and New Jersey. When back-

Frenchmen, and Ellis found East Anglia grounds are considered, New England led.

(north of London) to have been the most Of generals, the South has yielded rela-

productive part of Britain.

tively many. Of inventors, the northeastern

Of distinguished Americans, there have states have been most productive. Most

been several studies. "Dictionary of Ameri- prominent businessmen have come from

can Biography," (21 volumes, 1926-1936), towns or small cities, not from large cities

sponsored by the American Council of or farms, or from the South. Of million-

Learned Societies, includes sketches of aires, the yield in proportion to popula-

13,633 rather carefully selected men and tion is largest in the Rocky Mountain

women; "Who's Who in America," biennial states, smallest in the South.

since 1899, has sketched more than 50,000 Many prominent labor leaders have been

prominent Americans; "Webster's Bio- foreign born. Of those born in the U. S.,

graphical Dictionary," 1943, sketches about the yield in proportion to population has

5,000 Americans and about 35,000 other been largest in the Pacific States, smallest in

prominent people.

New England. Native distinguished musi-

The most comprehensive analysis yet cians are few. New York City yielded 5 of

made of the 1,000 Americans selected as the the 7 most famous, and also a large share

most eminent is by Walter G. Bowerman: of the concert musicians. Of 27 persons

"Studies in Genius," 1947. His selection is prominent in art, 7 were born in New York

106 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

City, 2 each in Chicago and Philadelphia, 5 in lesser cities, 11 in towns; only one was born in the South (Ky.), and only one farther west than Kansas.
Of 235 native Americans recently especially prominent on the stage, screen, or radio, 60 were born in New York City, 10 in Chicago, 8 in Philadelphia, 7 in Los Angeles, 5 in Pittsburgh, 5 in Boston, 4 in Washington, D. C, 3 in Salt Lake City, 2 in San Francisco, and 2 in Helena, Montana. New York State yielded 70; New England, 16; The Rocky Mountain States, 12; California, 14; Illinois, 14; Ohio, 12; Missouri, 9; Wisconsin, 8; Texas, 6; Nebraska, Indiana, Georgia, Virginia, each 4. The South's total is 25, or less than a fifth of its ratio in proportion to population.
Writers of distinction formerly came largely from New England and New York; then for a few decades, considerable numbers came from the eastern Midwest, notably Indiana. In recent years, however, successful writers have been less localized, and the South has yielded them at a rate not very far below its proportionate share of the nation's population.
Of distinguished scientists, there is, in proportion to population, an almost steady southward decline in yield state by state. Formerly, New England led by a wide margin. However, of the younger scientists, the Midwest and Far West have done relatively well, and the South has improved its low yield.
Some Theories on the Localization of Birthplaces
Four popular theories to explain the great contrasts in the yield of notable people in proportion to population are: (1) Rough land produces few leaders. (2) Rich soil yields relatively many leaders. (3) Climatic differences correlate with yield of leaders. (4) As wealth increases, so does the yield of notables.
Tests of these theories made by detailed studies reveal that topography and soil sometimes clearly are significant factors. For

example, most of the notables from Kentucky were born in the relatively fertile Blue Grass region, or in the larger cities along the Ohio River, and most of those of Tennessee came from the fertile Nashville basin. Moreover, the most hilly parts of most states were the birthplaces of relatively few notables. However, in most states, the sections which are most level and fertile were not the most productive of leaders. Climatic contrasts are entirely inadequate to explain the yield of leaders, although they almost certainly help to explain some of the contrasts between warmer and colder regions. In milder climates, a larger share of the population generally is of the "easygoing" type than is true in more difficult, colder ones. Hence, in proportion to population, outstanding people are less rare in our North than in our South.
What are the comparative advantages of farm, village, town and city? Many of the earlier famous Americans were rural born because, until recently, nearly all Americans were rural. In proportion to their population, farms and villages have yielded far fewer notables than have towns and cities. County seats, especially those which contained colleges, did exceptionally well, as did choice residential districts or suburbs of large cities.
Numerous studies clearly indicate that the character of the local community is highly significant in the development of leaders. It is essential that mental ability and physical stamina be inherited, but the fact that many well-endowed people fail to become distinguished proves that more than an excellent endowment is necessary. It is certain that proper encouragement is essential. This includes active appreciation by someone deeply respected, of one's qualifications to attain renown in a particular field of special personal interest. Verbal encouragement must be supplemented by opportunity to develop and to serve as a leader. Practically everyone who has attained distinction has done so with the aid of active encouragement.

107

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Good communities are important in the production of leaders partly because they contain some people able to aid, with encouragement, example, and opportunities, promising young people to develop. A good "home background" is important because therefrom one obtains not only biological inheritance but cultural inheritance. Nearly all who have become famous have had at least one parent far above average in ability, vision, vitality, and courage.
The correlation between type of place of birth and yield of notables apparently is far greater than that between yield and topography, soil, climate, material resources, or age of settlement. It apparently reflects the relative attractions of certain types of places for the notables.
Occupational groups must be considered in this connection. What are their contrasts in the yield of notables? Data were obtained by questionnaire from many scientists and subjects of "Who's Who in America" as to the occupations of their fathers. As to starred scientists, information was also obtained as to the occupations of grandfathers. The replies reveal that in proportion to their numbers in the population according to the census nearest the birth of the average notable, professional men fathered more than twice as many notables as did business men, nearly 20 times as many as did farmers, about 45 times as many as did skilled laborers, and more than 1,000 times as many as did unskilled laborers. Farmers fathered onefourth fewer than their share. In other words, only one unskilled laborer in about 38,000 fathered a son or daughter sufficiently noteworthy to win a place in "Who's Who"; one skilled laborer in 13,000 had that distinction; one business man in 62; one professional man in 27; and one Protestant clergyman in 15.
Why Do Few Homes Yield Leaders?
It is therefore apparent that a small portion of the men fathered a large share of the leaders. The interpretation of this con-

centration is in dispute. Advocates of the theory that environmental influences dominate assert that the people that produced more leaders did so because they afforded their children better opportunities for development. Conversely, advocates of the theory that hereditary influences are predominant declare that children of unskilled laborers, when adopted into homes of professional men or otherwise given comparable opportunities, nearly always fail to become leaders. They likewise declare that the superior economic status of the fathers of most leaders is the result of their superior qualities of mental alertness, earnestness, ambition, and vitality.
Advocates of the theory that social selection is very important find much support in such data as are here summarized. They point out that the mentally alert people are found chiefly in occupations where their mentality is most advantageous, while the mentally dull are found chiefly in occupations calling for physical strength or routine work. Social selection of another type is illustrated by immigrants of exceptional ability. For example, many eminent Americans are German descendants, especially of the liberals who came soon after the unsuccessful revolution of 1848, or else they are Jewish. Scotland, both directly and via north Ireland (the Scotch-Irish), also has supplied many ancestors of eminent Americans. But according to much evidence, by far the largest group of American leaders are descendants of emigrants from East Anglia, England, the district which has yielded many eminent British, as well as the ancestors of most of the Puritans of New England, of most Quakers, and of the Cavaliers of Virginia. The westward spread of the descendants of these immigrants clearly helps to explain the American geographical contrasts in the yield of notables. Conversely, their partial submergence numerically in various areas by less productive stocks largely produced the subsequent decline in the per capita yield of notables in those areas.

108 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Another theory is that outstanding leaders come from families that are especially alert, earnest, and ambitious, without respect to their ethnic or national backgrounds, and that such people tend to congregate in places of comparative opportunity for them to use their talents. There are many bits of evidence which support this theory.
Another evidence of the selective migration of the parents of notables is that relatively many distinguished Americans were born in county seats, the local centers of greatest opportunity for talent. The considerable number born in college towns is another evidence.
Another theory is that, from young people with the requisite ability, leaders come if they receive adequate encouragement from those close to them and from stimulating teachers, provided opportunities are afforded to them to develop their talents.
Some Tentative Conclusions
The areas most productive of notables at least in America are those which contain the most mentally alert, ambitious, persistent, and energetic people possessed of high ideals. Such people seek opportunities to use their abilities; they appreciate congenial associates and therefore congregate in desirable towns and in choice residential districts or in suburbs.
A region comparatively poor in resources comes, in time, to be peopled largely with those who are deficient in ambition; the more favored areas attract people possessing relatively large amounts of resourcefulness and energy. Notables and their parents are exceptionally mobile, alert to better their opportunities.
Men and women of distinction are a

product of both environment and heredity, certainly not predominantly of one of these. It is essential that certain physical and mental qualifications be contributed by heredity. But numerous persons who possess the biological potentialities fail to become distinguished because of unfavorable environmental conditions.
Of great consequence in a youth's choice of a vocation is encouragement from one or more persons whom he deeply respects. Such encouragement may change the direction of his life. Stimulating teachers in high school and college are often highly significant, as are other highly respected people. Important also are the opportunities for able and earnest young people.
Of the many environmental influences which contribute greatly to the development of leaders, some of the most important are those of the home and community. A person receives from his parents and other ancestors influences which affect his development in numerous subtle ways. The family and community influences combined are vitally important. Hence, in order to increase the number of creatively productive people, there is needed an increase in the number of children born and reared in families potentially able to contribute superior qualities both genetically and culturally. One of the ways of bringing about such an increase is to make it more widely realized that such homes are vitally important and that decadence is inevitable if the rearing of the next generation of children is left largely to those who are not well qualified both biologically and culturally. There obviously is dire need already for better comprehension, broader vision, more willingness to serve unselfishly, and more stamina. Very few people with these qualities come from families that are poorly qualified biologically and culturally.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

REFERENCES
BOWERMAN, WALTER G.: "Studies in Genius," 343 pp. Philosophical Library, New York, 1947.
CATTELL, J. MCKEEN: "American Men of Science," I, II, III, IV. Science Press, New York, 1906, 1910, 1921, 1927.
ELLIS, HAVELOCK: "Studies in British Genius," London, 1904, 1926.
HUNTINGTON, ELLSWORTH: "Builders of America," Morrow, New York, 1927; "The Character of Races," Scribners, NewYork, 1925; "After Three Centuries," Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore, 1935; "Tomorrow's Children: The Goal of Eugenics," Wiley, New York City, 1935; "The Mainsprings of Civilization," Wiley, New York, 1945.
MCCOLLUM, E. V.: "The Newer Knowledge of Nutrition," New York, 1918,1924, 1939.
ODUM, abstracted in Ward, Lester F.: "Applied Sociology," New York, 1906.
VISHER, S. S.

109
Geography of American Notables. Indiana Univ. Studies #79, 130 pp., 1928.
Scientists Starred 1903-1943 in American Men of Science, John Hopkins Univ. Press, Baltimore. 579 pp., 1947.
Indiana Scientists. Indiana Academy of Science, Indianapolis, 294 pp., 1951.
A Study of American Notables. American Journal of Sociology. 3 0 : 551-557. 1925.
Ecology of American Notables. Human Biology. 1: 544-54, 1929.
Environmental Backgrounds of Leading American Scientists. American Sociological Review. 1 3 : 65-72. 1948.
American Leaders, Where Produced and Used. Economic Geography 2 4 : 126-134,1948.
Concerning Indiana Leaders. Annals, Assoc. Am. Geographers 4 2 : 98-104, 1952.
Conditions Which Correlate with the Production of American Leaders, Science Education. 3 7 : 75-80, 1953.
Civilization's Most Valuable Resource, Social Education. 1 7 : 20-23, 1953.

