Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Medical genetics in the pacific area
Arno G. Motulsky
To cite this article: Arno G. Motulsky (1962) Medical genetics in the pacific area, Eugenics Quarterly, 9:1, 1-4, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1962.9987494 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1962.9987494
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

Vol. 9, No. 1, March, 1962

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

MEDICAL GENETICS IN THE PACIFIC AREA*
ARNO G. MOTULSKY
Departments of Medicine and Genetics University of Washington Seattle

M,. EDICAL GENETICS is in a phase of rap-
id growth. From the hobby of a few interested physicians and other scientists it has become a fertile field of investigation which has begun to permeate all of medicine, epidemiology and physical anthropology. Even psychologists, sociologists and social anthropologists are becoming aware of the pertinence of human genetics to their endeavors.
The Pacific area offers unique opportunities for genetic studies in comprising many different and unusual populalations. Most of the studies of this symposium, therefore, deal with various aspects of human population genetics. These studies confirm the singular advantage of the human species for population studies. Man is genetically heterogeneous exhibiting the first requirement for genetic studies: individual variation. Human beings are minutely categorized both morphologically and, more recently, by biochemical methods. Demographic registries and vital statistics are kept for many populations and very large num-
*Presented at the Tenth Pacific Science Congress of the Pacific Science Association, Honolulu, August 21 to September 6, 1961.

bers of individuals are, therefore, avail able for study.
Concern about the role of radiation in producing changes in the human gene pool has resulted in official requests to assess such radiation effects. The resultant scientific documents have stressed our relative ignorance of the fundamental composition of the human gene pool. Fortunately, a series of investigations has been stimulated in an attempt to elicit more facts. Initial studies on the effect of the atomic bombs on survivors of Hiroshima and Nagasaki have now been broadened to take advantage of the high rate of consanguineous matings in Japan. Inbreeding increases homozygosis and, therefore, allows the clinical detection of recessive genes. Dr. Kishimoto's paper gives an indication of the extensive material collected by Japanese investigators to supplement and extend the consanguinity studies previously carried out in Japan by Dr. Neel and Dr. Schull. Human geneticists will await with interest the full analysis of the data collected by both the Japanese and American investigators. Dr. SchulPs paper in this sym-

1

Motulsky

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

posium illustrates, among other subjects, an aspect of consanguinity studies not previously considered: the effect of maternal inbreeding on their offspring. Again, more extensive studies will undoubtedly be forthcoming.
Hawaii with its different populations offers opportunities for studies of hybridization. Dr. Morton's studies use an elegant technique well known to mammalian geneticists--the diallelic cross. This simple technique of experimental design compares offspring of matings between partners of different races as well as controls maternal effects by study of offspring from reciprocal matings with mother and father of different races (i.e., father: Japanese -- mother: Caucasian compared with father: Caucasian-- mother: Japanese). The data fail to show any hybridization or recombination effects and may upset some students of populations who have cited the "good health" of Hawaiian children of mixed crosses as an example of possible hybrid vigor in man. Further studies with attention to clinical and laboratory examination of outbred subjects are desirable to confirm Dr. Morton's findings which were based on information from birth certificates alone.
Small population groups with a limited choice of mating partners such as are found in some Pacific islands offer excellent opportunities for the study of chance phenomena or drift in the genetic composition of a population. No papers dealing with this aspect were given in the medical genetics symposium but were presented in a symposium on blood genetics that will be published elsewhere.
One of the central problems of human population genetics is determining the relative proportion of human genes carried as a mutational load with definite

harmful effects as against that fraction (heterotic genes) maintained by selective advantage under certain environmental circumstances. In this regard, genetic polymorphisms offer interesting problems for study. Modern techniques of serology and biochemistry have uncovered many well-defined genetic systems existing in differing but such high proportions in various populations that mutation could not explain their presence. Dr. Giblett surveys the frequencies of the interesting haptoglobin and transferrin systems in various Pacific populations. The student of population structure would like to know the environmental agents which have caused selection of the various genotypes in these systems. Unfortunately, crucial data on these points will be most difficult to obtain since in some cases the selective factors may have been extinct infectious diseases while at other times a selective advantage of very small magnitude can lead to genetic balance. Demonstration of small fertility or mortality differences are extremely difficult to demonstrate with even the most careful epidemiologic techniques.
Inherited traits of the red cells, such as the sickling hemoglobin, the thalassemias, and the glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency trait probably have been maintained by selective advantage to malaria as shown by various studies in Sardinia and Africa. Limited data with the enzyme-deficiency trait suggest a similar relationship in New Guinea but further work in other Pacific regions such as S.E. Asia, where this trait also occurs, is necessary. Various studies have demonstrated that thalassemia and one of the abnormal hemoglobins, Hb E, also exist as polymorphism in Pacific countries. Dr. Eng's paper offers some interesting clinical and ge-

Medical Genetics in the Pacific Area

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

netical contributions to the thalassemia problem. Studies in recent years have indicated that two major types of thalassemia occur. These two types relate to the existence of two different (a and ß) globin chains in normal adult hemoglobin («2^2) and cause depression of o chain or ß chain production, respectively. Since fetal hemoglobin («27-2) shares y chains with adult hemoglobin, the type of thalassemia depressing « chain production, if homozygous, should seriously interfere with fetal hemoglobin («2^2) synthesis and be lethal before or shortly after birth. Dr. Eng provides clinical evidence for this interpretation and indicates that a--thalassemia is not uncommon in the Pacific area.
The ABO blood groups continue to be studied with profit in many parts of the world. Initially considered ideal anthropologie markers because no selective factors were thought to affect their distribution in populations, this system now has been shown to be subject to selective forces. Dr. Matsunaga deals with Vogel's intriguing hypothesis that some infectious diseases such as plague and smallpox may have caused selective mortality in carriers of different ABO blood groups. His principal stress, however, is the important role of prenatal and perinatal selection in this genetic system. These considerations should remind students of modern human populations that genetic selection does not necessarily cease under conditions of modern civilization and medical care. Matsunaga's findings that there is an excess of O sperms is of great importance, if it can be confirmed. The postulated mechanism of meiotic drive, causing a distorted segregation ratio in favor of the O gene in this example, may play a more important role in the evolution of population structure than pre-

viously believed. The operation of these various mechanisms as well as the known interaction between the Rh and ABO system illustrates the complexity within a single genetic system and point out the need for more information considering all the variables at any one time. If most other genetic systems should be as complex in their population dynamics as the ABO system, the amount of future work to be done is gigantic.
Another facet of the ABO problem is illustrated by Dr. Desai's paper on the relationship of blood group and secretor status to gastric cancer. Gastric cancer and similar diseases of middle and old age probably do not represent the selective factors required to explain the ABO polymorphisms. However, the association of blood groups with such diseases is of interest in the elucidation of the genetic background against which other environmental and endogenous factors act to produce various chronic diseases.
Dr. Newcombe, who has pioneered in the application of vital statistics of population genetics, deals with an aspect of human mating habits which has sometimes been invoked to explain the maintenance of deleterious genes in the population. It has been claimed that parents who lose children because of genetic disease may voluntarily have additional children to make up for the death of affected children. Such reproductive overcompensation would cause an excess of the deleterious gene to be transmitted to the next generation. The present data indicate that such a mechanism does not appear to play a role in stillbirths.
Dr. Decker discusses another possible polymorphism: hyperuricemia and gout, its medical complication. The high incidence of hyperuricemia and gout in Filipinoes is of great interest and most like-

Motulsky

ly is genetically rather than environmentally determined. The reasons for this high incidence are unknown and again demand further investigations.
Kuru is a most unusual neurologic disease in its geographic limitation to a single tribe in New Guinea. The evidence for genetic etiology is highly suggestive as outlined by Dr. Bennett. Dr. Gajdusek's hypothesis of a viral agent interacting with a specific genotype makes good sense and will be productive of future work. This very common le-

thal disease poses many problems to the geneticist and as yet unsuspected genetic mechanisms may be at play to explain its high incidence.
The data accumulated in this symposium show how relatively few workers have found many new and interesting facts. As usual, many more questions have been raised than answers given. It is hoped that some of the answers can be supplied at the next Pacific Science Congress.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

