Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Demographic factors affecting the opportunity for natural selection in the United States
Dudley Kirk
To cite this article: Dudley Kirk (1966) Demographic factors affecting the opportunity for natural selection in the United States, Eugenics Quarterly, 13:3, 270-273, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1966.9987677 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1966.9987677
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles
Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:29

DEMOGRAPHIC FACTORS AFFECTING THE OPPORTUNITY FOR NATURAL SELECTION IN THE UNITED STATES

DUDLEY KIRK
Population Council New York

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

It is evident that in any society natural selection may occur because different genotypes produce different numbers of offspring and because different proportions of offspring survive to the age of reproduction. It also follows that selection occurs only to the extent that the genotypes are different. Major differences in reproduction and survival are important only to the extent that they involve important differences in genotype. In what follows I shall be discussing, not the actual genotypic selection, which is, of course, extraordinarily difficult to measure, but possible selection intensity under different demographic conditions.
Striking changes have occurred in the demographic factors that affect the opportunity for selection in the American population. These will be discussed briefly under two major headings, the first relating to mortality, the second, to reproduction.
SURVIVAL
We are here concerned only with survival to the ages of reproduction. The reductions of mortality have, of course, been dramatic: in 1840 only 66% of white females reached age 15--one-third were eliminated by death before they reached the age of reproduction. By age 45 only half of the women were still alive. According to 1960 life tables, 97.5% of white females reach age 15, and 96%, age 45. In 1960 the losses through death were very small compared to 1840.

This amazing reduction in mortality, clearly due to environmental factors, has given rise to concern that relaxation of selective pressures may be enabling the survival of the unfit and deterioration of the genotype.
The index of selective intensity of the mortality component is Pd, where Pd is
Ps the proportion dying before reaching reproductive age and Ps is the proportion surviving to that age. In 1840 this index was 0.50 and now only 0.03. Clearly there has been some relaxation in natural selection through mortality.
However, the force of this relation is modified by several influences:
1. Deaths from congenital anomalies have not been reduced in proportion. About one-fourth of all female deaths to age 15 are now attributable to deaths in the first 28 days of life owing to gross congenital defects. The most serious of these defects, male and female, are still being removed from the population through death.
2. Were it possible to do so, the survival factor (Im) should be computed from conception rather than from live birth. Fetal wastage, especially of malformed fetuses, is still high. The wastage in early pregnancy is now believed to be very high, potentially much more important than subsequent fetal wastage and mortality as a genetically selective factor.
3. The major savings of life have been in the reduction of epidemic diseases through environmental means. Resist-

270

Vol. 13, No. 3

Communications

271

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

ance or susceptibility to these may or may not be inherited; but even if resistance is inherited (as, for example, tuberculosis), the quality may be essentially irrelevant in a society capable of checking the disease through environmental control.
4. Finally, the survival component is usually less important than the reproduction component even in societies of high mortality. In Spuhler's series of possible selection intensities, only 3 populations out of 17 had a higher index for the mortality than for the fertility component--the Hutterites, a Bengali sample, and the Lesu of the New Hebrides (Spuhler, 1962). The idea that fertility has replaced mortality as the basis of natural selection is wrong in that in premodern as well as in modern societies natality is generally the more important factor.
REPRODUCTION
The index of possible selection intensity owing to variations in fertility (If) is the variance in the number of children born divided by the square of the average number born per parent. In human society this is affected by mating or marriage, fecundity, and the number and distribution of offspring. In a more complex model it would also include average length of generation since this affects the intrinsic rate of reproduction.
In this country fewer than 10% pass through the reproductive ages without marrying. The figure for women has dropped from 9% in 1910 to 7% in 1960, and this figure will continue to go down in the near future. Failure to marry is less of a selective factor than formerly.
Reduction in the average age at marriage has also perhaps somewhat reduced selectivity since chances of reproduction have therefore somewhat

increased and the average length of generation has been reduced. The average age at first marriage of males has fallen from 25.1 in 1910 to 22.8 in 1960; of females, from 21.6 in 1910 to 20.3 in 1960. This development combined with reductions in mortality and widowhood have increased the proportion of men and women in the reproductive ages living in marriage and may thus have tended to equalize the opportunities for reproduction. This reduces selectivity in fertility other than that through choice of family size by birth control.
These factors, and the reduction of biological infecundity, account for important changes in childlessness. Of females born in 1855-1859 only 10.5% were childless, i.e., with early marriage and little practice of birth control. With less marriage, later marriage, and widespread practice of birth control, 23% of the women born in 1909 were childless. By contrast, with again more and earlier marriage and probably some reduction of biological sterility, only 12% of the women of age 35 were childless in 1960.
Contrary to "common sense," the possible selective intensity of the natality component did not decline with the long secular decline in family size. This anomaly is explained by the fact that reduction of the mean number of children does not necessarily reduce the variance; tjn the contrary, in the U. S. the opposite has been the case. Thus the index of opportunity for selection was 0.710 for women born 1871-1875, who averaged 3.5 children. For the 1909 cohort the index was 0.876 with an average of only 2.1 children, the lowest for any U.S. cohort.
With the recovery of the birth rate the index has again gone down sharply, to 0.446 for the cohort born in 1928, who were age 36 in 1964 and had already

272

Communications

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

averaged 2.85 children. This is because of the heavy concentration at parities 1 to 4 (there was not much increase at higher parities that would contribute heavily to variance). Finally, if the expectations of married white women under age 40 in 1962 are realized (with 75% in the range 2 to 4) (Freedman et al., 1965), the index will have declined further to 0.257.
Thus we are moving into a situation in which the opportunity for selection through mortality, except for mutational load, is very low and the opportunity for selection through differential reproduction is also lower than it ever has been before. This is for the country as a whole.
Class differences in genotype in the United States have not been well measured, and the measures that exist are inferential rather than direct since they often relate to qualities much influenced by the social environment. Therefore, class differences in reproduction are not necessarily measures of genotypic selectivity.
Nevertheless, it is interesting to note that the intercensal decade 1950-1960 showed a marked closing up of class differences in natality, i.e., rural-urban, occupational, and educational. To the extent that there are genotypic differences as between socioeconomic classes, this basis of selection is being reduced. This is not true of differentials by race and probably not by religion (specifically Catholic vs. non-Catholic), both of which remain substantial.
CONCLUSIONS
1. The mortality component in the opportunity for selection has been greatly reduced. Instead of half of females dying before the end of the reproductive period as in 1840, now the figure is less than

3%. If serious mutations are entering the genotype at the rate of one for every 10 births, as roughly estimated, we must be absorbing a substantial increase in the genetic load. This effect is presumably much reduced (a) by the continuing elimination of serious congenital defects by early postnatal death and (b) by environmental changes that make many specific hereditary defects irrelevant (i.e., susceptibility to nowcurable diseases).
2. More people are marrying, and a larger part of the population in the reproductive ages is mated than previously. There is a retreat from voluntary childlessness and apparently a decline in physiological sterility. Hence a larger proportion of each cohort reproduces than formerly.
3. There is a growing concentration of families with two to four children and at the moment a rising mean number of children. Because the variance is declining, the index of selection presumably is now going down. This may well continue with the present rapid decline in natality and potentially even greater concentration at low parities.
4. Differentials are generally declining except for religion and for race (especially Negro-white). Aside from these, potential selectivity from educational, occupational, income, and residential differentials are being reduced.
5. Finally, we may be approaching a situation in which almost everyone lives to marry and have two to four children. Except for mutations, we may be moving toward a situation in which each generation tends to be a genetic carbon copy of its predecessor. Even today the combined opportunity for selection from both the mortality and reproductive components is probably smaller than it has ever previously been in our history.

Vol. 13, No. 3

Communications

273

REFERENCES
1. SPUHLER, J. N., 1962. "Empirical Studies on Quantitative Human Genetics." In Seminar on the Use of Vital and Health Statistics for Genetic and Radiation Studies (WHO Con-

ference, Geneva, Sept. 5-9, 1960). United Nations.
2. FREEDMAN, R., D. GOLDBERG, and L. BUMPASS,
1965. Current fertility expectations of married couples in the United States. Population Index, 31 (Jan.): 3-20.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

