Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
A new soviet hypothesis concerning heredity
Novosti Press Agency (APN)
To cite this article: Novosti Press Agency (APN) (1966) A new soviet hypothesis concerning heredity, Eugenics Quarterly, 13:1, 63-63, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1966.9987645 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1966.9987645
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:28

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

Brief Reports

A NEW SOVIET HYPOTHESIS CONCERNING HEREDITY
Novosti Press Agency (APN) Moscow, USSR

Soviet geneticist Nikolai Dubinin has advanced a new hypothesis concerning the changing of the hereditary properties of the cell.
The carrier of the hereditary information is desoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) found in the cell's chromosomes. Under the influence of radiation, temperature, or chemicals, the chromosome may undergo changes called mutations. Changes in the chromosomes alter the functions of the cell and the properties of the entire organism.
There is a widespread opinion among geneticists that any hereditary changes appear in the generation of cells subjected to the action of a mutagene and that these changes reproduce in the original form in the subsequent generations. Nikolai Dubinin noted that not infrequently the subsequent generations of a cell inherit the predisposition toward mutations which in many cases do not take place.
The subjugation of a chromosome to various influences does not necessarily result in the radical reconstruction of the heredity apparatus. It can make a cell disposed to mutations, to "rock" it, channelling mutations into a definite direction. This instability, according to Dubinin's hypothesis, is passed on to several generations.
This hypothesis demanded an experi-

mental check-up. Radioactive thymidin, the "raw material" used for the synthesis of DNA, was used in the experiments. Thymidin rapidly finds its way into the chromosomes of a cell; and, if "coloured" radioactively, it can help trace the life of a cell or even several generations of a cell.
Tracer atoms enabled the scientists to establish that mutations, similar to the original ones, also appear in the chromosomes of the subsequent generations. The supposition arose that chemical compounds which lead to disturbances in the chromosomes, passes on, when multiplying, to all subsequent generations and continues its fatal work I
Researchers Yuri Mitrofanov and Irina Kondratyeva, of Dubinin's laboratory, put up an experiment which precluded this supposition. First ferrous sulfate and then hydrogen peroxide were introduced into a cell. The interaction of these compounds produced chemical radicals, mutagenes, which lived for millionth fractions of a second. They, naturally, couldn't be present in the daughter cells; nevertheless, mutations took place in the subsequent generations.
This confirmed Dubinin's supposition that the mutagene interference will make the heredity apparatus unstable and disposed toward mutations.

63

