Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Responsible parenthood and the population problem: Report of a Special Ecumenical Study Group
N/A
To cite this article: N/A (1959) Responsible parenthood and the population problem: Report of a Special Ecumenical Study Group, Eugenics Quarterly, 6:4, 219-224, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1959.9987417 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1959.9987417
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

Eugenics QuarterlyVol. 6, No. 4, December, 1959

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

RESPONSIBLE PARENTHOOD AND THE POPULATION PROBLEM* Report of a Special Ecumenical Study Group

THE CONTEMPORARY SETTING
1. It has become a truism to speak of a world in crisis. The struggle for selfdetermination, for dignity and freedom of peoples round the globe, the economic and technological revolution and the emerging of a world-wide industrial society, these are a few of the facts with which we must learn to live.
2. The larger crisis of our time is reflected in families throughout the whole wide earth. Different regions and different nations produce varying problems, but nowhere is the family unaffected. It, too, is in crisis. The emancipation of women and the growing acceptance of partnership between men and women are revolutionizing the previously masculine-dominated social structures which now appear so patently unjust. Under
*Twenty-one members and consultants from the main confessions of the World Council of Churches and the International Missionary Council prepared this report. Dr. Richard M. Fagley acted as secretary of the group. The report does not represent the official view of the World Council of Churches nor the I. M. C. but has been issued as a document for study and comment. Reprinted by permission from the October 1959 issue of The Ecumenical Review, a quarterly published by the World Council of Churches in Geneva, Switzerland.

pressures within and without, age-old patterns of family relations are disintegrating on every side. Out of the ruins of the old must be built the new, but built on foundations of respect and dignity and freedom, not of servitude, injustice and conflict.
3. The rapid movement and extension of much-needed public health programs in all continents are bringing dramatic reductions in death rates, particularly in areas where high fertility has hitherto been offset by a tragically high mortality. The world confronts a doubling of the present number of people before the end of this century and is presently experiencing an annual increase of 50 million persons. While the effects of the mounting population pressures are felt throughout the world, the main thrust is occurring in the economically less developed regions of the earth, and indeed may be intensified by the first stages of industrialization. The crisis here stems less from the size of the human increase in relation to potential resources than from the rapidity of the increase in relation to the present and practicable rate of development of available resources.

219

220 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

4. The social, political, economic and even religious repercussions of this population explosion are vast and grave. Its shock waves buffet countless human families. Nor is there an easy or quick solution to this crisis. Indeed, it seems probable that only a wise combination of vigorous economic and social development aided by substantial technical and financial assistance, the easing of certain pressures by means of migration, the wide development of education, as well as the extension of "family planning" can hope to offer an acceptable answer.
5. Living in such a world and confronted with such problems the Church bears her continuing witness that God is at work, as He has been since the dawn of creation. The Church has survived past times of troubles and stands fast in faith toward the future. The concern of Christian faith for the family is not a new one, born out of the travail of the present. From the very beginning the Church has seen itself as the Family of families, and has known that the Christian witness is necessary and effective in the home, in the relationships between husband and wife, between parents and children. Throughout the centuries Christians have sought to relate the eternal truths of the Gospel to the problems and perils of their times. Yet it must be confessed that in the past Christian thought has, especially in the area of the family and its relationships, often clung to tradition without taking into account new knowledge. In the current age, God is calling upon us not to desert the eternal Christian truth but to apply it to the changing circumstances of the modern world.
6. We recognize the wide dimensions of the challenge, social, political, economic, medical and educational, and we welcome the fact that various agencies, national and international, are devoting their attention to them. Responsible parenthood does not in itself provide a

solution to all problems of social and economic development, including the certainty of rapidly increasing world population. The application of science and technical progress in agriculture and industry and the maintenance of peace and international cooperation will have to play a major role. On the other hand, no acceptable solution seems in sight without responsibility taken by individual parents. In this short report, we attempt to offer what seems to us some fundamental Christian principles on which those who are in Christ may base their personal decisions in faith and not in fear. The family embodies the most intimate of all personal relations and has a rightful privacy of its own, but in these days of annihilated distances and common cause the Christian family must open itself to the wider claims of the world and learn to live responsibly in the love of God, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ and the communion of the Holy Spirit.
II
CONTRIBUTIONS TOWARD AN
ECUMENICAL CONSENSUS
7. We have been impressed and encouraged by the evidence of a growing sense of responsibility for the family on the part of churches and councils in the ecumenical movement. Within the past decade there have been a number of important statements on Christian marriage and parenthood and additional studies are being undertaken.
8. Particular reference should be made to the 1958 Lambeth Conference Report and related resolutions, on The Family Life in Contemporary Society, and to the preparatory volume under the same title. The ecumenical movement as a whole is indebted to this undertaking for the serious way in which the problems of the family have been approached and for the substantive contribution made to a Christian response.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

9. The degree of agreement found in the available statements of various communions is striking, and indeed significant in terms of a prospective consensus within the ecumenical movement. Yet we are also mindful of the partial character of the evidence so far received. Our information is incomplete, and the known silence of important Christian bodies may have diverse meanings. We have in mind in this connection the Orthodox Church, the churches and councils in many parts of Asia, Africa and Latin America, churches in communist countries, as well as some of the churches in the West. The action of the World Council of Churches' Central Committee at Galyateto (1956) in recognizing the need for more serious ecumenical consideration and study of the population problem, and the related question of family planning, is still highly relevant.
10. These facts, however, do not minimize the import of the beginnings that have been made. The combined testimony of the churches that have spoken provides a thesis for future ecumenical study and action. It may be well to note briefly a few of the recurrent themes in the statements at hand, which indicate their common tenor.
There is repeated stress on the spiritual character of true matrimony, expressed in physical union and transcending it. The "two become one" is part of God's grace, to be accepted as a mystery and lived in faith.
The family likewise is surrounded by grace. Children are the gift of God, and procreation is sharing in God's creation.
Christian marriage and family life are consequently described in terms of responsibility; the mutuality of husband and wife, the loving care of parents for children, the love and respect of children for parents, the duties of the family in the service of society, the obligations of all to God and His

221
Church. There is repeated emphasis on the applicability of principles of stewardship to procreation within the marriage bond, and on the duty of the Church to inculcate such principles.
True marriage and parenthood are seen at the same time to be part of the realm of Christian freedom. This means freedom from sensuality and selfishness which enslave. It also means considerable latitude of choice, when the motives are right, in regard to mutually acceptable and non-injurious means to avert or defer conception. Marital freedom, indeed, is the pre-condition of marital responsibility.
11. The principles embodied in the available statements provide significant material for further work by the churches, councils and agencies of the ecumenical movement. To aid that process, we advance considerations which, despite possible differences as to detail, and except as noted below,1 find general assent among the members of this study group.
Ill
THE MEANING OF RESPONSIBLE PARENTHOOD
12. Marriage as a divine institution can be described in Biblical terms as a covenanted relationship within which man and woman receive the grace, security
1 The historic and doctrinal position of theOrthodox Church necessitates, at certain important points, a different approach to this subject from that reflected in the general course of this statement. The Orthodox member of the group, while sharing the concern of the group and contributing fully to its deliberations, drew attention to "the different teaching and practice of the Orthodox Church, which holds that parents have not the right to prevent the creative process of matrimonial intercourse; also, that God entrusted to them this responsibility for childbearing, with full confidence that His Providence would take care of material and other needs."

222 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

and joy promised by God to those who are faithful to it. Marriage is the "great mystery" which yet illumines for men the covenant or marriage of Yahweh with Israel (Hosea 2:19f.), and of Christ with His Bride, the Church (Ephesians 5:23-33, Revelation 21:9; 22:17).
13. The Christian marriage relationship is a covenant, entered into with sacrifice in the joyful giving of each to other; it is confirmed by the exchange of vows to which God's promised blessing is attached; it has its own rules or commandments related by God's ordinance to the nature of man and woman and to the relationship between them. Like every other part of human life, it is redeemed by Christ, it is preserved by His forgiveness, it is enriched beyond human measure by the Holy Spirit dwelling in the husband and wife as members of the Body of Christ, the Church.
14. Thus the covenanted relationship of husband and wife within marriage, is, in the purpose of God, one of total commitment, a total giving of self and a total acceptance of the other, resulting in a union, spiritual and physical, described in the Bible as becoming "one flesh." The terms of this union are not those of a human contract. In the Biblical narration the ordinance of marriage is integrated with the very creation of man and woman as such; so its terms, as given by God, are proper to the nature of man and woman, and to the nature of their union. Companionship and parenthood are therefore established together as the purposes of marriage from the beginning, with sexual union as the ordained servant of both. Marriage has its fullness where both are attained (Gen. 2:18-25; Matt. 19:4 ff; 13ff.)
15. The social, cultural and economic circumstances surrounding marriage and family life vary widely from region to region and from age to age. The formation of the family, and of companion-

ship within it, varies accordingly; so does the area of life open to personal decision. The gift of dominion to mankind, within the created order of which mankind is part (Gen. 1:28), reinforced by the command to man to love the Lord God with all his mind (Luke 10:27), calls upon us to extend this area of decision in humble accordance with our knowledge. Knowledge is thus a liberating gift of God, to be used for the glory of God, in accordance with His will for men. Such use of improved medical knowledge has brought a drastic reduction of infant mortality, and this is to be accepted gratefully as coming from God; at the same time it affects deeply the size of the family and the rate of population growth and has therefore created a new area for responsible decision.
16. Our concern is therefore with the responsible use of knowledge in family life, particularly in relation to the procreation and nurture of children. A knowledge of the relation of sexual love to the procreation process gives to a couple the power, and therefore the responsibility, to lift the begetting of children out of the realm of biological accident, or "fate," into the realm of personal decision--which is also the realm of grace, where man is free to wait upon God and consciously to respond to His will. Carried further, it enables husband and wife to decide, within the Providence of God, whether any one act of intercourse shall be for the enrichment or expression of their personal relationship only, or for the begetting of a child also.
17. That these two purposes of the act are thus separable, within the divine ordinance of the marriage covenant, is evident from the nature of the act itself, which is known to fulfill the first when it is incapable of fulfilling the second, either through sterility, or in times of periodic infertility and after the age of

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

childbearing in woman. Sexual intercourse within marriage has in itself a goodness given by God, even when there is neither the possibility nor the immediate intention to beget children.
18. Given this responsibility of choice, founded upon knowledge, what considerations are to guide a Christian husband and wife in the exercise of it? They would surely begin with the general ordinance of God for the marriage covenant, integrating the power of parenthood with the expression of sexual love; so parenthood will be normal and right for them, unless there are specific and compelling indications against it, as, for example, a valid threat to the wife's life or health.
19. This obligation--or fulfillment-- accepted, the questions may remain, "How many children?" "At what intervals?" Here the considerations involve:
(a) The integrity of the marriage-- every decision should be a joint one of husband and wife, made in faith and prayer and after deliberation in love.
(b) The claims of children aspersons in their own right--they are to be valued, not primarily as economic or social assets or even to assure the comfort of parents in old age or (as is believed in some Asian societies) their beatitude after death; but as persons with a right to parental care in infancy and youth and to a proper equipment from society to serve God fully in it themselves.
(c) The witness of a Christian family in society--the Christian family, as a cell in the Body of Christ, has a unique vocation and power to exhibit the fruit of the Spirit, often in what are humanly regarded as the most adverse physical conditions -- a witness especially needed in a non-Christian or sub-Christian society. To say this is in no way to deny the

223
complementary witness of celibacy, to which the Christian life adds new power and significance in many societies.
(d) The needs of the social orderof which the family forms part-- there are factors of special urgency in regions where a rapid multiplication of population coexists with poverty, insufficient supplies of food and other necessities of life, and a low potential for rapid economic development; responsible parenthood has ta take account of these.
(e) Church tradition--When deciding in conscience, Christians would have proper regard to the teaching or tradition, if any, of their own church, and then offer their own decision to God irt faith.
20. What considerations should guide parents in the means they employ for the responsible exercise of their procreative power? Responsible parenthood begins with responsible marriage. Biological maturity alone is not the only criterion of readiness for marriage. Life in the Christian community ought to have prepared the young man and woman to raise their sexual relationship above the domination of mere biological impulse, and to have dominion over it. Further, in the life of grace, not only chastity before marriage but also periodic continence within it, when freely accepted by both the spouses, are virtues; of positive worth attainable by Christian people.
21. But this is by no means the whole of the answer. The extremely high rates of abortion in many regions, Eastern' and Western, with their toll of humansuffering and violation of personality, testify to a tragic determination among' parents to find some means, however bad, to prevent unwanted births. The Christian conscience cannot approve of abortion, involving as it does the de-

224 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

struction of human life--unless, of course, the termination of a pregnancy is necessary to save the life of the mother.
22. "Life," however, does not begin until the sperm has fertilized the ovum and conception has taken place. Knowing this, what means may Christians properly employ to prevent an individual act of intercourse from resulting in conception? Granted that the attempt may rightfully be made, there appears to be no moral distinction between the means now known and practised, by the use whether of estimated periods of infertility, or of artificial barriers to the meeting of sperm and ovum--or, indeed, of drugs which would, if made effective and safe, inhibit or control ovulation in a calculable way. It remains that the means employed be acceptable to both husband and wife in Christian conscience, and that, on the best evidence available, they do neither physical or emotional harm. Here we would quote some words of a Committee of the Lambeth Conference of the Bishops of the Anglican Communion of 1958:
"It must be emphasized once again that family planning ought to be the result of thoughtful and prayerful Christian decision. Where it is, Christian husbands and wives need feel no hesitation in offering their decision humbly to God and following it with a clear conscience. The means of family planning are in large measure matters of clinical and aesthetic choice, subject to the requirement that they be admissible to the Christian conscience. Scientific studies can rightly help, and do, in assessing the effects and usefulness of any particular means; and Christians have every right to use the gifts of science for proper ends.'
23. In conclusion we may quote also Resolution 115 of the same Conference, based on the report of this committee:

"The Conference believes that the responsibility for deciding upon the number and frequency of children has been laid by God upon the consciences of parents everywhere: that this planning, in such ways as are mutually acceptable to husband and wife in Christian conscience, is a right and important factor in Christian family life and should be the result of positive choice before God. Such responsible parenthood, built on obedience to all the duties of marriage, requires a wise stewardship of the resources and abilities of the family as well as a thoughtful consideration of the varying population needs and problems of society and the claims of future generations.'
24. It is to be observed that such delib-
eration, and such estimation of human,
spiritual and social values, as has been
outlined above, is well nigh impossible
in some of the regions where they are
most urgently required. Where there is
grinding poverty, a high birth rate, high
death rate and high infant mortality, a
fatalistic attitude to death is almost in-
evitable, and a high valuation of hu-
man personality is difficult to attain.
Christians in wealthier regions have a
duty to ponder and to act upon this
truth in order to help their fellows in
less developed lands toward conditions
in which they can enjoy the freedom to
make personal decisions of this sort, and
to exercise responsible parenthood for
themselves. To secure this help, the
Christian is led by his faith to consider
such matters as the need for capital in-
vestment and hence his opportunities as
a citizen for political action. The com-
mand to love thy neighbor as thyself
(Levit. 19:18; Luke 10:27) is thus rele-
vant at all points: it defines the duty of
spouse to spouse; of parents to their
children and of children to parents; of
families to other families in society; of
churches to churches; and of nations
to nations.

