Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Editorial comment
C. Nash Herndon M. D.
To cite this article: C. Nash Herndon M. D. (1955) Editorial comment, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:4, 193-194, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987246 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987246
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

Vol. 2,No. 4,December,1955 EugefttCS

Quarterly

EDITORIAL COMMENT

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

A.E.S. to Sponsor

The meeting in Montreal in 1958 will

International Meetings

be the first session of this group on the North American continent in 26 years. The

Arrangements have recently been com- sessions will be held on the campus of Mc-

pleted for the American Eugenics Society to cooperate with other organizations in spon-

Gill University. Professor J. W. Boyes is the chairman of the General Organizing

soring two international scientific meetings. Committee. This committee has been hard

The International Congress of Human at work for many months making the neces-

Genetics will be held in Copenhagen, Den- sary plans and arrangements. A generous

mark, August 1 through August 6, 1956. The Tenth International Congress of

grant from the Dominion Government, announced in September, has greatly facili-

Genetics will meet in Montreal, Canada, tated the work of organization. Funds are

August 20 through August 27, 1958. Both being raised to provide travel grants to

of these meetings will be of outstanding bring outstanding geneticists from other

interest and should have the full support of countries to Montreal. A number of profes-

the membership of the A.E.S.

sional societies and scientific organizations are joining forces to sponsor this meeting,

The International Congress of Genetics is with the Genetics Society of America play-

among the oldest of the international scien- ing a leading role. The officers of the

tific organizations. The present organiza- American Eugenics Society are happy that

tion is the successor of the International this organization now has the privilege and

Conference on Plant Breeding and Hybri- the responsibility of sponsoring the Tenth

dization which was organized in London in International Congress of Genetics in as-

1889 and met in New York in 1902. The sociation with other scientific groups.

third session of this group was held in Lon-

don in 1906, and the name was then changed The International Congress of Human

to the International Congress of Genetics. Genetics to be held in Copenhagen next

Subsequent sessions of the Congress were August will be the first of its kind. It may

held in Paris (1911), Berlin (1927), Ithaca, properly be considered to have had its

N. Y. (1932) Edinburgh, Scotland (1939), origins in the International Symposium of

Stockholm (1948) and Bellagio, Italy Medical Genetics held in Rome during Sep-

(1953). The more recent sessions have in- tember, 1953, under the leadership of Pro-

cluded a section on human genetics, and fessor Luigi Gedda. A group of outstand-

many of the research reports presented to ing medical geneticists felt that there was a

this section have been quite significant from real need for international meetings that

the eugenic viewpoint. As advances in eu- would bridge the gap between laboratory

genic theory and practice must be based on a sound foundation of basic studies in genetics, the research communications presented to the Congress of Genetics will be of interest to all who are concerned with the biology of man.

genetics and clinical medicine. Medical genetics has become a specialty with close ties to both the animal geneticist and the physician. While the relations of medical geneticists to genetics as a basic science are adequately served by the International Con-

193

194 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

gress of Genetics, the relations to medical practice are not so well established. It was felt that this need might be met by an international meeting to which both medical geneticists and clinicians could be invited, and scheduled for a time and place that would avoid any conflict of interest with the International Congress of Genetics.
The invitation to hold the International Congress of Human Genetics in Copenhagen was issued by the Danish Organizing Committee with Professor Tage Kemp as chairman. National committees to sponsor this meeting have been formed in most of the countries of Western Europe and in some of the South American republics. The American Eugenics Society, the American Society of Human Genetics and the Genetics Society of America have joined hands to act as sponsors for this Congress in the United States and Canada. A committee has been formed to represent all these organizations under the chairmanship of Dr. Franz J. Kallmann of the New York State Psychiatric Institute and the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University. Professor Kallmann has been a member of the Board of Directors of the A.E.S. since 1949, is a charter member and past president of the A.S.H.G., and a member of the GSA since 1948. He has been a delegate to numerous international scientific meetings and is eminently qualified by his outstanding ability and experience to represent these societies at Copenhagen.
The final plans and programs for the Copenhagen meeting have not yet been announced. The provisional list of sections provides for papers and discussions concerning the applications of genetics to each of the medical specialties. There will also be sessions on genetic hygiene and genetic counseling, population genetics, differential fertility, assortative mating, intermarriage, twin studies and other problems of eugenic interest. (See pp. 253, 254.)
We hope that many members of this society will take advantage of the interest-

ing opportunities offered and will attend these meetings. While we can hardly expect a large proportion of the membership to make the trip to Copenhagen, Montreal is not too distant. We hope that the A.E.S. will be well represented at both Congresses.
C. NASH HERNDON, M. D.
LETTERS Mr. Robert C. Cook Population Reference Bureau, Inc. 1507 M Street, N. W. Washington 5, D. C.
Dear Bob: You have made a constructive proposal
in your article "Eugenic Hypothesis B" in the September 1955 issue of EUGENICS QUARTERLY. The desire to bear sound, even perfect children is undoubtedly deep and universal. With proper education in human heredity, and with the inculcation of higher ideals of social and personal values, this "instinctive" feeling should be an important force furthering a eugenic distribution of births. Your able statement makes this very close and puts all of us in your debt.
It seems to me unfortunate that in the same article, you set up a straw man of a Eugenic Hypothesis which does not in fact exist, and proceed seriously to demolish it.
So far as I know, the first use of the words "Eugenic Hypothesis" occurred in Preface to Eugenics (Harper's, 1940). The phrase has since been amplified in various articles, and occasionally has been used by others, though I don't think it has ever come into common use. I may therefore be permitted again to define its meaning. The Eugenics Hypothesis states that in a society in which the social and psychological environment was properly developed from a eugenic point of view, the major proportion of children would be born to couples who were above the average in approaching the ideals of the society in which they lived. The trend in evolution would

