Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Bylaws of American Eugenics Society, Inc.
To cite this article: (1963) Bylaws of American Eugenics Society, Inc., Eugenics Quarterly, 10:4, 202-205, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1963.9987568 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1963.9987568
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

BY.LAWS OF AMERICAN EUGENICS SOCIETY, INC.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Historical Note
The Constitution and By-Laws of American Eugenics Society, Inc., were adopted on January 30, 1926. The original Certificate of Incorporation was filed in the office of the Secretary of State at Albany, New York, on January 27, 1926. The incorporators were: Irving Fisher, Harry H. Laughlin, Henry Fairfield Osborn, Henry E. Crampton and Madison Grant.
Article I of the Constitution stated that the name shall be American Eugenics Society, Inc. Article II stated that the main objects of the Society shall be to promote the study and discovery of sound eugenics principles and of all matters in any way related thereto, and to make practical application of such principles to the improvement of the human race. Then followed a series of articles and by-laws all of which were later decided by legal advisers to be really bylaws. On September 23, 1937, Revised By-Laws were adopted as a substitute for the original Constitution and By-Laws and a certificate of amendment of the 1926 Certificate of Incorporation was filed in the office of the Secretary of State of New York at Albany.
The By-Laws have not been published by the Society since 1958. They are printed here with revisions since that date.
ARTICLE I
Members
Section 1. The Society shall consist of
members elected by the Board of Direc-
tors, or chosen in such manner as the
Board of Directors shall from time to
time provide. No person whose dues, as
hereinafter prescribed, are in arrears
more than one year shall continue to be
a member of the Society.
Section 2. Members shall be divided

into several classes named below and shall pay annual dues in such amounts as may from time to time be determined by the Board of Directors:
Members in the United States and Canada; members outside the United States and Canada.
Honorary members. Any person entitled to special recognition because of research or the promotion of eugenics may be elected to honorary membership upon a nomination signed by three members of the Society and approved unanimously by the Board of Directors. Honorary members shall be entitled to all the privileges of membership. No dues shall be required of honorary members.
Emeritus members. Any person who has been a member of the Society continuously for 25 years and has retired is eligible to request emeritus membership, which may then be granted at the discretion of the Board of Directors. Emeritus members shall pay no dues and shall have all the privileges of active membership.
Section 3. All members shall be entitled to receive the official journal, EUGENICS QUARTERLY, and such publications as may be issued through the Society except in cases where the Board of Directors decide that a certain publication requires a special charge.
ARTICLE II Board of Directors
Section 1. The Board of Directors shall consist of not less than fifteen (15) and not more than thirty (30) members and shall be divided into three classes equal numerically as far as possible.

202

By-Laws

203

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

The term of the members of one class shall expire at each annual meeting of the Society upon the election and qualification of successors. At each annual meeting of the Society such successors to the class whose term then expires shall be chosen to serve for a term of three years, or until the election and qualifications of their successors. Vacancies in the Board of Directors, whether caused by death, resignation, or otherwise, may be filled by election at the next annual meeting of the Society or at any meeting of the Board of Directors, and persons so elected shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term, or until the election and qualification of their successors. Any director may resign by a notice in writing to the President.
Section 2. The Board of Directors shall appoint each year a Nominating Committee consisting of three members of the Society whose duty it shall be to nominate to the Board of Directors members to succeed the class whose term expires at the next Annual Meeting. Written notice of the nominations approved by the Board of Directors shall be sent to members of the Society at least two weeks before the Annual Meeting at which the election is to take place. Additional nominations for such members of the Board of Directors may be made from the floor at the Annual Meeting, or in writing to the Secretary who shall present them at the Annual Meeting. Such nominations shall be added to the ballot if approval is voted by a majority of members present or represented by proxies. Only persons duly nominated as herein provided shall be eligible for election to the Board of Directors at any Annual Meeting.
Section 3. The Board of Directors shall be responsible for the custody and administration of the property and funds

of the Society and shall have full management and control of its affairs.
ARTICLE III Advisory Council
Section 1. The Board of Directors may appoint an Advisory Council.
ARTICLE IV Officers
Section 1. the officers of the Society shall be a President, a Vice-President, a Treasurer and a Secretary. They shall be elected for terms of three years by the Board of Directors, the first term beginning as of January, 1947. The President and Vice-President shall not be eligible for election to more than two consecutive terms of three years each. The President may at any time appoint assistant officers and assistants for terms limited to the fiscal year. The same person may be elected as Secretary and Treasurer. All officers shall hold office at the pleasure of the Board of Directors or until the election and qualification of their respective successors. A vacancy in any office may be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by the Board of Directors. No person who is not a member of the Board of Directors shall be eligible for election as President, VicePresident, Secretary, or Treasurer.
Section 2. The President shall be responsible for the administration of the affairs of the Society, subject to the Board of Directors. He shall preside at all meetings of the Society and of the Board of Directors at which he shall be present. Except as otherwise provided by resolution duly adopted at any meeting of the Board of Directors, the President shall sign for the Society all formal instruments and agreements and shall appoint all committees, the appointment of which is not otherwise expressly pro-

204 By-Laws

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

vided for. Unless the Board of Directors votes otherwise, he shall be Chairman of the Executive Committee, described below.
Section 3. In the absence or disability of the President, the Vice-President shall discharge his duties and exercise his powers.
Section 4. The Treasurer, subject to such regulations as may be prescribed by the Board of Directors, shall have the custody of the funds of the Society and shall have charge of the disbursement of its money. The Treasurer shall deposit the funds of the Society in such bank or trust company as may from time to time be designated by the Board of Directors. Such deposit shall be made subject to draft only on the signature of the Treasurer or the President or such other officer or officers, or member or members of the Society as may be designated by the Board of Directors for such purpose.
Section 5. At each Annual Meeting of the Society the Treasurer shall make a report of the accounts of the preceding fiscal year. He shall keep proper records of account and these shall be at all times open to the inspection of the members of the Board of Directors. At any meeting of the Society or of the Board of Directors the Treasurer shall, if called upon to do so, present an account showing in detail the financial status of the Society.
ARTICLE V Committees
Section 1. There shall be an Executive Committee of the Board of Directors consisting of seven (7) to nine (9) members, as the Board of Directors may decide. The Committee shall include the President, Vice-President, Secretary and Treasurer. The members of the Executive Committee other than said officers

shall be elected by the Board of Directors at its first meeting after each Annual Meeting of the Society, to serve for one year, or until their successors shall have been elected and qualified. The Board of Directors may at any meeting fill vacancies in the Executive Committee. The Executive Committee shall exercise all of the functions of the Board of Directors between meetings of the Board.
Section 2. There shall be such other standing or temporary committees as the Board of Directors shall deem advisable. The membership of such committees shall ordinarily be drawn from members of the Society. The duties of the committees shall be those assigned to them by the Board of Directors.
ARTICLE VI Meetings
Section 1. Meetings of the Board of Directors shall be held at such times and places as the Executive Committee may from time to time decide. The President may call a meeting of the Board of Directors at any time upon not less than two days' notice in writing or by telegram. In the absence of specification, all meetings of the Board shall be held in the office of the Society in the City of New York. One-third of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum.
Section 2. Meetings of the Executive Committee may be called by its Chairman, or by the President or Vice-President, and shall be called at the written request of any five members. Three members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum, provided notice of the meeting has been sent to all members by mail or by telegraph at least three days in advance of the meeting.
Section 3. The Annual Meeting of the Society shall be held on the second

By-Laws

205

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Thursday in November of each year, and notice of the meeting shall be sent by mail to members of the Society at least two weeks before the date is set.
Ten members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. In the absence of a quorum a majority of those present at the time and place set for a meeting may take an adjournment from time to time until a quorum is obtained.
Section 4. A Special Meeting of the Society may be called at any time by order of the Board of Directors. At least five days' written notice of any such special meeting shall be mailed to each member of the Society. Ten members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
Section 5. In Annual or Special Meetings of the Society, as provided for in Section 3 and Section 4 above, any member of the Society may be represented by proxy.
ARTICLE VII Fiscal Year
The Fiscal Year of the Society shall be from January 1st to December 31st

from and after January 1st, 1947.
ARTICLE VIII Publications
The Society may issue publications from time to time with the approval of the Board of Directors. The President shall each year appoint an Editorial Committee of three or more members, which shall edit the official journal, EUGENICS QUARTERLY, and any bulletins, pamphlets, leaflets or books to be printed for distribution by or for the Society.
ARTICLE IX Amendments
These By-Laws may be amended either (a) at any meeting of the Society by the vote, cast in person or by proxy, of a majority of the membership of the Society or (b) by a two-thirds vote of the Directors present at any meeting of the Board of Directors, but any amendment adopted by the Board of Directors may be modified or rescinded at any meeting of the Society by the vote, cast in person or by proxy, of a majority of the membership of the Society.

