Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Notes on the third international congress of human genetics (the University of Chicago, September 5­10, 1966)
R. H. Post
To cite this article: R. H. Post (1966) Notes on the third international congress of human genetics (the University of Chicago, September 5­10, 1966), Eugenics Quarterly, 13:4, 357-362, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1966.9987690 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1966.9987690
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 2
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:29

NOTES ON THE THIRD INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF HUMAN GENETICS (THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO, SEPTEMBER 5-10, 1966)

R. H. POST
University of Michigan Ann Arbor, Michigan

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

It would be presumptuous to try to summarize, however briefly, over 130 hours of concentrated presentations. Six or seven sessions of contributed papers occurred simultaneously during five afternoons; invited papers, during five morning and one evening symposia or workshops. Almost all this material concerns eugenics to some degree. The notes published here are selected, somewhat by chance, in the hope that they may give a few of the many points relating most obviously and directly to eugenics, pending publication of the full proceedings. They are based partly upon abstracts of the 165 contributed papers (available for §3 from Dr. Bernard S. Strauss, Chairman of the Congress); partly upon the few press handouts that were available of the 40 invited papers; and partly on memoranda kindly contributed by Dr. V. Elving Anderson of the University of Minnesota and Dr. Norman C. Nevin of the Institute of Child Health, London, both of whom have been kindly provident, yet should not be held responsible for any of the sins of omission and commission herein.
The first reference to eugenics was made in the opening address by L. S. Penrose,President of the Congress. After summarizing the contributions of British pioneers in human genetics, he warned that no one can be sure, as yet, that any gene will be harmful under all circumstances, nor that any gene is always beneficial: our knowledge of human genetics is still too limited to justify any

defining of principles for proceeding in human breeding. Professor Penrose indicated that the role of whole chromosomes in prehuman evolution and in current genetics might prove an unusually rewarding field of investigation.
Cytogenetics was represented as thoroughly as any other field of human genetics. The number of distinct abnormalities that can be identified is growing steadily, many of them due to deletions of a part of a chromosome. Some cases that present with abnormalities in two different chromosomes are composites of two syndromes. A new autosomal syndrome involving partial deletion of the long arm of chromosome 18 was described by /. Lejeune, who also showed a motion picture of the "Cridu-chat" syndrome. /. H. Turner reported analyses of 167 amnion biopsies from which the sex of the fetus could be determined, and, in some cases, the presence of chromosomal aberrations. Investigation of over 600 cases of Turner's and Klinefelter's syndrome tested for Xg blood type has provided an estimate of the proportion of nondisjunction in the mother and in the father. R. R. Race presented this work on behalf of / . H. Edwards.
Clinical cytogenetics is important, not only in research, but as a means of diagnosis of genetic disease. Approximately 1% of all live births have a detectable chromosomal aberration, according to M. A. Ferguson-Smith, who presented a long paper on this subject. Clinical entities discussed in his and other papers

357

358

Brief Reports

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

included Down's syndrome, leukemia, intersex, Klinefelter's and Turner's syndromes, and several rarer congenital anomalies including trisomies 13-15 and 18, short-arm deletions 4-5 and 18, and others.
Since most babies with multiple congenital anomalies have no chromosomal abnormality, old-fashioned clinical symptoms or phenotype clues must be used also, such as low birth weight; mental retardation; failure to thrive; congenital heart disease; or retarded or abnormal development of such organs as eyes, teeth, kidneys, etc. A comprehensive review of this subject was presented by W. Lenz, subdivided into (1) polygenic functional disorders, (2) monogenic abnormalities of tissue structure, and (3) malformations or developmental disorders. Some of the polygenic and multifactorial disorders (i.e., very many genes with very small additive effects, and genes with variable effects, respectively) present the most difficult problems for diagnosis, particularly when environmental components are high. Examples include gout, diabetes, obesity, mental dysfunction, and disorders of connective tissue. New syndromes that apparently are of normal cytology were reported by R. J. Gorlin and H. E. Cross.
Advances in dermatoglyphics have been notable. S. B. Holt reviewed the entire field, stressing Klinefelter's syndrome. Diagnoses of various chemical abnormalities by dermatoglyphics was discussed by M. Bat-Miriam and /. A. Uchida. The latter stressed Down's syndrome, D-l and 18 trisomies. Her investigation of the parents of 228 trisomic mongoloids revealed that 433 were normal, as were most of the 561 sibs, indicating that dermatoglyphics are not yet particularly efficient as markers for counseling. M. Alter arranged an exhibition of dermatoglyphic patterns of

genetic diseases and syndromes, with illustrations, and provided visitors with a booklet, Dermatoglyphics As a Diagnostic Tool.
The large program of screening for inborn errors of metabolism at Massachusetts General Hospital, also among the mentally retarded, was described by M. L. Efron. Three new disorders have been discovered, and population frequencies have been estimated for several well-known entities, particularly PKU (phenylketonuria). Chromatographs of 3,000 patients during the past few years have yielded 12 cases of genetic metabolic defects. Screening programs may be useful in "refuge areas" such as poor, unproductive regions that have suffered from selective emigration since early colonial times and where consanguinity is high. A chemical test for diagnosing schizophrenia--"pink spot" in urine-- was described by C. A. Clarke.
New variants of marker genes were reported--of hemoglobin M by P. Heller, in a Negro; of sickle-cell hemoglobin by R. M. Bookchin and A. P. Kraus; and of serum lipoproteins by K. Berg. Probably several other new polymorphisms were reported which escaped us.
Genetic heterogeneity of several diseases that were formerly considered single nosologic entities have been investigated by a number of workers. Thus P. E. Becker discussed the myotonias, differentiating dystrophic forms from nondystrophic. From his study of 150 cases of nondystrophic cases, he has discovered a new recessive type that is not congenital, appearing in childhood, also probably a new dominant type. L. E. Rosenberg discussed genetic heterogeneity of cystinuria, presenting evidence for allelism. Several authors, including M. L. Guillemot and N. S. Track, discussed diabetes mellitus. W. J. Kimberling re-

Vol. 13, No. 4

Brief Reports

359

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

ported a study of insulin antagonism in juvenile onset diabetes which suggests a single-gene effect. Epidermolysis bullosa is now subdivided into eight separate entities. The genetic complexity of early childhood deafness was reported by K. S. Brown, who has estimated a number of distinct recessive genes and some incompletely dominant genes, each at a separate locus, producing phenotypically indistinguishable entities. Multifactorial basis of ischaemic heart disease with appreciable risk among patients' relatives was discussed by N. C. Nevin and by /. Slack.
A number of contributed papers and an entire evening's workshop was devoted to computer methods and uses. Studies in genetic demography were described by W. Bodmer; experiments with artificial populations, to test hypotheses regarding breeding structure, by L. L. Cavalli-Sforza; computerization of the total genealogies of a population, by V. A. McKusick; registers and bibliographies of genetic syndromes, by M. Mi; analyses of linkage data, by /. H. Renwick.
A wide variety of research of particular interest to eugenics is being facilitated by new techniques in record linking on large series of punch cards and/or magnetized tapes, which were described by H. B. Newcombe. Records of married spouses, siblings, and/or other groups of relatives can be linked together in order to compile pedigrees by computers from the information stored during previous studies. The methods are cheap, rapid, accurate, and efficient. Largescale investigations are thus encouraged on such topics as making estimates of empiric risks among sibs; fertilities of mothers or fathers with certain genetic disorders; "compensation" (the phenomenon of parents' having extra children to replace those deceased or afflicted, in

excess of the numbers lost); and parental age effects, which are often difficult to separate from the effects of parity. Great advantages may be expected from these techniques, which include such tasks as storing a person's entire educational record from the kindergarten, with all school and college grades, tests, and records; storing his medical history, from birth to death, including all types of examinations, etc; linking a person's complete record with those of his relatives; constructing a mass pedigree of any trait for which the data have been coded.
Accumulations in unusually high frequencies of genetically conditioned diseases or disabilities in a circumscribed population are of particular concern to eugenics, especially of traits attributable to dominant or to multifactorial inheritance, perhaps also to recessive inheritance if the frequencies appear to be higher than might be explained by inbreeding alone. Several decades ago such accumulations were often explained hypothetically as resulting from longcontinued selective emigration out of the population by persons relatively free from the responsible and undesirable genes. This phenomenon is extremely difficult to demonstrate with precision and therefore has little appeal to investigators. Several populations that might be propitious for such research were described at the Congress, but not all the authors mentioned this hypothesis. AT. Fujiki described several isolates in Japan; V. A. McKusick and A. G. Steinberg', religious isolates in North America; H. O. Akesson, islands in the Baltic Sea; D. F. Roberts and /. Shine, two small island populations in the Atlantic. In a large study of the offspring of consanguineous parents in India by L. D. Sanghvi the estimated frequency of congenital malformations

360

Brief Reports

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

was 1.49%, compared with 1.39% among offspring of unrelated parents as controls. This difference was less than expected. A number of papers on inbreeding was presented.
In another series of studies H. P. Baker and F. M. Sahano described two small populations of primitive South American Indians which appear to have relatively low frequencies of deleterious traits--viz. sterility--and rather high frequencies of some very desirable traits, notably, superior vision acuity. It might be said that a mechanism of applied eugenics seems to be operating in each village, insofar as the chief, who is elected by the warriors as an outstanding fighter, hunter, and leader and is rewarded by several more wives than other men, produces considerably more offspring. Studies of genetic marker traits in similar small populations in Venezuela described by M. Layrisse demonstrate such phenomena as the origin of new village populations and new tribes--i.e., new gene pools--by splits in parental villages along specific lines of kinship rather than by random sampling. /. V. Neel and co-workers have proposed to designate this the "fissionfusion" model.
Several authors discussed some of the entities that have been reported in higher frequencies among Ashkenazi Jews than among neighboring populations: Riley-Day syndrome, or familial dysatonomia, by P. W. Brunt; infantile amaurotic idiocy or Tay-Sachs disease, by N. C. Myrianthopoulos; and Bloom's disease, or congenital telangiectatic erythema, by /. German, who reported Jewish ancestry in 10 of 19 families. No satisfactory explanation of these frequencies has been made.
Since preferential mating is known to intensify selection rates and thus to speed up evolutionary processes, it was

interesting to hear F. S. Hulse describe preference for marriage partners with lighter skin color in a sample of Japanese. A tendency of schizophrenic patients to marry each other was reported by K. Planasky. More cheerful to report, a positive association between intelligence and fertility as well as evidence for preferential mating in intelligence was described by /. B. Gibson and C. /. Bajema.
Genetic counseling in Denmark was reviewed by /. Mohr. Four laws bearing upon counseling, at least indirectly, provide for sterilization. Most of the sterilization of eugenic significance concerns the feebleminded (those with I.Q. below 75), who numbered 20,504 last year by official count in Denmark's population of 4.6 million, clearly a minimal estimate. The number of new registered cases of feebleminded has averaged about 1,200 per year, and the number sterilized by law during recent years, about 100, or about 8%. Sterilization of women has been more frequent than that of men, particularly in the I.Q. range of 50 to 75, where perhaps 40% of registered feebleminded women are being sterilized. The more seriously affected patients are more frequently institutionalized and thereby prevented from procreation. Adding together other motives for sterilization under the four laws, the annual total in Denmark is estimated at 500. Another 1,726 sterilizations on medical grounds are estimated for fiscal year 1964-1965 without application to a Governmental Ministry under the laws, bringing the annual total to about 2,200, of which a very large proportion is female.
While organized genetic counseling is practiced in only one center in Denmark --the Institute of Medical Genetics-- private practice among physicians is believed to be active. Nevertheless, Danish

Vol. 13, No. 4

Brief Reports

361

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

physicians appear reserved or at least unenthusiastic in giving genetic counsel, possibly because of the lack of techniques for diagnoses, the low prediction values (genetic risks), and the disagreeable feeling that abortion, sterilization, and even contraception are not "natural." Of 601 cases of counseling in 1965, 339 concerned applications for abortions; 17, for sterilization; 26, for both; 32, for adoption; and the balance were requests for advice. The 601 cases were subdivided genetically as follows: 84 malformations, 9 deafness, 26 blindness, 5 skin disease, 75 internal disease, 86 nervous system, 25 mental inferiority, 127 feeblemindedness, 62 psychosis, 64 less sharply denned mental aberration, and the remainder, a combination of two or more of the above categories.
Dr. Mohr reported I.Q. scores of 352 offspring of 186 feebleminded women who had been sterilized during a tenyear period: 32% were below 75; 36%, between 75 and 90; and 32%, above 90.
The motives for sterilization are rarely, if ever, eugenic. Most frequently it is in the interest of the patient, releasing the feebleminded from the burdens of raising offspring; secondly, in the interests of society, for sociological reasons. The former motive has become more prevalent lately, producing relatively more female sterilizations. Aside from the feebleminded, most sterilizations are motivated by medicosocial reasons, as are most abortions, viz., mothers' desire to have no more children. Eugenic considerations are quite secondary.
Recent advances in the diagnosis of gentic entities--by cytology, biochemistry, dermatoglyphics, and the recognition of phenotypes--should facilitate genetic counseling, particularly through the identification of carriers who are potential parents. A serious barrier to such progress lies in the meiotic process,

i.e., low empiric risks. Cytological diagnosis of early embryos through amniotic biopsy now promises to overcome this barrier for some entities, such' as Down's syndrome, where therapeutic abortion would be indicated. On the whole, however, counseling can hardly be expected to affect population frequencies appreciably until better techniques for screening and diagnosis are developed.
The outcome of genetic counseling since 1962 in a large London clinic was reported by C. O. Carter for 169 referral cases of above-average intelligence. Of 74 "high risk" cases, 68% were deterred, but 32% were undaunted. Of 95 "low risk" referrals, 25% were deterred and 75%, undaunted. Very few sought sterilization, which the clinic does not recommend.
Treatment of patients with genetic disease is of prime importance to eugenics, insofar as it permits procreation and relaxes the rigor of natural selection against the responsible genes. C. R. Scriver discussed this subject systematically, mentioning specific therapies for a large number of entities of various categories. Under the subheading "genetic engineering," his discussion was divided threefold: protein (enzyme) replacement, enzyme induction or repression, and transformation (transduction) of the genome. Possibilities of manipulation of the environment were also discussed. A paper on Hirschsprung's disease by E. Passarge estimating a risk among a patient's siblings some 200 times higher than in the normal population (which is 1 in 5,000 newborn) presents the same problem, since this condition can now be treated surgically, although the author did not consider this aspect. The increased marriage rate and reproduction rate of former schizophrenic patients was noted by L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling.

362

Brief Reports

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

Four evening receptions were held-- at the University of Chicago, at the museums of art and of science, and at the Pitt-Congress Hotel. Preceding the final reception, C. Stern reviewed the entire field of human genetics in a lecture open to the public, supported by the National Foundation.
The most purely eugenic paper, "What Genetic Course will Man Steer?", was presented by H. J. Muller in the final plenary session, "Man's Future." Stressing the ethical and democratic aspects of his well-known plan for artificial insemination from donor sperm banks (viz., T. M. Sonneborn, editor, The Control of Human Heredity and Evolution, Macmillan, 1965), Muller added a warning that similar plans for artificial insemination by donor (AID) are being developed by racist and "Social Darwinist" groups, which, if once started, might become a popular fad that would make it all the more difficult for ethical, idealistic, and democratically administered groups to gain broad support. With some 10,000 births annually, AID has already become almost a fad. Muller noted that properly protected frozen sperm have lower mutation rates per year than in the living donor. He answered the criticism of possible reduction in genetic variability by pointing out that, ideally, large numbers of donors would be utilized, and that each married couple should select the donor they prefer, from among those who had been screened for all deleterious traits appearing in their own or their closer relatives' medical histories. Positively donors should be screened not only for superior health and intelligence but also for "cooperativeness," by which Muller

apparently implied "contributiveness," social-mindedness, a sense of charity, "character," etc. Current AID practice was criticized for dictatorial, secret selection of donors, often without proper genetic investigation and quite regardless of eugenic considerations.
The large and distinguished audience was obviously impressed.
Following are the titles of the 10 symposia and workshops of invited papers, and their chairmen:
Computer Methods, H. B. Newcombe Biochemical Genetics, H. Harris Clinical Genetics I, V. A. McKusick Clinical Genetics II, A. Franceschetti Cytogenetics, L. Lejeune Human Evolution, T. Dobzhansky Immunogenetics, R. Owen Molecular Genetics, H. Dintzes Population Genetics, L. L. Cavalli-Sforza Teaching Medical and
Human Genetics, J. A. Fraser Roberts
There were 32 sessions of contributed papers, each of 15 minutes' duration:

Subject
Cytogenetics Population Genetics Biochemical Genetics Clinical Genetics Somatic cells and tissues Twins Behavioral Genetics Congenital Anomalies Dermatoglyphics Immunogenetics Linkage Mutation

No. of sessions
8
5
4 4 3 2 1 1 1 1 1 1
32

