Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Procedures for referral to heredity counselors
C. Nash Herndon M.D.
To cite this article: C. Nash Herndon M.D. (1958) Procedures for referral to heredity counselors, Eugenics Quarterly, 5:1, 43-46, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1958.9987348 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1958.9987348
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

43

REFERENCES

BOOK, J. A. and REED, S. C. 1950. Empiric risk
figures in Mongolism. J.A.M.A., 143: 730-732.
HSIA, D. Y. 1957. The laboratory detection of hétérozygotes. Am.J. Human Genet. 9 : 98-116.
NEEL, J. V. 1953. The detection of the genetic carriers of inherited disease. In: ClinicalGenetics (A. Sorsby, ed.). St. Louis: C. V.

Mosby, pp. 27-34.
, and SCHULL, W. J. 1954. Human
Heredity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 361.
1956. The Effect of Exposure to the Atomic Bombs on Pregnancy Termination in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Nat. Acad. Sci.-Nat. Res. Coun., Publ. No. 461, pp. xvi and241.

CHAIRMAN GLASS: The next speaker on the it is tact and good judgment, and I don't panel is one who, so far as I know, didnot know anyone who exhibits continually greater start his work in the field of genetics by work- tact and hasa greater flair for catching up the ing on the lower animals, but he has certain ideas that have been bandied back and forth other qualifications that render him almost in a discussion and putting them in a nutshell ideal in his position on this panel. If there is than Nash Herndon. Hedid it excellently this anything a heredity counselor needs, I suppose morning, and we will hear from him again.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

PROCEDURES FOR REFERRAL TO HEREDITY COUNSELORS

C. NASH HERNDON, M.D.
Bowman Gray School of Medicine

T

A HETERM REFERRAL SHOULD BE interpret- service. This material can be readily util-

ed broadly to include all mechanisms ized by making arrangements forthe heredi-

whereby the heredity counselor and the ty counselor to attend ward rounds and

patient, or members of his family, come staff conferences normally held on these

into contact. It may be useful to consider services. Conferences with the students

referral procedures in relation to the pri- and house officers assigned to patients of

mary functions of a medical center. Gen- genetic interest can be used to guide the

erally speaking, a medical center has three student in collecting suitable pedigreema-

major functions. These are, first, teaching; terial and in outlining suitable advice to

second, research; third, patient care. Many the patient or his family. This function

medical educators rank these functions in is particularly valuable in increasing the

importance in theorder given.

number of physicians in the community

A teaching service requires a well-bal- who are able to handle many counseling

anced variety of problems to provide a flow problems directly, and whowill refer the

of suitable material for the purpose of more difficult problems to the specialist in

training students and house officers. Most genetics.

of the material needed for teaching can Establishing contact with patients needed

be provided by thenormal flow of patients for research projects can be done in a

found on anyactive pédiatrie and medical variety of ways. Usually a method isre-

44 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

quired for obtaining an unselected and statistically unbiased series of patients of a type suitable for the research plan. Often this will depend on the establishment of close rapport between the geneticist and the house staff of the teaching hospital. Arrangements should be made with the chief of the proper service for notification on admission of any patient suspected of having the condition selected for study. This should be supplemented by an arrangement with the record librarian to obtain notification concerning all hospital records received bearing the desired diagnosis as these records are received on discharge of the patients. A plan of this type must be implemented by seeing the patients promptly and obtaining the necessary studies, and leaving a consultant's note on the hospital record, and also by conferences with the house officers concerned.
Research problems may also require the collection of information on a series of cases previously seen in one or more hospitals or clinics. As the patients are no longer immediately available, this requires a record search and usually home visits. The technique of conducting survey studies of this type was discussed extensively at the conference on problems and methods in human genetics held at the National Institutes of Health in October of 1953 and published in the American Journal of Human Genetics (Neel, 1954; Herndon, 1954; Macklin, 1954). In these studies contact with the patient is usually established by a field worker, and this contact is often made much easier by working through the family physician.
The function of patient care involves all referrals that are initiated by the patient, his physician, or a social agency, and will be unrelated to the research activities of the department. These referrals may be received in several ways. The staff geneticist may receive consultation requests on patients in the hospital or clinic from the attending physician in the usual consulting routine of the hospital. If the geneticist

succeeds in demonstrating to his clinical colleagues his usefulness in the management of clinical problems, this consultation service can be expected to become rather heavy. Similar referrals may also be received from practicing physicians whose offices are located outside of the medical center. These referrals are usually made by letter or by telephone. The magnitude of this service depends upon the degree of genetic education of the physicians practicing in the community or area and their awareness of the usefulness and availability of the consulting service. In our experience the bulk of referrals of this type are received from physicians who took courses in medical genetics as students or were house officers in a teaching hospital with a genetics service. Awareness of the usefulness of this service can be stimulated by talks to county medical societies and other medical groups. It is important to maintain an efficient appointment schedule and to report findings and recommendations by letter promptly to the referring physician. The patient should be encouraged to remain under the care of the referring physician, and the consultant should work in cooperation with the referring physician.
Referrals may also be received from various social agencies including welfare departments, health departments, adoption agencies and various private service organizations. These must be based on a mutual understanding between the counselor and the agency concerning the method of referral and the information to be collected and supplied by the agency. This can be made more effective if the counselor will give occasional educational and informational talks to staff meetings of agency workers and to other meetings of social workers, public health nurses and other personnel concerned. In dealing with agencies, the problem of privileged communication must be handled with care. The counselor may submit a report to the agency only if he has written permission from the patient or his family to do so. The counselor must be

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

45

careful to observe the pattern of medical ethics and the legal requirements for transmission of information to non-medical personnel. The patient will usually regard the counselor as equivalent to a physician in terms of doctor-patient relationships, and the counselor must avoid any action that could possibly be construed as malpractice. In this connection it is most important to keep an exact record of the advice given to the patient verbally and to keep records of all correspondence. Even with agencyreferred patients, it seems advisable to work with the patient's family physician if this is at all possible or to suggest that he obtan a physician.
In addition to patients referred by others, some patients will refer themselves. The existence of an heredity clinic is often publicized in newspaper or magazine articles, and numerous mail inquiries are often received after such publicity. All letters so received should be answered, but much caution and tact is required. Some of these will be requests for general information, for example, students writing term papers, and these may usually be handled by a routine letter or by sending appropriate pamphlets. Requests for information on specific diseases or specific family problems are potentially dangerous and must be handled with care. In our experience information given in such letters is often erroneous and could lead to improper advice if one attempted to supply genetic counsel upon such inadequate information. It is surprising how often such letters give incorrect diagnostic information, apparently resulting from misunderstanding or misinterpretation of verbal information re-

ceived from physicians. Giving genetic advice on the basis of an unsupported letter should be avoided. Every effort should be made to induce the patient to consult his family physician and o b t a i n r e f e r r a l through this source, or to have the patient visit the clinic for both diagnostic examination and genetic study. It is often possible to give suitable advice to a physician for transmission to a patient that cannot be seen in person, but this should be based only upon accurate diagnostic and pedigree information collected by the referring physician.
A final type of referral is that which may be received from a court in medicolegal cases. These must also be handled with care to meet the legal requirements for blood group testing. Arrangements for blood testing are usually made by attorneys and upon court order. Care must be taken to maintain the legally required chain of evidence. The individuals concerned must be properly identified, and preferably the opposing parties to the action should identify each other in the presence of the geneticist. Reports with proper interpretation should be sent direct to the clerk of the court concerned, with copies going to the attorneys representing both parties.
In summary, patients may be referred to the genetic counselor in many ways and for many purposes. In general, it is advisable to work with the patient's physician if this is at all possible. Due care must be taken to avoid errors that can occur as a result of incomplete diagnostic or inaccurate pedigree information, and careful record keeping and reporting to the proper physician or agency is essential.

REFERENCES

HERNDON, C. N. 1954. Three North Carolina Surveys. Am. J. Human Genet. 6 : 65-74.
MACKLIN, M. T. 1954. Methods of selection of probands and controls. Am. J. Human Genet. 6:

86-95. NEEL, J. V. 1954. Problems in the estimation of
the frequency of uncommon inherited traits. Am. J. Human Genet. 6: 51-60.

46 Eugenics Quarterly

CHAIRMAN GLASS: Our next speaker, Dr. Clarke Fraser of McGill University, is equally well known to us for his work on human genetics and his work on mice. I don't know whether the mice led him to the men, or the

men led him to the mice, but of mice and men, anyway, his career has been made. He's going to talk about "The Types of Problems of Heredity Counselors."

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

TYPES OF PROBLEMS PRESENTED TO GENETIC COUNSELORS
F. CLARKE FRASER, M.D.
Department of Genetics McGill University
and Montreal Children's Hospital

LY DISCUSSION WILL BE LIMITED tO w h a t
kinds of questions genetic counselors are required to answer, how many cases they may expect to deal with, and where the questions come from. In order to get some information to talk about, I sent a rather rough-and-ready questionnaire to some of my counseling friends, who have been very generous in their response, and whom I would like to thank for their cooperation. The object was simply to get some impressions of the sort of case-load carried by counseling centers, and no claims to statistical validity are made. The questions dealt with the number of cases referred per month, what proportion were referred from hospital wards, practitioners, or came directly, what categories of questions were asked, and the five most frequent conditions encountered.
The first question dealt with the number of cases per month referred for genetic counseling. The answers would depend somewhat on the method of classification; some correspondents might include referrals for zygosity diagnosis in twins, for instance, and others might not. The answers ranged from 1 to 40 referrals per month. This volume might be expected to rise somewhat as the benefits of genetic counseling become more widely appreciated. However, it seems unlikely that counseling cen-

ters will ever become self-supporting on the basis of income from fees. (This is one of the problems of genetic counselors.) No information concerning fees was gathered by the questionnaire, but it seems from personal conversation that fees are not usually charged, at present.
The sources of referrals would be expected to vary widely according to the organization of the particular center, and so they did. Counselors associated with medical centers received anywhere from 20 to 80 per cent of their referrals from the hospital wards. The proportion of cases referred from physicians varied from 10 to 80 per cent, and the proportion that came directly to the counselor varied from 0 to 90 per cent. Some centers actively discourage the direct approach, and one center insists that referrals shall be through a practitioner or hospital. Our department does not employ such a hard-and-fast rule, but we believe that in genetic counseling, as with any medical specialty, the practice of referring cases through medical sources should be encouraged. For one thing, it is easier to get reliable medical information about cases referred in this way, and, for another, the counselor is given added prestige in the eyes of the patient by this approach. Additional sources of referrals are institutions and agencies, but referrals from

