Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
For children of mixed racial ancestry
Sheldon C. Reed & Esther B. Nordlie
To cite this article: Sheldon C. Reed & Esther B. Nordlie (1961) For children of mixed racial ancestry, Eugenics Quarterly, 8:3, 157-163, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1961.9987478 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1961.9987478
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

G e n e t i c Counseling: ForChildren of Mixed Racial Ancestry

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

INTRODUCTION
The editors of this journal have been interested in genetic counseling because it is a major practical application of the results of research in human genetics. It is reasonable to assume that genetic counseling may also have some relationship to eugenics, though there is nothing known as to exactly what this relationship may be.
Genetic counseling should be helpful to those who ask for it. The understanding of any problem is the first step toward its solution. Understanding of the problem removes some of the attendant anxiety, even if the solution is unpleasant. There should be less anxiety after genetic counseling . than before it has occurred, and the clients indicate in many ways that it is useful to them.
The relationship between genetic counseling and eugenics is certainly ambiguous. It is my impression that the relief of anxiety concerning the likelihood of a repetition of an abnormality results in increased reproduction of the parents of the affected children. If this is true, the frequency of any genes responsible for the abnormality would be increased, though slightly, in the population, which would be a dysgenic process. The increased reproduction of the parents of the anomalous children should also increase the frequency of any genes related to the attributes of responsible parenthood which should have positive eugenic benefits. It is not clear to me whether the net result of these opposing tendencies is eugenic or dysgenic. The dysgenic effect is to increase slightly the pool of rare genes for abnormalities which are

infrequent, while the slight increase in the supply of genes related to responsible parenthood would be less significant percentage-wise because such genes are presumed to be more frequent in the population. If genes related to responsible parenthood do not exist, one can only conclude that genetic counseling may well be dysgenic.
Genetic counseling at present would seem to be liable to the suspicion that it is dysgenic. This effect may be too trivial to warrant consideration. Hopefully, the obvious benefits to the parents who come for counseling outweigh the possible dysgenic costs to society as a whole. The only alternative to genetic counseling is the refusal to impart whatever information research in human genetics has discovered; such a philosophy would be deplorable. Genetic counseling has a function and is here to stay.
It is the intention of the editors to present articles by other genetic counselors from time to time. Presumably these articles will cover particular areas of counseling with which they have had extensive experience.
BACKGROUND OF STUDY
We have had considerable experience at the Dight Institute in working with adoption agencies in the placement of children of mixed racial ancestry. Mrs. Esther Nordlie (1961) and I have just completed a follow-up of the results of the placement of such children and will summarize the results here, as this is the first study of its kind. It is probable that genetic counselors will be increasingly occupied with this topic as interracial

157

158 Genetic Counseling

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

unions are likely to continue in the United States. The casual unions often result in children who become available for adoption.
The emphasis in adoption practice has been shifting from giving the parents a child to giving the child a home. Theoretically, every child without gross physical or mental anomalies should be adoptable. Practically, it is still difficult to place older children, those of mixed racial ancestry, and those with moderate physical handicaps. The problem of placing "pure" Negro, Indian or Mexican children is difficult only because few families of these minority groups request children for adoption. Ordinarily, no attempt would be made to place these babies in Caucasian families as the child or the adoptive parents would probably find social adjustment too difficult. However, children of mixed racial origin may "pass for white" or resemble the Caucasian adoptive parents sufficiently so that placement in a white family is feasible. Such placement is desirable for the child as the socioeconomic environment is assumed to be more favorable there. This would be true only if the racial appearance of the child would permit acceptance in the white community. Many white couples are desperately anxious to adopt children. Some are sufficiently free from racial prejudices to be able to adopt children of mixed racial ancestry, if a reasonable "match" between child and adoptive parents can be made. The critical prediction rests with the geneticist (or anthropologist) who must project the appearance of a small baby ahead to the child of five or six when entering school.
The most important physical differences between whites and non-whites are dependent upon partially dominant inheritance and should show up in everyone who carries the genes for these traits.

One would suppose that predicting the chances for a child to "pass for white" would be quite simple. Such, however, is not the case. The main difficulty is that these traits, when present in the racial hybrid, may not be apparent in an infant but develop over the years. Hair texture and skin color are the most important traits and at the same time the most difficult to predict. The baby may have no hair; it is well known that babies with considerable Negro ancestry may look quite light at birth and darken considerably during childhood. The geneticist is thus vulnerable to mistakes in his predictions as to the future appearance of the baby. One could take the attitude that unless the geneticist can make his prediction with certainty he should not enter the picture at all. Such reasoning is absurd. The baby is in the custody of the adoption agency and the agency must make some provision for this child. The many agencies assisted with this problem have all been most grateful for the insight given them by the Dight Institute. (See Reed (1955) for the criteria used in appraising the children.)
Many of the infants and children seen from two to fourteen years ago are now well along in school. It is possible to follow up some of them and see how well they have adjusted and how successful the Dight Institute was in predicting their present appearance. Adoption is always a delicate subject and particularly so in the racial hybrid area. Therefore, it was clear that the adoption agencies were the only groups with the right to inquire into the present status of the children they had placed. The agencies were therefore presented with questionnaires outlining the topics to be investigated. Their cooperation was excellent, as expected, and we are, in our turn, grateful for it. Ten agencies were asked for information about the 61 children

Genetic Counseling

159

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

they had brought to the Dight Institute in past years. One child had died and others could not be contacted so that only 49 remained in the sample. Most of these had, or were alleged to have, Negro ancestry; only seven were Mexican, Indian or Japanese in alleged ancestry. We were never much concerned about the actual or alleged ancestry; the problem was always that of whether the child would benefit by placement in the white community and the chances of such a placement's being successful. The alternative to placement in the white community for the child is usually residence in a succession of boarding homes, generally an undesirable alternative.
Mrs. Nordlie classified the children according to their descriptions as recorded when first seen at the Dight Institute. The five groups are arbitrary and have no theoretical significance. The 49 children who were followed up had these original groupings.
Group I. No trace of racial admixture could be found in these eight children. They were appraised as white, in spite of alleged Negro ancestry, and it was recommended that they be placed in white homes.
Group II. Seventeen children had some signs of racial admixture, but they were not far from the normal variability of Caucasians. It was predicted that these children could "pass for white" and should be placed in white homes also.
Group HI. Five children had swarthy skin color and some had dark eyes or black hair. This critical group was recommended for placement in families of Mediterranean ancestry if appropriate families could be found.
Group IV. Twelve children were too Negroid in appearance to expect to adjust well in a white community. It was recommended that they be placed in Ne-

gro families who wished to adopt children, hoping that enough of these families could be found.
Group V. Seven children looked to be of Oriental origin or some variation of it such as Mexican or American Indian. It was recommended that attempts be made to find white homes for these children.
A. PLACEMENT
Thirty-nine of the 49 children had been placed for adoption. Seven children were not adopted, two had been placed but were later removed from the home, and one child was living with his natural mother and stepfather. Private agencies place up to 98 per cent of their children but public agencies may place as few as 10 per cent of their children. The public agencies "inherit" from the private agencies children who are not adoptable. Not all of the backlog of unadoptable children have handicaps; some cannot be adopted because of regrettable legal, religious or other extraneous reasons. In view of the racial "handicap" that the children in our sample possessed it can be said that the adoption agencies did a superb job in placement. As one child is still with its natural mother, only nine (18 per cent) have not been placed for adoption.
All the children of Group I were placed, as might be expected. Four of the 17 children in Group II were not placed; two each for Groups III and IV and one from Group V were not adopted.
The most common explanation for lack of adoption given by the agencies for the nine children was that of emotional problems. This was the reason given for four of the nine children not adopted. Two of the four had actual brain damage and, as they developed, their aggressiveness and hyperactivity

160 Genetic Counseling

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

prevented placement attempts. One of these has been in three different boarding homes and his behavior has been a large factor in his changes of residence. One child is very withdrawn and is emotionally not yet ready for adoption.
Three children, one each in groups II, III and IV, have not been adopted because of lack of suitable homes. For these three, 6 per cent of the total, it would seem that their racial admixture was the main barrier to their adoption.
One child who had been adopted was removed due to marital difficulties of the adoptive parents combined with hyperactivity of the child.
The remaining child was removed because the parents thought that while they could accept his ancestry for themselves, they could not face the questions of others.
In summary, four of the nine children not now adopted are apparently not placeable because of their mixed racial ancestry. The other five were appraised on follow-up as white in two cases, whiteMediterranean in two cases and one as Indian possibly Negroid. Except for the last one of the five, the alleged racial admixture does not seem to have been a major factor in their failure to be placed.
B. PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS AT
FOLLOW-UP
In an effort to ascertain whether the predictions of the Dight Institute were reliable, a section of the questionnaire to the agencies was devoted to the appearance of the children at follow-up.
Group I. The eight children of this group had been appraised as white when they were seen at the Dight Institute for the first time. At the follow-up, six were still considered to be white but for two no definite commitment was obtained.
Group II. These seventeen children were predicted to be able to pass for

white, or at least to be able to fit into a white community. In two cases no commitments about the physical characteristics of the children were obtained. Nine children were appraised as white on the follow-up. Two children were appraised as Negro. One of these was a girl whose hair has become kinky and whose skin has become yellowish and knees dark. The other seems to have been a case of some mix-up in identification in that apparently a different child than the one brought to the Dight Institute was placed. In these two cases the predictions were incorrect, which is unfortunate for the families concerned. In neither case, however, have the parents offered to surrender the child.
The four remaining children of the group do not fit into any category. One was described as looking mixed white with Negro or Indian, perhaps Italian or Mexican. Another was said to have a small trace of Negro appearance, the third as white with reservation and the fourth is a child for whom two questionnaires were filled out by mistake by the agency; one listed him as looking mulatto and the other as white.
A case by case comparison of the original appraisal and the follow-up shows no gross fault in the predictions of the Dight Institute in 15 of the 17 cases. In one case the problem seems to have been a mistaken identity rather than incorrect prediction and in the final case the prediction was wrong.
Group III. This is the most difficult group for prediction. The five children were expected to be possible candidates for placement in families of Mediterranean ancestry. At follow-up the agengies described one as Mediterranean; the second as Sicilian, possibly Negroid; the third as slightly Negroid; the fourth as Negro; and the fifth as swarthy but not

Genetic Counseling

161

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

colored. The description of the fourth child did not demonstrate what changes had taken place (if any) in the physical characteristics to warrant the child's being classified as a Negro.
Group IV. These twelve children were not thought to be able to secure placement in a white community except that in one case it was thought that the child could be placed in a white family if one could be found which would accept a three-way mixture of white, Negro and Indian ancestry. On follow-up, the Negro and Indian characteristics were still apparent but they had not developed further than at the first viewing.
Nine of the children were originally appraised as clearly Negro and seven were so considered at the follow-up, one as white-Negro and one was not reported upon as to appearance. Two of the remaining three children had been considered to be Negro and/or Indian and were appraised as Negro in the followup. The twelfth child was appraised as white at follow-up. There were thus no gross faults of prediction for these twelve children.
Group V. This group is composed of the seven children who seemed to have some "Oriental" heredity. At follow-up the skin color of one ten-year-old girl was somewhat darker than expected. She had been classified as almost completely Indian and at follow-up was classified by the agency as Indian though possibly Negro. There were no gross faults of prediction in this group.
It was never expected that the babies seen at the Dight Institute would get any "whiter" with age. It was expected that errors in prediction would result from the child becoming more Negroid with age. Fortunately, there were only three such errors that were large enough to be established, and one of these apparently

resulted from a case of mistaken identity. We have a great deal of information from the agencies as to possible changes in hair shape and color, eye color, nose shape, skin color and many other "traits." These were all subjective determinations by a number of agency caseworkers and would be expected to differ from worker to worker. Nor would they be expected to agree exactly with determinations made at the Dight Institute. There has been sufficiently good prediction and agreement as to these subjective values so that there have not been any unpleasant repercussions so far, even in the three cases where there were errors in prediction.
There will always be "errors" in genetic counseling, as there are throughout the medical arts. It is hoped that the experience of the Dight Institute in appraising children of mixed racial origin will be helpful to others in avoiding some of the errors. Plans have to be made for the children, and the geneticist can be of great assistance in this procedure. The writer examined practically all of the children in this study and would have been happy to adopt any of them, except the few with neurological or emotional problems. Even these last few can sometimes be placed successfully, though the adoptive parents have to have special talents to meet the challenge of multiple handicaps in such children.
C. ADJUSTMENT IN HOME AND COMMUNITY
A number of questions were asked to try to determine the feelings of the parents toward the child and the adjustment of the child in the home and community.
We got no useful information about these difficult questions for nine children. We don't know what the situation is for them but at least it is not so bad that the adoptive parents have decided

162 Genetic Counseling

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

on a change. Adjustment was considered to be good in 29 cases, questionable in three and not good in eight.
One of the questionable cases is one of the incorrect predictions who was placed in a white home and appraised as Negro at the follow-ùp. The parents do not admit to being disappointed at the child's appearance. The child was described by the agency as quiet and emotionally mature. There seems to be no problem of acceptance since it is a mixed area.
The second questionable case is not adopted and is getting along fine in the boarding home. However, he is being made aware of his race in the neighborhood.
The third case is a potential problem. This is a Negroid child adopted by a white couple. They accept her completely but realize that there will be problems in the neighborhood.
Of the eight children who are not well adjusted, five are not adopted and were discussed previously. Two are brain damaged, two are slow learners and one is doing poorly in school. Of the three adopted children with poor adjustment, one lives with his natural mother and stepfather. The stepfather is sensitive about the child's Negroid characteristics. Adjustment in the home is "fair" and better in the neighborhood, which is mixed. One of the other adopted maladjusted children has been referred to a diagnostic study and treatment center. The third child causes great difficulties at home and at school, is belligerent and not accepted by other children. Both of these behavior problem children look white, the adoptive parents are white, and physical characteristics do not seem to be involved.
Our sample is small but it does not seem to differ significantly from a study made by Boehm (1958) on adjust-

ment of children without regard to the racial aspects. In her study, 13 per cent of the adopted children had behavior problems while 70 per cent of those still in foster homes had such difficulties. Presumably many children fail to be placed because of emotional problems and thus increase the percentage in the foster homes who are so afflicted.
The adoptive placement may be broken because of emotional disturbances which results in their being removed to a boarding home.
SUMMARY
This article on genetic counseling presents our experience at the Dight Institute in a field which has not been considered seriously in the past. This comprises the prediction of future appearance and adjustment of children of mixed racial ancestry who are candidates for adoption.
Sixty-one children of alleged mixed racial ancestry who had been brought to the Dight Institute for evaluation between two and 14 years ago by adoption agencies were selected for follow-up studies. The agencies were asked to make the contacts and procure the data. One child had died and ten more could not be contacted, leaving a sample of 49 children.
Thirty-nine of the 49 children had been placed for adoption. Seven children were not adopted, two had been placed but were later removed from the home, and one child was living with his natural mother and stepfather. If we ignore this last child, nine children could have been adopted who were not. In five of these cases the fundamental problem was emotional maladjustment (two had brain damage) and only four were without adoptive homes because of their racial characteristics.

Genetic Counseling

163

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

The follow-up study by the adoption agencies showed three predictions to have been incorrect in that the child turned out to be definitely more Negroid than expected from its appearance as a baby or infant. Other minor discrepancies may have been errors or merely differences of personal opinion which could not be avoided under the circumstances.
The adjustment of 29 of the children in home and neighborhood was good. In nine cases it was not possible to get a clear idea as to the adjustment. In three cases the adjustment was questionable and in eight cases it was not good. Three of the maladjusted children were adopted while the other five were in boarding homes. In only one of the eight maladjusted cases does the appearance of the child seem important. In this case the child is living with his natural mother and stepfather, which in itself might be the source of some of his difficulties. The stepfather is sensitive to the boy's Negroid appearance and adjustment in the home is only fair.
In conclusion, our predictions as to

the later appearance of the children turned out to be better than expected. Only four children of the 49 had not been placed because of their racial traits. These four might have been placed in Negro families if they had been available. Thus mixed racial ancestry makes original placement more difficult but it does not seem to have serious effects on later adjustments in the home and community, if the geneticist's predictions as to future appearances are correct, and placements are made accordingly.
REFERENCES
BOEHM, B. 1958. Deterrents to the Adoption of Children in Foster Care. Child Welfare League of America, Inc., New York.
NORDLIE, E. B. 1961. Follow-up on adoption counseling for children of possible racial admixture. M. S. thesis, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis.
REED, S. C. 1955. Counseling in Medical Genetics, Chap. 20. W. B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia.
SHELDON C. REED
and ESTHER B. NORDLIE Dight Institute for Human Genetics University of Minnesota, Minneapolis

