Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Types of problems presented to genetic counselors
F. Clarke Fraser M.D.
To cite this article: F. Clarke Fraser M.D. (1958) Types of problems presented to genetic counselors, Eugenics Quarterly, 5:1, 46-48, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1958.9987349 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1958.9987349
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

46 Eugenics Quarterly

CHAIRMAN GLASS: Our next speaker, Dr. Clarke Fraser of McGill University, is equally well known to us for his work on human genetics and his work on mice. I don't know whether the mice led him to the men, or the

men led him to the mice, but of mice and men, anyway, his career has been made. He's going to talk about "The Types of Problems of Heredity Counselors."

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

TYPES OF PROBLEMS PRESENTED TO GENETIC COUNSELORS
F. CLARKE FRASER, M.D.
Department of Genetics McGill University
and Montreal Children's Hospital

LY DISCUSSION WILL BE LIMITED tO w h a t
kinds of questions genetic counselors are required to answer, how many cases they may expect to deal with, and where the questions come from. In order to get some information to talk about, I sent a rather rough-and-ready questionnaire to some of my counseling friends, who have been very generous in their response, and whom I would like to thank for their cooperation. The object was simply to get some impressions of the sort of case-load carried by counseling centers, and no claims to statistical validity are made. The questions dealt with the number of cases referred per month, what proportion were referred from hospital wards, practitioners, or came directly, what categories of questions were asked, and the five most frequent conditions encountered.
The first question dealt with the number of cases per month referred for genetic counseling. The answers would depend somewhat on the method of classification; some correspondents might include referrals for zygosity diagnosis in twins, for instance, and others might not. The answers ranged from 1 to 40 referrals per month. This volume might be expected to rise somewhat as the benefits of genetic counseling become more widely appreciated. However, it seems unlikely that counseling cen-

ters will ever become self-supporting on the basis of income from fees. (This is one of the problems of genetic counselors.) No information concerning fees was gathered by the questionnaire, but it seems from personal conversation that fees are not usually charged, at present.
The sources of referrals would be expected to vary widely according to the organization of the particular center, and so they did. Counselors associated with medical centers received anywhere from 20 to 80 per cent of their referrals from the hospital wards. The proportion of cases referred from physicians varied from 10 to 80 per cent, and the proportion that came directly to the counselor varied from 0 to 90 per cent. Some centers actively discourage the direct approach, and one center insists that referrals shall be through a practitioner or hospital. Our department does not employ such a hard-and-fast rule, but we believe that in genetic counseling, as with any medical specialty, the practice of referring cases through medical sources should be encouraged. For one thing, it is easier to get reliable medical information about cases referred in this way, and, for another, the counselor is given added prestige in the eyes of the patient by this approach. Additional sources of referrals are institutions and agencies, but referrals from

47

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

these sources appear to be in the minority. Several centers, including ours, try to avoid giving advice by mail, although sometimes the person requesting information is so remotely situated that there seems to be no alternative. I think several of you have had experience recently with a request from New Zealand for advice as to a contemplated cousin marriage. This person apparently also conducted a survey of genetic counselors--it would be interesting to see how much variety there was in the replies.
The questions asked of the counselor could be grouped in a number of categories. The most frequent type of question seems to deal with whether parents should have a baby, the problem arising either because they had already had a child with some disease of presumed or actual familial tendency, or because some such disease was present in one of the parents themselves or in some more distant relative. The next most frequent type of question deals with the desirability of a contemplated marriage, either because of consanguinity or some genetic disease in one of the families involved. Some cases are referred for an opinion as to the genetic suitability of an adoption procedure, some for an interpretation of the cause of a child's illness or defect (apart from eugenic considerations), some for an opinion as to the chances of a sibling or other relative of an affected person becoming affected in the future, and a few for other reasons such as paternity disputes, zygosity diagnosis in twins, dermatoglyphic diagnosis of Mongolism, and diagnosis of rare, obscure diseases. We have had, as yet, no experience with artificial insemination, although the procedure has been discussed in a few cases, and we have, as yet, had no requests for DNA transformations, although we are expecting one any day.

We did have quite a number of requests to diagnose sex before birth after the Richardson saliva test became known, and I might mention, incidentally, that although one could make the diagnosis with better than 90 per cent accuracy, a few cases that were wrong were so upsetting to the parents that they far outweighed the minor benefits of the ones that were right, and we no longer provide this service.
The specific conditions involved were of such great variety that there is little point in discussing them in detail. "Congenital malformation" was the group most frequently mentioned in the questionnaire. Others that appeared several times were neuropsychiatrie conditions, consanguinity, Negro-white skin color, Mongolism and Rh trouble. The type of condition referred would be expected to depend somewhat on the interests and situation of the counselor. Dr. Kallmann would no doubt find a high proportion of his referrals were neuropsychiatrie problems, and Dr. Walker almost certainly gets a lot of Mongoloid imbeciles referred to her. Hemorrhagic diatheses form a large portion of the cases referred to Dr. Herndon, because of his hematological colleagues' interest in clotting mechanisms. Unlike some centers, we are hardly ever bothered with skin color problems, and the hematologist handles cases of Rh disease and disputed paternity. Most of the counselors questioned reported a "miscellaneous" category including a wide variety of rare but relatively clear-cut diseases, too numerous to mention here, and it would seem probable that a large part of counseling practice deals with cases of this sort.
I shall be interested to hear how well, or badly, these rough impressions of the nature of a counselor's practice correspond with those of other members of this group.

48 Eugenics Quarterly

CHAIRMAN GLASS: I'm certainly glad that this question of the support--the financial support--of heredity counseling and the question of fees is coming up. I hope that it will be discussed more fully.
I just want to say at the moment that, during the past year and a half, I would have had to

employ an extra secretary to keep up with the mail inquiries about the genetic hazards of various kinds of radiation which have piled up on my desk. And, in this regard, I also feel it's a nice little courtesy when the author encloses a self-addressed envelope with a threecent stamp on it, but I can't help feeling a little hurt when he encloses a dollar.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

CHAIRMAN GLASS: Our next paper is "Types of Advice Given by Heredity Counselors," to be given by Dr. Franz J. Kallmann. Dr. Kallmann is one who certainly needs no introduction to any audience like this. Let me just say that, in

my own opinion, one of the reasons -- and not the least of the reasons -- for the decline of human genetics in Germany and Austria during the 30's and 40's was brought about by Dr. Kallmann's transfer to this country.

TYPES OF ADVICE GIVEN BY HEREDITY COUNSELORS

FRANZ J. KALLMANN, M.D.
Department of Medical Genetics New York State Psychiatric Institute
Columbia University

l-AVING HAD THE PRIVILEGE OF KNOWING
the program chairman for many years, I am sure that his decision to save the least conformable topic of this interesting symposium for the very last, like fireworks, was an act of prudence rather than a reflection of hidden sentiments. He understands that with the types of advice given in heredity clinics depending primarily on the functional character of the clinic, the nature of the problems presented, and the professional qualifications of the counselors available, there can be no uniformity in this area. It is also clear that, while the unfolding of some inevitable differences of opinion may be both sparkling and noisy, the general effect of such fireworks is harmless and good fun.
In other words, even if I do not always see eye to eye with every member of this panel on some psychiatric issues, we are

still good friends dedicated to a common cause. More specifically, we are all agreed that heredity counseling is an important and rather exacting task which requires a high degree of proficiency and must be learned. In the last analysis, the type of advice given can never be better than the level of professional competence of the counselor who is giving it. It is therefore doubly regrettable, as has been stressed by Herndon (3) and others (6,8,14), that although counseling in medical genetics is part of a preventive public health scheme, our training programs have yet to prepare future heredity counselors for activity in this vital sector of public health work.
Under these circumstances, the simplest way of defining the kind of advice given by a heredity counselor would be to paraphrase Calvin Coolidge's account of a sermon on sin. Just as Coolidge's preacher

