Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Marriage and family research a critical evaluation
Reuben Hill
To cite this article: Reuben Hill (1954) Marriage and family research a critical evaluation, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:1, 58-63, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987164 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987164
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

Family Life Division

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

MARRIAGE AND FAMILY RESEARCH A Critical Evaluation
REUBEN HILL
Department of Sociology and Anthropology University of North Carolina

JA-ESEARCH tends to keep marriage and family educators modest in the assertions they make in their teaching and counseling. One of its major functions is to verify or refute such assertions, indicating for what populations they are true and under what conditions. "Howdo we know" should be asked whenever we are encouraged to advance our ideas as truth.
Of the twenty studies of marital happiness summarized by Clifford Kirkpatrick in "What Does Science Say About Happiness in Marriage," 152different factors were found to be significant in at least one study, but the agreement among these twenty studies was very small on any one of these factors. One factor--happiness of husband's parents' marriage--was supported by five studies; two--length of acquaintance and duration of engagement--were supported by four studies. More recent research, using tests of marital adjustment developed by Ernest Burgess and his associates, show more agreement in this respect, although this research hasbeen carried out on Southern Negro couples, Swedish couples, and Chinese. Some research on more mature families suggests that marriage adjustment reflects different factors later in the family cycle and that the marriage texts are teaching what makes for happiness in the first few years of marriage rather than for the entire family life cycle.
Research, therefore, is useful to test the
lAbstracted from a speech given at Columbus, Ohio, April 1953 at the 16th Annual Groves Conference on Marriage, and the Family

common-sense generalities which pass for
fact only because marriage experts have
written them up in books. Much of what
we think is vigorously denied by students
taking another approach.
Research also serves to deal with some
of the pressing problems raised by the pub-
lic, but few family sociologists enjoy attack-
ing these problems. Relatively few re-
searchers have directed their energies to
get answers to these highly personal ques-
tions; Judson Landis, Jessie Bernard, Har-
old Christensen, and Winston Ehrmann are
among the exceptions. For example, the
public asks questions such as these:
1. How to meet and marry? 2. How to marry happily; howto remain
happy--can second marriages be happy? 3. Howto plan a family; howmany children in an ideal family--Does pregnancy improve marriage? 4. What can families do together? 5. How to understand children and be good for them.
Of much more appeal to research has
been a third task, that of filling in the gaps
of family theory dealing with the following:
1. Thesocial psychology of marriage and family interaction
2. The interrelations of family structure and personality growth
3. The interrelations of the family and other social structures
4. Theinterrelations of types of marriage and family forms and their success in meeting the needs in family living.
Such research leads us to existing new
knowledge about the family as a small

58

59

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

group and to new insights as we go from the known to the unknown. And it hints at a common science of human relations, as we attempt to generalize findings from the family as a small group to groups other than the family.
Trends in Research The first family research dealt discreetly
and expediently with far-away families because to have studied families at home would have been hazardous, a violation of the sanctity of the home. In our own day the pioneers of family research have seen this area of investigation shift from being suspect to becoming respectable.
Coincident with the shift to respectability --for it takes less courage to do research in marriage and the family today--we find fewer of the prophetic deviant personalities in the field and more pedantics. Two new arrivals, Kolb and Foote, have what Becker would call "charisma," the desire and capacity to act as image breakers; most of the other researchers are image worshipers.
Sheer numbers of research projects in the family field have increased 700 per cent from 1942 to 1950, but the number has dropped almost 50 per cent since then. The focus of marriage and family research has made striking shifts since the last decades of the last century from large-scale comparative analyses of great sweep like Westermarck's study of the history of marriage forms and similar studies of ancient family customs to present-day microscopic explorations of the internal workings of families in our home neighborhoods.
The shift from the study of matrimonial institutions to the families in which people live has been gradual over the past twenty years. Ernest Burgess is credited with launching the movement to consider families as living associations in the late twenties, but its development in the form of concrete research projects has had to wait upon the willingness of individual families to be studied, the emancipation of scientists from blinders imposed by our mores, and the

formulation of research methods for collecting, analyzing, and interpreting the new family data. The most recent survey of the National Council on Family Relations shows only 4/104 projects concerned with the institutional aspects of the family. The balance concentrated upon the effects of family relationships on personality development, critical analyses of courtship, marriage and family practices, and the effectiveness of teaching programs in preparation for marriage and parenthood. The shift is quite complete.
Another trend in family research is the movement of national leadership to bring about coordination of research efforts; most of our family research has been random, scattered and subject to faddish imitation. The National Council on Family Relations an 1945 invited research workers dealing with the effects of the war on marriage and family relations to share their research plans and findings with one another, and a division of labor was agreed upon. In 1950 the National Council in cooperation with the Committee on Human Development of the University of Chicago carried out a multi-disciplinary workshop on marriage and family research to train researchers from eleven different disciplines in a common language, stressing family development and structure-function approaches to family study. The Family Research Committee of the Social Science Research Council has financed an intensive critique of family research and charted directions for future research to follow; its findings will be published soon.
Finally I think we should recognize that marriage and family research is beginning to show evidences of cumulative generalizations and theory, that it is becoming accretive. By that I mean the specifying in each study of the hypotheses from previous studies that are being tested. As illustrative a few may be cited.
1. Strauss, Winch and Mangus in their courtship and mate-selection studies have tested and only partially con-

Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

firmed the ideal-mate and parentalimage hypotheses of Freudian family sociology. 2. Kirkpatrick and Caplow have tested and do not confirm Waller's theory that breaking of a courtship relationship is traumatic, like a divorce, for the party who cares more. 3. Burgess and Wallin have tested hypotheses advanced in the classic study by Burgess and Cottrell--that the same factors make for success in engagement that makes for success in marriage.
Similar in type is the trend to test findings from one region of the country and to test generalizations made for one social class in other regions and social-class groupings. Ruth Cavan's new text, "The American Family," has taken full advantage of this research to give us at long last a picture of the American family which specifies the variations in family patterns, practices, and objectives by the major regions, social classes, and different ethnic configurations in the United States.
Contemporary Emphases
Family sociologists are currently doing almost all the research reported on mate selection, courtship, marriage, institutional aids, and on the family as a social institution, if our sources are at all exhaustive. They are also appreciably more concerned with the operations of the family as a smallgroup association. The research reported as mate selection and many of the marriage research studies are predominantly validating in character, verifying theories of propinquity, of endogamy-exogamy, and of complementary needs as they operate in mate selection. There are obvious gaps and discontinuities observable in the research in progress in any given year which may be remedied in subsequent years. Nevertheless, I am tempted to point to the apparent discontinuing of significant lines of research which have been carried on for years and now seem to have slowed down, at least temporarily:
Studies of the societal contexts of the

family Historical development of family forms Cross-cutural analysis of family patterns Family-expenditure patterns and family
values Impact of technology and social change
on family functions Sex and the family Divorce and postdivorce adjustments Family adjustments to bereavement The quick overview of research under way and the trends cited are heartening, but critics have rightly expressed impatience with our modest results to date.
Cottrell and Foote in their recent mono-
graph, "New Directions of Research on the
American Family," come closer to our ma-
jor deficiencies than any other critics I have
read. They make these criticisms:
1. Our research is scattered; several hundred articles are printed about some problems, almost none about others.
2. Our research is often amateurish, reflecting its source in masters' and doctors' theses, too often done by oneshot researchers, limited in scope and rarely followed up.
3. Most research is limited to sheer description; fact finding prevails over theoretical speculation, formulation of hypotheses, and the design of decisive experiments. The principles derived from the observations are of a very low level of generality, the analyses not very deep or discriminating. Even the concepts employed are rudimentary and isolated, rather than bearing systematic, deductive relations to each other. The development of family studies marks a history of styles in concepts rather than cumulative progression of factual ' knowledge, theory, and method.
4. Studies suffer from the penchant that family researchers have developed of viewing families as if they were "spectators" in a specious attempt to be objective; this gives a flat two-dimensional quality to much of the scientific writing which makes it dull by comparison with lay writing, uninteresting because the researcher is uninterested. The "spectator for sake of objectivity" role, moreover, has created a gulf between the family researcher and the social worker.
5. The spectator role accounts for the fact

61

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

that most research stops short of application, putting emphasis upon the pursuit of understanding for its own sake, and being satisfied with plausible ex-post facto explanations and imputations of findings. The practical result is that extensive tissues of speculation survive indefinitely amid rival systems of equal plausibility.
6. Family research has been limited for a number of years by its own value framework. Kolb has already pointed out in two articles that we have a value framework which emphasizes family stability as the major end of family processes. To be in equilibrium, or in adjustment, is the end in view. Research .has been directed at the factors disturbing equilibrium and at the attributes which make restoration of equilibrium less likely which if removed or changed would enable the marriage or family to return to equilibrium, as if that were normal functioning. The results are to make patterns of conventional appeasement and harmony at any cost appear desirable for success in marriage. In this instance research has performed a disservice both for counseling and education.
Cottrell and Foote have used harsh words
in referring to family research as scattered,
random, meager, dealing with trivial prob-
lems, amateurish, dull and speciously neu-
tral. But these criticisms are little more
than dramatically worded readings from
yardsticks which could be used to assess the
adequacy of research in any field. The
question we must ask is this: Are we more
competent in these respects than we were
twenty years ago, ten years ago, or last year?
In sheer numbers of projects reported we
have dropped in family sociology since 1949
from second to fourth place among the
fields of sociology. Industrial sociology and
population studies have surpassed us in
attracting the energies of sociological schol-
ars. In most of the other areas we could
make a case for continued improvement in
our competence, if not from year to year
at least from decade to decade. We have
labored under conditions unfavorable to

research and have struggled with obstacles met by few other disciplines.
What has slowed up our progress in family research? First, families have resisted being studied. We have had to wait to share the sanctity of the home; the family is a closed system. However, the fact that each family is a closed system means the data collected will be more likely to have integrity and reliability than data collected from more adventitious associations. Family research has had to wait upon the willingness of individual families to be studied and the motivation and training of scientists to study them. Once this has happened, rich ores have been uncovered.
More frustrating has been the lack of methodological tools to collect, analyze, and interpret data obtained from families. Most rewarding have been the various forms of case study, the use of family histories, diaries, autobiographies, family budgets, and in recent years the discerning and focused interview techniques. These devices arc best designed for collecting such data, but we are handicapped when it comes to analyzing and summarizing these data. Statistical methods have also been applied by students collecting census-type data. The statistical data lend themselves well to analysis but do not too often add materially to our insights; they deal largely with surface phenomena and are most useful in providing measures of the reliability of any finding. Prospects for speeding up progress in family research are dim unless the strengths of the case study and statistical methods are combined and their weaknesses ironed out cooperatively. The trends toward multidisciplinary research hint that this may be in the offing.
Two obstacles to progress in family research have been linked together: prima donnas and the discipleship developing around them. Our system of graduate study, personal by-lines in publication, promotion based on individual publication-- all these have rewarded the solitary worker.

62 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Several competing approaches for studying

work of research home economists is

the family have grown up within sociology,

more closely allied to farm manage-

social anthropology, psychology, and home economics, which provide relatively incompatible systems for viewing the family. Generalizations made by one approach cannot

ment than family operation; it is really household management. Consequently it is hard to add their findings to any other propositions about the American family. However, no disci-

easily be added to generalizations made by

pline is going family-centered more

other competing systems.

rapidly today than home economics;

My associates at Iowa State College and the University of North Carolina have identified a number of systems competing for adherents among research workers to-

there have been tremendous gains in the last ten years. 5. The learning-theory-developmental approach is the dominant system among the projects reported by non-

day: sociologists. Among family sociologists

1. Zimmerman of Harvard asserts his in-

the interactional-role analysis ap-

stitutional and historical approach is

proach most frequently characterizes

the only way to study true family so-

the conceptual system used for defin-

ciology.

ing and ordering research design.

2. The interactionists are locked in bat- With so many competing approaches to

tle with the structure-function advo- the study of the family, is it any wonder our

cates to see who will win the younger family researchers; both are able to focus upon the family as a small group successfully, whereas the Zimmerman approach has too broad a sweep to catch the conjugal family unit.

findings don't add up to any consistent body of theory?
Finally, we are lagging in family research because there are almost no full-time research workers. Precious few men have un-

3. The learning theory-developmental dertaken to play the role of critics and syn-

approach makes the personality of the growing child the focus and perceives the family as the context of early learning, of socialization, guidance, and value orientation. The family is

thesizers: Burgess, Cottrell, the Mowrers, Nimkoff, Kirkpatrick. Only four to my knowledge have undertaken to question the value premises underlying our research:

the setting, not the focus of study, and Foote, Kolb, Marsh, and Humphrey, the

interpersonal relationships between father and child, sibling and sibling,

so-called axiological analysts.

and between husband and wife are slighted if treated at all. The family for these students appears to consist

Prospects for Future Research I find it difficult to forecast the future in

of a mother and a child without father research. I hope we are going to change

or siblings.

rapidly enough so that my forecasts will be

4. The traditional home economists have applied the technology of management which deals with resources of time, money, and energy but until recently have skirted family values and

understatements. One direction will be the study of the family as a decision-making and planning association. The methods developed by Bales of interaction-process anal-

family relationships in their research. ysis will be peculiarly helpful in capturing

Out of over a hundred experiment- the processes of problem perception, break-

station bulletins by home economists and rural sociologists supposedly studying family living, I found almost

ing the problem down into its components, suggesting actions required, and allocating

no mention of children, husband-wife responsibilities for carrying out the actions.

concerns, or family activities as a family. The studies concentrated on expenditures and levels of living, facilities, standards of performance, use of time, nutritional standards, housing,

The method of experimental participation described by Foote shows how engaged couples can be involved in identifying their objectives, getting together on a joint mari-

health, etc. The conceptual frame- tal career, and increasing their ability to

63

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

intercommunicate. Much of the work on small groups, planning councils, discussion groups, industrial work groups, combat teams, etc., provides both methods and concepts which can be applied fruitfully to marriage and family groups as action groups.
A second direction will be the study of the family as it interacts with other associations in our society. The methods for studying the impact of the occupational sphere on the family sphere developed at Harvard beg application in other family and society points of contact: the family--and the legal system, and the religious systems, and the property system, and government, and the class system, and the educational systems, and the system of helping professions such as medicine, social work.
A third direction will be the study of the family as an operating unit in fertility planning and control, in medical care and health education, and in the prevention and treatment of emotional disabilities. This focus of study will profitably follow developments in the first two directions just mentioned. Agencies are discovering that many fronts do not yield results when working directly with children, that it is necessary to work simultaneously through the family as an active planning and controlling unit in order that programs outside the family will prove fruitful. To work through the family, we need some picture of the actions and the action potentials of this singular group association. Herein lies the rationale for this direction of study.
As I close, I want to call attention to a multi-disciplinary approach to family study which emerged from the planning for the first White House Conference on Family Life. Family development as a multidisciplinary framework has borrowed the concept of stages of the family-life cycle from the rural sociologists, the concept of development needs and tasks from the child psychologists and human-development specialists, and has taken from the family sociologist and social theorist the concepts of age

and sex roles, plurality patterns, functional
prerequisites, and the family as an arena
of interacting personalities. All these con-
cepts have been fused fruitfully to produce
a frame of reference for studying the in-
ternal growth and development of families
from formation to dissolution as follows:
The family may be viewed as an arena of interacting personalities each striving to obtain the satisfaction of his basic desires. Parents who themselves have urgent needs make most of the adjustments in the building of complementary roles between themselves and their children. If we hold the entire family in focus in dealing with this drama, we see that many of the normal tangles of members during the family's life cycle are due to fundamental incompatibilities of the diverse developmental strivings of siblings and parents at critical points of growth. There can be identified, using these concepts, seven well-defined stages of the familylife cycle each with its own peculiar sources of conflict and solidarity. . . . Each of these stages may be seen in three dimensions of increasing complexity: (1) the changing developmental tasks and role expectations of the children; (2) the changing developmental tasks and role expectations of the parents, both mother and father, in their capacities as providers, homemakers, spouses, and persons; (3) the family developmental tasks of the family as a family which may be obtained by integrating the functional prerequisites of survival and growth (provided by structure-functional theory of social systems) and implications for the family of the personal development patterns of children and parents (derived from developmental task theory).
As this approach to family study is ren-
dered researchable by more rigorous defini-
tion of concepts and by methods of data
collection which can provide analyzable
data, the dynamics of family development
may be tested over a family's life span with
living families. The outcome of that re-
search may some day produce a companion
volume to Dr. Benjamin Spock's pocket
book, "Baby and Child Care." It may well
be called "Your Family from Wedding Day
to Dissolution Day."

