Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Evolution and the phenomenon of man
Helen Hammons
To cite this article: Helen Hammons (1960) Evolution and the phenomenon of man, Eugenics Quarterly, 7:2, 86-95, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1960.9987435 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1960.9987435
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

EVOLUTION AND THE PHENOMENON OF MAN

HELEN HAMMONS

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

INVOLUTION DEMANDS OMEGA-GOD. Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, French Jesuit, biologist and paleontologist, in his posthumously published work, "The Phenomenon of Man," which has been called one of the publishing events of the century, finds God within the scientific evidence for evolution.* He does not fit evolution into a theological framework or otherwise act as an apologist for the supernatural.
With the celebration of the Darwin Centennial still reverberating in the world of science, the publication in English of an exposition like this, whose whole interest is to see scientifically, should have impact upon the metaphysical assumptions of much of the thinking about evolution today. More and more, scientists are proclaiming the necessity of directing man's evolution, and eugenists are of this group. The fact that man knows he evolves entails the possibility that he can influence his own biological destiny, many scientists believe. The world of evolution is presented again and again as a world in which man must rely upon himself and realize he is not the darling of the gods but only another aspect of nature. (1) We are told that it is up to us to supply the program which nature has failed to provide. Other scientists find "lofty scientific morality" by the round-about way of psychoanalysis. (2)
*Harper & Brothers, New York, 1959, 318 pp., $5.00.

Père Teilhard finds direction, program, "scientific morality"--all these-- in the very stuff of the universe, and he sees man's task as one of cooperation with what is already part of rerum natura. He refuses to dichotomize evolution and the supernatural. For him it is not sub specie aeternititis or sub specie evolutionis. Both form an unimpeachable whole. Père Teilhard lives in the world Darwin led us to and cannot be said to cling to a belief in Santa Claus. (1) He sees one of the faces of the universe as red in tooth and claw, but he also finds direction in the groping of the evolutionary process. Science and even mankind are marking time at this moment, he believes, because we are reluctant to recognize that evolution has a precise orientation and privileged axis. Leaving aside all anthropocentrism and anthropomorphism, we can see a direction and line of progress for life so well marked, that their reality will universally be admitted by the science of tomorrow, asserts this Jesuit scientist.
Père Teilhard asks us not to expect a final explanation of things or a metaphysical system. What he seeks to depict is not the past in itself but rather as it must appear to an observer standing on the advanced peak where evolution has placed us. It is a safe and modest method, he surmises, and yet suffices to bring surprising visions of the future.
If "The Phenomenon of Man" is to be understood properly, the author insists it must be read not as a work on

86

87

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

metaphysics, still less as a sort of theo-
logical essay, but purely and simply as
a scientific treatise. The following sum-
mary, then, of this book is presented
only as the attempt of a scientist to see
and to show what happens to man.f
THE STUFF OF THE UNIVERSE
The more we split and pulverize mat-
ter artificially, the more insistently it
proclaims its f u n d a m e n t a l unity.
Throughout each new phase of anthro-
progenesis we are faced by the unimagi-
nable reality of collective bonds. It is
sufficient in the beginning to include
them all under the empirical name
given by science to their common prin-
ciple: energy. In its physical, concrete
reality the stuff of the universe cannot
divide itself. The cosmos in which man
finds himself caught up in is a system--
a totum, a quantum; there is an unim-
peachable wholeness of its whole. And
the more deeply we penetrate into mat-
ter the more we are confounded by the
interdependence of its parts. All bodies
Père Teilhard develops his own arrestingly original terminology, some of which is obscure without explanation. Julian Huxley in his introduction to the book offers the following definitions of some of the distinctive terms used. Complexification: includes genesis of increasingly elaborate organization during cosmogenesis as manifested in the passage from subatomic units all the way up to cells, then to man and civilized societies; also an all-pervading tendency involving the universe in all its parts in an enroulement organique sur soi-même--world stuff as rolled up or folded in upon itself, process being accompanied by increase of energetic tension in the resultant corpuscular organizations, a convergent integration. Convergence: used to denote tendency of mankind during its evolution to superpose centripetal on centrifugal trends, so as to prevent centrifugal differentiation from leading to fragmentation and eventually to incorporate the results of differentiation in an organized and unified pattern. Hominisation: process by which original proto-human stock became and is becoming more truly human. Noogenesis: gradual evolution of mind. Noosphere: sphere of mind as opposed to biosphere or sphere of life, acting as a transforming agency promoting hominisation.

owe their origin to arrangements of a single initial corpuscular type. Matter has obeyed from the beginning that great law of biology, the law of complexification.
THE WITHIN OF THINGS
Père Teilhard believes that on the scientific plane the quarrel between materialists and upholders of a spiritual interpretation of the universe comes from a lack of common ground. Objects are thought of as consisting only of external actions in impermanent relationships or, on the other hand, as being shut in on themselves in their "immanent" working. The two points of view need to be united to take into account the internal as well as the external aspect of things. Things have their Within, their reserve. In the eyes of the physicist nothing exists legitimately except the Without of things. The apparent restriction of the phenomenon of consciousness to higher forms of life has given science an excuse to eliminate it from models of the universe. But Père Teilhard finds a conscious inner face that everywhere duplicates the material external face which alone is commonlyconsidered by science. To avoid an antiscientific dualism, he describes all energy as physical in nature but divided into two distinct components: a tangential energy linking the element ivith all others of the same order as itself; a radial energy which draws it toward even greater complexity and centricity--in other words, forward.
THE ADVENT OF LIFE
In a sense we can no more fix an absolute zero in time for the advent of life than for any other experimental reality. Everything has existed from the very first, but to realize that each new being

88 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

must have a cosmic embryogenesis in no way invalidates the reality of its historic birth. The best we can say is that life begins with the cell, but the cell cannot be understood unless we situate it on an evolutionary line between a past and a future; it is both the outcome of long preparation and yet profoundly original. The granule of matter is gradually converted into the granule of life. Biochemistry is beginning to establish the reality of molecular aggregates which appear to reduce to measurable proportions the gaping void hitherto supposed to exist between protoplasm and mineral life. What we have then in the cell is really the stuff of the universe reappearing once again with all its characteristics. The first cells must have been formed in a liquid environment out of mega-molecules. It is natural then, that life as it just emerges from matter should be "dripping with molecularity."
Naturalists are more and more convinced that the genesis of life on earth belongs to the category of absolutely unique events that once happened are never repeated. Thus the cellular revolution would be seen as a critical singular point, an unparalleled moment on the curve of telluric evolution; the point of germination. Protoplasm was formed once and only once on earth, thus the deep organic likeness which stamps all living creatures from bacteria to mankind.
THE EXPANSION OF LIFE
Sooner or later each cell divides. The more the phenomenon of cellular division spreads, the more it gains in virulence. Once fission has started, nothing from within can arrest its devouring and creating conflagration. The cell multiplies without crumbling. We find coming into play the endless permutations

and combinations of character so dear to modern geneticists. Left alone life would have spread and varied, but always on the same level, like an airplane which can taxi but not take off. Here the phenomenon of additivity intervenes and acts as a vertical component. The rejuvenations made possible by each reproduction achieve something more than mere restitution. They add one to the other, and their sum increases in a predetermined direction. Dispositions are accentuated; organs are adjusted or supplemented. We then get diversification, the apparition of the line as a natural unit distinct from the individual. This law of controlled complication, orthogenesis, Père Teilhard calls the dynamic and only complete form of heredity-- the mature stage of the process in which we get first the micro-molecule, then the mega-molecule, and finally the first cells.
Life-fights for elbow room; there is profusion born of unlimited multiplication with a good deal of biological efficiency despite waste. By reckless selfreproduction life takes its precaution against mishap. Here we find the technique of "groping," which combines the blind fantasy of large numbers with precise orientation of a specific target. Groping is seen as directed chance rather than mere chance: pervading everything so as to try everything and trying everything so as to find everything.
As life expands, it splits spontaneously into large units; it ramifies. A dispersion of simple type occurs precisely where chance would make us fear a complicated tangle. The species becomes individualized. The phylum has been born, what Père Teilhard calls the living "bundle," the line of lines. The development of a phylum is strangely parallel to successive stages of man-made invention. Tryout follows tryout; then

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

at last perfection comes within sight. The newly born group spreads and at the same time consolidates. The final picture presented by a phylum in full bloom is that of a verticil of consolidated forms. Through the technique of groping, it fans out. It enters on mutation. Through the new opening another pulsation of life surges, soon to divide again, and then a new phylum appears; so the process continues.
CONSCIOUSNESS
Père Teilhard finds a direction and line of progress in the phenomenon of consciousness. Among the infinite modalities in which the complication of life is dispersed, the differentiation of nervous tissue stands out as a significant transformation; it provides a direction and by its consequences proves that evolution has a direction. The natural history of living creatures on the exterior amounts to the gradual establishment of a vast nervous system; on the interior it corresponds to the installation of a psychic state on the very dimensions of the earth. On the surface we find nerve fibers and ganglions; deep down, consciousness.
Delving into the Within, we find the phenomenon of a rise of consciousness at the heart of life, explaining its progression. Biologists persist in looking for the principle of vital developments in external stimuli or in statistics. But the impetus of the world, glimpsed in the great drive of consciousness, can only have its ultimate source in some principle which alone could explain its irreversible advance toward higher psychisms. In long-term modifications of the phylum then, we are forced to abandon the explanation of every case simply as survival of the fittest or as a mechanical adaptation to environment and use. We

89
are confronted with an effect not of external forces but of psychology. The number of bones, shape of teeth, ornamentation of the integument: these visible characters merely form the outward garment round something deeper which supports it. To write the true natural history of the world, we need to be able to follow it from within. Right at its base the living world is constituted by consciousness clothed in flesh and bone.
The increasing intricacy of forms and organs demonstrates the irreversible augmentation of brain--and therefore consciousness--not only in quantity but quality. Thus we are forced to realize that an event of another order, a metamorphosis, was inevitably awaited to wind up this long period of synthesis in the course of geological time. And this took place in the mammalian layer. Evolution went straight to work on the brain of the primates. In one wellmarked region at the heart of the mammals where the most powerful brains are found, they became red-hot. A flame burst forth at a strictly localized point.
Thought is born!
REFLECTION
From a purely positivist point of view man is the most mysterious and disconcerting of all the objects met with by science. As science is able to reconstruct him, he is an animal little separable anatomically from the anthropoids. Morphologically the leap to man was extremely slight; yet it was the concomitant of an incredible commotion among the spheres of life. There is evidence that science neglects an essential factor or rather an entire dimension of the universe. Again it is necessary to consider the Within as well as the Without of things. Biologists do not agree if there is a direction of evolution, nor do psy-

90 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

chologists agree whether human psychism differs specifically--by "nature"--from that of man's predecessors. To settle the question of man's superiority over animals, we must make straight for the central phenomenon: reflection.
The animal knows, but it cannot know that it knows. Because we are reflective, we are not only different but quite other. Here in the accession to the power of reflection, the whole curve of biogenesis reappears summed up and clarified. We are disturbed to notice how little anthropos differs anatomically from other anthropoids. But is not this resemblance exactly what had to be?
By the end of the Tertiary era the psychical temperature of the cellular world had been rising for more than 500 million years. The anthropoid was brought to the boiling point mentally. By a tiny tangential increase, the radial was turned back upon itself, and, so to speak, took an infinite leap fonvard. Outwardly almost nothing in the organs had changed, but in depth a great revolution has taken place. Consciousness was now leaping and boiling in a space of supersensory relationships and representations.
And all this happened for the first time!
HOMINISATION
Man only progresses by slowly elaborating from age to age the essence and totality of a universe deposited within him. To this grand process of sublimation it is fitting to apply the word hominisation: that individual and instantaneous leap from instinct to thought, the progressive phyletic spiritualization of all the forces contained in the animal world. With hominisation we have the beginning of a new age--the era of noogenesis, the development of all the stages

of the mind. The earth gets a new skin, or better still finds its soul. There is a new layer, the noosphere, the thinking layer which has spread over and above the world of plants and animals.
Man came silently into the world! The human species emerged phyletically like any other, coming from the big primates in the fan of the anthropoids. Each time a new living form rises, it is always complete and already legion. Thus in the eyes of science first man is, and only can be a crowd. He was born a direct lineal descendant from a total effort of life. At the end of the Quarternary era man is modern in every way. In the Neolithic age civilization was born and a cluster of factors favored the pace of hominisation. The noosphere there and then began to close in upon itself and to enrich the earth.
MODERN CHANGE OF NOOSPHERE
Two centuries ago our civilization was based on the soil and its partition. But a critical change of noosphere has taken place since then, and to us in our brief span of life falls the honor of coinciding with it. Life is taking a decisive step in us and in our environment. In the last century and a half the most prodigious event, perhaps, ever recorded by history has been taking place in our minds: the definitive access of consciousness to a scale of new dimensions, and the birth of an entirely renewed universe without any change of line or feature by the simple transformation of its intimate substance.
What makes and classifies a modern man is his seeing in terms, not of space and time alone, but of duration, or biological space-time; and, above all, having become incapable of seeing anything otherwise--anything--not even himself. Evolution is now, whether we like it or

91

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

not, gaining the psychic zones of the world and transferring to the spiritual constructions of life not only the cosmic stuff but also the cosmic "primacy" hitherto reserved by science to the tangled whirlwind of the ancient "ether." The consciousness of each of us is evolution looking at itself. Man is not the center of consciousness as once thought but something much more wonderful: the arrow pointing to the final unification of the world in terms of life.
But this vision only acquires its full value through the simultaneous illumination within ourselves of the laws and conditions of heredity. We do not yet know how characters are formed, accumulated, and transmitted in the secret recesses of the germ cells. Biology inclines to make the living being the passive and powerless witness of the transformation he undergoes. In our innermost being we all feel the weight of obscure powers--good or bad--a sort of definite and unalterable quantum handed down once and for all from the past. But with no less clarity we see that the further advance of the vital wave depends on how industriously we use these powers.
Transplanted by man into the thinking layer of the earth, heredity without ceasing to be germinal (or chromosomatic) in the individual finds itself, by its very life center, settled in a reflecting organism, collective and permanent, in which phylogenesis merges with ontogenesis. From the chain of cells it passes into the circumterrestrial layers of the noosphere. Passive as it may have been before reflection, heredity now springs to life supremely active in its noospheric form, that is to say, by becoming hominised. It is not enough to say that evolution, by becoming conscious of itself in the depths of ourselves, only needs to

look at itself to perceive itself. It also becomes free to dispose of itself; it can give or refuse itself. Not only do we read in our slightest acts the secret of its proceedings, but, for an elementary part, we hold it in our hands, responsible for its past to its future.
The whole psychology of modern disquiet is linked with the sudden confrontation with space-time. The malady of "space-time" manifests itself by a feeling of futility, of being crushed by the enormities of the cosmos. Enormity of space is the most tangible and frightening aspect. We need the perception of an evolution animating these dimensions of multitude and immensity. Time and space become humanised as soon as a definite movement appears which gives them a physiognomy. Half our present uneasiness would turn into happiness if we could accept the facts and place our modern cosmogonies within a noogenesis. What makes our world specifically modern is our discovery in it and around it of evolution. What disconcerts our modern world at its very roots is not being sure of an outcome--a suitable outcome--to that evolution.
MEGA-SYNTHESIS
The spring and secret of hominisation is found in the coalescence of elements and the coalescence of stems -- the spherical geometry of the earth and psychical curvature of the mind harmonizing to counterbalance the individual and collective forces of dispersion in the world and to impose unification. By this unification there is a general gathering together in which, by correlated actions of the Without and the Within of the earth, the totality of thinking units and forces are engaged. All this becomes intelligible as the natural culmination of a cosmic process which has never varied

92 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

since our planet was young. First molecules of carbon compounds with their thousands of atoms symmetrically grouped, next the cell containing thousands of molecules, then the metazoa in which the cell is no more than an almost infinitestimal element, and later the manifold attempts of the metazoa to enter into symbiosis and raise themselves to a higher biological condition. And now, as a germination of planetary dimensions, comes the thinking layer which intertwines its fibers to reinforce them in the living unity of a single tissue. Père Teilhard sees no way of grouping this immense succession of facts save as a gigantic psychobiologic operation, a sort of mega-synthesis: that superarrangement to which all the thinking elements of the earth find themselves subject today.
If this is what really happens, what more do we need to convince ourselves of the vital error of any doctrine of isolation? asks Père Teilhard. No element could move and grow except with and by all the others with itself. No evolutionary future therefore awaits man except in association with all other men. Within the compass of biological spacetime, man is a continuation of the very lines of the universe amongst other realities as vast as itself.
With our knowledge of hormones we are on the eve of having a hand in the development of our bodies and even our brains. With the discovery of genes we soon may be able to control the mechanism of organic heredity. And research fosters the dream of mastering, beyond all atomic or molecular affinities, the ultimate energy of the world, and, thus, by grasping the very mainspring of evolution, seizing the tiller of the world. But there is less difference than we think between research and adoration. For

knowledge in the end always faces the same problem: how to give to each and every element its final value by grouping them in the unity of an organized whole.
COLLECTIVITY OF CONSCIOUSNESSES
AND THE HYPER-PERSONAL
We are faced with a harmonized collectivity of consciousnesses, equivalent to a sort of super-consciousness. Père Teilhard sees the earth as being covered by myriads of grains of thought and becoming enclosed in a single thinking envelope to form the plurality of individual reflections which are the act of a single unanimous reflection. Thus we are led scientifically to envisage the future of mankind. To the man in the street and even to a certain philosophy of the world, perspectives such as these will seem highly improbable. But to a mind familiar with the fantastic dimensions of the universe, they will seem quite natural. In the direction of thought, could the universe terminate with anything less than the measureless?
The idea of a spirit of the earth does not stand up to the test of experience. Man will never succeed in going beyond man by uniting with himself. But Père Teilhard feels that discouragement is a feeling to be overcome. Half a million, perhaps a million, years were required for life to pass from the pre-hominids to modern man. Thus, despite an almost explosive acceleration of noogenesis, we cannot expect to see the earth transformed in a generation. In spite of all evidence to the contrary, mankind may well be advancing, but, if so, almost imperceptibly. And this does not allay the most acute of our fears: Does it not seem sometimes as though we were in the grip of some ineluctable forces of mutual repulsion and materialization?

93

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

Is it not possible, asks Père Teilhard, that we have neglected to give due place to the person and forces of personalization? Unlike primitives who gave a face to every moving thing, modern man is obsessed by the need to depersonalize all he most admires. Personality is seen as a specifically corpuscular and ephemeral property, a prison from which we must try to escape. Yet we seem to be led to the precisely opposite view by notions of space-time and evolution.
What is the nature of the personal center of convergence upon whose existence hangs the evolutionary equilibrium of the noosphere? By definition, in Omega the hoard of consciousness liberated little by little on earth by noogenesis adds itself together and accumulates. The very center of our consciousness, deeper than all its radii: that is the essence which Omega--if it is truly to be Omega--must reclaim. The grains of consciousness do not tend to blend; the more "other" they become in conjunction, the more they find themselves as "self," steeped in Omega. Omega can only be a distinct center radiating at the core of a system of centers. This is the only picture that emerges when we try to apply the idea of collectivity with remorseless logic to a granular whole of thoughts. The goal of ourselves is not our individuality but our person, and according to the evolutionary structure of the world we can only find our person by uniting. The true ego then grows in inverse proportion to egoism. Amongst the various forms of psychic inter-activity animating the noosphere, those of an intercentric nature must be harnessed first, if we want to help the process of evolution in ourselves. This brings us to the problem of love.

CONVERGENCE IN OMEGA
Considered in its full biological reality, love is not peculiar to man. If there were no internal propensity to unite--even at a prodigiously rudimentary level, indeed in the molecule itself --it would be physically impossible for love to appear higher up in hominised form. Driven by the forces of love, the fragments of the world seek each other so that the world may come to being. This is no metaphor. Love is nothing more and nothing less than the more or less direct trace marked on the heart of the element by the psychical convergence of the universe upon itself. The paradoxical conciliation of the element with the whole, the synthesis of individuals and people: these are called Utopian, and yet they are biologically necessary. We may think we have exhausted the natural forms of love with a man's love for his wife, children, friends, or country. Yet the most fundamental form of passion is the one which under the pressure of an involuting universe precipitates the elements one upon the other in the Whole: cosmic affinity and hence cosmic direction. A universal love thus is not only psychologically possible; it is the only complete and final way in which we are able to love.
For failure to turn into success, we should extend our science to its farthest limits and accept not only some vague future existence but also the radiation, as a present reality, of that mysterious center of centers, Omega. Thus from the grains of thought forming the indestructible atoms of its stuff, the universe goes on building itself above our heads in the inverse direction of matter which vanishes. For Omega is the hominisation of death itself. The universe then is a collector and conservator, not of mechanical energy, but of persons. All around

94 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

us "souls" break away, carrying upward
their incommunicable load of conscious-
ness--one by one, yet not in isolation.
By the very nature of Omega, for each
of them there can only be one possible
point of definitive emersion--that point
at which, under the synthesizing action
of personalizing union, the noosphere
will reach collectively its point of con-
vergence, at the "end of the world."
RESEARCH IN EUGENICS
Père Teilhard gives eugenic research
new dimensions in terms of evolutionary
process. Along what lines of advance are
we to proceed, he asks, from the plane-
tary level of psychic totalization and evo-
lutionary upsurge we are now approach-
ing? If research is to progress, it will be
by localizing central zones for conquest.
An era of human science is in order, the
practical and theoretical science of homi-
nisation.
"So far we have certainly allowed our race to develop at random, and we have given too little thought to the question of what medical and moral factors must replace the crude forces of natural selection should we suppress them. In the course of the coming centuries it is indispensable that a nobly human form of eugenics, on a standard worthy of our personalities, should be discovered and developed. "Whether we like it or not, all the signs and all our needs converge in the same direction. We need and are irresistibly being led to create, by means of and beyond all physics, all biology and all psychology, a science of human energetics. "It is in the course of that creation, already obscurely begun, that science, by being led to concentrate on man, will find itself increasingly face to face with religion."
Science and religion must join, for
neither has succeeded in discrediting the
other. And the reason is simple. The

same life animates both. Religion and science are the two conjugated faces of one and the same act of complete knowledge--the only one which can embrace the past and future of evolution.
THE CHRISTIAN PHENOMENON
By its very structure the noosphere could not close itself, either individually or socially, save under the influence of the Center called Omega. We are led logically to this postulate by the application to man of the experimental laws of evolution. If Omega is already in existence, its traces should be manifested here. To animate evolution in its lower stages, the conscious pole of the world could only act in an impersonal form under the veil of biology. Either the whole construction of the world as presented here is vain ideology, suggests Père Teilhard, or some excess of personal, extra-human energy should reveal the Great Presence. At this point we see the importance for science of the Christian phenomenon. It seems to bring to the perspectives of a universe dominated by energies of a personal nature the crucial confirmation we need.
Christianity seems desperately intricate. In reality it contains an extremely simple and astonishingly bold solution of the world. Is the Kingdom of God a big family? Yes, in a sense, says Père Teilhard. In another sense it is a prodigious biological operation: that of the Redeeming Incarnation. As early as St. Paul and St. John we read that God unifies the world by uniting it organically with himself, by partially immersing himself in things, by becoming "element," and then from this point of vantage in the heart of matter assuming the control of what we now call evolution. Christ, principle of universal vitality, put himself in the position to subdue

95

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

under himself, to purify, to direct and superanimate the general ascent of consciousness into which he inserted himself. By a perennial act of communion and sublimation, he aggregates to himself thetotal psychism of theearth. And when hehas gathered together and transformed everything, hewill close in upon himself and his conquests, thereby rejoining the divine focus hehas never left. The universe fulfills itself in a synthesis of centers in perfect conformity with the laws of union: God, the Center of centers. In that final vision the Christian dogma culminates, and this coincides perfectly with the Omega Point.
The bigger the world becomes and the more organic its internal connections, the more will theperspectives of the Incarnation triumph. Though frightened for a moment by evolution, theChristian now perceives that what it offers him is nothing but a magnificent means of feeling more at one with God and giving himself more to Him. Christ invests himself organically with the very majesty of his creation. It is in no way metaphorical to say that man finds himself capable of experiencing his God inthe whole length, breadth, and depth of the world in movement. To be able to say literally to God that one loves him not only with all one's body, heart, andsoul but with every fiber of the unifying universe: this is a prayer that can only be made in space-time.
CONCLUSIONS
Père Teilhard went against much of the thinking of his own Church with this majestic presentation of evolution and the phenomenon of man. Hewas barred

from teaching in France because ofhis ideas on human evolution, andhe never obtained permission to publish any of his major works. Many scientists would decry his metaphysics and say: "We don't know;" or "The evidence is lacking." As Julian Huxley states in his introduction to this volume, many will find it impossible to follow himall the way in his attempt to reconcile thesupernatural elements in Christianity with the facts and implications of evolution. Other scientists will find some of his material inadequate. Huxley points out that the biologist may think he has slighted genetics and natural selection and the social scientist that he has neglected political and social history. But his purpose was not to review all the "evidence." Who could? Père Teilhard was impatient of overspecialization andthe timidity which refuses to pass from detailed study to broad synthesis. To open vip rather than to finalize, is his statedaim. This he certainly accomplishes, regardless of how strongly one maydissent from his position; and he does it in language noteworthy for its simplicity although sometimes obscure in meaning, andwith a synthesis of concepts awesome in their totality.
His final summation of human evolution will not be found wanting, at least:
"In one manner or another it still remains true that, even in theview of the mere biologist, the human epic resembles nothing so much as a way of the Cross."
REFERENCES
1. SIMPSON, GEORGE G. 1960. The world into
which Darwin led us. Science, 131:966-974.
2. ROSTAND, JEAN. 1959. Can Man be Modi-
fied? New York: Basic Books.

