Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Genetics and demography: Summary of "Workshop Conference" between Demographers and Population Geneticists, under the auspices of the American Eugenics Society, October 16­17, 1964, Princeton Inn, Princeton, N. J.
R. H. Post editor
To cite this article: R. H. Post editor (1965) Genetics and demography: Summary of "Workshop Conference" between Demographers and Population Geneticists, under the auspices of the American Eugenics Society, October 16­17, 1964, Princeton Inn, Princeton, N. J. , Eugenics Quarterly, 12:2, 41-71, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1965.9987608 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1965.9987608
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 5
View related articles
Citing articles: 4 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

GENETICS AND DEMOGRAPHY
Summary of "Workshop Conference" between Demographers and Population Geneticists, under the auspices of the American Eugenics Society, October 16-17, 1964,Princeton Inn, Princeton, N. J.
R. H. POST, editor University of Michigan

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

PARTICIPANTS

Genetics
ALLEN, G.
National Institutes of Mental Health
BODMER, W. F.
Stanford University
CAVALLI-SFORZA, L. L.
University of Pavía, Italy
GLASS, H. B. (Chairman). The Johns Hopkins University
LEWONTIN, R. C.
University of Chicago
MACARTHUR, R.
University of Pennsylvania
OSBORNE, R. H.
University of Wisconsin
REED, S. C.
University of Minnesota
SCOTT, J. P.
Jackson Memorial Laboratory
SPUHLER, J. N.
University of Michigan

Demography

CAMPBELL, A. A.
Department of Health, Education and Welfare
COALE, A. J. Princeton University

DEMENY, P.
Princeton University

HAJNAL, J.

The London School of Economics and

Political Science

¡

KIRK, D.
Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences

RISER, C. V.
Milbank Memorial Fund >

K.UNSTADTER, P .
Princeton University

OSBORN, F. H.
Population Council

PERRIN, E. B.
University of Washington

RYDER, N. B.
University of Wisconsin

WESTOFF, C. F.
Princeton University

41

42

Summary

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

The purpose o£ the conference was to bring together a few population geneticists and demographers to discuss areas of common interest, common problems, and possible opportunities for greater cooperation and collaboration.
Population geneticists and demographers both recognize the importance of each others' contributions to the study of present trends in human evolution. Knowledge in this field is essential to the development of eugenic programs. Both groups appreciate that a better understanding of their reciprocal relationship is needed in order that eugenics may have, first, a more sound theoretical basis and, later, perhaps, a more effective application. The American Eugenics Society conceives one of its immediate tasks to be the fostering of a closer relationship between these and other workers in kindred fields.
In a sense it may be said that human population geneticists are interested primarily in traits having high degrees of heritability, particularly in monomeric traits, while demographers are inclined to be environmentalists who are overdependent on data obtained either by census enumerators or by asking randomly selected subjects a few questions. If this were strictly true, there would be little point in having this joint workshop conference. Happily, however, some geneticists have shown themselves interested in at least the vistas and horizons of eugenics and in what might be called "refined guesses" of some of the effects that demographic conditions might have on natural selection. Likewise, some demographers, fortunately for eugenics, are interested not only in the effects of environmental changes per se but also in the hereditary basis of human behavior and in whatever roles the forces of environment may play in molding or channeling changes in gene frequencies from generation to generation.
The primary function of the demographers at the workshop conference was to outline and explain the kinds of data they produce which might be useful to students of population genetics, indicating as far as possible their limitations and the pitfalls of interpretation, and to outline their own aims and methods. Population geneticists were to indicate which demographic data they can use, in addition to their own data, what shape it must be in, and what additional data they would like to have. The second function of both groups was to comment on each others' work through group discussion from whatever point of view they believed might clarify, stimulate, direct, or in other ways mutually aid one another, particularly in matters related to eugenics. While these functions may appear slightly premature or overambitious at the present moment, since we are a very long way from being able to make precise studies of any of the genetic processes which are going on in human populations, still it cannot be too early to start thinking about them and to start systematizing our thoughts as far as they can be brought into focus.

Brief Notes on Some Terms Used During the Workshop
Fertility and Fecundity. As used in genetics, the term "fertility" means the capacity to reproduce, in an all-or-none sense. "Fecundity" is a quantitative measure of reproduction, such as the

number of eggs laid or hatched, the total number of offspring born, the number reaching a certain age, etc. Unfortunately, the demographer uses these terms quite differently; to him "fertility" is the quantitative measure of viable offspring, and "fecundity" is the capacity or po-

Vol. 12, No. 2

Genetics and Demography

43

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

tentiality for reproduction. To meet this difficulty in the present papers, the word "natality" will be substituted for "fertility" in statements attributed to a demographer, and will be added, in brackets, after the use of "fecundity" by a geneticist.
Natality. The number of viable offspring, including zero (sometimes used by demographers instead of "fertility"-- viz., the U.N. Demographic Dictionary).
"R"--Instantaneous intrinsic rate of increase (or decrease) of population size. Estimated from fertility, fecundity, and mortality data adjusted for age, R represents the overall net rate of change of population size per unit of time during one complete generation. It may refer to carriers of one specific trait or character in a population.
Random mating. Correlation of zero between mates with respect to any trait. The term is used by the population geneticist generally with respect to specific traits which are genetically determined and frequently cryptic (such as blood groups). Mating with respect to outwardly manifest traits such as stature or coloration is usually nonrandom. These traits usually involve situations of assortative mating or other phenomena which cause a departure from random mating.
Assortative mating (or assortive mating). The tendency of marriage partners to resemble one another as a result of preference or choice. Usually the term is used in connection with a specific character or attribute, such as tallness, high or low intelligence, etc. It represents a departure from random mating.
Fitness. A measure of performance in the transmission of a genotype to the next generation, not of potentiality for transmission. The term should be modified by an adjective such as "biological,"

"Darwinian," "genetic," or "reproductive." As a crude example, a person who might be considered superbly fit in health, longevity, intelligence, overall life-success, group contribution, etc., but who leaves no viable offspring, has a fitness of zero.
Heritability. Ratio of the genetic variance in a population (with respect to a specific trait) to the total variance, which latter is the sum of genetic plus nongenetic variance. In the narrow sense, as was usually implied during the workshop conference, heritability jis additive genetic variance divided by total variance. Natual selection cannot operate if heritability in the narrow sense is zero.
R. A. Fisher's "fundamental theorem" (of natural selection). The rate of change in frequency from generation to generation of a genetically conditioned trait or character when under selection pressure is related to the additive genetic variance of that character, and not to its total genetic variance. Additive genetic variance is reflected in parent-offspring correlation, but nonadditive genetic variance is not. For example, dominance contributes to nonadditive genetic variance. This theorem applies to changes in the mean fitness of a population, which is proportional to its additive genetic variance with respect to fitness.
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Also called H-W balance or H-W ratio, or genetic equilibrium or balance or ratio. A balance between the frequencies in a population of the three genotypes produced by two alíeles under a system of random mating. For instance, if the frequency of alíele "A" is p and that of the mutant alíele "a" is q, so that p plus q sums to unity, then the frequencies of the three resulting genotypes AA, Aa and aa will be respectively p2, 2pq, and q2 when mating is at random and there are

44

Summary

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

no differences in fitness between these three genotypes. Forces such as inbreeding or assortative mating can upset this ratio, usually reducing the frequency of the hétérozygote Aa with corresponding increases in the frequencies of the homozygotes, AA and aa. If the increase in the former homozygote is represented by t and of the latter by s, then the ratio would be p2 + i to 2pq -- t--s to q2+s, which would not be in H-W equilibrium.
Reproductive compensation. Parents who practice birth control have been observed in a number of studies to have one more child than previously planned, in compensation for the loss of a child. If the children die from genetic causes, this practice would affect the frequencies of the relevant genetic factors.
Relaxation of genetic load. Environmental changes which diminish the hardship of individual victims of hereditary disabilities or diseases, such as the development of new medicines, new surgery techniques, devices such as eyeglasses, etc.
Relaxation of selection. Environmental changes such as the above will permit the biological survival, i.e., reproduction of individuals who would not have survived otherwise. Relaxation of the rigors of natural selection, in the words of Dr. Bentley Glass, "has taken place with cultural developments of human society and more particularly in recent times with medical preservation of the [genetically] handicapped, in various ways. This permits a greater degree of genetic diversity. By and large there is a [negative] relationship between the rigor of selection and the genetic'variance of a population."
Index of opportunity for selection. An estimate of the upper limit of the opportunity for natural selection through

fertility and fecundity differentials, which can be obtained largely from census data. It is believed that in the United States at the present time the opportunities for selection may be rising as the average family size decreases, rather than falling, as heretofore assumed by many students. That is, differential variation in family size is becoming more important than differential variation in deaths, on the basis of selection shifts from mortality differentials to those of fertility and fecundity. It is most important that a beginning be made to explore the degrees to which fertility and fecundity differentials may be genetically conditioned. (Attributed to Prof. James F. Crow, Univ. of Wise, from unrecorded convers., unpub.)
Comment on Opening Paper on Demography1
Discussion of Dr. Riser's paper centered about the desirability of having more complete census data. Geneticallyminded demographers are interested in such topics as natality differentials in various segments of population, mating structure as revealed by the types of classification now being used by the census, and interassociations between these classifications which might be added. Natality differentials would be reflected from data on child spacing, such as mother's age at the birth of each child, and from stillbirths. The place of birth would also be helpful.
Additional information on mating structure might be obtained by data on age at marriage, education, occupation at that time, etc. One of the basic shortcomings is that the census takers' questions are limited to household members
1 The opening paper on demography by Dr. Clyde V. Riser appears on p. 72 in this issue.

Vol. 12, No. 2

Genetics and Demography

45

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

at the time of the census with no data on persons who may have previously left the household. Sibships should be as complete as possible. Another is the pooling of all nonwhites into a single category. A more refined breakdown is needed. Although no classificatory system of race or color could ever be beyond criticism, the least unsatisfactory might be to ask each person to classify himself.
Dr. Reed summarized the first large study on the association between reproductive performance and I.Q. in which all the siblings of parents were considered, including childless siblings. The association was then approximately zero. (J. V. Higgins, E. W. Reed, and S. C. Reed, "Intelligence and Family Size: A Paradox Resolved," Eugen. Quart., 9: 84-90.) Previous studies failed to include childless siblings of parents and had produced negative associations between natality and I.Q.
Summary of Opening Paper in Population Genetics by Dr. James N. Spuhler
INBREEDING AND BEHAVIOR
The term "coefficient of inbreeding" usually means the probability that any particular individual in a pedigree will be homozygous for a typical pair of alíeles, both of which are inherited from the same ancestor through different pathways of descent, such as the person's two parents or two of his grandparents. Another meaning of the term is the coefficient of correlation between the gametes (egg and sperm) which unite to form a new individual. The inbreeding coefficient has been estimated with fair exactitude for very few populations, among them the Ramah branch of the Navajo Indians and the inhabitants of three islands--Kisar, Hosajima, and Tristan da Cunha.

Four principal effects of inbreeding are the reduction in frequency of hétérozygotes together with corresponding increases of homozygotes, changes in population variance, increases in correlations between sibling pairs and between parents and their offspring. It is noteworthy that gene frequencies remain constant with all changes in inbreeding despite the shifts in frequencies of genotypes (and their corresponding phenotypes)-- i.e., despite departures from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.
A few studies have been made of the effects of inbreeding on behavior, principally intelligence. All the studies on randomly selected families indicate at least a slight "inferiority" or "depression" among the offspring of consanguineous parents as contrasted with the performances of controls whose parents are not related. In the largest study, which is not yet fully reported, similar results were obtained in ten measurements of body size, but to less marked degrees than in behavioral traits. In vision acuity, the "inferiority" of the inbred subjects was particularly marked. Such differences between inbred subjects and controls are reflections of genetic control of a trait, perhaps better termed "genetic conditioning."
ASSORTATIVE MATING AND BEHAVIOR
Preferential choosing of mates has been observed in many species of birds and mammals. The phenomenon was discussed extensively by Darwin as "sexual selection." Among humans it varies widely with different cultural milieux. It supports the academic argument, otherwise vulnerable, that man may be considered in some respects a domesticated animal.
Assortative mating is more complex genetically than is inbreeding. One can

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

46

Summary

Eugen. Quart.

make statements about inbreeding regardless of the number of genetic factors involved. But the results of different degrees of assortative mating depend in part upon the number of genetic loci, as well as upon the degrees of dominance. The correlation between genotypes and phenotypes is not always one-to-one. Therefore, no general statement of the relationship between the degree of assortative mating and the population distribution of phenotypes can be made.
Two general features are that gene frequencies remain unchanged in successive generations regardless of the intensity of assortative mating, while the genotype frequencies do change. To illustrate with the case of a single alíele difference such as produces three genotypes which may be represented as AA, Aa, and aa in the population, assortative mating will augment the frequencies of the homozygotes AA and aa but diminish those of the hétérozygote Aa as the generations proceed, but the frequencies of the alíeles A and a will not change. With mating completely assortative, the proportion of hétérozygotes is reduced by

one-half in each successive generation. At the limit the population will consist of the homozygotes AA and aa alone-- each assumedly represented by a distinct phenotype--in frequencies which are proportional to the population's original gene frequencies for the two alíeles A and a.
The theoretical reduction in the percentage of hétérozygotes in successive generations under four different degrees or intensities of assortative mating is shown in Table 1. The degree is represented by "r," referring to the coefficient of correlation between mated pairs for the character in question. Usually it is multiplied by an estimate of the heritability of the character. In the theoretical table, heritability is unity. It is noted that an increase in the number of genetic factors will decrease the effect on heterozygosis. For instance, in the two columns under r=.5, in one case with a single factor and the other ten factors, the frequency of heterozygosis is reduced from .5 to .333 after five generations in the former case and from .5 to .48 in the latter. Little change would be produced after even an infinite number of genera-

TABLE 1
PERCENTAGE OF HETEROZYCOSIS IN VARIOUS GENETIC SYSTEMS UNDER VARIOUS DECREES (r) OF ASSORTATIVE MATING.

Perfect
assortative mating
r=+1.00 Genera-
tion n = l n=2 n=10

Imperfect assortative mating

r=+.8O

r=+.50

r = - K25

n = l n=10 n = l n=10 n = l n = 10

Perfect negative assortative mating
r=-1.00
n=l n=4

0 .500 .500 .500
1 ¿50 .375 .474 2 .125 .312 .462 3 .063 .266 .451 4 .031 .227 .439 5 .016 .193 .428 10 .001 .088 .376
15 .000 .040 .330
CO 0 0 0

.500 500
.300 .480 .220 .472 .188 .465 .175 .459 .170 .454 .167 .436
.167 .427 .167 .417

500 .500
.375 .488 .344 .484 .336 .482 .334 .481 .333 .479 .333 .477
.333 .476 .333 .476

500 500
.438 .494 .430 .493 .429 .493 .429 .492 .429 .492 .429 .492
.429 .492 .429 .492

.500 .500
.750 563 .625 531 .687 535 .656 .533 .672 .533 .667 .533
.667 .533 .667 .533

n=number of pairs of genes. A condition of no dominance is assumed. Sources: Wright (1921) with additions.

Vol. 12, No. 2

Genetics and Demography

47

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

tions at this degree of assortative mating, but at higher degrees, such as shown in adjoining columns, the decrease in heterozygosis--and the increase in frequencies of both types of homozygote--would be more rapid.
Some sixty studies have been made of assortative mating in behavior traits, some of which are to be reviewed in a later paper for this journal. Some of the intraspouse correlations are fairly substantial. Correlations between .2 and .3 are quite common for anthropométrie traits such as stature and body weight. Those for intelligence vary from .08 to .76, with a mode somewhere in the middle forties. Those for personality traits are somewhat lower than for intelligence, but frequently higher than for anthropométrie traits.
ILLUSTRATION
Once the relative frequencies of genotypes have been changed by assortative mating in any particular generation, the efficacy of natural selection is increased as far as the character in question is controlled by additive polygenes, which is the hereditary mechanism generally assumed for intelligence, personality traits, and other behavior traits. As a simple illustration, let us suppose that gene "A" confers higher intelligence and its alíele "a" confers lower intelligence; likewise with B and b, C and c, etc. Suppose also that intelligence is favored by natural selection in the particular environmental milieu being considered. With additive inheritance, selection on the homozygous genotypes AA, BB, etc. may be termed positive, selection on hétérozygotes Aa, Bb, etc., neutral, and on homozygotes aa, bb, etc., negative. Since assortative mating will decrease the relative frequencies of the hétérozygotes and increase those of both classes of homozygotes, the

efficacy of natural selection is obviously increased.
Mathematical Models of Population Change
Summary of Presentations of Drs. Perrin, Westoff, and Cavalli-Sforza
During the past ten or fifteen years, mathematical statisticians have developed a number of methods for processing data which are becoming more and more useful to demographers and biologists for the understanding of present phenomena as well as for the prediction of future changes in sociological or genetic traits in real populations. Since the methods are usually based on assumptions regarding the probability of occurrence of certain specific events, the methodology is called "stochastic" or "hondeterministic."
Although the raw data of demography have been far more voluminous than those of population genetics, problems of the latter discipline have appealed more to mathematical statisticians, because of their more interesting structure. There is a natural preference for constructing theoretical models as opposed to fitting raw data. But the two areas appear now to be coming together. Commencing with the use of deterministic models for the description of population change and extending recently to the more general and potentially useful stochastic approach, models are being constructed which are capable of more adequately describing observed demographic phenomena, and vice versa.
As examples of the applicability of stochastic models, studies have been made of projections through many future generations of an artificial population in the fluctuations in frequencies of

48

Summary

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

marker genes, such as those of blood groups, or alternately, the fluctuations in demographic characteristics of a given segment of a population, such as of human fertility patterns (Perrin and Sheps, 1964, "Human Reproduction: A Stochastic Process," Biometrics, 20:28-54). Although randomness in the first case may be due essentially to the mode of transmission of the genetic material and in the second case to the multiplicity and complexity of sociological forces at work on a population, the procedures are quite analogous. It is fruitful to look at each as a random process in time.
Perrin and Sheps (1964) have recently constructed a general theory to describe child-spacing distributions based on probabilities of conception, probabilities of stillbirths and abortions, and distributions of the length of pregnancies and of the length of the sterile period following the termination of a pregnancy. The theory can be generalized to include a simple specification of contraceptive practice. Theoretical distributions can be fitted to the observed child-spacing distributions for a series of cross tabulations with respect to relevant socioeconomic and other characteristics. The interactions between these factors and the fertility patterns can then be studied in terms of the estimated values of the parameters used to define the theoretical distributions. These models can be combined with a specification of the age at marriage of husband and wife to investigate the effects of the age of marriage on the total fertility. Such an approach promises to answer the tremendous need for appropriate analysis of large and complicated tabular outputs such as are produced by the census.
Dr. Perrin comments:
Most important of all, perhaps, from a practical standpoint, is the fact that

advances in computer technology have made it possible for an individual investigator to now construct a stochastic model without worrying excessively whether or not a general mathematical solution exists for the process which he generates. One can, by the use of simulation procedures (i.e., Monte Carlo procedures) on an electronic computer, obtain quite rapidly an approximate solution for almost any stochastic model which is biologically meaningful. The results obtained in this way are less satisfactory than a mathematical solution in the sense that they are less general, but in some cases may actually be more valid because of the greater latitude in including complicated forms of dependence in the stochastic model.
It does seem, then, in view of the fact that the techniques of investigation of stochastic processes are being used more commonly in both demography and human genetics, that this is an area where cooperation between the two fields would be most fruitful --cooperation both at the level of understanding the new techniques and in their employment as tools to increase our knowledge of the processes involved.
A number of studies of population models are being pursued at Pavia University in Italy under the direction of Dr. Cavalli-Sforza. One of them, on consanguineous marriage, aims to process all of the marriage records available since 1530 or so in Italy. The observed frequency of consanguineous marriages are analyzed according to models taking account of age and migration in order to ascertain what can be learned about population structure through consanguineity studies. Effects on the progeny of consanguineous marriages are also

Vol. 12, No. 2

Genetics and Demography

49

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

considered. A second project attempts to build all genealogies from the 17th century onwards for an area where some 10,000 people are living today and in which blood group data have been collected. This study has primarily genetic aims, but it also supplies a considerable amount of data of demographic interest. A third project concerns the analysis of an artificial population simulating the above one in order to evaluate the expected amount of genetic drift as well as the expected frequencies of consanguineous marriages.
(Note: Dr. Cavalli-Sforza's paper on population models presented at the Cold Spring Harbor Symposium of July 1964 is summarized in Eugenics Quarterly, 11: 236-238.)
Dr. Westoff discussed a rather specialized study of matrilineal cross-cousin marriage patterns as reported in certain primitive cultures, wherein a man's choice of a wife is limited to approximately one fourth of his first cousins, such as marriage to only the daughters of his mother's brothers. Correspondingly, a woman may marry only the son or sons of her father's sisters. With such normative restrictions, the question arises, "What is the maximum frequency of such marriages that can occur in a small population with normal demographic variability?" The question grew out of discussions of how frequently primitive societies depart from their conventions, which if strictly observed in a small population, might reduce the number of available mates below the minimal level for replacement. Starting with an artificial population of 50 males and 50 females aged 15, and plugging in the demographic conditions reported by ethnologists such as a very low rate of population growth, high mortality, high natality, and early marriage age, the com-

puting machine produced the attributes of a population which ran along through successive generations with a birth rate of approximately 41, death rate of 40, thus a growth rate of 1 per thousand per generation. Vital statistics of divorce, family size, age distributions of deaths, etc., from several primitive populations were utilized for "instructing" the computer, all within the genealogical relationships required by strict observance of matrilineal cross-cousin marriage.
After about eleven trials running up to 750 years each, it was concluded that the maximum frequency of matrilineal cross-cousin marriage was concentrated between 20 and 35 per cent of all marriages. These seem to be the maximal frequencies which can be expected in small populations of "primitive" culture with normal demographic variability.
Selected Excerpts
Rapid Increase in Birth Control Practice
Mr. Osborn noted the great change in the relations of occupational and educational categories to natality which have taken place since the late 1930's, when "biological survival" of the least successful people as classified by these norms was almost twice that of people of the higher categories. Today the differential has almost disappeared in some areas. The rapidity of the change is due to the extraordinarily rapid increase in contraceptive practices among occupational and educational segments which previously exercised no control.
There was no real improvement in contraceptive methods during the previous 30 or 40 years. There was a great increase in the use of contraceptives, but their effective use tended to be

50

Summary

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

limited to the upper levels of education. Then suddenly about three years ago the "pill" came along, which was effective at all levels. It was easier to use even though expensive . . . groups who had never successfully used contraceptives came in and used the pill . . . From three to four million women are using it today in the United States (which is perhaps about 15 to 20 per cent of all women at risk). Then about a year and a half later, the intrauterine contraceptive devices appeared . . . their use has increased wholly beyond expectations. . . . Women switch to it in every class of society.
Mr. Osborn estimated that the use of I. U. C. D.'s is spreading at the rate of about 40,000 beginners per month in all countries. In New York City the devices are inserted gratis for indigent women in at least two large hospitals. The rapidity of its increase will undoubtedly produce a decrease in the natality differentials of contrasted occupational and educational categories as noted by Dr. Kiser.
Mr. Osborn added, later:
At the present time the number of unwanted pregnancies is almost sufficient to produce the excess above replacement that is now going on, about the difference between 2.4 births and 3.0 births per family. My belief is that the extension of the use of these new and very effective means of birth control would pretty nearly cut off unwanted pregnancies. . . . That would bring the population pretty nearly to replacement. To the extent that this happens from increased effectiveness of birth control, I think it will happen within the next ten years. I think the situation is changing very, very rapidly. In addition, I think that there is a

good deal of reason to believe that people generally will want somewhat smaller families than at present.
I think the baby boom will diminish further before it stabilizes, maybe a good deal further. It that case, if we get down to replacement in ten years and hold it there--now this again is a guess which no demographer would make--but if we hold it there, and it is my opinion we will, then our population will increase by the year 2,000 to a little over 325 millionsomething like that. I don't think we are justified in talking about populations of 600 million or 800 million in the United States.
Possible Genetic Basis of Natality
DR. BODMER: Don't you think that people may differ genetically in how many children they want to have?
DR. WESTOFF: It is not obvious that they do.
DR. BODMER: It seems so to me. Take, for example, the figures on the per cent of career women. Don't you think that there is an inherited component, to some extent at least, in what type of people become career women?
DR. WESTOFF: The ones that are unattractive.
DR. LEWONTIN: Without exception, every animal anybody has ever tested shows a strong genetic component in its libidinal drive.
DR. WESTOFF: Other animals don't use contraceptives.
DR. RYDER: Every other animal lacks culture.
DR. LEWONTIN: It would be extraordinary if you could wipe out entirely the genetic component for sexual drive. You may in fact make the heritability low by superimposing on that component a vast amount of environmental determination,

Vol. 12, No. 2

Genetics and Demography

51

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

but to say that it will disappear seems excessive.
DR. RYDER: What has sex to do with natality?
DR. COALE: It has nothing to do with natality.
DR. LEWONTIN: It is prerequisite, I believe.
MR. OSBORN: Instead of saying the sexual drive, you can say desire for children.
DR. COALE: For children, all right, but if you are going to say for sex, it has very little to do with it.
DR. KIRK: There is another factor in this--the problems of sterility and infertility are being rapidly resolved by medical advances, in that those couples who want to have children, and who formerly could not have children, are now being enabled to have them. Furthermore, marriage rates are increasing and the proportion of marriages that produce children is rising--primarily, I believe, due to sociocultural factors. I can't quite believe that these changes have a genetic base. I think the genetic base is pretty well blanketed out by social changes and medical advances.
DR. BODMER: During this particular period of change, yes; but we are in a period of rapid environmental change in all these factors. I would be the last person to deny that at this time these changes in environmental factors may not be lowly correlated with genetic differences, but this isn't going to go on forever. It may not even go on for another five or ten years, particularly in a population such as that of the United States; and as soon as that time of change settles down to any extent, I think genetic factors will again take on some importance.
DR. KIRK: We are approaching the kind of a situation in which most couples

who want to have children have them; and, within a narrow range, they have the number they want.
DR. BODMER: Not all couples want the same number of children.
DR. KIRK: Correct.
DR. WESTOFF: That variance is getting lower and lower.
DR. SCOTT: I think we are arguing about the problem in a somewhat absurd way--not purposely, of course--and that the issues can be put more clearly in terms of animal experimentation. For example, there have been studies of genetic differences in maternal care in rabbits, and definite strain differences have been demonstrated in this species. There is every reason to assume that similar differences in the biological basis of parental care may also exist in human populations. On the other hand, if we are to be realistic about the problem of genetic effects upon behavior, we must remember that any complex behavior of this kind is not biologically inherited as such. It is incorrect to call it genetic, and equally incorrect to call it environmental. Rather, it is the result of a long process of development in which both genetic and environmental factors may play a part.
One of the real problems in the area of human genetic change is something that has been pointed out by many students of human affairs, namely, the rapidity with which the cultural environment can change as compared with the environment of our experimental population of animals, which we can hold constant over quite a long time.
MR. OSBORN: I think Bodmer is arguing on the basis of Professor Charles Darwin's recent book in which he said that populations are bound to increase for genetic reasons, namely, that when you have perfect methods of birth con-

52

Summary

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

trol available to everybody, then you would breed from one generation to another to people who wanted more children.
DR. BODMER: It is certainly not inconceivable that there are genetic differences in natality, and I would not be very happy for the human race if this were not true.
DR. CAVALLI-SFORZA: All the people who want more children are going to reproduce more than the others, so there are bound to be increases which nobody can stop. Genotype does not produce the same result under all environments; if an environment should change, the genotype is going to produce another phenotype. Maybe those people who want children now won't want children tomorrow.
DR. ALLEN: I think one of the main arguments against saying that these fecundity [natality] differences may have an important genetic component is that in man under circumstances of controlled fecundity [natality] the desire to have children operates through the environment, through culture; and culture is so complex that the operation of the genetic factors would not be discernible.
DR. GLASS: Jim Spuhler has the data from Crow's study that represents what documentation there is for the statement, that the opportunity for selection on the basis of fertility and fecundity [natality] is the dominant factor in human selection now.
DR. SPUHLER: I published these data for the World Health Organization Conference in Geneva several years ago.
I have information on 32 different populations using Crow's "Index of the Opportunity for Selection." I might say his index is related tó R. A. Fisher's fundamental theorem, and the maximum potential for selection is defined as the

variance in the number of progeny divided by the square of the number of progeny. This can be divided into two components, one due to mortality, and the component due to fecundity [natality], which is the variance in fecundity [natality] divided by the square of the number of children that survive. I picked ten tribal populations that vary greatly in size, from 600, one local group of Navajo, to 700,000 for the Ashanti. The overall fecundity [natality] of these tribal populations is not as great as what I call state populations, which would include Bengali villages, Jamaica, Trinidad, and so on. But in five out of the ten, the component due to mortality of the tribal populations is greater than the component due to fertility [natality].
In the tribal populations the index goes from .06 to about .30. In the 10 state populations--and I included the Hutterites in this group--I might say it is difficult to find data on this problem because you need to know the variance in number of progeny. This is difficult to get for primitive groups, but in eight out of ten of the state populations, the overall mean number of births is larger. That is, the component due to fecundity [natality] is larger than the component due to mortality.
Then, finally, in national populations of Japan, Portugal, and so on--indeed, in all except Brazil--the component due to natality is larger than that due to mortality.
In addition, I have data on the United States and Canada. Twenty-five out of thirty-two populations have total selection intensity lower than that of the United States in 1950.
So the maximum potential of selection doesn't say anything about the amount that is actually occurring, and it is still

Vol. 12, No. 2

Genetics and Demography

53

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

quite high in industrial populations like the United States, Britain, and Canada.
Inadequacy of Family Size for Estimating "R," and Related
Problems
DR. LEWONTIN: Could I ask a somewhat different question, one which has been raised by all of this morning's discussion? That is, why do demographers keep talking about "average number of children" and why don't they talk about the complete age-specific mortality and fecundity [natality] schedule?
From the standpoint of the animal ecologist it is perfectly clear that the average number of offspring over a lifetime is a totally useless parameter. I can tell far more about a Drosophila population from the number of offspring individuals have during the first ten days of life.
As every demographer knows, only the first births really count, later ones hardly at all; the age of the first offspring is a critical parameter. One of the beauties of R, the intrinsic rate of increase, is that it does in fact compound the age-specific mortality and fecundity [natality] schedules in a meaningful way. Demographers use this all the time when they talk about the total growth of populations, but when they start to ask about the relative fitness of different I.Q. groups and so on, they forget about it.
DR. WESTOFF: I think part of the explanation is that although the rate of increase may have some genetic significance, it doesn't have a lot of sociological significance. You can't talk about the rate of increase of educational groups or occupational groups; but if you do, R does not have the same meaning as the concept would if applied to a racial group.

DR. LEWONTIN: The ratio of R of the

Negro population to R of the white

population is in fact a measure of how

fast the Negro population is growing

relative to the white population.

DR. MACARTHUR: It is true of I.Q.,

too.

DR. WESTOFF: That's right, anything

that is inheritable.

DR. LEWONTIN: This is what we are

talking about.

DR. COALE: I understand. But that is

not what demographers are ordinarily

talking about. So the reason they don't

go around calculating R's for all groups

is that for certain other purposes the

natality is important for itself.

DR. MACARTHUR: The aim is to talk

about an I.Q. in terms of the number of

births because people usually infer from

this that the high I.Q.'s aren't repro-

ducing as rapidly as they might; yet, R

is what they should be calculating. May-

be R is actually higher for the high I.Q.'s

because they have births earlier.

DR. LEWONTIN: All we are suggesting

now is that for the purpose of the in-

teraction between demographers and ge-

neticists, what geneticists need is the rate

of increase.

:

DR. COALE: It would be easily calcu-

lable in some circumstances] Let me state

some reasons why perhaps R has not

been emphasized. One can arrive at a

very close estimate of R by knowing the

total natality or the gross reproduction

rate, the mean age of childbearing, and

the probability of surviving to the mean

age of childbearing. Now there is much

more variability in natality than there is

in the mean age. The mean age of child-

bearing in human populations lies ap-

proximately between 26 and 33, and

within a given country it is apt not to

vary that much. That is, between popu-

lations, such as the Swedish and the

54

Summary

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Indian, you will find means ranging from 26 to 33.
Secondly, the mortality differences in modern societies are not as great as they used to be, and are subject to rapid narrowing where they still exist.
The question I would raise of a more serious dimension is the factor of marriage; that is, we tend to give completed family size for married women, but the important missing element is the proportion marrying. I think these are probably more important variables than the mean age at childbearing or the proportion of survival. Dr. Reed has pointed this out.
DR. LEWONTIN: Yes. The Mx schedule will contain that information inherently, whereas the average number of offspring per married couple doesn't.
DR. COALE: That's right. I think that is a very serious omission.
DR. LEWONTIN: I think that is probably the most serious, but I wouldn't discount the importance of the difference between the mean age of 26 and the mean age of 33. I have recently made some calculations on the rate of change of R with respect to various life-cycle components. A difference of five years is important. But it would be far more important if this were the difference in age between first and second offspring.
DR. LEWONTIN: Let me give an example. A vast amount of effort has been spent on correlating blood groups with all kinds of what I would consider peripheral human attributes, like peptic ulcer. Maybe peptic ulcer is important but I don't know how many people it kills, and I don't know what it does to the age-specific mortality and fecundity [natality] schedule.
Now, I would like to know how much effort could be put into getting the age-

specific mortality and fecundity [natality] schedules for the ABO blood groups. Having done this, I would then know what the selection rate is for each ABO alíele; that is, whether there is, indeed, any differential rate of increase among the different groups.
DR. BODMER: That would mean collecting blood group data on a scale comparable with the census.
DR. LEWONTIN: HOW many bloods would you need?
DR. BODMER. An enormous number, because this is one of the major problems, at least as we see it in the analysis of census data.
I think that one of the dangers of doing exactly the sort of thing you suggest is to do it without taking account of all the other factors which affect fecundity [natality] which you would have to try to control or allow for in some way, so that you would need data on an exceedingly large scale to really understand the nature of the selective forces.
DR. CAVALLI-SFORZA: It seems to me that the case is one where you should examine every mating by itself. If you take the intrinsic growth rate of a specific type, you are going to get faulty conclusions, because it is not going to give us the equilibria of where you are going. This is one point.
Another is that we have always to keep in mind, if we start on projects like this, how rapidly conditions of survival are changing in modern populations. Any research based on the distribution by age alone today is almost meaningless. It would be much better if one could take blood group data, for instance, on army recruits of 30 or 40 years ago. One could then follow them up and see how many have died. I don't know what would be the earliest records on blood

Vol. 12, No. 2

Genetics and Demography

55

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

groupings, and of course, some of them would be faulty. But one could at least test survivors in order to estimate how frequently there was a misclassification some 30 or 40 years ago.
DR. LEWONTIN: When we get estimates of the correlation between a particular blood group and some disease, we really have no information of genetic usefulness because we don't know what the age-specific mortality and fecundity [natility] schedules are, for that group of diseased persons. It may have nothing to do with selection. Perhaps people with peptic ulcers have more children than others, or have them earlier, because they are more nervous.
When I mentioned ABO blood groups, I obviously put my foot in it. All I am trying to say is that the kind of partial information which concerns either mortality or fecundity [natality] alone is clearly not going to give us the answers to these questions. We must take total age-specific births and deaths. Anything less than this would give us an erroneous picture. Or, we must do what Coale says and find out whether any one of these components is a good predictor of the result.
Rapidity and Fluctuation of Evolution Rates
DR. GLASS: Let's take a specific example of rapid change. Suppose you consider the situation with respect to sickle-cell hemoglobin. Probably nothing is changing much faster than the selection rate on that gene at the present time. Yet it seems to me that an analysis of R with respect to the situation in populations living where malaria is still endemic, and in Negro populations in the United States where malaria is no longer endemic, is extremely valuable.

And it is in great part a demographic or epidemiological problem. I don't see why the very fact that these rates are changing and changing fairly rapidly means we should throw up our hands and quit. I think we can calculate faster than the changes.
DR. COALE: We have learned certain things. We have found, for instance, that a schedule of natality and mortality observed in any population does not describe even the behavior of a cohort moving through time; that the rate of reproduction of the U. S. population in the 1950's, which would have produced about 3.6 children had the schedules continued, actually exceeds the reproduction of any actual group moving through life--because there was a change in timing and a piling up of cohorts. Thus the schedules were misleading, even the ones we're observing in any moment of time. However, I'm not saying that we ought to throw them out.
I think one should consider the natality and the replacement indices and so on of cohorts and of the population in cross section and draw inferences that sometimes exist between them.
What I'm worried about is the implication that the natality and mortality schedules that we observe in a population in a moment of rapid change should be considered to be of much significance with respect to the intrinsic rate of increase. To say the population isn't replacing itself or would double in twelve years, or something of that sort, is wrong from the demographic view.
For instance, take the sickle cell population. Certainly if one calculated the intrinsic rate of increase in Africa where malaria is still endemic, I will bet in five years malaria wouldn't be endemic any more, and R would then, of course, be quite different.

56

Summary

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

DR. EODMER: It's just those sorts of changes that you're describing that one is interested in studying.
DR. SCOTT: I think one important thing for the geneticists here to remember is the fact that the rate of cultural change is so very, very rapid compared with the ordinary rate of genetic change. Enormous environmental changes often take place in one or two generations. This is something not all geneticists really appreciate.
DR. LEWONTIN: Excuse me. Drosophila geneticists often study genetic changes that are much more rapid than those in human populations. The task of observing population and gene fluctuations was undertaken by Drosophila geneticists over 20 years ago. These may change by 20, 30, or 40 per cent during a year, in a cyclic fashion. The rates of increase are often drastically different in the spring contrasted with summer. I think demographers are tending to overmagnify the differences in human popula tions. Drosophila geneticists are in fact concerned with multiples of R. I wouldn't be too much concerned whether R changed by 10 per cent or 20 or 50 per cent.
DR. HAJNAL: If you consider trying to determine fitness in particular conditions, why, would you say, don't geneticists do it by calculating R?
DR. BODMER: Because they have not had the help of the demographers?
DR. HAJNAL: Why is this? In fact, however these things have been done, sometimes badly, sometimes wrongly, from the demographer's point of view they haven't been done by calculating R.
DR. LEWONTIN: The answer is that your relation to human genetics is in the statistical and mathematical aspect of genetics. I'm a population geneticist and I tend to think more about R

because I think about Drosophila and populations of that sort. Human geneticists until recently have been trained largely in the genetic etiology of disease.
DR. HAJNAL: Yet when Haldane comes to discuss his rates and so on, on relative fitness, he does not do it by calculating R.
DR. BODMER: I think one of his very early papers in the Cambridge Philosophical Society did try to do this. As far as I'm aware, it was about the same time as some similar work of Fisher. He probably thought that, for the simple types of interpretations which the population geneticists had so far given, he would not be getting anything qualitatively different by getting a lot more complicated.
DR. LEWONTIN: Why is it that human geneticists haven't used R more?
DR. BODMER: They haven't felt it was that important, or they haven't had the data to look at it in sufficient detail.
DR. RYDER: We've been talking about the rapidity of change, and the geneticists seem to be interested in the problem where change is fairly rapid. In order to calculate an R for a human population, you'd have to have 50 years of experience, and the 50 years of experience will overlap the next cohort group as it comes along. Forty-nine of the years will be in common if you're using a one-year cohort. And it seems to me that you've got a rather complicated problem of deciding which particular group you're going to be looking at, because these successive cohorts will have different R's, each one of them, and they may go down and up again, and so on.
Now, we have not much more than enough data for the United States for calculation of one decent R, not much more than that, for one cohort. And this cohort is now out of date because

Vol. 12, No. 2

Genetics and Demography

57

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

most childbirth occurs rather early in life.
DR. MACARTHUR: It really helps to work with Drosophila because it doesn't take 50 years. But if you're dealing with human populations undergoing rapid change, what significance do you place on R?
DR. LEWONTIN: That's the answer to Dr. Hajnal's question. One of the reasons human geneticists haven't used R is that it's so difficult to consider.
DR. BODMER: Don't you need to assume a stable age distribution in any case for the calculation of R? You would be able to follow the rate of change by whatever measure you use whether it's R or some derivative of it, or some alternative index which you can calculate more easily.
DR. RYDER: DO you want to know how it changes? There are books full of data on it. The Princeton population group here turns out a Population Index every quarter, and in back of the Population Index, I think once a year, there are rafts of intrinsic rates published for all sorts of varieties of populations. They come up regularly year after year. There are lots of that sort of data around.
DR. LEWONTIN: What's the 20-year variation in R?
DR. COALE: It was essentially zero in 1935, and its maximum was about 2.1 per cent. So the minimum difference is from zero to .02. That's from 1935 to the present. Prior to that it went from something a little over 3 per cent down to zero in an essentially monotonie way with a few episodic interruptions such as the Civil War.
DR. LEWONTIN: Then its range is around .03 with a mean somewhere around .015. If that represents two standard deviations, the variance doesn't seem to be tremendously great.
DR. ALLEN: What about segments?

DR. COALE: The biggest one I can think of offhand would be the Hutterites, whose intrinsic rate of increase is about 5 per cent. There are plenty of groups where it's negative, or minus 1 or 2 per cent.
MR. OSBORN: AS I remember, for the years 1935 through 1940, couples, both of whom were college graduates, were 48 per cent below replacement in the number of their births. For the years 1945 to 1950 they were 10 to 15 per cent above replacement. This shows the extraordinary change that may take place in a very short time. Some of the same people were involved in both of those calculations.
DR. MACARTHUR: Could I ask, is it possible to give some sort of a measure of the degree to which populations are in groups which actually become extinct and replace one another? Because if the type of selection which was talked about earlier, group selection, is going to take place, where groups replace one another instead of individuals, I think you will actually have groups that are becoming extinct and then are refounded by individuals.
DR. COALE: The nearest case, I suppose, would be that of the Indians. They were pretty nearly extinguished. Probably some tribal groups, or genetic groups, were completely wiped out.
DR. MACARTHUR: I don't think we've looked for it in any detail yet. If you could give us documentary evidence of this happening in the past, it would be quite important.
DR. KUNSTADTER: I'm working on one case which is, I think, precisely this at the present time.
DR. BODMER: If we studied this over a longer period of time, we could get some information as to the patterns of these changes.

58

Summary

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

DR. COALE: During the long period when natality was falling in the United States--and for 130 years or so we have no documentation--for most of that time or a good bit of it there was a difference by socioeconomic class in family size. People with higher education, incomes, and so on had smaller families. During these 130 years the trend looked like a statistical law, but now that's no longer true. During the past 20 years or so, this situation has been in the process of disappearing. Our best estimate is that, quite likely, there will be a positive association between socioeconomic class and natality within another decade or so. This is so partly because everybody has access now to means of controlling family size, and even an unskillful, uneducated person will be able to control it very well. So that one could have come to possibly genetically significant conclusions after possibly a century or more of experience, which would be by now wholly out of date.
Effects of Inbreeding on Poly genie Traits
DR. GLASS: I think that Fred Osborn would like to ask a rather interesting question. It grows out of the discussion of the population structure--specifically of inbreeding, consanguinity, and assortative mating--on the frequency of certain kinds of genes. He raises the question whether this relates only to singlegene effects that are quite clear-cut, or whether it also applies to those multifactorial characteristics such as intelligence where not only many genes but also many environmental factors are involved.
MR. OSBORN: DO I understand that at the present time a geneticist has nothing to say about the possibility of changes in frequencies of genetic traits by differ-

ences in natality or survival, so that the demographer is limited to the general experience that in animal populations, it has been possible to breed simply by selecting animals who are "superior" in certain genetic traits?
DR. LEWONTIN: NO. I think if you are willing to make a few simplifying assumptions--all of which are probably untrue--that you have a large number of genes whose action is the same, that their initial frequency is the same and so on; then you can make predictions about changes in gene frequency on the basis of selection. In fact, if you are willing to set the thing up for a computer, you can make any predictions about gene frequency you want.
DR. BODMER: I think the questions are not so much about changes in gene frequency but changes in the frequency of the attribute, assuming it is partly genetically determined and partly environmentally determined.
The geneticist has a certain machinery of models and hypotheses that can certainly give some qualitatively and quantitatively meaningful results, and it is a basis for interpretation; but I do think there is a lot more that can and needs to be done.
DR. CAVALLI-SFORZA: There has been a great deal of discussion of phenodeviants and even a statement that this is "mystical" genetics. Some of you may remember such a discussion between Morton and Lerner. It is one of the more intriguing problems in animal genetics.
DR. LEWONTIN: Part of the answer to the question can be given only if we understand the nature of the gene action in the sense of how the genes are expressed in homozygous and heterozygous conditions. In the simplest case, again, if a large part of the selection goes on among hétérozygotes, then the small

Vol. 12, No. 2

Genetics and Demography

59

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

added number of homozygotes won't make very much difference.
We assume generally for qualitative traits that they are additive, and to the extent that they are additive we can answer the question. To the extent that there are complete dominants, then inbreeding can become much more important. The degree of dominance of genes is a terribly important parameter in answering this question.
On the Increasing Load of Human Mutations
DR. OSBORNE: I was not entirely satisfied with the answer to Dr. Kirk's question a while ago on what would happen if everybody had two children with exact replacement, and, therefore, with no more selection going on. What would be the genetic effect on the population? Consideration wasn't given to the factors of different ages at reproduction and assortative mating. Cannot these two factors change the constitution of the population, even though you remove the mating factors you were talking about?
DR. LEWONTIN: Let me make my answer crystal clear, if I can. Given that there is no change in R, given that there is no difference in age-specific mortality and fecundity [natality] schedules by genotype, then there can be no natural selection, by definition.
Now that is not the same as saying that given that everybody has two children, there can be no differences. Because if I am of a genotype--which I am, as you know--that has its children early and you have a genotype that causes you to wait until much later, then I will leave more remote progeny than you in a continuously breeding population.
But I understood Dr. Kirk's question to mean not literally that everybody had two children and other things were

variable but that in fact there were no dierences in age-specific mortality and fecundity [natality] schedules among genotypes. Our answer is that if this occurs, there will be no natural selection.
If there is any difference in mortality and fecundity [natality] schedules among genotypes of whatever form, such that their R values are not different--and you can invent different schedules which give the same R--there is no selection; if they give different R's, there is selection. It is as straightforward as that.
DR. KIRK: I can't quite picture a situation in which all of the differences in the R's would be wiped out; but I was interested, and I still am a little confused by this, because by definition sterility to the extent that it is genetically inherited is selected out of the population. But by virtue of medical progress we are making it more possible for people who otherwise would not have had children, to have children. You are perpetuating something that would not have been perpetuated otherwise.
DR. BODMER: Probably in the same frequency as it occurred at the time you made that change.
DR. LEWONTIN: SO, therefore, there would be no changes in frequency except by mutation.
DR. COALE: There will be a change in the dynamic process. It used to be that, let's say, the slow occurrence of mutations which produced something linked with sterility, whatever it may be, tended to be continuously eliminated. You are going to arrest that process (in your model) and, therefore, if there is a continuation of mutation which produces these elements, that kind of factor is going to increase in the population where formerly it didn't.
DR. LEWONTIN: But at a rate which is of the order of mutation rate maximum.

60

Summary

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

And mutation rates are of the order of 1(H to 1(H per generation. This is the question I wanted to raise. It has bothered all of us in genetics for a long time that as selection coefficients are relaxed by precisely the processes you are talking about, by saving people who would have formerly died, the number of affected persons rises because of continued mutation. And although the rate of elimination in terms of death or failure to reproduce is relaxed, the social load increases all the time. You have to have more people making crutches like insulin, making money to buy it, and so on. Relaxed selection accumulates the frequencies of all kinds of inherited diseases. More and more people spend greater portions of their energies saving themselves and others from dying by whatever techniques are available. To what extent does the demographer see any limit to this process?
DR. HAJNAL: I wonder if this is really so different from what has been happening in the past. A long time ago, for example, our ancestors went through an evolutionary change which deprived them of their hair. The result is that we all have to spend an enormous amount of energy clothing ourselves. Has this been a tremendous disaster?
DR. LEWONTIN: Nobody says it is a disaster. What we ask is whether the capacity is unlimited. It may be that the capacity of society to change the environment to make all genotypes viable is unlimited. How much of a man's working day can be spent essentially earning money to keep sick people alive?
DR. HAJNAL: Again I think this is a question which no demographer, or, so far as I know, anyone is competent to answer, because it has to do with the future development of technology.
Again I think underlying your ques-

tion there may be much fruitful work for the application of demographic techniques, trying to assess such questions as, what is the effect of keeping diabetics alive, or, the numbers of diabetics to be expected in future generations.
I think you will find, in a subsidiary extent--and I should emphasize all the time that I am speaking of the application of demographic techniques and genetics, and I am not anticipating any tremendous evolution--that these minor technical jobs ought to be tackled and ought to be tackled properly. I think you will find that there is a need of trying to work out this problem.
DR. GLASS: It seems to me that this is very much at the heart of our problem, and we shouldn't dismiss the consideration of these questions too quickly. The reason I raised my question a while ago is that I think the elaboration of any kind of a eugenic program that is realistic at all is very much related to the question of whether the population is expanding or whether the population is stabilized in numbers. This is a demographic as well as a genetic question, which I hope we will get around to considering and discussing.
Limits of the Genetic Load
DR. LEWONTIN: We hear a great deal about the question, "How much genetic punishment can human populations absorb?" That's something we really would like to know. It might be so very great that it would never be of any eugenic concern, or it might not.
We would like to know if it's at all possible with present human data to give a rough estimate of the total differential mortality available in the human species --or let's say in a Caucasian population, if you want to make it more exact--that would still enable a population to re-

Vol. 12, No. 2

Genetics and Demography

61

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

place itself. In other words, to put it very crudely, if a human female is capable of producing 200 fertilized eggs in her lifetime, can we dispense with 198 of them or so and leave just a couple left over? What is the right number?
DR. SCOTT: May I give an animal answer to this? I think we have a pretty good one in the case of the dog, which has also gone through the experience of relaxed selection that human beings are experiencing but much more rapidly because dog generations require about two years instead of twenty-five years. What has happened in the case of the domestic dog is that there has been a long history and recently a strongly increased amount of social protection of these animals compared with the ancestral wolves, so that we get survival of some very deviant individuals.
Nevertheless, there is no indication at all that dogs are dying out, in spite of the fact that in purebred dogs about 50 per cent of the females are essentially incapable of reproducing.
Now, what has happened? In the case of the dog's contemporary ancestor, the wolf does not come into sexual maturity until about two years of age or older. The average litter size is about five. In a natural wolf pack there is rarely more than one litter per year, no matter how many females there are. The rate of reproduction is, therefore, quite low.
In the case of the dog there has been selection towards increased fertility, in that the age of sexual maturity has been reduced to less than one year, the breeding cycle has been increased to twice per year, and the average litter size in the larger breeds has gone way up over five. So, in spite of the fact that all of these incapable (from one point of view) individuals are preserved, the limit of re-

productive capacity has been nowhere nearly reached.
I should say we might offer a similar answer for man, merely from the fact that crude birth rates may be very high-- rates as high as forty or forty-five per thousand have been reported.
DR. COALE: Sixty.
DR. SCOTT: It would take a crude birth rate of about fourteen per thousand on the average to keep a population stable.
DR. COALE: Yes. And the margin is larger than that. Because when fertility is such as to produce a birth rate of sixty, the portion of women bearing children is lower than in the ratio of sixty, so the ratio of children-producing women is higher in sixty than in fourteen.
DR. KIRK: I think Mr. Osborn has given us a simple answer, that there have been human populations in which the average woman has had eight children. Two are necessary for survival. The margin is about 400 per cent.
DR. LEWONTIN: That's not enough for some purposes in selection. One of the big arguments in population genetics at the present time is how much heterosis there is, how much balanced adaptive polymorphism. It doesn't take much polymorphism to absorb 400 per cent excess.
DR. KIRK: That's the kind of margin you're dealing with at the present time without any major physiological changes and without any major change at the age of mating and reproduction.
DR. LEWONTIN: We need something like 198 out of 200 eggs to dispose of to explain a reasonable amount of polymorphism. Suppose humans don't provide us with that many?
DR. PERRIN: I should think they could provide at least 190 or so. If a woman has a probability of 25 per cent of becoming pregnant each month--and this

62

Summary

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

is the average expectancy--she would need only 8 eggs on the average to reproduce the original pair. This assumes, of course, that these two eggs live to reproduce in turn.
DR. LEWONTIN: It depends on when the eggs die. If they die in the middle, you've lost that many. If they come to term and die, you've lost a lot of eggs. If the child nurses, you've lost even more eggs. So the distribution of death times the age of the offspring is very important.
DR. BODMER: A lot depends on early fetal death, about which too little is known.
DR. COALE: But we can point out that the implications of fetal death are quite different because of the difference in what Henry calls "dead time," that is, the time when a woman is not at risk because of a fetal death instead of a full-term pregnancy.
DR. BODMER: That adds to the opportunity for genetic selection.
DR. COALE: Precisely. You could lose 198 that would not reach the point of conception at all.
DR. LEWONTIN: I'm asking what number of genes can presently be maintained by actual, natural selection at rates of the order of one per cent against both homozygotes. It's not more than 202 or something like that. So this puts a real limit on how much selection can be going on in a population.
Assortative Mating Augments Natural Selection
DR. ALLEN: I would like to return to something that was implied without being stated clearly enough to satisfy me. Dudley Kirk suggested the hypothetical situation where, with greatly relaxed selection, all genotypes might be replacing themselves. And suppose, for exam-

ple, that all persons of I.Q. over 170 married persons of over 170 I.Q., and all people with I.Q. of 50 married spouses with I.Q. of 50. Even in the complete absence of selection, would't that kind of assortative mating alter the distribution of genotypes?
DR. GLASS: Yes.
DR. COALE: This is a problem that the demographers present have defined--the effect of the assortative mating which apparently is being established in the population, even if there is no differential natality.
MR. OSBORN: In addition, if selection were going on within this assortative mating pattern, then you would get a great change in the actual frequency of genes throughout the population, as Dr. Spuhler has pointed out.
DR. LEWONTIN: We can say, then, as Mr. Osborn says, that an increase in the positive assortative mating rate will make selection more efficient. That's important, that the rate of genetic selection will be greater, the more the assortative mating.
Limitations of the Workshop Conference
The problems confronting demographers and population geneticists in trying to grasp each others' fields during so brief a conference became apparent to all participants. They were eloquently expressed by Dr. Hajnal, who indicated the need for training research workers in at least three basic fields simultaneously: mathematical statistics, demography, and population genetics:
It is essential to have individuals who combine in themselves some knowledge of mathematics and genetics, and I think this is what we must do in the field of eugenics. If you have the popu-

Vol. 12, No. 2

Genetics and Demography

63

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

lation geneticist putting his problems to the demographer, he won't put the right problems. . . . I think, however, the field is ripe for very substantial progress.
The opportunity for progress arose from the profound demographic changes (often termed the "demographic revolution") which began in Europe some two or three centuries ago. They are still continuing and gradually affecting the whole of mankind. These trends are bringing about fundamental, but ill understood, changes in the genetic system of man. Knowledge of the demographic revolution both in its historical aspects and in its current impact was rapidly growing and creating increasing opportunities for studying the genetic implications.
Dr. Hajnal stressed that the demographic aspects of genetic problems could not be properly tackled by applying existing demographic techniques. New concepts and procedures, frequently of a mathematical character, needed to be developed. Examples cited in this connection included the inadequacy of our understanding of population breeding structure as affected by historical changes in consanguinity rates or genetic drift; the need for new methods of investigating interbreeding between generations; the effects which earlier marriage and family limitation or marriage postponement and greater spacing between offspring can have on the rates of defects reflecting maternal age, such as Down's syndrome; the lessons to be learned from animal demographers. A related point was that population data were not collected with a view to the requirements of geneticists. The population geneticist is unable to utilize very efficiently the vast amounts of data produced by census bureaus or the United Nations unless he is trained in demography. For substantial

progress to be made population geneticists would need to "get used to thinking in terms of demographic concepts, applying them for completely different purposes from those for which they were intended. . . . I feel very definitely that there is no solution other than having persons who really have devoted substantial time to both fields."
Proposals for Joint Fellowships in Population Genetics and Demography, to be Offered by the American Eugenics Society
DR. BODMER: T O oversimplify matters, there are three main areas where a geneticist feels that demographic data can contribute to the sort of things I think we are interested in. First is the study of differential fertilities [natalities] in different groups of the population. Second, the question of mating patterns, the association between mates and the general problem of marriage characteristics. The third area, one with which geneticists are principally concerned, is assessing the genetic contribution to the various subclassifications which demographers make. These three will allow us at least qualitatively to form a picture of genetic changes as they go on in a population.
DR. GLASS: Thank you. That's very helpful. Now, Ansley, may we have your suggestions with respect to a fellowship fund?
DR. COALE: They're very tentative because I think working out a program would require some thought and consultation by people from different areas. But the preliminary ideas that occurred to me are that it should be possible, I think, to encourage two different kinds of persons to establish some kind of bridgehead between the two groups that have been discussing problems here these two days. One possibility would be to

64

Summary

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

find a person who is already well established in one of the two fields and who wants to pursue the combined area, then to make available to him some kind of fellowship or stipend or paid leave of absence for one term, which I think would be sufficient in the case of the geneticists. I can't estimate how long it would take a demographer to learn genetics, but I think for a mathematically trained geneticist to learn everything he would need to know about demography might require about one term. A fellowship or some other sort of arrangement that would make it possible for the right kind of scholar to spend a term at a good institution would be adequate to get him launched. He would at the same time be able to establish relationships with interested persons to progress further in genetico-demographic research. A demographer interested in genetics would require considerably more time to learn the genetics and the basic mathematics. That would require exceptional interest on his part, and on ours, the greatest of care in selecting the right person.
The other possibility would be to offer fellowships at the graduate level to students of human population genetics to take courses in demography. . . . Select a student who has a good mathematics background, and award him a special fellowship if he will elect this field and offer it in the general examination for the Ph.D. I suspect it's not true the other way around. I would make the specific suggestion that someone survey the universities' programs, find a situation-- such as at Chicago, Michigan, Stanford, or Wisconsin, among others--where there is a good program in genetics, and then offer a fellowship at the appropriate time to a student who has the mathematics and the genetics to take appropriate courses in population demography

and offer them for a general exam. Then you would have a person who has the requisite knowledge.
DR. RYDER: I want to say a brief word or two about the possibilities at Wisconsin. We have people who are interested in population genetics and others interested in demography. Thus Jim Crow and I are on a Population Studies Committee, established partly to administer a minor for the Ph.D. Every Ph.D. candidate at Wisconsin is required to take a minor outside his major department. Although ordinarily taken in one other department, a minor can be developed in Population Studies with courses in several departments.
I received a training grant last year to help us give additional courses, prepare teaching materials, and so forth. This will permit us to give an instructional program that will not be oriented as it is now to the specific needs of the sociologist or economist or geographer, but rather be an offering in the field of demography. I would think this would be more useful to people in population genetics, as well as in public health and similar fields. Such an approach is quite feasible in an institution where demography courses are offered and can be useful to people taking graduate work in other areas. Professor Crow is quite interested in this, and I think there will probably be a small number of students coming over from his genetics program to take demography with me in the next few years.
DR. LEWONTIN: More than that, of course, there is the cooperative program, which allows students in some ten universities in the midwest to take courses in any other of these institutions for their Ph.D.
DR. RYDER: We at Wisconsin are thinking of establishing a "demography sum-

Vol. 12, No. 2

Genetics and Demography

65

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

mer," gathering some people in addition to the ones we have on hand to offer quite a range of demographic material during the summer so that students could come to the institution and concentrate for the whole summer semester. A concentrated summer is almost adequate. The experience at Chicago of offering a concentrated summer session in demoggraphy has been quite good in this respect.
DR. GLASS: That would be very helpful, because I am sure there are a good many places having rather strong work in human population genetics but with unfortunately little demography, and probably the reverse situation also exists.
MR. OSBORN: There is an interesting parallel here with what was done in medical or clinical genetics when we had the same problem. A course was set up at Bar Harbor in which doctors from medical schools, young research men, took a concentrated course in genetics for two or three weeks. It was quite successful and is still going on.
DR. OSBORNE: The program at Wisconsin that Ryder is talking about has developed another facet in recent months. This is a joint degree program which we are calling Human Biology. This eventually may reach down to the undergraduate level. Wisconsin may develop a degrees program which would be ideal for what was suggested.
DR. BODMER: Again, I think it would probably be best to send a population geneticist with training in a department of genetics to a place like yours, he having developed some studies along these lines, and give him a fellowship of maybe one, two, or three years which would enable him to carry on a specific program.
DR. COALE: I think the postdoctoral procedure would fit in very nicely.
DR. POST: Special care must be taken

in selecting candidates, I think, to insure eugenic motivation; that is, to reduce the risk of their switching their interests away from studies basic to eugenics once they get their degree.
DR. SCOTT: Could we get a list of at least half a dozen of the institutions where this kind of training could be obtained in either demography or population genetics?
DR. BODMER: I should say that at Stanford it would be very good to have a demographer who would like to take an interest in genetics problems.
MR. OSBORN: Your first proposal for a one-term course in demography for established geneticists is the one that would be most immediately effective, most quick to bring somebody into the field.
DR. COALE: Yes, but I think that such a person is the hardest type to find. I think the problem is that most people who would be good enough and who have real promise are already overcommitted, and it's going to be hard to find the right person who can take a term off and so on. I think it's a good idea to keep your eyes open for such a person, but in the meantime, let's start a fellowship program that will train students who can move into the profession.
MR. OSBORN: IS Bodmer'S suggestion easier?
DR. COALE: I think it might be easier, yes.
DR. MACARTHUR: May I ask if there exists a list of what demographers consider to be fairly good papers that would be representative so that we could show them to doctoral students and ask them if this is the kind of thing they would like to do?
DR. LEWONTIN: A good modern textbook and bibliography.
DR. MACARTHUR: It should be more

66

Summary

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

than the course. It should be an example of the works themselves.
DR. COALE: You're asking for a selected reading list. We could probably get one together.
DR. SPUHLER: I would agree that the quickest way would be to make this union between mathematics, formal demography, and human population genetics; but it seems to me that there is also a contribution to be made from the ethnological demographers, etc.
DR. COALE: I wouldn't disagree with that. One would think that if this program has two students a year over the next five years or so, they would get a variety of background training. Let me say in any demographic program at the graduate level that a student is exposed to some of all that. It's a question of what emphasis there should be.
Dr. Coale later summarized this discussion as follows:
The meeting of population geneticists and demographers in Princeton in October of 1964 showed that persons in each discipline looked at similar problems and similar data in very different ways. It appeared unlikely that a geneticist could make adequate allowance for the insights that might result from the demographic approach until he had some training and research experience in population. Also, of course, a demographer cannot do profound work in genetics without substantial training in that field. It was agreed that a geneticist with a good background in mathematics could probably master the demography he would need in one academic term of intensive work. Training at three different career stages were discussed as promising. First would be

to include demography as a field of study for a geneticist preparing for his doctoral degree. This possibility appears readily feasible at universities having strong programs in genetics and population. Special fellowships might induce a few of the best students at these institutions to include demography in their training. The second level would be postdoctoral training for geneticists who had recently received their Ph.D. Possibly training in population could be combined with employment on a research project. Finally, a well-established geneticist interested in human genetics might spend a one-term leave of absence at one of the population research centers combining a study of demography with collaboration on a demographic-genetic research project. It is also possible, of course, for demographers to learn genetics, but the consensus^ of the participants of the meeting was that unless the demographer's background already included an unusual and high degree of familiarity with biology and genetics, the needed period for special training would be substantially longer than required for a geneticist to master demography.
Because of the difficulty of obtaining free time for special purposes during the academic year for persons beyond the graduate school level, and because of the greater flexibility at all stages of allocating summer time, a good vehicle for learning population is summer courses, or summer seminars, or summer workshops for geneticists.
(Note: Dr. Bodmer has prepared a bibliography for the American Eugenics Society as mentioned above which is available upon request to the Society.)

Vol. 12, No. 2

Genetics and Demography

67

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Tentative Suggestion for Applied Eugenics
DR. GLASS: This might be a good time for a discussion of questions of eugenic policy and their relation to some of the demographic-genetic problems we have been considering. I have been thinking about this for several years, trying to make a beginning of what might be called a eugenic policy such as might be politically feasible as well as scientifically sound and, of course, practicable. Now that the intrauterine contraceptive devices are quickening the trend in reducing family size towards the replacement level, it might seem opportune to start thinking about applied eugenics.
MR. OSBORN: The American Eugenics Society has a . . . suggestion. They have not put it forward as a program or policy, but they have suggested it tentatively. It's one which Dobzhansky and Gordon Allen and, I guess, I have worked on and which Gordon put into the best shape. I wish I had it here to read. It was a statement of eugenic position which was drafted about two years ago. This is the eugenic program: that every effort should be made to study all of the psychological, social, and economic factors that affect size of families in the population, then to press for the social changes--they will be very moderate--that would increase family size among the more successful individuals but decrease family size among the least successful. A number of trends are working in this direction already. In fact, if we jump ten years, it's quite possible that this is the form o£ society we will be living in without any eugenic effort. The trends toward assortative mating which I spoke of, and particularly the trends toward better job placement, the trends toward more education for everybody which will make for

better understanding of these things, and

particularly the trends for universal ap-

plication of entirely effective methods of

birth control which will put parenthood

on a wholly voluntary basis--all these

trends seem to be working in this direc-

tion, together with the main trend,

which is apparently a reversal of the

differentials that we previously had.

Now, our knowledge of differentials

is pretty much the knowledge of group

differentials. But there are some studies,

referred to by Dr. Reed and Dr. Riser,

which show that individuals in a partic-

ular environment who were at the high-

est I.Q. level were leaving more viable

progeny than those who were below this

level.

So this proposal for a wholly auto-

matic and voluntary eugenics would seem

to promise to work in the same direction

as the present trends. This is an alterna-

tive to systems propsed by others in

which some compulsion would be neces-

sary. We feel that compulsion may not

be necessary to make any changes in

society at all. They may evolve on their

own. Or, it may be necessary to do some-

thing to increase certain pressures, or

to reduce certain restraints. But there

does seem to be a tendency now, in

some areas, for the more successful peo-

ple in society to have more children than

the less successful.

A VOICE: IS this good?

· MR. OSBORN: This isn't a measure of

success which I--or anybody else--am

giving them. It's their own success. The

fellows who are earning more money

seem to be having children in greater

numbers.

;

A VOICE: IS this good?

MR. OSBORN: This is happening.

A VOICE: But is it good?

MR. OSBORN: That is something for

us to find out.

:

68

Summary

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

DR. MACARTHUR: The thing is to try to do something good. I'm not convinced that what's happening is good just because it's happening.
MR. OSBORN: If this is happening, then we are breeding to an environment; and if we don't like what's happening, we should try to change the environment toward the ideal environment instead of changing genetic selection toward an unknown genetic ideal. It would be very much safer to work towards improving our environment in such a manner that genetic changes would make more people successful in that environment. Then we won't be setting ourselves up as authorities on what kind of genes we are to have.
DR. LEWONTIN: What I just said before about assortative mating might be used in a eugenic program. That is, since we cannot define the best environment, perhaps--and we out to think about this--what we ought to do is to make the possibility of natural selection in a complex environment as great as we can, to increase the genetic heterogeneity of the population so that in fact, in the heterogeneous environment in which we live there would be more opportunities for filling the available niches. This can be done by assortative mating. You increase the genetic variance just by convincing people to have a high correlation in gentic characters when they meet. Now, there's no compulsion here. The question is, is assortative mating really increasing? If it isn't, perhaps an educational program can be undertaken: "Consider the following things before you choose a mate." I can just see the posters.
MR. OSBORN: I didn't make my statement quite clear, perhaps, when I spoke of "an environment." I was really speaking of all the great variety of environ-

ments which are useful in modern society; that is, this kind of selection would be going on for different types in a great number of different environments--professional environments, musical environments, physical environments, athletic environments, if you want.
VOICE: AS I understand it, it sounds like quite an intelligent idea. It may be that a concrete proposal would be to insure at least a one-to-one sex ratio in an institution like Princeton.
MR. OSBORN: This has happened in most universities.
VOICE: This is not a facetious statement.
DR. COALE: We are moving in that direction by gradually bringing an increasing number of women into the graduate program, and there are already a number in the undergraduate program.
DR. SCOTT: I would like to second very strongly what Mr. Osborn has said. I think he has presented a wise and sensible viewpoint of eugenics, and I would like to add to what he has said a list of some of the policies and projects that the American Eugenics Society under his leadership has found to be successful. One of these policies is the encouragement of basic scientific research in genetics, not starting with a doctrine but beginning with the question, "What are the facts?" This policy further assumes that if people know the facts, they will act on them with reasonable intelligence. Thus people are given a free choice of whether or not to act in regulating their own reproduction.
This, of course, is the whole basis of the medical genetics counseling program which the Eugenics Society helped to originate, namely, that if prospective parents know the risks of producing defective offspring they can make their own choices. We assume that, on the

Vol. 12, No. 2

Genetics and Demography

69

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

whole, they will make wise choices. We are hoping that one result of this workshop conference will be eventually to extend such knowledge to a wider field than that of gross genetic defects.
Another point that might be emphasized is that genetic changes in human populations must occur relatively slower under almost any kinds of conditions. If you ever struggled with a selection problem in an animal population that you are deliberately trying to change, you know how difficult it is and how long it may take with characteristics whose heritabilities are very small or whose inheritance is very complex. I think we would be incredibly foolish to try to predict what the desirable composition of the human gene pool should be after the century or two it might take to make any really important changes. This I think simply reinforces the desirability of voluntary programs on the basis of firm scientific knowledge.
DR. HAJNAL: It seems to me that encouraging people too much to think about whether they ought to have children because they are the kind of people who have marvelous genetic possibilities would be to spread the basis of deceit throughout the population. It seems to me that we do not know what is desirable. It's extremely tempting for a group of academic people to believe that what is the most desirable characteristic is intelligence and to want to select for the genetic bases of intelligence. There seems to be many things we just don't know. There are human possibilities one can't even think of.
For instance, the proposal that we should take steps to encourage the most intellectually successful men to marry the most intellectually successful women; it's not obvious to me that intellectual

zest is purely a matter of intelligence. It's purely a matter of drives and ambitions and so on. It's not at all clear that the woman who has the ability for intellectual success most strongly developed is necessarily the one that will give the children the most stable form of emotional environment.
It seems to me that we do not know what is desirable. It seems to me that we do not know the genetic mechanism of any of these things. From the sickle-cell anemia situation, it's very evident that a situation may be totally different from what one may naively suppose. If, for example, there is superior fitness of the hétérozygote, then you will get situations where a conclusion drawn from any idea that selecting the most successful type will lead you to the most desirable homozygotes, is quite wrong.
I think we do not know what is desirable, nor do we know genetic mechanisms. Moreover, we do not know how to create stable social environments. We have no idea what the results of people's reproductive behavior will be even ten, fifteen years ahead, let alone fifty or a hundred years ahead. And I think it's quite illusory for us to say we will create an environment under which such and such people will live. We just don't know how to do it.
Finally, we don't know anything about the interactions between genetic and environment factors. These may be very, very important.
Take the matter of intelligence. Like many other characteristics which have been pointed out, it's controlled genetically in the same sense that the genes set the stage for a complex process of development. But we may learn how to alter and interfere with this process at another point in quite unexpected ways.
Some experiments are now going on

70

Summary

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

in South Africa based on the idea that intelligence is very much affected by the development of the brain during the last few weeks of gestation. It doesn't strike me as very convincing, but there it is, that some of the most prominent geniuses were the product of premature births, where the prematurity was not due to any defect which would prevent the child from developing. Such people as Milton and Voltaire held that their brains were allowed to develop outside the pressure of their mother's body. This may or may not be so. But what they are doing is this: they put pregnant women into a sort of box with diminished air pressure and this reduces the pressure on the baby. They maintain that the result is to produce more intelligent babies. I think the oldest of the babies produced from this program is now only about two years old, and they can't have I.Q. tests in the normal sense, but developmental tests. Let me point out, I have absolutely no belief in this sort of thing. But it seems to me very likely that things of this general sort will become possible, not necessarily before birth but after birth. For example, where previously a mother with a small pelvic size therefore had an unintelligent baby who was nevertheless genetically highly endowed with intelligence, it may turn out to be possible in the future to induce the mother to give birth to the baby prematurely by some drug conducive to the highest degree of intelligence. We just don't know what can be done in this way.
DR. GLASS; Let me comment on one or two points, if I may. With much of what you said, I agree very strongly. Certainly you touch on some of the areas of ignorance that geneticists are only too well aware of. Certainly you touch on some of the issues that are most heartily debated among geneticists.

On the other hand, I think you shouldn't overlook the fact that the efficacyof selection does not depend upon a full knowledge of the genetic nature of the genetic mechanisms involved. This is only too clear, and if it were not so, the effects of selection upon domestic animals and cultivated plants throughout history would not have produced the important results from which we are all now benefitting.
MR. OSBORN: I think it's fair to say that the American Eugenics Society is not at present making any firm proposals for eugenic programs. It wants first of all to get an idea of what is actually going on under present conditions. In the broadest sense, is it probable that the frequency of genetic factors related to capacity for developing above-average intelligence is increasing from one generation to another, or is this frequency declining? What are the causative factors in the changes going on, and how do they operate? The determination of what is going on requires the collaboration of geneticists and demographers. Demographers are concerned with births and deaths, mating habits, and other demographic patterns. The effects of the patterns on gene distribution and gene frequencies lie in the field of the geneticist. The demographic data seem to indicate that there was a dysgenic trend well into the nineteen-forties. Now this trend seems to be diminishing and possibly is being reversed. We have some hypotheses as to the causes for this change. If further study confirms these hypotheses, we will have made the first steps toward practical measures for insuring a distribution of births which would be on the eugenic rather than the dysgenic side. Strengthening present trends would not impose a hardship on anybody. For example, there is evidence

Vol. 12, No. 2

Genetics and Demography

71

that today many people who are handicapped in their economic life and below the modal grades of intelligence don't want the number of children they are having. They report by far the largest number of unwanted children. We believe that with improved methods of birth control they will reduce their births

to those they want. This is a voluntary

process. Fewer children will be brought

up with the handicap of being unwanted.

Such a change would certainly not be

dysgenic. More likely, it would have

eugenic aspects on the whole, although

there is no firm evidence for this at the

present time.

,

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

