Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Schizophrenia and evolution
Robert E. Kuttner & Albert B. Lorincz
To cite this article: Robert E. Kuttner & Albert B. Lorincz (1966) Schizophrenia and evolution, Eugenics Quarterly, 13:4, 355-356, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1966.9987689 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1966.9987689
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 9 View related articles Citing articles: 4 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:29

SCHIZOPHRENIA AND EVOLUTION
ROBERT E. KUTTNER and ALBERT B. LORINCZ
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology The Chicago Lying-In Hospital The University of Chicago Chicago, Illinois

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

It has been recently argued that schizophrenia-prone individuals must display some biological advantages, otherwise the lowered reproductive efficiency of schizophrenics would have eliminated such genes from the population except those that arise as new mutations (Huxley, Mayr, Osmond, and Hoffer, 1964). The well-established analogy to sickle cell anemia in which condition the heterozygote carrier of the gene possesses a selective advantage in malarial environments makes this reasoning appear most plausible. Difficulties develop when the authors attempt to specify the nature of the advantage possessed by the schizophrenia heterozygote. It is suggested that these individuals are less responsive to histamine, insulin, thyroxine, the hormones associated with shock, and other physiological agents in keeping with observations made on persons fully expressing the schizophrenic state.
The problem with this assumption is that it is hard to visualize what benefits an organism obtains by subnormal sensitivity to some or many natural physiological substances in either a primitive or civilized environment. For every hypothetical advantage, it is easy to imagine an equally significant disability. The endocrine balance of the body is itself a product of evolutionary selection and one would expect that subnormal sensitivity is as damaging as excessive responsiveness once the normal range of variation has been established

in a species. If the effects of thyroxine and adrenal hormones are less in the schizophrenia heterozygote and this offers protection against trauma, it may at the same time reduce over-all adaptability to climatic extremes and thus nullify the selective benefits of the trait. It is a common clinical observation that even minor endocrine malfunctions may be seriously dysgenic regardless of whether they are compounded by a tendency toward deviant behavior.
A second hypothesis on heterozygote advantage in schizophrenia is offered by the authors. Schizophrenoid mothers are held to be more protective than normal mothers and this is presumed to benefit the offsprings. In reply, it is evident that the mother-child relationship also has had a long evolutionary history and varying one way or the other from the successful norm is not likely to lead to any selective advantage. Psychologists who are students of the subject seem generally convinced that overprotectiveness can have disabling consequences on the personality of the young. The functions of motherhood require a proper balance of all the elements entering into maternal behavior and to argue for the biological superiority of one exaggerated aspect of this behavior goes beyond valid speculation.
Disagreement on the above points does not invalidate the premise that the schizophrenia carrier state must be accompanied by some positive selective features, and that these features in the

355

356

Brief Reports

Eugen. Quart.

end must have some organic basis. The question that remains is where to search for these beneficial attributes. It seems, since schizophrenia is a particularly human disorder, that any advantage accompanying this trait should be expressed in some largely or even exclu-

sively human characteristic such as adjustment to social conditions.
REFERENCES
HUXLEY, J., E. MAYR, H. OSMOND, and A.
HOFFER, 1964. Schizophrenia as a genetic morphism. Nature, 204: 220-221.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

