Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The innovating spirit in our day
Caryl P. Haskins
To cite this article: Caryl P. Haskins (1959) The innovating spirit in our day, Eugenics Quarterly, 6:1, 26-31, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1959.9987387 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1959.9987387
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

THE INNOVATING SPIRIT IN OUR DAY*
CARYL P. HASKINS
The Carnegie Institution of Washington

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

r\.T FIRST GLANCE, it seems curious that in an age which offers unparalleled challenges to break new ground, in an age which probably presents the richest fabric of novel enterprise in all human history, truly great innovation should still be a comparatively rare event. Even more striking is the rare and precious quality of the innovator himself, relative to the comparatively huge and evergrowing number of fine minds devoted to the scientific way. It is hard to escape the impression that the opportunities for original advance have not been as fully grasped as they well might be.
This rarity of innovation, and innovators, of course, is as old as man's experience. We are so accustomed to the notion of continuous progress in our modern world that we find it hard to comprehend that real progress has been the shining event, not the rule, of human history. . . .
One reason for the historical rarity of great conceptual innovation in more recent times undoubtedly lies in the difficulty of its communication--not so much in its failure to be recognized as in the misconstruction of its message. The followers of Darwin, after his death,
*Excerpts from Reports of the President, Carnegie Institution of Washington, 1957-1958. Reprinted by permission of author and publisher.

introduced all sorts of implications extraneous to his theory. They applied it to areas where it was quite inappropriate, which he was especially careful to avoid, generating misconceptions that have required two generations of intensive work to clear away. The discoveries of Gregor Mendel, the monk of Altbrunn, whose epoch-making experiments in the heredity of garden peas and the conclusions he drew from them were models of precision in measurement and clarity of reasoning, set the whole stage for modern genetics. But they were of necessity published in a local journal, obscure and little read, and so were lost for almost thirty-five years. When they were finally unearthed in 1900, Mendel was already dead, and those who found his paper rediscovered only a part of his conception. They saw in his work, not his vision of a wide and grand design, but rather much narrower and more specific findings, to be tested by their own kinds of experiments. For this failure of communication, the whole science of genetics suffered for many years.
The intrinsic difficulty of great innovation and the numerous impediments to its communication are surely but two of the reasons for its comparative infrequency. An important and perhaps an ultimately limiting factor, of course, is the inherent rarity of the deeply inno-

26

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

vating mind. Perhaps we must accept as given the fact that in any human population there will be a low proportion of truly original figures. But we are far from certain just how low that proportion needs to be under the best conditions. The nature of those conditions demands the most serious consideration.
It is a striking paradox that, though our contemporary culture affords opportunities for creativeness probably unequaled in human history, it also poses hazards that may likewise be unequaled. One important kind of hazard is inherent in the very structure of thought and philosophy which may crystallize about a field of inquiry. Such well formed systems, when rigidly and tenaciously held, may constitute more powerful and dangerous barriers to the advance of concept and experiment alike than we ordinarily recognize. The more elaborate the pattern, the more adequate, the more satisfactory, the more self-consistent it seems, the more difficult it is to transcend and the greater may be the resistance to truly original departures from it. This paradoxical balance between the older thinking and the new is the more delicate because it seems inevitable that, although all new scientific concepts must transcend the older matrix from which they arise, if they are to become established and permanent they must also find firm links with it. . . .
There can be no more vivid examples of the tremendous power of a central idea in advancing or retarding innovation than those offered by the sciences of life and of mind, in our generation in ferment such as they have not known since the days of Galen or of Leeuwenhoek. The distinction between the "living" and the "not-alive" as two quite different and opposite categories is far

27
older than even medieval science. From the days of Harvey it was refined even further, until, for almost-modern biology, it was not considered difficult in practice to characterize a newly discovered object as living or nonliving. Into our own time the life sciences almost unconsciously retained as a central concept a notion that actually had its greatest currency in sixteenth-century thinking. Implicitly, if not explicitly, the organism was commonly endowed with the "property" of life as a unique, inhabiting quality much as the alchemist endowed the burning body with phlogiston, or the early physicist the bar with weight and color, length and hardness, or the physician the bitter pill with taste.
Perhaps what did as much as anything to shake the central idea of life as a unique "inhabiting" property was the preparation of the "crystallizable" plant viruses a quarter of a century ago and the discovery of their long durability upon the shelf, so like a "lifeless" chemical, combined with the power to resume the lifelike properties of growth and reproduction after long periods when reinoculated to a suitable host. With that step taken, with the recognition that the "living" and the "nonliving" may in some contexts at least differ in degree rather than in kind, the advances of concept and experiment that now are in full tide crowded upon one another. Recent studies of the dynamics of metabolism, especially in microorganisms, have helped to replace the older notions of the structures of life as gross and essentially static morphologies, like cell walls and semipermeable membranes, with those far more exciting concepts of precise structural lattices and highly specific sites of adsorption which in the last years have become dominant. Radical experi-

28 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

ments in the synthesis of amino acids under conditions approximating those believed to have obtained on the lifeless earth, and illuminating researches in paleobiochemistry, have made common currency of the notion that living things may have indeed originated terrestrially, and have further obscured the division between the living and the nonliving. Quantitative biochemical genetics, the fine analysis of the structure and function of the chromosome that is proceeding apace today, with its accompanying new insights into the mechanisms of replication and its demonstrations of transduction and transformation, further reinforce the new ideas of biological systems as wonderfully complex dynamic structures of exquisitely detailed precision in both space and time. Some modern investigators of the structure of the chromosome see in it a precisely designed mechanism for the transfer of information, as truly an instrument of communication as any designed by man, and far more intricate in function. Indeed, it seems quite possible that in our time some of the new central ideas about living matter, whether as individual organism, as structured population, or as the changing product of evolution, will describe it primarily in terms of selfregulating, goal-directed s y s t e m s to which modern concepts of information theory and information flow can profitably be applied. It is hard to realize the swift and tremendous strides of thirty years which the escape from too exclusive a preoccupation with an old idea has brought.
A similar revolution is beginning in the science of the mind, again consequent upon the abandoning of an older concept, this time even more confining. Here, to the notion of life as a "prop-

erty" of living matter was added a further barrier--the central idea of the mind as fundamentally different in kind even from the living body, the res cogitans as distinct from the res extensa-- inherited from the brilliant eighteenthcentury advocacy of Descartes. It is only in the last few years that mind, too, has widely come to be regarded as a selfregulated, goal-directed dynamic system, structured, like life itself, with exquisite precision and almost unimaginable complexity in both space and time, but not necessarily differing in essence, not necessarily wholly beyond the modes of investigation already available to us. It is only now that the central idea of communication which has become so prominent in the life sciences--and indeed may be so important to the whole structure of science itself--has been extended to the subject of mind as well; that mental processes in some of their aspects are beginning to be translated, like the processes of heredity, into terms of communication theory and information flow. We can only speculate today what the consequences may be. As with the life sciences, experimental evidence is accumulating along the novel paths of thought that escape from the older pivotal notions has made possible, evidence provided from such diverse sources as studies of therapeutic neurochemicals and of electronic computing systems.
No more vivid historical examples, perhaps, could be cited of the long delays to basically new departures that too static and finished, too self-contained and self-consistent systems of thought may impose than these sciences of life and mind.
There are other barriers of a more practical sort. One of the profound ways in which the modern world oiay

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

differ from other centuries is in its conscious recognition of, and its high respect for, the fact--but not always the process --of innovation. Recognizing its power, our own society would like to hurry it along, to enlarge its scale, to organize it more efficiently. Impressed as we are by the extent to which the processes of development built upon innovation can be accelerated by organization, we are greatly tempted to extend this thinking to creative matters, to believe that we can organize for great innovation too. Such misconceptions are peculiarly liable to occur in massive and highly organized environments devoted to research and development. They are inherent in the all-too-prevalent confusion between the processes of scientific research itself and of development, in the frequently uncritical transfer of ideas and techniques from development and production into the field of scientific innovation. Among them, too often, is the destructive concept that the effectiveness of innovation, like that of production, can be doubled simply by doubling the size of the accompanying effort. Some departments of research and development in industry and in government are particularly vulnerable, and the academic world is by no means immune.
But we should be well warned. It is deeply significant that, in our own time of unparalleled technical advance, in a day when engineering achievements built about new principles can accomplish unbelievable things, the great innovations are still highly individual, are still associated, at their inception, with a mere handful of names.
The comparative rarity of the environments most favorable to truly original investigation, their unusual and special character, and the frequent practical

29
impediments to their best development may impose sharper limitations on the creative potential of our nation than we are inclined to recognize. Climates of research must comprehend many and varied elements, some of which are rarely joined in more ordinary situations. Important among them are understanding and protection. Since innovation is and must always remain a uniquely individual experience, it poses unusual social dangers for the investigator from which he must be adequately shielded--the animosity which the new, with its threat to current things, must often provoke. Such perils may not be fatal to the advance once it is fairly made. For if the advance is truly novel and important, and if the society in which it occurs is self-confident, it is likely to be eventually accepted and incorporated, and may even become symbolic. The greater risk is that the prospect of such hardships may inhibit the individual capable of great innovation from undertaking it or from fully developing its results. Such considerations of the hazards opposing the unexampled richness of opportunity for scientific creativeness in our society bring home anew the gravity of our responsibility to analyze most carefully this climate in which true scientific originality best flourishes and to see that environments embodying it are adequately provided and conserved.
It is not hard to set down the major tasks that institutions assuming these great responsibilities must perform. The most important, of course, must be the discovery, the encouragement, the adequate training of the outstandingly original investigator, and the fostering of his work. Such institutions must be unusually sensitive to the rare, natively innovating mind, and unusually adept in

30 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

its discovery. They must have in high degree the ability to promote and develop the peculiar drive, the special verve and flare, the fine sense of style, which great innovation inherently requires. They must be able to train the innovator of exceptional promise in the company of other gifted investigators already mature and at the height of their powers.
Above all, the environments that such institutions create must be unconventional and malleable. Their responsibility is not only to provide for the very different requirements of different workers, based in divergences of temperament, of method, of timing. It is also to meet the very different requirements of the same investigator at various periods of his working life. There must be ready, yet penetrating, astringent tolerance-- and indeed welcome and encouragement --for the long preliminary phase of apparently rambling and aimless effort that so often and so characteristically precedes the great individual discovery or the brilliant innovational career, while the ground is being canvassed and a wealth of divergent but relevant material is being mastered and consolidated. There must be provision for the long intervals of seclusion and introversion that may be essential during periods of highest creativity, when white-hot effort will not brook interruption. There must be ample understanding and ample capacity to shield the worker in this his most vulnerable time from the insistent demands that will surely come to prematurely formulate results and conclusions only half-attained. Conversely, there must also be adequate provision for compensating periods of extroversion, when the immediate barrier is surmounted and the conclusions are con-

solidated and the extensive communication that must accompany or follow creativity is encouraged and sustained.
Institutions for creative research must be able to set and apply subtle standards of excellence. They must be able to judge and reward high standards by criteria more searching and more true than those too often and too superficially accepted. They must provide teachers of research of the very highest quality, and in high ratio to those they train--indeed, those primarily in training as investigators should, ideally, be in the minority. And they have one final and supremely important responsibility -- the task of communicating the results of research rapidly and effectively to workers in fields that may seem far remote, yet may actually be contiguous to those in which the discoveries have been made. Such institutions will benefit greatly by being relatively small, and will almost certainly benefit, too, if they are somewhat decentralized, both physically and in the subject matter with which they deal.
The discovery and training of new generations of investigators in science are, of course, basically functions of the universities. Theirs must be a grave portion of the responsibility. But they are inevitably hindered in this special task by many of the current pressures that bear especially heavily upon them: the pressures to large size, to an everlessening ratio of teachers to students, to a lowered quality in the teaching staff itself, valiantly as this is--and must always be--resisted. Moreover, the whole mission of the universities is of course far broader. The training of great innovators, and, even more specifically, of great innovators in the scientific way, must always remain one of their most

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

important challenges. But it is, of necessity, a somewhat narrow sector in the total context of their work. They need assistance.
Such circumstances place renewed emphasis in our day on the great and continuing importance of the research institute in our national life. Its task is not only that of scientific innovation and discovery. This indeed is important enough. But, far more important, to it must fall the essential function of symbolizing in the best and purest form the way of scientific innovation with all that it means for our nation and our culture --undismayed and undeterred by pressure or by hazard. To it belongs the great responsibility of discovering and fostering new minds of high promise, of selecting them with discernment, of affording them a rare training as investigators, and then of seeing to it that their careers can be fulfilled where their talents are most effective. Far beyond the task of research itself lie the challenge

31
and the responsibility to cultivate new minds through all the possible and relevant means--symposia and exchange fellowships, the flow to university and industry and back again, all the particular media of publication.
More and more, in our time, it is recognized that the true wealth of a nation resides not so much in the volume and the variety of goods that it can produce, not even so much in its total resources of production, but rather in two human factors more subtle, more powerful, more determining: in the quality and excellence of its people as a whole, and in their capacity for innovation. In the guarding, the fostering, the building of this last element of national wealth lies the ultimate challenge to such a research organization as the Carnegie Institution of Washington. Never in the history of science in our nation has that challenge been more exciting, that responsibility more keenly privileged.

