Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Notes at the conclusion of the second Princeton conference (Princeton, N. J., November 18­20, 1965)
Dudley Kirk
To cite this article: Dudley Kirk (1966) Notes at the conclusion of the second Princeton conference (Princeton, N. J., November 18­20, 1965), Eugenics Quarterly, 13:2, 147-151, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1966.9987659 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1966.9987659
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:28

Brief Reports
NOTES AT THE CONCLUSION OF THE SECOND PRINCETON CONFERENCE (PRINCETON, N. J., NOVEMBER 18-20, 1965)
DUDLEY KIRK
Population Council New York, New York

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

The purpose of this meeting, as I understand it, is to bring the experience and wisdom of several disciplines to bear on the problem of measuring variations in human heredity and of determining the selective forces that operate to change gene frequencies. My report will inevitably reflect selective perception, and I hope you will take the opportunity to make any corrections that you think appropriate in emphasis and perspective.
For the last 25 years or so, we have seen an overwhelming tide of sociological and social determinism that has almost monopolized thinking on these questions in the social sciences.
We are engaged here in an attempt to break through our respective intellectual isolates, whether in genetics, psychology, or sociology. The question is whether we are getting from this hybrid vigor, or simply miscegenation, or perhaps no mating of ideas at all.
In this connection, it is gratifying that the first report by Lewontin showed concrete progress as recommended at our last meeting here in Princeton in establishing an interdisciplinary program in population genetics and demography that may have the distinction of being project number one in the new National Science program.
We then proceeded to consider three background papers from three different disciplines:

PSYCHOLOGY
Loehlin in his paper and brief oral discussion, "Measuring the Phenotype in Human Behavior Genetics," presented a very lucid summary supplemented by what looked to an amateur to be an extraordinarily useful and well organized bibliography.
Among his practical suggestions, I was most intrigued by the idea that studies of heritability should include measures of characteristics that are clearly not heritable: this as a control would be very important when one may expect comparatively low true heritabilities with potentially great unreliability in measurement. I was struck by Lewontin's observation in the discussion that,even in drosophila experiments heritability of .50 is considered high and that therefore psychologists and others should not be unduly disturbed at the relatively low indices of heritability obtained in this kind of work.
Ginsburg made a provocative comment on the need for culture-dependent tests for comparisons with so-called culturefree tests. We may be approaching the problem of measuring the I. Q. from the wrong angle. The I. Q. apparently is a good measure to the extent that it is correlated with success in the society concerned. We may be striving for culturefree tests of unimportant matters at the expense of getting measures of the things that are really significant.

147

148

Brief Reports

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

ANTHROPOLOGY
Harvey presented a paper and brief discussion on "Recent Trends in Social Structure Studies with Implications for Population Genetics." Anthropologists are moving toward more collection of quantitative data of value in demographic and genetic contexts. These include data on kinship, inbreeding, birth and death rates, etc.
Lewontin raised a challenging issue: Why the great interest in the subject of inbreeding in human population? In the subsequent discussion I drew the conclusion from the geneticists that study of inbreeding in human populations is significant only insofar as it contributes to homozygosity and that even in small populations the degree of inbreeding may be ignored for most genetic purposes. If true, this, of course, bears on the value or lack of value of kinship studies in primitive populations for the purposes of genetic research.
Scott suggested that study of small populations of primitive societies are interesting not just because of consanguinity but because this is the situation in which most of human evolution occurred. I took this to be the prevailing view among geneticists.
SOCIOLOGY
Scott in his paper and discussion on "Social Genetics" described a hierarchy of scientific organization ranging from molecular genetics to social and population genetics. Perhaps most provocative was his assertion that the greater the degree of differentiation (whether among dogs or humans), the greater the degree of differentiation of social organization developed by them. This led to a vigorous discussion with a tentative conclusion that this was an attractive theory hard to demonstrate in practice. The

most obvious illustration in our own society--stratification based on color-- probably should be ruled out because there is no evidence that color genetically determines behavior.
PROPOSED STUDIES
There followed discussion of three proposed studies:
Phenotypic Selection and Human Behavior
Allen made a presentation under the title, "Some Reasons and a Proposal for Studying Phenotypic Selection with Respect to Human Behavioral Traits." He illustrated the method of determining the index of opportunity for selection, which defines the limits o£ possible evolution occurring in the society. We study phenotypes in the absence of the means of relating behavior to genotypes. The first step here is the direction of phenotypic selection and, after that, to determine what genetic variables are involved in different phenotypes.
In civilized societies the selective forces affecting gene frequencies are transient, variable, and extremely hard to measure. In the present study, Allen hopes to determine selective forces under stable cultural conditions.
With the help of Dr. Redekop, Allen described the extraordinarily interesting community of some 13,000 Old Colony Mennonites in Mexico, a closed community with negligible gene infiltration since 1870 and unlikely to change culturally in the next 20 years.
Maher expressed skepticism about the proposed tests: he asked if it was not a long shot to expect to relate "traits" to fitness; he wondered whether objective and higher order measures of success like "money in the bank" would be more meaningful (incidentally, the kind of socioeconomic variable demographers are

Vol. 13, No. 2

Brief Reports

149

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

using all the time to measure reproductivity or, if you will, "fitness").
Not unexpectedly, it was concluded that one should try both "traits" and measures of success among the Old Colony Mennonites, and it was further suggested that a homogeneous society of this type might be a good place to try out measures of the fitness of value-laden traits of character.
Ginsburg suggested that the study might well achieve the opposite or converse objective to that suggested (i.e., the study group comes from a heterogeneous European population; it is a sizeable group that now does not have systematic selection; maybe this study will be a means of testing culture-free tests rather than genetic selection).
Gottesman and Weinstock expressed concern about the danger of contamination by interviewers and the "subtle cultural infiltration" of the Sears Roebuck catalog, which seems to serve a number of cultural, and some unexpectedly practical, purposes in this society.
In this connection, Allen asked concerning the necessity and efficiency of the proposed 20-year follow-up. Kirk expressed the view that perhaps almost as good results could be obtained from a study of 12 to 15 years. The objective is presumably to obtain a three-generational perspective rather than a twogenerational one. With cohort analysis, the span of 12 to 15 years would make possible projections of total number of children born that would be almost as good as carrying the observation 5 to 8 years longer. In any case, it seems optimistic to hope that this group will not be affected culturally over a 20-year period considering the rapid socioeconomic change now going forward in the surrounding Mexican society.
It was felt that Allen could obtain the kind of workers he needs who would

have both social science training and the low German dialect; there are apparently a sufficient number of people of similar Mennonite background with social science training to carry forward such studies.
Sociopsychological Factors and Fertility
Weinstock described a possible study of sociopsychological factors affecting fertility. Previous studies in this area have shown productive results only in relation to socioeconomic class and to religion. Perhaps we have been looking at the wrong variables. He would like to study reference groups, differential association, communication patterns, knowledge of sex, etc. He would like to try out concepts of time; consumption aspirations; family identity (self-identity vs. negative self-image); image of the marriage partner; the need for affiliation, power, and achievement.
He proposes to study a sample of 1,000 Irish and Italian American Catholics, 200 families each of 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 parities, married 10 years. He would throw out biological sterility and would not use any age control.
The study is purely in the thinking stage; there is no financing or organization as yet jelled.
There seemed to be agreement that psychological variables due to genetic factors must logically have a part in differences in family size and that further exploration of this problem was desirable.
Wisconsin Student Population
R. Osborne described the "Wisconsin Study of Students and Families." He contrasts his study with Allen's, which he pictured as a survey of a stable and homogeneous community for investigating components of behavioral variables.

150

Brief Reports

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

He pictured the Wisconsin group by contrast with the Mennonites as a complex heterogeneous mixture of diverse genetic stock and certainly greater diversity of environment. While the objectives and the use of the Wisconsin data are not yet fully laid out, he thought that university students provide the opportunity (1) to get at heritability in a large, genetically diverse population; (2) for partitioning environments in which one can try to find culture-free tests; and (3) for measurement of achievement in the university and afterwards.
The immediate problem is to set up an effective data-gathering system and to determine what should be collected.
Osborne has immediate objectives to study and measure the spontaneous automatic nervous system action and other behavioral reactions. But the application of a regular battery of test profiles for twins, sibs, and families is, of course, planned.
Lewontin suggested picking a spectrum of relationships--identical twins, fraternal twins, sibs, double cousins, single cousins, etc.--to obtain a curve of genetic vs. environmental influence.
While there was general agreement as to the usefulness of such a spectrum, no one offered a suggestion of how such graded relationships could be readily ascertained from the proposed data.
Lewontin also challenged the idea that the Wisconsin student population is genetically heterogenous as contrasted with the Old Colony Mennonites. The student population is highly selected and relatively homogenous at least as regards intelligence, in contrast to the unselected Mennonites.
Ginsburg felt that the proposed measures included too narrow a band of qualities in such things as the I.Q.; it is equally important to measure other factors in success, such as motivation,

industry, and social dynamics, to which Maher added physical attractiveness.
One was left with the impression that in the Wisconsin data there was a potentially rich ore, but as yet we did not quite see how best to mine and refine it for the purposes at hand.
DEFINITION OF "TRAIT"
In the discussion on Saturday morning, we got back to an old question in all scientific inquiry: What is the unit of measurement? What is a trait? There was a useful airing of ideas with agreement (at least among nonpsychologists) that a trait is something found to be empirically useful in measurement, or, as Dobzhansky said, a trait is what the psychologists call a trait. Loehlin pointed out that the heritability coefficient applies only to the population studied and that psychologists do not now use measures of variation nearly so much as they focus on development of the individual. Maher's suggestion that a trait must have temporal stability was challenged. There seemed to be some division between the psychologists and the geneticists in that the psychologists, for example, Hirsch, felt that at this stage it was more fruitful to focus on the organism than the society. Scott and Ginsburg felt that emotion, motivation, etc. may be more important than the central nervous system and that the unit of study should be in the behavioral rather than in the mechanical area. Ginsburg called for a review of the measurement problem with an open mind. Maybe we need quite a different set of measures, for example, of genetically determined motivations, etc. He made the suggestion that we should generate general hypotheses from the present studies, not just description: generalization both (1) methodological-- about how measures may be culture-free

Vol. 13, No. 2

Brief Reports

151

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

or not--and (2) about the general influence of heredity and environment. It was amusing to find the geneticists arguing for an essentially social approach against the psychologists who emphasized the study of the individual.
There was some discussion of whether the objective of measuring selection in evolution was genetically more meaningful here than the measurement of the individual. It would be useful to measure early child potentiality but with the objective of getting at heritability rather than the sequence of physical and psychological development of the individual human being.
CONCLUSIONS
1. On communication: I was agreeably impressed by the facility of interdisciplinary exchange we have had here. Our last meeting, which was somewhat more technical, resulted in the population geneticists and the demographers

rather talking past each other. Speaking as a demographer, I found the psychologists here lucid and germane, and I even felt that I now understood what Lewontin and Allen were saying when they went to the blackboard, which was not always true at our previous meeting. Having been exposed to the previous discussion did provide a useful background.
2. On applications: I thought our several disciplines were brought to bear quite fruitfully on the proposed study of old Mennonites--the possibilities, the problems, and the risks. I thought we were less successful in focusing on the Wisconsin study, which is admittedly at an earlier stage of conceptualization.
3. Finally, I hope that some summary of the proceedings will be made available, at least to all of us who attended; but some of the materials that were presented seem to me to be much too good to be restricted to this relatively small audience. I hope there will be some provision for publication.

