Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Heredity counseling
C. Nash Herndon M.D.
To cite this article: C. Nash Herndon M.D. (1954) Heredity counseling, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:1, 64-66, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987165 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987165
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

HEREDITY COUNSELING

C. NASH HERNDON, M.D.
Bowman Gray School of Medicine Wake Forest College

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

XHE GENETIC COUNSELOR meets all sorts oí problems, no two really alike, but many involving some family tragedy. Unfortunately, a rather gloomy prognosis must be offered to many individuals requesting advice concerning problems in heredity. It is therefore a pleasure to encounter a couple to whom a more cheerful prognosis may be given.
Mr. and Mrs. X were deeply concerned over the fact that both had relatives with epilepsy. Although they had been married for six years, they remained childless because of fear of having epileptic children. They consulted their family physician concerning this problem and were referred to the Department of Medical Genetics of the Bowman Gray School of Medicine.
An extensive family history was obtained by questioning Mr. and Mrs. X. Their family physician had advised them to obtain as much information as possible concerning their relatives, and they brought with them necessary family records and reports from physicians who had treated certain relatives. It was possible to construct a nearly complete pedigree of both families covering four generations.
Mr. X was next to the youngest in a family of eleven children, three of whom had died in infancy. Three brothers and three sisters were living and well. An older brother was a severe epileptic. His convulsive attacks had begun at the age of eleven years and had gradually progressed in severity. Mental deterioration occurred, and he became subject to violent rages. As he was dangerous to others during such

Discussions of problems in heredity counseling will be presented in eachissue of EUGENICS QUARTERLY by a geneticist.
attacks, he was committed to a state hospital for epileptics and was still a patient there at the age of forty-five. All of Mr. X's six normal brothers and sisters were married and collectively had eleven normal children. However, one sister had an only son who was reported to be "crippled." Information from his physician indicated that this boy had cerebral palsy that was apparently secondary to birth injury and probably not of the inherited variety.
There was no evidence of any pertinent abnormality in Mr. X's father, his paternal grandparents, or among any of the six paternal uncles and aunts or their descendants. However, two additional cases of epilepsy had occurred in relatives of Mr. X's mother. His mother had nine brothers and sisters, all normal, but one of the sisters had seven children of whom one girl had frequent and severe convulsions, was thought to be mentally retarded, and had died of pneumonia at the age of eighteen years. Mr. X's maternal grandmother had five normal brothers and sisters, but one of these sisters had nine children of whom one had convulsions and two others were mentally retarded.
In summary, Mr. X had three blood relatives with some form of convulsive state, these being a brother, a first cousin, and a first cousin once removed.
In the family of Mrs. X there were two relatives who definitely had some form of epilepsy, and a third with a questionable history. Mrs. X's mother, age fifty-eight,

64

65

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

had been subject to occasional convulsions for the past ten years and had more frequent spells of "blanking out" for a few seconds, diagnosed by her physician as the petit mal form of epilepsy. The mother had four brothers and sisters, one of these having died at the age of forty, but having previously had minor attacks suggestive of petit mal. Mrs. X had twelve brothers and sisters. A brother, age fourteen, was reported to have convulsive attacks and visual disturbances present since an accident two years previously. He had been carefully studied by our Department of Neurosurgery, and it was found that the convulsions were of the Jacksonian type, secondary to the accident, and definitely not hereditary.
In addition to the patients with convulsions, Mr. and Mrs. X were worried about two other items. Three of Mrs. X's brothers, her father and two paternal uncles had nystagmus, or "dancing eyes." This consisted of uncontrollable rapid side-to-side motion of the eyeballs, present at all times', and interfering with vision to a moderate extent, but with no other symptoms. Nystagmus is often a sign of disease of the nervous system, and Mrs. X thought that this might be connected in some way with the epilepsy. We were fortunately able to show that the nystagmus was of the congenital stationary type, which is inherited, but is not indicative of any serious nervous or mental disease and causes no disability beyond moderate visual disturbance. We were able to demonstrate that nystagmus was due to a dominant gene in this family but that Mrs. X did not possess this gene and would not transmit this condition to her children.
Mrs. X's last worry concerned "insanity," as one of her aunts had sustained a "mental breakdown" at the age of forty-five requiring sanitorium treatment. Her psychiatrist informed us that the patient had only a menopausal psychoneurosis and was not psychotic. Hereditary factors are not

known to be of importance in this condition.
The list of family abnormalities, which we might call the debit side of the ledger, seems bad enough, but is not nearly so gloomy as Mr. and Mrs. X had feared. The clinical and pedigree data clearly show that the nephew with cerebral palsy, the aunt with the "mental breakdown," Mrs. X's brother with Jacksonian epilepsy, and her relatives with congenital nystagmus were of no significance with regard to the prognosis for children of Mr. and Mrs. X. They were assured that these conditions could be entirely disregarded. The only debit item of serious concern is the presence of epilepsy of an inherited type on both sides of the family.
On the other hand, it was noted that there were also factors which should be entered on the credit side of the ledger, although these were a bit more difficult to evaluate. First, both Mr. and Mrs. X seemed to be above average in general intelligence. Being one of the youngest in a family of eleven, Mr. X did not have the advantage of a college education, but in spite of this he had risen to a responsible position in a large manufacturing concern. He was superintendent of a manufacturing section, his position requiring special knowledge of cloth manufacture and of repair and maintenance of intricate machinery, and also required skill in personnel management of nearly one hundred employees under his direction. Mrs. X had completed college, was a school teacher, and was successful in her profession also. Further inquiry revealed that both Mr. and Mrs. X were active in civic and church affairs in their home community and were well liked by their neighbors and associates. Physical examinations and inquiry to their physician demonstrated that they were both healthy physically and mentally. In summary, both seemed to be above average in those qualities which are difficult to measure but which are generally considered desirable in the community.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

66 Eugenics Quarterly

At this point the consultant felt that the debit and credit values were very nearly in balance for this couple, and more exact information seemed highly desirable. It is known that in many cases, though not in all, asymptomatic carriers of the inherited predisposition to epilepsy may be identified by use of the electroencephalograph. This instrument records the electrical activity of the cortex of the brain. Many carriers will show specific abnormalities of these records that can be identified. If either Mr. or Mrs. X could be definitely identified as a carrier of hereditary epilepsy, the risk that this disability might appear in their children would be of serious concern. While a normal brain tracing would not entirely rule out the possibility of this unfortunate event, it would indicate a much lower risk. The Neurology Department made the required examinations and reported that Mr. and Mrs. X both had normal tracings.
We therefore felt that the likelihood that epilepsy might appear in one or more children of this couple was quite small and that the other desirable qualities that they exhibited would far outweigh this risk. Mr. and Mrs. X were therefore advised of these opinions and reassured concerning their fears. We hope that they may have as many children as they desire.
This case is described in such detail to emphasize a principle that must always be kept in mind by the genetic counselor. One must not only consider the obvious abnormality which prompts the patient to seek

genetic advice; one must also take into account all evidence that may be obtainable concerning the total genetic potential of the parties concerned. It is possible to lay down hard and fast rules for only a few very severe hereditary abnormalities, which are fortunately rather rare. Each case must be handled as an individual and unique situation, with due attention to many factors. The absence of exact and objective methods of measurement makes any estimate of total genetic potential a matter of judgment, and in addition such factors as the mental stability of the prospective parents and their attitudes toward children must also be considered. Such an evaluation of multiple factors is admittedly difficult and inexact, but it must be undertaken.
The genetic counselor has a responsibility to relieve anxiety and fear wherever this is possible, and this may be done adequately only by considering all possible aspects of the unique family situation under observation. This principle and other related matters were discussed at more length during a panel discussion on genetic counseling held at a recent meeting of the American Society of Human Genetics (Dice, 1952). It is to be hoped that further research in genetics and allied fields will permit more exact estimations of the total genetic potential of individuals in the future.
REFERENCE
DICE, L. R., chairman, 1952. A panel discussion: genetic counseling. Amer. J. Human Genetics 4:332-346.

Annual Business Meeting of American Eugenics Society

The annual business meeting of the American Eugenics Society was held at the Sheraton-Plaza Hotel, Boston, Massachusetts on December 29, 1953, immediately after the Symposium on Genetics Factors Affecting Intelligence, with President C. Nash Herndon presiding. The following new directors were elected: Gordon Allen,

M.D., Dr. Emily Mudd, Mrs. Dorothy Iselin Paschal. An amendment to the Bylaws was passed which raised membership dues from $3.00 to $5.00 and abolished library and associate membership. The Annual Report (see p. 79) was presented by the Secretary, Frederick Osborne, and the Treasurer's report read.

