Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Biologic concepts of sex and reproduction
Sheldon J. Segal
To cite this article: Sheldon J. Segal (1960) Biologic concepts of sex and reproduction, Eugenics Quarterly, 7:3, 148-156, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1960.9987442 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1960.9987442
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

BIOLOGIC CONCEPTS OF SEX AND REPRODUCTION
SHELDON J. SEGAL
Laboratory of the Population Council The Rockefeller Institute

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

A BIOLOGIC CONCEPT, sex may be
considered as a comparison of contrasting characteristics in organisms that produce either eggs or sperm. It is not a force to produce these contrasts, but simply the aggregate of genetic, anatomic, physiologic and psychologic qualities that we recognize as maleness or femaleness. Egg and sperm may be produced by a single individual; such cases are known as hermaphrodites. Since some lower animal forms are naturally hermaphroditic, sexuality may relate only to the genetic characteristics of the gametes and omit completely any consideration of somatic variations among individuals. But for most animals, including all the protochordates and chordates, sexuality refers to the composite of genetic, somatic and behavioral contrasts between males and females. The somatic differences involve mostly the reproductive system and various accessory structures, frequently ornamental, that are related somehow to the process of reproduction. Even though sex-specific characteristics may exist that have no apparent association with reproduction, these usually result from the action of hormones of the reproductive system. Examples would include sex-differences in the normal concentration of certain blood constituents or the fact that tolerance to drugs may differ between the two sexes of a single species.

SEX DETERMINATION
Genetic sex is established at fertilization and until differentiation of the gonads during embryonic development of the individual, chromosomal constitution may be considered the sole manifestation of sex. The term sex determination is often applied to the establishment of chromosome constitution at the time of fusion of egg and sperm. With each gamete contributing a haploid complement of chromosomes, the fertilization process establishes the diploid chromosome number, characteristic of the species and found in the nuclei of all somatic cells. In the human, for example, the diploid number of 46 chromosomes has now been amply verified (Tjio et al., 1959). In males and females, 44 chromosomes may be classified in 22 pairs, termed autosomes. The remaining two of females are paired also, and are known as the sex chromosomes, symbolized as XX. Males, however, have sex chromosomes that are morphologically distinguishable; one resembles the X chromosome of females and the other is the much smaller Y chromosome. The sex chromosome constitution of the male, therefore, is XY, and it is referred to as the heterogametic sex. Consequently, when chromosomal reduction to the haploid number occurs in the process of sperm formation (spermatogenesis) half of the sperm are endowed with a set of

148

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

autosomes and an X chromosome, while the other half contain the 22 autosomes and a Y chromosome. The former may be termed gynosperm and the latter androsperm. Obviously, the female produces only one kind of egg, all carrying the X chromosome; this is the homogametic sex. It is assumed that sex is genetically determined on the basis of a quantitative balance between male-determining and female-determining genes. Although the sex chromosomes are the primary vehicles for sex-determining genes, in certain animal forms autosomal factors may contribute to the quantitative balance that decides sexuality (Goldschmidt, 1955). The "balance" system works so that two doses of the female determiners on the X-chromosomes (XX) overcome the male determiners outside of the X, but one dose (XY) is insufficient for the dominance of female factors. The quantitative balance theory of sex determination emphasizes that male and female sex determiners are present in both sexes, accounting for the fact that in each sex the potentiality for the other sex is present.
HETEROGAMETY AND HETEROCHROMOSY
Considering the distribution of chromosomes during the genesis of gametes, it is apparent that in species with male heterogamety, as in the human, the chromosomal constitution of the sperm is of major importance in determining sex at fertilization. Efforts have been made to separate androsperm and gynosperm on the basis of supposed differences in physical-chemical properties (Gordon, 1957). Such separation, followed by artificial insemination, could permit the control of sex of offspring. To date, however, confirmed and defini-

149
tive results have not been achieved. Promising investigations are continuing, utilizing the techniques of electrophoresis (Vesselinovitch, 1960), immunology (Tyler, 1948) and differential centrifugation (Lindahl, 1958). It has been claimed by Shettles (1960) that androsperm and gynosperm of the human can be identified by morphologic characteristics evident under the phase microscope. Future confirmation will be required to establish the validity of this observation. About ten years ago Barr and his co-workers (1949) discovered a previously ignored sexual dimorphism in somatic cell nuclei that permits the identification of male or female tissue. It is possible to identify female tissue by the presence of a characteristic chromatin mass, which is absent or only occasionally seen in male cells. This body, the sex chromatin mass, is probably a manifestation of the intermitotic phase of the X chromosomes. There remains some controversy as to its precise origin. However, the study of sex-chromatin has become of considerable importance in diagnosing and classifying cases of human intersexuality (Segal and Nelson, 1957). For this purpose, the terms chromatin-positive and chromatin-negative have been introduced to refer to females and males, respectively.
PRIMARY SEX DIFFERENTIATION
The sex glands serve the dual function of gamete production and hormone secretion. They originate identically in males and females as undifferentiated primordia consisting of a cortical and medullary region. The cortex is an inductor of female differentiation and the medulla an inductor of male differentiation. In the event of male development the embryonic medulla predominates to form the major part of the testis and

150 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

the cortex regresses. Female development is marked by the dominance o£ the cortex which gives rise to an ovary. Normally, the pathway of differentiation to form testes or ovaries is determined by the genetic sex established at fertilization. Nevertheless, this process can be influenced by non-genetic factors. It has been demonstrated in amphibia, birds and mammals that testes may very well develop in genetic females, if the proper hormonal or physical influence is exerted while the embryonic gonad is still in the indifferent state. Conversely, ovaries may be induced to differentiate in genetic males. The factors that decide the alternatives of testicular or ovarian differentiation may be placed in three groups: genetic, environmental and localized internal agents (for review, see Witschi, 1957). Environmental conditions such as extreme temperatures or delayed fertilization can partly or completely reverse the genetic determination of amphibia (Witschi, 1952). In nature, a striking example of the importance of environmental conditions during differentiation of the gonads is the case of the eel. Sex ratios of eel populations differ greatly in different geographic locales, in spite of the fact that the genetic mechanism for sex inheritance should result in a 50:50 sex ratio. Among certain European eels, females are more prevalent in the higher reaches of rivers, while in the estuaries and coastal seawaters males are more frequent. Also, in the farthest regions of the geographic area of distribution of a species, females tend to predominate. The accumulated facts and supporting experimental evidence suggest that environmental conditions such as temperature and crowding can overcome genetic sex determination and exert a primary influence over sex differentiation (D'Ancona, 1959). Ex-

ternal factors do not interfere by changing the genetic constitution. They affect adversely the cortical or medullary inductor systems that operate in the differentiation of the gonad. Among the invertebrates, the influence of external environmental factors on sex differentiation is noted in many species. In Bonellia, a gephyrean worm studied by Baltzer (1937), the males are minute and undergo sexual differentiation while parasitically attached to the larger female. Most of the free-swimming larvae which come to rest upon the probóscides of the females differentiate in the male direction; those which settle on the sea bottorm transform into females. Extracts of the proboscis, added to the water in which sexually indifferent larvae are maintained, are effective in encouraging the production of males. In another annelid worm, Ophryotrocha, all young individuals are functional males but become females under favorable environmental conditions. Adverse conditions, such as inanition, lack of oxygen, accumulated excretions resulting from overcrowding, cause the female to revert to the male phase (Hartmann and Lewinski, 1938). These examples serve to demonstrate that many of the invertebrates have genetic mechanisms so labile that natural or experimental alterations of the environment may suffice to produce sex reversals.
The role of localized internal factors in sex differentiation becomes evident through an analysis of experimental and naturally-occurring sex reversal in vertebrates. Lillie's (1917) descriptions of different sexed cattle twins illustrate this concept. When the fetal membranes of male and female calf embryos become united in the uterus so that a common blood circulation develops, the female embryo is modified in the male direction,

151

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

forming the so-called free-martin. So complete is this transformation that the female develops a sterile testis instead of an ovary. Absolute sex-reversal, to the extent of transforming genetic males or females into reproductively functional individuals of the opposite sex has been istration of hormonal susbtances before the embryonic gonad is differentiated. An example is the sex-reversal of Xenopus larvae, by Chang and Witschi (1955). If young tadpoles are reared in aquarium water containing small quantities of estrogenic hormones, the expected 50:50 sex ratio does not prevail; instead all larvae become ovary-bearing females. That genetic males are functioning as reproductive females without alteration of the original male genetic constitution can be proven by breeding experiments between sex-reversed males and normal males. Since in this species the male is homogametic (XX), 100 per cent of the offspring of such a mating are male. Many species of amphibia have been completely sex-reversed in this fashion. Functional sex reversal may be produced, also, in birds (Miller, 1938). It is entirely reasonable that this could occur in higher vertebrates although it has not yet been achieved experimentally or proven to have occurred spontaneously.
SECONDARY SEX DIFFERENTIATION
Differentiation of the accessory sex structures follows the primary differentiation of the gonad and almost without exception, throughout the vertebrate class, these organs are not under direct genetic control but under the influence of secretions from the newly-formed gonads. In the embryo during the indifferent stage, the oviducts (ducts of Müller) and mesonephric ducts (of Wolff) appear in both sexes. The oviduct is the primordium of the Fallopian tubes,

uterus and upper vagina. The mesonephric duct gives rise to the epididymis, vas deferens and seminal vesicle. In the male, the oviduct degenerates during the process of secondary sex differentiation, while in the female it is the mesonephric duct that does not persist. External genitalia of each sex develop from bipotential primordia, the urogenital sinus and the genital tubercle, which have the capacity to develop along masculine or feminine lines (for review, see Grumbach and Barr, 1958). Thus, each embryo possesses the potentiality to develop internal and external genital organs of either sex. Recent experiments, employing the technique of fetal castration, have elucidated the influence of the fetal gonad on the differentiation of the sex accessory organs. In the absence of gonads, mammalian fetuses will develop female accessory structures, regardless of whether the castrated individual be genetic male or genetic female. (Jost, 1947). If genetic males are deprived of their fetal gonads after the masculinization of the upper portion of the genital duct system has begun, then only the lower regions and the external genitalia are of the feminine type. In this fashion, pseudohermaphrodites can be experimentally produced which possess both male and female genital structures. By unilateral castration, it can be demonstrated that the morphologic inductive capacity of the mammalian fetal testis acts locally to suppress the oviduct and activate the mesonephric duct. Removal of a single fetal testis results in the appearance of a female duct system on the operated side, while male development proceeds on the unmolested side. These experiments of Jost, with rabbit fetuses, have contributed considerably toward the understanding of human pseudohermaphroditism and intersexual-

152 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

ity. Parallel experiments of Wolff (1959) in birds reveal the interesting fact that in this group of vertebrates, it is the ovary that must be present to suppress the tendency for masculine differentiation to occur. The principles regarding the inductive role of the gonad in the differentiation of the accessory sex organs are identical. Why the agonadal condition results in masculinization in one group of vertebrates and in another brings about feminization is problematical. In all likelihood, the explanation is linked to the fact that females are the homogametic sex in mammals while male birds are homogametic. How this genetic factor acts in secondary sex differentiation is unknown.
CONTROL OF ADULT SECONDARY SEX
CHARACTERISTICS
The establishment and maintenance of sexual patterns, both morphologic and behavioral, usually involve the activity of coordinated hormonal interactions. Some sexual dimorphisms, particularly among birds, are not hormonally controlled but are determined by genetic constitution directly. This is true of normal sex differences in plumage of a number of avian species. In the English sparrow, neither removal of the gonad nor hormone injection has any noticeable effect on plumage dimorphism (Keck, 1934). An intermediate type is represented by the pheasant in which full development of sexually characteristic plumage is dependent upon simultaneous actions of both genetic and hormonal factors (Danforth, 1935).
In contrast to those instances, mainly in birds, of direct genetic control, is the vast majority of behavioral and morphologic expressions of sexuality which are established and controlled by hormonal mechanisms. The range of hormonally controlled sexual characteristics in ver-

tebrates extends from exotic courtship rites of salamanders to such majestic ornaments as the antlers of the deer or the mane of the lion. Almost all of these sex-specific features are under the influence of steroid hormones, produced by the sex glands. However, exceptional situations have been described in which there is a direct influence of protein hormones from the pituitary on secondary sex characteristics. In several generations of African finches, the male bird assumes a bright nuptial plumage at the onset of the breeding season. He maintains this adornment for two or three months and then, after molting, dons the hen-type plumage, a constant characteristic of the female. This plumage change coincides with the cyclic change of the gonads from the quiescent to the breeding stage. Castrated males, however, continue to develop the colored plumage rhythmically. This indicates that feather pigmentation during the male phase of the plumage cycle is not controlled by the gonad. It has been established that a pituitary hormone, luteinizing hormone, controls this secondary sex characteristic (Witschi 1936). This represents an unusual case, perhaps an evolutionary transition, for almost always pituitary hormones direct their action toward endocrine glands and it is the secretions of the target glands that influence the rest of the body soma.
As each vertebrate organism approaches the stage of gonadal maturation, greater and greater contrast between male and female becomes apparent. Male guppies develop a gonopod; thumb-pads appear on the digits of male frogs. In the male turtle, Pseudemys elegans, the three middle foreclaws, which are used to stimulate the female during courtship, begin to elongate. Voice changes, not unlike those of young

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

boys approaching puberty, become apparent in such diversified vertebrates as the leopard frog, tree toad, prairie chicken, domestic duck and the male mink. With the onset of gonadal function in the male Virginia deer, antler growth begins. By the time these appendages are needed for fighting during courtship, they have shed the velvet and grown hard in response to increased production of testis hormones. The boar's tusks, the bull's horn and crest, the goat's odor gland, the ram's horns and the rooster's comb and spurs are all well-known secondary sex characteristics that respond to the action of testicular hormones (for review, see Beach, 1949). Females are equally dependent upon hormonal stimuli from the gonads for the development of sex-contrasting characteristics. The thread-like oviducts of the female frog enlarge to fill most of the abdominal cavity as the first breeding season approaches. The female opossum's vicious resentment of the male's advances is replaced by docile acceptance as ovarian function becomes established. The female clawed-toad, Xenopus, undistinguishable from males as young juveniles, responds to ovarian hormone production by a typically feminine growth pattern just as the awakened ovary stimulates the developing of feminine contours in the human female at puberty.
SEX CYCLES: NEURAL INFLUENCE ON
SEXUALITY
In many vertebrates, the majority of sex-specific characters appear and regress seasonally at the time of the breeding season, while others, including all primates studied, maintain most sexual features from the time of puberty until the onset of gonadal senility. These differences depend on events controlling the function of the gonads. All lower ver-

153
tebrates, most birds and some wild mammalian species, are seasonal breeders. Ovaries and testes regress each year at the end of the breeding season. Consequently, the hormone-sensitive secondary-sex characters become quiescent, ready to be re-awakened the following spring. The cottontail rabbit is representative of this group. The testes, for example, return to a completely immature condition each autumn. In midwinter, they begin to grow and in early spring reach fifty to a hundred times their weight in the inactive phase (Witschi, 1956). Correspondingly, sex structures such as the seminal vesicles and prostate glands, as well as sexual behavior patterns, regress and develop each year, under the influence of the falling and rising tide of testicular hormones. Seasonal breeders exhibit an annual ovarian quiescence, also. The ovary of starlings increases nearly thirty-fold in weight from early winter to spring (Witschi, 1956). Ovarian hormones are not produced during the inactive phase but gradually reappear each year as ovarian growth is initiated. Consequently, oviduct development and other factors necessary for successful reproductive function are provided with the required hormonal stimulus in time for the breeding season.
The rhythmic character of gonadal function in both sexes of seasonal breeders is the result of concomitant waves of anterior pituitary production of gonadstimulating hormones (gonadotrophins). In the male cottontail rabbit whose testicular history was described above, the gonadotrophin content of the pituitary increases over the inactive phase by 600 per cent at the opening of the breeding season (Elder and Finerty, 1943). The importance of seasonal changes in length of daylight in controlling these cyclic

154 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

peaks of gonadotrophin production has been well established for many species. Brook trout, for example, which usually spawn in December, will produce offspring in August if the light-dark rhythm is appropriately manipulated (Hoover and Hubbard, 1937). Similarly, ovarian development, consequent to the awakening of gonadotrophin production, may be stimulated in female sparrows during the winter by increasing the light ratio (Riley and Witschi, 1938). Nevertheless, light is not the only cause for the cyclic nature of the pituitary; all factors are not completely understood. It is apparent, however, that these factors, including light, operate through the neural system -- the hypothalamus or higher brain centers--in exerting their influence on the pituitary. Thus, the control of gonadotrophin production and release exemplifies a neuro-endocrine mechanism which links the two important coordinating systems of the body. It is evident that differences in sex cycles among mammalian females simply reflect different degrees of spontaneity in the function of neuro-endocrine pathways controlling the production and release of gonadotrophic hormones. Monestrus, seasonal breeders like the cottontail rabbit or ferret, in response to photostimulation in the spring, elaborate the gonadotrophic hormones which develop ovarian follicles and stimulate the ovary to produce estrogenic hormones. The ovary may remain in this condition for the remainder of the breeding season. No further gonadotrophininduced events occur spontaneously. When the neural stimulus initiated by the mating act reaches the pituitary, the necessary gonadotrophins for ovulation are released, and the ovary responds to this hormonal stimulus by releasing eggs from the matured follicles and by switch-

ing its hormone production from the sexual - preparedness type (estrogens, mainly) to the pregnancy-preparedness (progesterone, mainly) type. The mating stimulus activates, also, the release of the gonadotrophic hormone required to maintain the ovary as a progesteroneproducer. This sequence is the basic pattern of gonadotrophin production for the complete manifestation of gonadcontrolled sexuality in all mammalian females. Differences in sex-cycle type reflect differences in the extent to which neural stimuli for the release of the various gonadotrophins occur spontaneously, without the requirement of the neurogenic influence of mating. The neuroendocrine pathways of polyestrus breeders, like the rat or mouse, bring about the release of both follicle-stimulating and ovulation-inducing gonadotrophins in repetitive sequence. Thus, spontaneous ovulation becomes a regular event in the reproductive cycle of these animals. However, like the rabbit, they require the stimulus of mating to activate the neural pathways that control the release of gonadotrophins to maintain progesterone production by the ovary. Progestational breeders (cows and guinea pigs) and menstrual breeders (humans and other primates) include even the latter event among the spontaneous occurrences of the reproduction cycle, accounting for the prolonged, post-ovulatory phase of their cycles.
Neural control of gonadotrophin release may be considered the key mechanism through which "maleness" and "femaleness" become contrasted in the sex hormone activity of individuals of many species (Segal and Johnson, 1959). Except for seasonal breeders, males tend to release at a steady rate the full complement of gonadotrophins necessary for complete gonad function--both gamete

155

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

and hormone production. Even seasonal breeders follow this rule during the reproduction season each year. Femalesof all species, however, exhibit a cyclic gonadotrophin activity which controls the observed temporal variations in ovarian function and almost all secondary sex characteristics, including sexual receptivity. In many ungulates, a parallelism exists between the duration of heat and therelative preponderance of follicle-stimulating hormone in the pituitary (Asdell, 1946). Normally this favors a desirable synchronization between the time of maximal sexual receptivity and the spontaneous release of ovulationinducing gonadotrophins.
Although it is clear that neural control of gonadotrophin release as described for lower mammals applies, also, to thehuman, almost nothing is known of the mechanisms through which psychologic factors influencing sexuality. It would be tempting to suppose that the gonadotrophin-release mechanism of the neural system is ultimately the basic modus operandij but this explanation fits only some of theobserved facts and not others. Psychologic pseudo-pregnancy in thehuman could be explained on this basis, but in psychic infertility, a far more prevalent condition, gonadotrophin function appears to be completely normal. Similarly, abnormal conditions of sexual performance, including frigidity, impotence and nymphomania, do not appear to be correlated with abnormal gonadotrophin function. It maybe pointed out,however, that our present tests for gonadotrophin function are far from precise, and,with the development of better methods, our current concepts may undergo considerable change.

REFERENCES
ASDELL, S. A. 1946. Patterns of Mammalian Reproduction. Comstock Publishing Co., Ithaca, N. Y.
BALTZER, F. 1937. Entwicklungsphysiologische Analyse der Intersexulitat. Rev. Suisse Zool. 4 4 : 331.
BARR, M. L. and BERTRAM, E. G. 1949. A mor-
phological distinction between neurones of the male and female, and the behavior of the nucleolar satellites during accelerated nucleoprotein synthesis. Nature 163:676.
BEACH, FRANK A. 1949. Hormones and Behavior. Paul Hoeber, Inc., New York. Chapter 10: 148.
CHANG, C. Y. and WITSCHI, EMIL. 1955. Breeding
of sex-reversed males of Xenopus laevis Daudin. Proc. Soc. Exper. Biol. and Med. 89:150.
D'ANCONA, UMBERTO. 1959. Distribution of the
sexes and environmental influence in the European eel. Archives d'Anat. Micros. et Morph. Experim. 48bis:61. DANFORTH, C. H. 1935.Different potentialities of male and female skin in Reeves pheasants. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. andMed. 33:291.
ELDER, J. H. and FINERTY, J. C. 1943. Gonado-
tropic activity of the pituitary gland in relation to the seasonal sexual cycle of the cottontail rabbit (Sylvilagus floridanus Mearnsi) Anat. Record 85:1.
GOLDSCHMIDT, RICHARD B. 1955. Theoretical Ge-
netics. Univ. of California Press, Berkeley, Part IV:424. GORDAN, M. J. 1957. Control of sex ratios in rabbits by electrophoresis of spermatozoa. Proc. Nat.Acad. Sciences 43:913.
GRUMBACH, MELVIN M. and BARR, M. L. 1958.
Cytological tests of chromosomal sex in relation to sexual abnormalities inman. Recent Prog. Hormone Research 14:255.
HARTMANN, M. and LEWINSKI, G. VON. 1938. Un-
tersuchungen uber die Geschlechtsbestimmung and Geschlectsumwandlung von Ophryotrocha puerilis. Zool. Jahrb. Abt. Allg. Zool. u. Physiol. Tiere. 58:551.
HOOVER, E. E. and HUBBARD, H. F. 1937. Modi-
fication of the sexual cycle of trout by control of light. Copeia 4:206
JOST, ALFRED. 1947. Recherches sur la Différenciation Sexuelle de l'Embryon de Lapin. III. Rôle des Gonades Foetales dans laDifférenciation Sexuelle Somatique. Arch. d'Anat. Micr. et de Morphol. Exper. 3 6 : 271.
KECK, W. N. 1934.The control of thesecondary sex characters in the English sparrow, Passer domesticus (Linnaeus). Jour. Exp. Zool. 67:315.
LILLIE, F. R. 1917.Thefree martin: A study of the action of sex hormones in thefoetal life of cattle. J. Exper. Zool. 23:371.
LINDAHL, PER ERIK. 1958Separation of bull spermatozoa carrying X- andY-chromosomes by counterstreaming centrifugation. Acta Agricultural Scandinavica 8:3.

156 Eugenics Quarterly

MILLER, R. A. 1938. Spennatogenesis in a sexreversed female and in normal males of the domestic fowl, Gallus domesticus. Anat. Record 70:155.
RILEY, G. M. and Witschi, E. 1938. Comparative effects of light stimulation and administration of gonadotropic harmones on female sparrows. Endocrinology 23:618.
SEGAL, SHELDON J. and NELSON, W. O. 1957. De-
velopmental aspects of human hermaphroditism: The significance of sex chromatin patterns. Jour. of Clin. Endocrin. and Metab. 17:676.
SEGAL, SHELDON J. and JOHNSON, D. C. 1959. In-
duction influence of steroid hormones on the neural system: Ovulation controlling mechanisms. Arch. d'Anat. Micr. et de Morphol. Exper. 48bis:261.
SHETTLES, LANDRUM B. 1960. Nuclear morphology of human spermatozoa. Medical Circle Bul-
letin 7:8.
TJIO, J. H., PUCK, T. T. and ROBINSON, A. 1959.
The somatic chromosomal constitution of some human subjects with genetic defects. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sciences45:1008.

TYLER, ALBERT. 1948. Fertilization and immunity. Physiol. Review. 28:180.
VESSELINOVITSCH S. D. 1960. Electrophoresis of spermatozoa and sex control. The Cornell Veterinarian 60:326.
Witschi, EMIL. 1936. Effects of gonadotropic and estrogenic hormones on regenerating feathers of weaver finches (Pyromelana Franciscana), Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. and Med. 3 5 : 484.
. 1952. Overripeness of the egg as a cause of twinning and teratogenesis. Cancer Research 12:763.
. 1956. Development of Vertebrates. 1st Edition, Philadelphia, W. B. Saunders Co.
. 1957. The inductor theory of sex differentiation. Jour, of the Faculty of Science, Hokkaido University, Japan, Series VI, 13:428.
WOLFF, ETIENNE. 1959. Endocrine Function of the Gonad in Developing Vertebrates in: Comparative Endocrinology (ed. A. Gorbman) John Wiley &Sons, NewYork, Chapter 3 5 : 568.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

