Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Heredity and the eye
Conrad Berens M.D.
To cite this article: Conrad Berens M.D. (1954) Heredity and the eye, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:2, 16-26, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987173 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987173
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 5 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

HEREDITY AND THE EYE*

CONRAD BERENS, M.D.
Managing Director The Ophthalmological Foundation, Inc.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

HEREDITARY EYE CONDITIONS RANGE from mild defects to complete blindness. Well over a hundred types of hereditary variations of the eye are listed in works on human genetics and most of these are pathologic.1
An analysis of the ophthalmologic records of blind children under 21 years of age in 7 statesf revealed that of 2,796 cases occurring between 1926 and 1950, 1,339 were of prenatal origin. In the latter group heredity was established in 7-9 per cent and presumed in 20.6 per cent.! Among 20,591 adult recipients of aid to the blind in 20 states whose blindness was classified as of hereditary origin, the diagnosis was considered to be established in 0.8 per cent and presumed in 2.6 per cent, making a total of 3.4 per cent.2 Evidence that the hereditary factor is probably greater in adults than these statistics show is suggested by the following data: (1) The percentage for some state groups in a Social Security Board study is .much higher than the 3.4 per cent average.
(2) An intensive study by Hamilton in Tasmania3 revealed that 52 out of 195 blind pensioners (26.7 per cent) had a family history of similar affections of the eye. (3) Posner and Schlossman,4 in their study of glaucoma patents, found 51 out of 373 (13.7 per cent) with demonstrable hereditary tendencies. These statistics reveal the need for more adequate records of our blind population and also suggest that hereditary diseases constitute a serious visual problem. In diagnosing hereditary diseases the physician must differentiate between prenatal abnormalities due to mal-

development during the fetal or embryonic stages and those due to environment, e.g., syphilitic infection in the mother. According to Sorsby,6 the clinical similarity of many congenital§ anomalies of genetic origin to those of environmental origin is suggestive of a common mechanism underlying both types. Many hereditary anomalies are overlooked for they are not suspected unless two or more relatives develop the disease or defect.
Actual blindness and eye diseases are not inherited. It is the tendency to a structural deviation from the normal that is inheritedGenetically determined anomalies may be latent and appear in a tissue that apparently developed normally and functioned normally for many years. But after an eye has developed a severe disease, it is difficult to determine whether it actually was a normal eye originally.
To understand heredity in relation to the eye, it is essential to realize that the human body is made up of millions of cells, originating from a single fertilized egg, which gives rise to the new individual. Chromosomes are the basis for hereditary phenomena. All, except the sex chromosomes, are called autosomes. These are rodshaped bodies which are visible in the cells at the time when they are dividing and increasing in number. The chromosomes, except in the germ cells, occur in similar pairs. The male has two dissimilar sex chromosomes. One of these is the Y-chromosome, which if it fertilizes the egg will produce a male individual.

*Aided by the Ophthalmological Foundation, Inc., and the Research Department of The Lighthouse.
Illinois, Maine, Maryland, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, North Carolina and Vermont.

Data prepared through the courtesy of C. Edith Kerby, Associate in Statistics and Analysis of the National Society for the Prevention of Blindness from a recent but as yet unpublished study by the Society.
§Existing at or before birth.

16

17

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

To create a new individual, each parent contributes 24 chromosomes, making a total of 48. Along the chromosomes are distributed the genes, which are complex microscopic protein structures, also occurring in pairs. In the fertilized egg, two genes for each character are reunited. These genes act and interact in numerous ways. For example, they may be dominant, recessive or sex-linked.
A dominant gene produces its effect in the first generation and can be anticipated in succeeding generations. A recessive gene is one that does not produce its effect in the presence of the dominant gene and will not be evident physically until it is paired with an identical gene, usually resulting in abnormalities. Thus, consanguineous marriages may increase the incidence of defects due to heredity because the parents have a similar genetic make-up. Sex-linked genes produce their effects unequally in males and females. In man there are more than 20 known sex-linked characters.
To illustrate dominant and recessive inheritance, let it be assumed that two normal-appearing individuals marry, but each of them carries a recessive gene for abnormal whiteness of the skin, hair and eyes (albinism). Their genetic make-up is as follows: Aa and Aa. Because the genes arrange themselves in pairs, each pair consisting of one from the father and one from the mother, the offspring may carry the following genes: AA, Aa, Aa, and aa. All the children with the two dominant A's will be normal. Those with a dominant A and a recessive a will appear normal and those with the double recessive aa will have very light skin, hair and eyes. Though the parents appeared normal, they transmitted albinism to their offspring. In this type of dominant inheritance, 75 per cent of the offspring appear normal and 25 per cent are abnormal.
Now let it be assumed that Aa, one of the children, married a normal individual A A. Their offspring would have the following genetic make-up: AA and Aa. There is no

visible evidence of albinism in the offspring, but AA will have only normal progeny, while Aa will continue to transmit albinism because of the recessive genes.
To illustrate sex-linked inheritance, let it be assumed that a man who cannot distinguish red or green marries a woman with normal vision. Their genes can be represented by cY (male) and CC (female) . By the pairing of the cY genes with the CC genes, the children will have the following genetic make-up: Cc and CY. Y always indicates a male. There is no gene for color blindness (c) in the male offspring, but the daughters carry a recessive gene for red-green blindness and a dominant gene for normal vision. This illustrates the fact that the color-blind father transmits his abnormality through his daughters, although they are unaffected.
But if two color-blind individuals marry, the following is expected: cY and cc genes are paired, resulting in the following combinations in the offspring: cY and cc. All the offspring, both male and female, are color-blind, for no dominant gene for normal vision is present.
If a color-blind man and a woman carrying a recessive gene for color blindness marry, the following is anticipated: cY and Cc will pair and the offspring will carry Cc, CY, cY and cc genes. Some of the daughters and some of the sons will be blind for red and green but not all of them.
Table I lists an assortment of eye conditions that are attributed to dominant, recessive and sex-linked inheritance. Similar or identical diseases are not always inherited according to a single genetic pattern. A number of conditions, e.g., night blindness and abnormally small eyes (microphthalmos), result from all three types of inheritance- In addition, certain diseases are caused by two or more different pairs of genes, recessive or dominant, acting together. Genes, however, may not routinely produce their effects or may not always work in the same way, or prenatal environment may be a factor. Again, it must be

18 Eugenics Quarterly

TABLE 1
A TABULATION OF VARIOUS EYE CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH DOMINANT, RECESSIVE AND SEX-LINKED INHERITANCE

Anatomy

Dominant Inheritance

Recessive Inheritance

Sex-Linked Inheritance

Eyelids and Eyelashes

Ptosis (drooping) Distichiasis (double row
of eyelashes) Epicanthus (large skin
folds) Lagophthalmos (difficulty
in closing eyelids) Adhesions of eyelids

Distichiasis

Distichiasis

Cryptophthalmos (congenital union of eyelids)

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Lacrimal Apparatus Lack of tears (Tears and Drainage Channels)

Dacryocystitis ? (inflammation of the lacrimal sac)

Eyeball

Microphthalmos (small eyes)
Glaucoma (increased intraocular pressure)

Microphthalmos Anophthalmos (absence) Glaucoma Infantile glaucoma

Microphthalmos Glaucoma Juvenile glaucoma

Refractive Media of the Eye

Refractive errors Astigmatism (parallel rays of light focus on different points)
Farsightedness (rays focus behind retina)
Myopia (rays focus in front of retina)
Anisómetropia (difference in refraction of two eyes)

Astigmatism ?
Farsightedness Myopia

Astigmatism ? Myopia

Muscles and Eye Movements

Strabismus (crossed
eyes) Nystagmus (abnormal oscillatory movements of
the eyes)

Strabismus

Paralysis of eye muscles (loss of function)
Nystagmus

Sciera (Outer White Coat)

Blue discoloration Hyperemia (excess of
blood) Scleromalacia (softening)

Cornea (Transparent Anterior Part of Outer Coat of Eyeball)

Keratoconus (cone-shaped bulging)
Megalocornea (large) Cornea plana (flat) Arcus juvenilis (cloudy
ring in the cornea)

Keratoconus
Cornea plana Kayser-Fleischer ring
(green pigment ring)

Megalocornea

Lens (Transparent Spherical B o d y Behind Cornea)

Congenital cataract
(opaqueness) Senile cataract Ectopia lentis (disloca-
tion)

Microphakia (small)

Cataract

Anatomy

(Table 1 cont'd)

Dominant Inheritance

Recessive Inheritance

19
Sex-Linked Inheritance

Iris (Colored Circular Diaphragm) and Pupil (Opening in Iris)

Coloboma (lack of part
of iris)
Aniridia (absence of iris) Ectopic pupils (displaced) Pinpoint pupils (marked
contraction) Eye color
Albinotic iris (no pigment)

Coloboma
Eye color Albinotic iris

Coloboma Albinotic iris

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Choroid (Blood Vessel Coat)

Choroideremia (absence)

Gyrate atrophy (shrink- Choroideremia ing of the choroid)

Retina (Nerve Coat of the Eyeball)
Optic Nerve

Retinosis pigmentosa (pigmentary degeneration)
Angiomatosis (diseased vessels, hemorrhages and tumors)
Retinoblastoma ? (tumors) Retinal detachment ? (sep-
aration from choroid) Night blindness
Optic atrophy (wasting or degeneration)

Retinosis pigmentosa
Dystrophy (degeneration) Glioma (tumor)

Retinosis pigmentosa Dystrophy ?

Retinal detachment ? Night blindness Color blindness
Optic atrophy

Retinal detachment? Night blindness Color blindness
Optic atrophy

remembered that genes may assort or pair at random, mutate (change), cross over (exchange of material by similar genes), and link (not assort at random). These variations complicate the diagnosis of hereditary diseases. In man our knowledge of heredity is based mainly on records of the occurrence of abnormalities in families over several generations. Because the eye is accessible to observation and examination, geneticists have studied it extensively, and many hereditary conditions have been noted.
Eyelids and Eyelashes
The eyelids and eyelashes perform the important function of protecting the eyes from injury. Any malfunction of their movement or deformity in their shape involves a facial disfigurement and perhaps a dangerous exposure of the eyeball or an associated muscular or neural disease.
Adhesion between the upper and lower eyelids (ankyloblepharon) have been at-

tributed to a dominant inheritance. However, in complete ankyloblepharon associated with congenital union of the eyelids (cryptophthalmos) a recessive pattern is favored.
Drooping of the eyelids (ptosis) usually results from the faulty development of the levator muscle which raises the eyelid. Ptosis has been observed as a congenital anomaly with a dominant inheritance. In certain instances the defect does not become evident until early in childhood or even later. One type that develops slowly is believed to occur as late as 40 or even 60 years of age.
Difficulty in closing the eyelids (lagophthalmos) occurs when the orbicularis muscle, which closes the eyelids, is defective as in spasm of the levator muscle of the upper eyelid or in myotonia congenita. This latter disease is characterized by spasm and rigidity of certain muscles when an attempt is made to move them after a period of rest or when mechanically stimulated. Both the

20 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

lagophthalmos and the muscular abnormality are attributed to dominant genes.
A large fold of skin on either side of the bridge of the nose may cover the inner angle of the eye. The condition is commonly seen in Mongolian idiocy, and extreme mental deficiency with skeletal defects. It may also occur independently of Mongolism. Many pedigrees have been traced over 2 or more generations, and in one family there was a possibility of sex-linkage.5
Conjunctiva The conjunctiva is the membrane lining
the eyelids and reflecting back on the eyeball. A few abnormalities have been attributed to hereditary factors. Slight elevations of the conjunctiva, composed of transparent connective (binding) tissue (pinguecula), have been recorded in sibships.
A hereditary factor is suspected when a triangular fold of membrane extending from the conjunctiva (pterygium) encroaches on the cornea, for it has been observed in relatives and ©ver 2 generations, as well as in association with sex-linked night blindness and myopia.5
Lacrimal Apparatus The lacrimal apparatus consists of the
lacrimal gland, which secretes tears, and the lacrimal sac and drainage passages, which channel the tears into the nose. Heredity has been considered an important factor in a number of anomalies. For example, lack of tears is thought to be a dominant affection.
Congenital absence of the outlets for the tears (lacrimal p u n c t a ) and blocking (atresia) of the nasal openings have been observed in a number of sibships over several generations.
Eyeball The size of the eye has been known to
be influenced by hereditary factors. Abnormally small eyes (microphthalmos) do not seem to adhere to a uniform inheritance pattern. Dominant, recessive and sex-linked genes, respectively, appear to be involved.

Environmental factors are also operative in some cases because microphthalmos has been observed in retrolental fibroplasia, a disease of premature infants involving an opaque membrane behind the lens, blindness and increased intraocular pressure (glaucoma).
In approximately 50 per cent of the cases of combined microphthalmos and anophthalmos (absence of eyeballs), mental deficiency is a complication. One pedigree revealed recessive sex-linked inheritance.6
Anophthalmos is due to defective embryonic development. It is thought to result from a recessive character, and consanguinity has been noted frequently.
In infantile glaucoma (increased intraocular pressure) the eyeball and cornea are large and tension is elevated. Both sexes seem to be affected equally. An autosomal recessive gene is considered responsible. In the adult type of glaucoma there is a possibility that dominant, recessive or sexlinked genes as well as autosomal genes are involved. There apparently is no evidence of a relationship between adult and infantile glaucoma. In 36 families in which infantile glaucoma was recorded, there was no diagnosis of adult glaucoma.7
Within the same family glaucoma tends to have the same onset and to run the same course- In one series of glaucomatous patients almost 50 per cent had similarly affected ancestors.8. In a pedigree,8 consistting of 84 members and spanning 7 generations, there were 11 cases of chronic simple glaucoma. Seven of these were in women and 4 in men. Other eye anomalies were present in an additional 7 members. This is a high rate of incidence since 27 individuals in this pedigree died in youth and 14 could not be located.
Of 126 adult patients afflicted with primary glaucoma, 16 cases were possibly on a genetic basis, as there was at least one other case of the same type of glaucoma in each of the immediate families.9 Transmission appeared to be dominant in 7 and recessive in 9. One pedigree covering 3

21

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

generations indicated a sex-linked or recessive pattern.10
Errors of Refraction
As light enters the eye the rays are bent. These changes in the direction of light rays are known as refraction. Light entering the eye must pass through the cornea, the aqueous fluid (just behind the cornea), the lens and the vitreous before striking the retina. The shape of the eyeball is a factor in determining whether light rays focus on the retina or focus in front of it or behind it.
If the eye is nearsighted (myopic), the rays focus in front of the retina. If the eye is hyperopic (farsighted), the rays focus behind the retina. If the eye is astigmatic (usually caused by unequal curvature of the cornea) the rays focus at a number of points on the retina. If the eyes are anisometropic (difference in refraction in the two eyes), the rays in one eye may focus in front of the retina and in the other eye behind it. In this latter condition, there are numerous refractive combinations. For example, one eye may be mildly myopic while the other is markedly myopic. Both dominant and recessive factors have been held responsible for this difference in the two eyes.
Nearsightedness and other errors of refraction may be hereditary and often are familial. For many years close work has been considered an important factor in producing myopia, but in 1941 a study of 150 unselected pairs of twin revealed heredity as the vital factor-11 In another investigation the same incidence of myopia was found in literate and illiterate groups.12
The hereditary and biologic etiology of myopia has advocates. Repeated examinations of a series of myopic patients indicated that changes in refraction after the age of 7 depended on factors which affect growth.13
In a survey of 257 kindred with myopia, when (1) neither parent was myopic, 230 of 645 children (35 per cent) had myopia,

which was purely recessive; (2) one or both parents were myopic, 309 of 628 children (49 per cent) had myopia, which was dominant.14 The dominant type of hereditary myopia was apparently more frequent than the recessive type.
In farsightedness the mild form is considered a dominant trait while the more severe form is attributed to a recessive inheritance.
Astigmatism is generally believed to be a dominant characteristic but other modes of inheritance, e.g., recessive, intermediate and sex-linked, have been suspected.
Eye Muscles and Eye Movements Six eye muscles are responsible for the
movements of the eyes. These are the internal and external recti, the inferior and superior recti and the superior and inferior oblique muscles. Each of these muscles originates in the bony wall of the orbit (socket in which the eyeball is situated). Because they are attached to the eyeball at certain sites, each muscle governs or contributes to different movements of the eyeball.
Abnormalities of the muscles, their surrounding structures and their nerve supply result in strabismus (crossed eyes). In a series of 158 patients, there were 47 per cent who had families with 2 or more affected members.15 This familial tendency occurred in 48 per cent of the patients with esotropía (eyes turning inward) and in 36 per cent of the patients with exotropia (eyes turning outward). The type of squint may vary a great deal in the same family. A recessive inheritance was suspected for esotropía and exotropia, with convergence (turning in of the eyes) dominant over divergence (turning out). It is thought that about 1 out of every 4 persons is a carrier of the gene for strabismus.15
Studies of identical twins have shown that if one has strabismus it is usually present in the other. A comparison of the incidence of primary strabismus (that unassociated with other eye defects) in identical twins and in fraternal twins18 revealed the près-

22 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ence of strabismus in 81.2 per cent of both identical twins but only in 8-9 per cent of both fraternal twins. This difference may be explained on the basis that identical twins are the product of a single egg and have the same chromosomal heritage and genetic constitution. By contrast, fraternal twins are derived from different egg cells and therefore can have a different chromosomal and genetic make-up.
Sorsby5 believes that primary strabismus occurs as a result of a dominant gene and that the expression of this gene may range from a low degree of esophoria and weakness of fusion (inability to see two ocular images of an object as one) to actual strabismus.
The term secondary strabismus refers to cases in which the muscle defect results from another eye anomaly. Such cases have been associated with hereditary farsightedness and with hereditary corneal lesions.
Total and incomplete paralysis of certain eye muscles (external ophthalmoplegia) has been attributed to a dominant or a recessive inheritance.
Abnormal eye movements include short, rapid, involuntary, rhythmic oscillations or tremors of one or both eyeballs (nystagmus) . Vision is not necessarily affected. In congenital nystagmus the genetic, intrauterine or birth factor may not be revealed until 3 or 4 months after birth.17 Nystagmus assumes especial importance because it may be associated with many hereditary ocular defects, e.g., albinism and color blindness, and with central nervous system disturbances. That the inheritance may be recessive and even sex-linked is shown by many pedigrees. Nystagmus is thought to be suppressed in approximately one-third to one-half of the women who carry the gene.8 This would account for the theory that affected men do not pass the condition on to their sons.
Sciera
The sciera is the tough outer coat of the eye. It forms the white of the eye, and

its function is protective. Several hereditary abnormalities have been noted. For example, blue discoloration of the sciera is a dominant condition, especially evident during youth. A sudden hyperemia (excess of blood) of the sciera and adjacent conjunctiva, called episcleritis fugax, and softening of the sciera (scleromalacia) associated with arthritis and kidney disease have also been attributed to dominant factors.
Cornea
The cornea is the transparent anterior part of the sciera. Alterations in the shape and size of the cornea may seriously interfere with vision because all light rays must pass through this structure before entering the eye-
In keratoconus the cornea bulges forward, assuming the shape of a cone, and the central portion becomes thin. Vision fails and there are changes in the corneal curvature, which may have a deleterious effect on the refraction of the eye. Dominant and recessive inheritance has been noted, but clinically the disease seems more prevalent in women than in men.
Congenital flatness of the cornea (cornea plana) has been attributed to dominant and recessive characteristics.
In microcornea, the cornea is small but vision may be unaffected. It has been considered sex-linked.
Megalocornea is a condition in which the cornea rapidly increases in size and appears glassy. Since it seldom affects women, a sex-linked type of inheritance is favored. However, it has been noted as a dominant characteristic.18
The cornea is also subject to degenerative diseases. A congenital opaqueness of the periphery of the cornea (embryotoxon) occurs in young individuals, and a cloudy ring within the corneal margin (arcus juvenilis) is occasionally observed. Dominant inheritance is suspected. Another type of ring consists of a greenish pigment at the outer edges of the cornea. This is the Kayser-Fleischer ring which is believed

23

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

to result from recessive factors.
Lens The lens is the transparent, somewhat
spherical body situated behind the cornea, serving to focus rays of light on the retina. When the lens is extremely small (microphakia), a recessive factor may be involved.
If the lens becomes opaque, it is said to be cataractous. A cataract is usually considered hereditary except when it is due to environment, e.g., infection, chemical poisoning or injury. According to many authorities, cataract is a symptom of old age but even the senile types are attributed to a dominant inheritance. There are repeated examples of congenital cataract transmitted dominantly. The time of onset from birth through middle age varies in different families and appears to be determined by dominant inheritance. Another theory is that hereditary cataract is sexlinked and tends to appear earlier in each succeeding generation.
Iris and Pupils
The iris is the circular diaphragm situated behind the cornea. The opening in its center is the pupil. Heredity may influence the size of the pupil. Marked contraction (miosis or pinpoint pupil) is considered a dominant characteristic.
In aniridia, the iris muscles are absent and there is only a narrow circle of tissue. Other congenital and hereditary anomalies may be present, such as cataract and glaucoma. A dominant inheritance has been suspected, but aniridia may be due to a chromosomal mutation (change) that behaves as a dominant character.
The color of the iris is determined genetically by several genes. The change in color with age and the sex differences in pigmentation complicate the analysis of inheritance factors. Geneticists have suggested that the first human beings all had very dark brown or black irides and that by changes in the genes through the ages variations in eye pigment evolved.19 It is believed that pure blue eyes are recessive

to darker eyes. The children of two blueeyed parents usually have blue eyes and only rarely brown eyes. Bright blue eyes are apparently inherited as a recessive characteristic, but dominant inheritance has been noted.20 The children of two browneyed parents can have irides of any lighter shade or the same brown. In albinism the iris is translucent. Pigment is not only absent in the iris, hair and eyelashes, but vision is often seriously disturbed because of lack of pigment in the retina. Transmission may be dominant, recessive or sexlinked.21
Choroid
The choroid is the blood vessel coat of the eye, situated between the sciera and the retina. Its function is to supply nourishment to the retina or seeing coat of the eyeball- Because of hereditary factors the choroid may be absent (choroideremia). In early life, central vision is often unaffected but these patients may be unable to see at night. In most cases, however, blindness does not occur until about 40 years of age.22 Choroideremia is inherited in a recessive or sex-linked pattern, i.e., women may have a mild form but men a severe form. Affected men have daughters carrying the gene and the whiteness of the interior of their eyes confirms the presence of such hereditary factors. In a report on the occurrence of choroideremia in three families22 it was noted that nearly all the cases recorded were in men.
Dominant inheritance is suspected in Doyne's familial choroiditis, a hereditary degenerative inflammation of the choroid. In the back of the eye near where the optic nerve enters, there are light-colored patches in the choroid.
Retina
The retina is the innermost nerve or seeing coat of the eye. It contains cells called rods and cones. In one small area the cones are more numerous than in any other part. This is the macula lutea. In its center is

24 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

the fovea, where there are only cones. This part of the retina provides the keenest vision. The cones are particularly important for clear daylight vision and for seeing colors, while the rods are essential for twilight or night vision and in adaptation to darkness.
Congenital color blindness for red and green is a hereditary, familial sex-linked and frequently recessive anomaly, but certain pedigrees suggest a dominant factor. As a rule 50 per cent of a color-blind man's grandsons are affected. It is ordinarily transmitted through women, but its transmission on a Y-linked gene, which indicates direct transmission through the male line, has been observed.23 It is rare for a daughter to be color-blind, for it necessitates either 2 color-blind parents or a color-blind father and a mother carrying a recessive gene for color blindness. But the case of a color-blind (deuteranomalous) 19year-old girl has been recorded. The family history revealed that 2 brothers of her mother were deuteranomalous.24
Night blindness is the inability to see in a dim light. One pedigree has been traced through 10 generations, starting in 1637 and ending in 1907. There were 2,116 members in this family, and 135 were known to be night blind. Genetically, this may be a dominant or recessive defect. However, vitamin A deficiency may be a factor in some patients. When night blindness and nearsightedness exist together, recessive genes, either autosomal or sexlinked, are thought to be involved.
A general term for degenerative conditions of the retina, which are not inflammatory, is retinosis. In retinosis pigmentosa, pigment invades the retina and gradually encroaches on the optic nerve. It is frequently associated with night blindness and constriction of the fields of vision. In a pedigree covering 4 generations, in which retinosis pigmentosa and glaucoma were noted,26 the third generation included 10 children whose father had retinosis pig<mentosa and whose grandmother had the

same disease. Of the 10, 4 were not examined, 2 daughters had retinosis pigmentosa and glaucoma and 3 sons had retinosis pigmentosa. In the fourth generation there were 6 normal sons and 2 normal daughters who were the offspring of the 2 sisters with combined retinosis pigmentosa and glaucoma. There are 4 or more possible inheritance patterns that have been noted in retinosis pigmentosa.
The retina may become detached or separated from the rest of the eye. Its hereditary pattern is not definitely known. Certain pedigrees suggest both dominant and recessive inheritance. Many cases of familial retinal detachment are associated with high degrees of nearsightedness. However, there are 2 pedigrees in which the disease followed a sex-linked inheritance pattern.26
Tumors of the retina may also be due to a certain type of inheritance.27 The direct transmission of retinal glioma over 2 generations and one pedigree involving 3 generations have been reported5
Retinoblastoma, or glioma, is a tumor arising from the retinal germ cells when the embryo is developing. Survivors of this type of glioma tend to pass the affection on to their children. Based on available pedigrees, a dominant inheritance is probable. However, because the disease is usually fatal, its existence has also been ascribed to the appearance in each generation of new genes determining its development.28
Dystrophies of the macular area of the retina typically show fine pigmentary changes. The inheritance has been attributed to a recessive factor, to an irregular dominant factor and to recessive sex-linkage. The dominant or irregular dominant type is rare, appearing in early childhood, but is a ravaging disease. There is a possibility of a recessive sex-linked inheritance. The recessive type is prevalent, when the disease occurs at about the ages of 10 to 14 years. Onset may be sudden and marked by a rapid decline in central vision, but certain patients retain their central vision.

25

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

The adult forms are considered to be recessive or dominant conditions beginning at about the age of 30 years.
Optic Nerve
The optic nerve connects the retina or seeing coat of the eye with the brain. A hereditary disease of the optic nerve is optic atrophy or Leber's disease. In addition to degeneration, there may also be a congenital malformation of the optic nerve. Optic atrophy may appear alone or in combination with one or more associated neural degenerations. The condition has been attributed to a sex-linked recessive character, transmitted by females and predominantly affecting males.29 However, certain research suggests that the hereditary pattern is autosomal dominant with a changing penetration of the genes.30 This opinion is based on a pedigree including 103 persons and covering 5 generations. Twenty-two persons (13 men and 9 women) were affected. It may even be a recessive character.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Genetic eye diseases range from minor defects to complete blindness. In their diagnosis prenatal and environmental factors must be eliminated. Our knowledge of human heredity is based largely on pedigrees.
Hereditary diseases of the eyelids include adhesions, drooping of the eyelids, and difficulty in opening and closing the eyelids.
In the conjunctiva, genetic factors become evident in such conditions as the formation of membranes and the appearance of elevations.
Lack of tears as well as dysfunction of the lacrimal apparatus has been found to involve hereditary characteristics.
Dominant, recessive and sex-linked genes may be responsible for abnormally small eyes and for glaucoma. The records of the familial occurrence of glaucoma present a strong case in favor of heredity as a cause

m some cases. The familial tendency to inheritance as-
sociated with nearsightedness, farsightedness and other errors of refraction has long been noted. Dominant and recessive patterns are the most frequent forms of inheritance.
Genetically, strabismus has been attributed to dominant and recessive factors. When strabismus occurs in one identical twin, the other is usually affected similarly.
In nystagmus recessive and sex-linked inheritance patterns have been noted.
The principal hereditary factor involved in certain diseases of the sciera appears to be dominant. The conditions include blueness of the sciera and inflammations.
The shape, size and transparency of the cornea have been connected with genetic factors.
In the lens the most prevalent familial disease is cataract. Its inheritance has been attributed to dominant, recessive and sexlinked genes.
The iris and pupil have been studied genetically in relation to size, absence and color. Marked contraction of the pupil is considered a dominant characteristic, as is absence of the iris. The color of the iris involves several genetic patterns. A dark color is believed to be dominant to blue eyes. In extremely light eyes, as in albinism, various modes of transmission appear to be important.
The choroid may be absent as a result of sex-linked inheritance. In degenerative conditions, dominant inheritance has been noted.
Prominent among the genetic diseases of the retina are color blindness, night blindness, retinosis pigmentosa, and tumors. The inheritance patterns vary. In the macular area, degenerative conditions have been linked with genetic factors.
The optic nerve with its intimate connection with the brain may be involved in generalized hereditary neural diseases. Blindness frequently results from atrophy or disease of the nerve. Various inheritance

26 Eugenics Quarterly

patterns areinvolved.

mechanisms governing thegenes and their

In evaluating the hereditary transmission effects, great advances should be made in

of eye diseases, an outstanding fact is that eliminating eye diseases, anomalies and

the modes of inheritance vary for individ- blindness. Future research may identify

ual diseases. Much of our knowledge of ge- numerous eye conditions with hereditary

netics is based on meager records, perhaps factors, the causes of which are now un-

involving only one or two generations. known.

When science can unravel the mysterious

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

REFERENCES

1. OSBORN, F.: "Preface to Eugenics," Rev. Ed., 16. WAARDENBURG, P. J.: Some genetic aspects, in

New York, Harper & Brothers, 1951,p. 333.

"Modern Trends in Ophthalmology," edited by

2. HURLIN, R. G., SAFFIAN, S., and RICE, C. E.:

A. Sorsby, New York, Paul B. Hoeber, 1947, p.

"Causes of blindness among recipients of aid

174.

to the blind," Fed. Secur. Agency, Sec. Ad- 17. ANDERSON, J. R.: Causes and treatment of con-

minis., Bureau of Public Assistance, Govern-

genital eccentric nystagmus, Brit. J. Ophth.,

ment Printing Office, 1947, p. 131.

37: 267-281 (May) 1951.

3. HAMILTON, J. B.: "The Significance of Hered- 18. GREDIG, C.: Heredity in megalocornea, Arch,

ity in Ophthalmology, A Tasmanian Survey,"

d. Julius Klaus-Stiftg. Vererbgforschg., 2 :79,

Melbourne, Australia, A. H. Massina and Co., 1926.

Pty., Ltd., 1951.

19. SCHEINFELD, A.: "You and Heredity," New

4. POSNER, A, and SCHLOSSMAN, A.: Role of In-

York, Frederick A. Stockes Co., 1939, p. 434.

heritance in Glaucoma, Arch. Ophth., 41: 125- 20. GATES, R. R.: Blue eyes in natives of Ceylon

150 (Feb.) 1949.

(correspondence), Brit. Med. J., 1: 921, 1938.

5. SORSBY, A.: "Genetics in Ophthalmology," St. 21. COSMETTATOS, G. F.: Albinism, Arq. portug. de

Louis, C. V. Mosby Company, 1951,p. 251.
6. ROBERTS, J. A. F.: Sex-linked microphthalmia sometimes associated with mental deficiency, Brit. Med. J., 2: 1213-1216 (Dec. 18) 1937.
7. PROBERT, L. A.: A survey of hereditary glaucoma, Canadian M. A. J., 66:563-568 (June) 1952.

opal., 4: 51-58, 1952.
22. SORSBY, A., FRANCESCHETTI, A., JOSEPH, R., and
DAVEY, J. B.: Choroideremia. Clinical and genetic aspects, Brit. J. Ophth., 36: 547-581 (Oct.) 1952.
23. REED, S. C., CAMBIER, R. K., and APPLEN, J.
E: A color vision anomaly showing holandric

8. FRANÇOIS, J., DEWEER, J. P., and VANDEN BERGHE,
J.: Simple chronic glaucoma and dominant heredity, Ann. d'ocul., 184: 404-422 (May) 1951.
9. BIRO, I.: Hereditary glaucoma, Ophthalmologica, 122: 228-238 (Oct.)1951.
10. GOLDSCHMIDT, R. B.: A notdominant glaucoma pedigree, J. Heredity, 42: 271-272 (Sept.-Oct.) 1951.
11. JANCKE, G.: Origin of myopia, Klin. Monatsbl. f. Augenh., 106: 264, 1941.
12. CRISP, W. H.: Myopia, acquired and hereditary, Am.J. Ophth., 2 1 : 680, 1938.
13. BROWN, E. V. L.: Average yearly changes in

(Y-linked) transmission, Am. J. Hum. Gen.,
3: 282-284 (Sept.)1951.
24. FUNDER, W.: A case of deuteranomaly withunusual fundus changes, Klin. Monatsbl. f. Augenh., 121: 449-454, 1952.
25. SALVI, G. L.: The rare andfamilial occurrence of retinosis pigmentosa with glaucoma, Boll. d'ocul., 32: 36-42 (Jan.) 1953.
26. LEVY, J.: Inherited retinal detachment, Brit. J. Ophth., 36: 626-636 (Nov.) 1952.
27. RIEGER, H.: The question of inheritance in retinal glioma, Wien. Klin. Wchnschr., 63: 573-574,1951.

refraction of atropinized eyes from birth to beyond middle life, Arch. Ophth., 19:719, 1938; Use-abuse theory in refraction vs. biologic the-

28.

FALLS, H. F., and NEEL, J. V.:
retinoblastoma, A. M. A. Arch. 367-389 (Oct.) 1951.

Genetics of
Ophth., 46:

ory. Arch. Ophth., 28: 845, 1942.
14. WOLD, K. C.: Hereditary myopia, Arch. Ophth., 42: 225-237 (Sept.) 1949.
15. SCHLOSSMAN, A., and PRIESTLEY, B. S.: Role of
heredity in etiology and treatment of strabis-

29. BAREDAY, M., and COBB, S.: Relation of heredi-
tary optic atrophy (Leber) to other familial degenerative diseases of central nervous system, A. M. A. Arch. Ophth., 48: 669-680 (Dec.) 1952.

mus, A. M. A. Arch. Ophth., 47: 1-20 (Jan.) 30. MÜLLER, F.: A family tree of Leber's disease,

1952. Klin. Monatsbl. f. Augenh., 119: 62-76, 1951.

