Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Population planning in Great Britain
Margaret Pyke
To cite this article: Margaret Pyke (1956) Population planning in Great Britain, Eugenics Quarterly, 3:3, 148-151, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1956.9987284 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1956.9987284
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

POPULATION PLANNING IN GREAT BRITAIN

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

MARGARET PYKE
The Family Planning Association Great Britain

G,'REAT BRITAIN IS VERY FORTUNATE in
having no laws against propaganda for birth control or the sale of contraceptives. This position was established nearly eighty years ago in 1877 when Charles Bradlaugh, Member of Parliament, and Annie Besant who was his co-worker in the Freethought Movement re-printed "The Fruits of Philosophy" by Dr. Charles Knowlton which was first published anonymously in New York in 1832. They did this deliberately because a printer and publisher in England who has re-issued the pamphlet the previous year had been successfully prosecuted.
Mr. Bradlaugh and Mrs. Besant were duly tried, the indictment accusing them
"of unlawfully and wickedly devising, contriving, and intending, as much as in them lay, to vitiate and corrupt the morals as well of youth as of divers other subjects of the Queen, and to incite and encourage the said subjects to indecent, obscene, unnatural and immoral practices, and bring them to a state of wickedness, lewdness and debauchery. . . ."
Although the jury returned a verdict against the defendants this was quashed on appeal.
The following year, 1878, the Malthusian League was founded with Dr. Charles Drysdale as President and Mrs. Besant as Secretary. After years of propaganda this League eventually started a clinic at Walworth, London in September, 1921. A few months earlier Dr. Marie Stopes, whose books "Married Love" and "Wise Parenthood" had already met with great popular success, had founded the Society for Constructive Birth Control and had opened the first birth control in Britain.

Development after 1921 was more rapid. Several groups were started to open clinics to investigate methods, to undertake work abroad and to do propaganda. All of these combined in 1930 to form the National Birth Control Council, later called the Family Planning Association. Today all groups, except the Constructive Birth Control Society (President, Dr. Marie Stopes), are merged in the F.P.A.
The Council was exceedingly fortunate in its chief officers. The President, Lord Horder (then Sir Thomas Horder), was not only Physician to the King, but he was widely known and as widely respected by both the medical profession and the general public. Lady Denman, Chairman of the National Executive Committee, was wife of a former Governor General of Australia, daughter of a famous man of business (Lord Cowdray) and herself Chairman of the National Federation of Women's Institutes and as such known and loved up and down the country. These two not only governed the affairs of the Council wisely, but their support ensured attention from many official bodies and others who might have preferred to ignore the whole subject.
In Great Britain, elected bodies in towns and counties have responsibility for local Government within the framework of laws passed by Parliament. These local authorities, as they are called, function through Committees (e.g. for Health, Housing, Education, etc.) and salaried staff. They receive grants from Government Departments and also levy rates on local inhabitants.
Government Departments have no direct power over local authorities, but they interpret the law and make representations

148

149

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

and urge the local body to do this, that, or the other, and in the last resort, a Government Department can stop its financial grant if it considers the local authority is acting ultra vires. In practice, however, the Minister's word is usually accepted as law, and local authorities are almost overanxious to get the approval of whichever Ministry is concerned before it will undertake any course of action which has no precedent.
Up to 1930 the Ministry of Health had refused all requests to allow or encourage local health authorities to give any advice on birth control, but in April of that year a conference on the "giving of information on birth control by Public Health Authorities" was held in London and was attended by many representatives, both of those Authorities and of voluntary organizations. This conference called upon the Minister of Health "to recognise the desirability of making available medical information on methods of birth control to married women who need it." In the following July the Minister issued the first of several memoranda which, in effect, gave the authorities permission to provide advice on contraception for certain classes of women "for whom further pregnancy would be detrimental to health," but what in fact was detrimental to health was left entirely to the local Medical Officer of Health to decide. Some considered that it covered spacing of families, but at least one said that even an epileptic mother of eleven children was not eligible.
The newly formed National Birth Control Council devoted its main efforts to persuading Local Health Authorities to implement the Ministry's memorandum which was purely permissive, but quite early in its history a new development occurred. A local Health Authority at Plymouth in Devonshire offered to lend the Council premises to start a voluntary clinic. This plan had obvious advantages. The clinic could deal with all cases--not only those in medical need of advice--it would work

under the aegis of the local authority, and it would have free premises. The plan was submitted to the Minister of Health who said his consent was not required, and in 1932 the first voluntary clinic to be held on the premises of a local health authority was started. Today there are 211 branch clinics of the Family Planning Association, and three quarters of them are held on the premises of either a hospital or a local health authority, mostly free of charge. In addition, many authorities either pay a> block grant or a per capita fee to cover cases eligible for advice under the Ministry of Health memoranda who are officially referred to the F.P.A. clinic.
Although Headquarters makes an initial loan to new clinics, F.P.A. branches have to support themselves financially. Some of them are helped by voluntary subscriptions and donations, but the main sources of income are patients' fees and the sale of appliances and literature. Fees vary from clinic to clinic; a few have graduated scales and one or two have income limits but the normal fee is about 5s. and it is reduced or remitted altogether in cases of necessity. F.P.A. clinics are staffed by salaried doctors and nurses, and by lay workers, mainly unpaid.
Self-supporting clinics are only possible where the population is large enough to supply numbers of patients. In memory of Lady Denman, who was still Chairman when she died in 1954, a special fund is being raised to start clinics in rural areas so that countrywomen, to whose interests she devoted so much of her life, may be able to get the help they need.
In 1949 a Royal Commission on Population was appointed by the Government "to examine the facts relating to the present population trends in Great Britain; to investigate the causes of these trends and to consider their probable consequences; to consider what measures, if any, should be taken in the national interest to influence the future trend of population and to make recommendations." Its Report, issued five

150 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

years later, reached the conclusion that
there is a steady increase of the use of fam-
ily limitation by married couples. It said:
"We agree with the view that there is nothing inherently wrong with the use of mechanical methods of contraception. Our survey of the history of family limitation leaves us no doubt that, if these methods were not available other means would be used, and some of them e.g. criminal abortion, the prevalence of which is even now distressingly high, are very undesirable. There is no prospect that men and women, having acquired control over the numbers of children they will have, will abandon it. Nor is it desirable that they should. The spread of contraceptive knowledge represents a big extension of man's control over his circumstances. As such it brings many problems with it. But it has been one of the conditions of the great social advances that have been made since the 19th century; it has made possible for increasing numbers of people the planning of the size of their families, and has helped to free women from excessive burdens and to ensure that more and more children born are wanted children. Control by men and women over the numbers of their children is one of the first conditions of their own and the community's welfare, and in our view mechanical and chemical methods of contraception have to be accepted as part of the modern means, however imperfect, by which it can be exercised." and it also considered "that public policy should assume and seek to encourage the spread of voluntary parenthood." Finally it recommended that
"The giving of advice on contraception to married persons who want it should be accepted as a duty of the National Health Service and the existing restrictions on the giving of such advice by public authority clinics should be removed."
This report has never been discussed in
Parliament, but its conclusions have cer-
tainly had an effect on public opinion.
The medical world in Great Britain has
become much more cooperative as the years
have passed, but provision for training doc-
tors in contraceptive technique rarely

exists in teaching hospitals. Some of these
send their students to F.P.A. clinics, but
most do little or nothing. Twenty-nine
F.P.A. clinics have been inspected by the
Association's medical panel and recognized
as suitable to train doctors and nurses.
In Great Britain as in other countries
there is a multiplicity of contraceptives
varying greatly in efficiency, reliability and
price. The F.P.A. has an Approved List of
those contraceptives which pass certain lab-
oratory tests and have proved harmless over
many years of clinic use. Manufacturers
whose goods are on the list have to conform
to certain conditions of publicity and ad-
vertisement.
The other problem of family planning,
i.e., sub-fertility, has not received from the
medical profession in Great Britain the at-
tention it deserves, particularly in the field
of male infertility, despite the fact that the
Biological and Medical Committee of the
Royal Commission of Population reported
that "Of a typical group of women marrying at various ages in the proportions implied by 1938 marriage rates, probably between 5 per cent and 8 per cent on the average are likely to be involuntarily childless."
The Committee also said that
"Few people are aware of the importance of the male factor in fecundity and there is still a general tendency to regard the wife as being 'to blame,' and for the husband to refuse to submit to examination." In 1945, the F.P.A. established a seminological centre in London, and both here and at the F.P.A. branch in Exeter valuable pioneer work has been done. At the London center 20,000 cases have been dealt with, and medical journals have published accounts of its work. Many F.P.A. clinics are undertaking at least preliminary advice and have secured the cooperation of local hospitals and consultants.
Included in family planning work in this country is advice on cases of marital difficulties. The need for help often becomes apparent at a Family Planning clinic dur-

151

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ing the course of the doctor's examination and questions. It is met in varying ways. A few clinics have special sessions, some refer cases to a local Marriage Guidance Council, a Consultant or another possible source of help, others deal with cases as they arise.
Most clinics give advice to couples before marriage and some have special sessions for men.
Over the years, the attitude of the British Broadcasting Company and of the British Press has been, with a few notable exceptions, one of neglect rather than hostility. Indeed there has been until recently what has amounted to a conspiracy of silence on the subject of birth control and the same has applied, in general, to public opinion.
But during the last few months there has been marked evidence that family planning is moving from the realm of propaganda into that of progressive news and discussion. Seven months ago the then Minister of Health, Mr. Ian Macleod, M.P., to mark the Silver Jubilee of the Association, accepted an invitation to visit a branch clinic (North Kensington Marriage Welfare Centre) and the Headquarters of the F.P.A. where he met Officers and Committee Members with some of whom he afterwards lunched. This event led to an appearance on B.B.C. Television, a talk in the B.B.C. programme "Woman's Hour", a leading article in the London Times, another in the British Medical Journal and reports in countless other newspapers and journals.
As regards the attitude of organized religion in Great Britain, the Roman Catholic Church opposes the establishment of

F.P.A. clinics and has occasionally suc-
ceeded in persuading a local health au-
thority not to grant the use of premises.
There is nothing in the doctrine of the
Church of England or of the Free Churches
to preclude the use of mechanical methods
of contraception, and individual Bishops,
Free Church leaders and ministers of dif-
ferent denominations are active supporters
of the F.P.A. The Secretary of the Depart-
ment of Christian Citizenship of the Meth-
odist Church has been officially appointed
to the Executive Committee of the F.P.A.,
and it is possible that the Baptist Union
may take similar action.
To sum up: in Great Britain today the
Family Planning Association is opening
new clinics at the rate of one every eleven
days. Last year 250,000 women and men
visited F.P.A. clinics; in addition there are
independent clinics, notably that run by
Dr. Marie Stopes in London. Public in-
terest and support, both official and unoffi-
cial, are growing steadily. The present posi-
tion and probably future development were
well expressed by the British Medical Jour-
nal a few months ago.
"The history of the Family Planning Association as a voluntary organisation follows the usual British pattern--the demonstration of a social or medical need followed by attempts to meet it, growing public favour, and expansion of staff and premises leading to the national provision of services. The natural conclusion--full official recognition, followed by the assumption of the work, or at least financial responsibility for it, by the State or by local authorities--does not seem likely while birth control remains a subject of controversy."

