Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Heredity counseling the darker side
F. C. Fraser Ph.D., M.D.
To cite this article: F. C. Fraser Ph.D., M.D. (1956) Heredity counseling the darker side, Eugenics Quarterly, 3:1, 45-51, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1956.9987264 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1956.9987264
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles Citing articles: 5 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

Family Life Division

HEREDITY COUNSELING The Darker Side

F. C. FRASER, Ph.D., M.D. Department of. Genetics and Paediatrics,
McGill University Department of Medical Genetics, The Montreal Children's Hospital

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

In this article I do not want to give the and palate, and it is found that the

impression that I am against genetic coun- parents are first cousins. The consan-

seling. I am, of course, very much for it, and enthusiastic about the many ways it may help people. But it needs tobe pointed out that there aremany pitfalls to trap the unwary, many important factors that the inexperienced counselor (including myself) may fail to consider, and many cases where it seems impossible to supply any satisfac-

guinity may be a coincidence, and this case may be no different, genetically, than most other cases of cleft lipand palate, in which the risk for the next child has been estimated as about 5 per cent (Fogh-Andersen, 1942). But we know that not all cases of harelip and cleft palate are etiologically the same (Van der Woude, 1954). The parental

tory solution. To draw attention to such consanguinity in the present case sug-

problems, so that more effort may be de- gests that here a rare recessive gene is the

voted to solving them, this paper willdis- cause of thepatient's defect, andthat the

cuss some of the unsatisfactory aspects of risk for future children is 25 per cent.

counseling.

How canwe distinguish between the two possibilities for this particular case-- co-

A. Genetic Heterogeneity of

incidental consanguinity or rare recess-

Clinical Entities

ive?

A lot of difficulty comes from the fact For what it's worth, the frequency of cleft

that for many diseases two clinically similar lip in the siblings of children with cleft

cases may be genetically different, and thus lip ( ± cleft palate) does not seem tobe

have different genetic prognoses.

elevated in the rather small sample avail-

Example 1. The patient, aged 13years, able. I have selected from three series of

has diabetes mellitus. Three older and cases of harelip and cleft palate (Fogh-

four younger siblings are well. Her Andersen, 1942, Fraser, unpublished, Sand-

mother is diabetic, and has one brother ers, 1933) the families in which the pro-

and three sisters who are well, and a sister band's parents were related. There were

who is diabetic. Themother's mother is 20 such families, with 66 siblings of the

also diabetic. Is this a case of "ordinary" probands, andonly 2 (3percent) of these

diabetes, in which the risk for a subse- were affected. This is not significantly dif-

quent sibling is something over 10 per ferent from the risk for a sibling of a pro-

cent (Steinberg, 1955), or is it a clinically similar disease due to a rare dominant gene, where the risk is 50 per cent? At

band whose parents are unrelated (5 per cent).

present there seems no wayof telling.

Parental consanguinity may also raise

A similar problem may arise in the case counseling problems when the patient's

of consanguineous matings giving rise to condition is rare, but usually not inherited.

offspring with relatively common diseases. Example 3. The patient is diagnosed as

Example 2. The patient has a cleft lip having retrolental fibroplasia, a condition

45

46 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

occurring in premature infants, probably due to improper oxygen administration, and leading to blindness. The fact that the parents are first cousins leads one to wonder if, in this case, the eye changes may be due to a recessively inherited disease producing the clinical picture of retrolental fibroplasia. This makes it hard to give the parents any useful advice. If it is the usual type of retrolental fibroplasia the risk of recurrence is very low, but if a simple recessive gene pair is involved the risk is 25 per cent. One hesitates to warn the parents of a rather high risk of recurrence without any real evidence; even to mention, however cautiously, the possibility of a 25 per cent risk of recurrence, is likely to cause them a great deal of harmful, and perhaps unnecessary, worry. But to ignore the possibility of recurrence may expose them to a severe shock if the condition does recur and they have not been warned. Even so, the latter may be the better course, though it does stick the counselor's neck out a bit. A third reason why genetic heterogeneity in clinical entities causes difficulties in counseling is the existence of phenocopies, where an environmental agent may produce a disease clinically indistinguishable from one produced by a pathological gene. Example 4. Mr. Dillon* had bilateral retinoblastomas removed surgically when he was 2 years old. This malignant disease of the retina is known to show dom. inant inheritance in many cases; the "sporadic" cases are thought to be either mutations or phenocopies. Mr. Dillon, whose family history is free of this disease, married a woman who was accidentally blinded as a child, and they have a son who at the age of 6 years has no signs of retinal disease. They were referred for counseling, because they very much want another baby. They are intelligent, loving parents, both college graduates, who are doing a fine job of raising the present child. They cannot adopt a child, as blind couples are not considered suitable adoptive parents by the adoption
*All names are, of course, fictitious.

agency. What shall they be told?
If Mr. Dillon's neoplasm was gene-determined, the baby's chance of losing at least one eye, and perhaps its life, is 50 per cent. If it was a phenocopy, the chances are virtually 0 per cent. Opinions as to the proportion of retinoblastomas that are phenocopies range from almost none to three out of four (Nachtsheim, 1955). Suppose we guess it as one out of four. Then the risk for Mrs. Dillon's future child is 3 chances in 8 (37.5 per cent) of getting a retinoblastoma. This is the statistical probability, but it is not very helpful to the parents. They would, I think, rather be told that "The chances are either 50 per cent or 0 per cent although we do not know which" than that "The chances are 37.5 per cent." But it would be infinitely more helpful if someone would discover how to distinguish the phenocopies from the genetic cases.
Since the parents were intelligent and responsible, they were told more or less what has been written here, and the matter was discussed at some length and from many angles. After much soulsearching they decided to take the risk and Mrs. Dillon is now pregnant. Since the gene usually does not manifest itself at birth, the outcome of their decision will not be clear for several years.
B. Clinical Heterogeneity of Genetic Entities.
The fact that a single gene may have
widely different manifestations in different
persons, or perhaps no manifestation at all,
leads to difficulties in counseling simply
because it may be impossible to make a
definite diagnosis.
Example 5. A French-Canadian couple was referred by Social Service for an opinion as to the outlook for future children. The first baby, a boy, died at the age of two days, and the parents were told that "the hole in his heart did not close." He was not in a hospital and there was no autopsy. The second child, a boy, died at the age of 5 weeks, of gastroenteritis. He had been "blue" all his

47

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

life. The record from another hospital stated that he had "circulatory trouble." The third child, a boy, age 7, is well. The fourth, also a boy, had cyanotic congenital heart disease which at autopsy was found to be a most complicated defect involving, among other things, transposition of the aorta and an aplastic left ventricle. The baby had a decidedly dolicocephalic skull, a right inguinal hernia and left hydrocoele. There was no parental consanguinity, and no history of similar heart defects in the relatives.
What then is the outlook for the next child? Three cases of congenital heart disease in one sibship is certainly unusual. Is this a striking coincidence (in which case the outlook for the next child may well be good) or is there some special factor predisposing to developmental heart defects in this family? One thinks of arachnodactyly (Marfan's syndrome), for instance, where an irregularly dominant gene may or may not produce cardiovascular disease along with one or more of a variety of defects including long fingers and toes, an elongated habitus, dolicocephaly, and eye defects such as dislocation of the lens and myopia (Lutman and Neel, 1949). The mother is short and fat, and nothing unusual is found on physical examination. The father is not tall (5'8") but is on the thin side, has a dolicocephalic skull, a long narrow chest, and has a "bad eye." Ophthalmological examination shows there is no dislocation of either lens, but a severe myopia of the left eye. He does not have long fingers, but it has been pointed out that the skeletal effects of the gene may be largely overshadowed in a person who is constitutionally disposed to be short and stocky (McKusick, 1955). If the defects in the children are due to the arachnodactyly gene, the outlook for future children is relatively poor. But we do not know for sure whether the arachnodactyly gene is involved here or not. Certainly it would be hard to convince the average clinician,

or a court, that the father represented a form (however fruste) of Marfan's syndrome. To complicate matters further, the mother tried to abort this, and previous pregnancies, and feels that the defect is either caused by, or a punishment for, her action. She is very depressed, guilty and hostile, particularly to her husband. What will be the effects on the marital relationship if she is told it's not her fault, since her husband transmitted the gene. (Of course the fact that the husband may have transmitted the gene to the child does not mean that the child's disease is his fault, but that is the way the mother will interpret it.)
The parents were told, during a great deal of discussion, that the defects were certainly not due to the abortion attempts, but that there was a distinct possibility that it might occur again (there was no point in estimating a probability, which might give the impression that we actually knew what the probability was). As they are Roman Catholics, their choice of ways to meet this problem is decidedly limited. I feel that counseling in this case was a failure, partly because we could not give a reasonably definite prediction (since we do not know enough to identify minor forms of Marfan's syndrome with certainty) and partly because what the mother really needed was extensive psychiatric treatment, which we could not supply, and which she was unwilling to request from the proper sources.
So far in this discussion the source of our difficulties has been mainly a result of inadequate genetic knowledge. Many other examples could be cited--for instance, the problem of a hemophiliac with a negative family history and whether or not his mother is a carrier. Or the cases that just do not fit genetic theory, such as a family in which pseudohypertrophic muscular dystrophy shows regular sex-linked recessive inheritance except for the presence of a pair of monozygotic, female twins, of which one member has the disease!

48 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

G. Psychological and Emotional Complications.
Now let us consider some of the counsel-

did not seem opposed to this, but wanted to know if there was anything to the idea that first cousins shouldn't marry. The genetic disadvantage of consanguineous

ing problems arising not from inadequate matings was explained, and it was

genetic knowledge but from the psychologi- pointed out to him that although marry-

cal and emotional conflicts that are often ing a first cousin certainly increases one's

involved in counseling situations, and which, if unperceived or ignored by the counselor, may make the counseling procedure worse than useless.

chance of having defective children, we really do not know what the actual risk is--if we had to guess it we might say about a 10 per cent risk for each child of developing a recessively inherited disease.

1. Ulterior motives of those seeking coun- This risk constitutes an argument against

seling.
Sometimes a person who comes for genetic counseling does so not because he is sincerely interested in making a decision

the marriage which would have to be balanced against the arguments for the · prospective marriage, and the decision taken accordingly. Shortly afterwards Mrs. Andrews, Mr. Dixon's sister, con-

on the best available evidence, but because sulted me, not knowing of Mr. Dixon's

he hopes to use the genetic situation to visit, because her daughter was thinking

further his own ends.

of marrying Alan Dixon. Exactly the

same advice was given to her. Example 6,-f A 23-year-old albino French-

Canadian man was referred by the In-

The result was that Mr. Dixon went

stitute for the Blind because he was con- away saying "The geneticist says the risk

sidering marriage and wanted to know the risk of his children being albino. Two of his nine siblings were also albinos. It was explained to him that the statistical risk for his children was low, but that the crucial point was whether

is low, and there is no objection to the marriage," while Mrs. Andrews went away saying "The geneticist says the risk is high, and the marriage would be illadvised." Both interpreted the information to suit their own ends.

or not the prospective wife was a carrier, Because of the possibility of being mis-

the risk being 50 per cent if she was, but interpreted, it is wise for the counselor to

0 per cent if she was not. In view of record his advice in writing, although the

Waardenburg's claim that albino "car- counseling should, of course, always be

riers" may often be identified by transillumination of the iris (cited by Falls,

done by personal interview.

1953) we suggested that the fiancee 2. Psychological pressure on the counselor.

should come in for examination. The At times the counselor may be subjected

patient reacted so strongly against this that further delving into his feelings about the fiance'e was undertaken, and it was found that she was eight years older than he, that she, not he, had done the proposing, and that, in short, he was

to pressure from various sources that may tend to influence his decision. It is, in some circumstances, almost impossible to avoid becoming emotionally involved in the situation.

not at all keen on getting married and Example 8. Mr. and Mrs. Johnstone were

was hoping to use the poor outlook (as referred by the obstetrician for an opin-

he thought) for the children as a reason ion regarding the outlook for future

for not going into the marriage.

children. Their first baby, a girl, had

Example 7. Mr. Dixon consulted me be- died at the age of 4 days with a tracheo-

cause his son, Alan, was intent on marry- esophageal fistula. The next child, a girl,

ing Mr. Dixon's sister's daughter. He had died in hospital with a rare de-

I am indebted to Dr. J. D. Metrakos for supplying the details of this case.

velopmental defect of the cardiovascular system. The third baby, a boy, died with

49

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

the same sort of cardiovascular anomaly.
The parents were, naturally, quite con-
vinced that they were unable to have
normal children, and intended to adopt
a family. However, Mrs. Johns tone be-
came pregnant, and when they arrived
for counseling they were determined to
have the pregnancy terminated. It be-
came clear that the counselor was ex-
pected to provide scientific justification
for this procedure by stating that the
next baby was almost certain to be mal-
formed. However, our evaluation of the
situation did not add up this way. There
is no evidence of a relationship between
tracheo-esophageal fistula and develop-
mental cardiac defects, and no good evi-
dence that the risk of recurrence of con-
genital heart disease is higher after a
mother has had two affected children
than after she has had one. We there-
fore concluded that the risk for the next
baby was relatively low. (Note that not
all counseling problems involve having
to tell parents of the ominous outlook for
future children--here it was quite the
other way around!) The following is an
extract from our letter to the referring
obstetrician.
"I am therefore forced to conclude that the disastrous sequence of malformed children in this family should probably be regarded as an unfortunate coincidence. Even if it were due to a hitherto, unrecognized recessive gene the chance that the next child would be affected would be 25 per cent--i.e., the odds would be in favor of getting a good baby. It therefore seems that, unless this represents a previously unrecognized medical phenomenon, the chances are in favor of the next baby being healthy.
"I feel I ought to mention, however, that Mr. and Mrs. -- were quite skeptical when I told them this, and quite understandably so. They said, in fact, 'That's what they told us the last two times,' and I could understand how, in spite of the statistics, they might feel convinced that the next baby would inevitably be malformed. They seemed to feel, when I saw them, that Mrs. -- might not be able to stand the fear, worry and heartache of the gestational and neonatal period, and that if the child were malformed (it has at least a 3 per cent

chance of being defective in some way) the effect on the parents would be nothing short of disastrous."
This decision was reached in the face of an almost overpowering intuitive feeling on the counselor's part that Mrs. Johnstone was a woman who for some reason seemed destined to have nothing but malformed babies. In addition there was the tremendous emotional pressure brought to bear by the parents on the counselor to give a poor prognosis for the next baby. All sorts of appeals to the counselor's sympathy were used, and even the argument that if Mrs. Johnstone had a nervous breakdown under the strain it would be the counselor's fault. It was a harrowing experience all round, and there were several people besides the parents who worried throughout the remaining seven months of the pregnancy. Happily, the baby turned out to be a nice healthy little girl.
D. Other Problems
The problems that the counselor meets in his practice are endless in their variety and present a continual challenge to his sensitivity, tact and ingenuity. Each situation is different and must be approached with the knowledge that the problem is not only a genetic one, but involves domestic, economic, psychological and emotional factors, recognition of which may be vital to the successful management of the case. A few miscellaneous examples will provide further grist to the mill of my thesis.
Example 9. Mr. and Mrs. Laflamme were referred because their baby boy had been admitted to the hospital with amyotonia congenita. The parents were unrelated. Their first child was a girl, now three years old, who is well. The second child died in another hospital at the age of 2 months and was diagnosed as having amyotonia congenita. The third child was the present patient. This fatal disease is known to show recessive inheritance (Brandt, 1951). The counselor spent some time talking to the parents about the nature of the baby's

50 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

illness, their domestic situation and so forth, and eventually the parents raised the inevitable question of the outlook for the future child. The idea of recessive inheritance was explained to them, and it was pointed out that the chances were 3 to 1 that the next child would be healthy. On second thought, I feel that this may have been a mistake. The parents are good Roman Catholics and cannot use contraceptive measures other than the rhythm. But the mother's menstrual cycles range from 30 to 60 days in length, making it impossible to use the rhythm effectively. They will undoubtedly continue to have children. Why burden them with an unpleasant prospect that they cannot do anything about? When we have had time to follow up some of these cases, and see what effects our advice has had, we may know better how to manage future cases. Example 10. This case was referred by the Adoption Agency. Mr. and Mrs. Bond have applied to the agency for a baby. Mr. Bond's mother has Huntington's chorea, and this couple has decided, on eugenic grounds, to abstain from having children. The Adoption Agency is concerned about Mr. Bond's suitability as a father--if he develops this dreadful disease he will not be able to provide a proper home for an adopted child. The risk that Mr. Bond would develop Huntington's chorea was calculated, taking into account that he had already passed an appreciable portion of the age range during which this disease develops. We decided that he should wait until about the maximum age that the agency considers suitable for adoptive fathers, and then if still unaffected, go ahead with the adoption, since the risk of his developing the disease at that age would be fairly small. The intriguing thing about this case is that the physician who handled the family situation at the time when Mr. Bond's mother became ill had managed to convey to Mr. Bond that his children might inherit the disease, without telling him that he himself might be affected! Imagine the ticklishness of trying to inform Mr. Bond of our plan

without revealing to him the fact that he was a candidate for the disease. Example 11. The McDonalds were referred by the Social Service Worker of the Cleft Palate Clinic because they told her they were refraining from having further children for fear of recurrence of their child's defect--a harelip and cleft palate. The following story was pieced together from the social worker's notes and our personal interview.
Mr. McDonald was one of three children. He was born with a bilateral cleft lip and cleft palate. His father refused to have the palatal defect repaired surgically, saying "He was born like that, let him stay like that." Mr. McDonald therefore grew up with all the psychological trauma that one might expect from the possession of a severe and ugly defect and of a cruel, hostile father. He did not finish school and could obtain only poorly paid manual jobs. Mrs. McDonald was an ambitious, intelligent, frustrated and domineering woman who was unable to get an education consistent with her ambition, and who married this poor social and economic prospect as a last resort. Then Mr. McDonald had his palate repaired (the day after his father died) and almost immediately began to improve his social and economic position, went to night-school, and became a much more self-sufficient person. This apparently made him less dependent on his wife, and more self-assertive, but made her feel less needed, less able to dominate him, and consequently more hostile to him. Then they had their first child, a boy, who had a defect like his father's. To them the defect is "obviously" the father's fault, and the mother makes no bones about saying so and presumably uses this as a useful weapon in their frequent arguments. It is almost impossible for a psychiatrically untrained counselor to step into such an emotionally loaded situation without stirring up trouble!
Fogh-Andersen (1942) states that the risk for a future child in such a situation is about 15 per cent. This is considerably lower than the parents ex-

51

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

pected, butthey didnotseem as pleased members of families. We know almost

at the "good news" as onemight think nothing about the effects of counseling on

they would have been. It seems likely that they do not want anyfurther children, deformed or not, and the expectation of a high risk of being deformed provided a convenient excuse for not having more. Furthermore, it became

the psychodynamics of personal and family situations, andthere is a great need for research in this field. Until weknow more, we canat least tread carefully, think sympathetically, speak tactfully.

apparent to Mrs.McDonald that if it Acknowledgments. Financial support from the

was not entirely her husband's fault, then it must be at least partly someone else's

Federal-Provincial Public Health Grants is gratefully acknowledged.

fault, namely hers. This in spite of the

REFERENCES

counselor's efforts to point out that it

was no one's "fault," andthat there was

BRANDT, SVEN. 1951. Werdnig-Hoffman's infantile progressive muscular atrophy. Op. ex Domo

no question of blame involved. The up- Biol. Hered. Hum. Univ. Haf. 22.

shot was that thefamily stopped coming to the clinic and cut off their contact with the social worker, presumably because the mother did notlike havingthe situation shecould use so effectively upset by meddling counselors.
E. Conclusions
This article has tried to demonstrate:
1. That in spite of the current somewhat scornful attitude toward the "pedigree collecting" type of research in human genetics, there is still a lot we need toknow for counseling that canonly be found out in this way.

FALLS, H. F. 1953. Albinism. Trans. Am. Acad. Ophth. and Otolaryng. 57 (3): 324-331.
FOCH-ANDERSEN, P. 1942. Inheritance of harelipand cleft palate. Arnold Busck, Copenhagen. 266 pp.
FRASER, F. C. 1952.Consanguinity and its significance in the family history. Can Med. J. 6 6 : 258-260.
LUTMAN, F. C. and J. V. NEEL. 1949. Inheritance of
arachnodactyly, ectopia lentis and other congenital anomalies (Marfan's syndrome) inthe E. family. Arch. Ophth. 4 1 :276-305.
MCKUSICK, V. A. 1955. Thecardiovascular aspects of Marfan's syndrome: a heritable disorder of connective tissue. Circulation 11 (3): 321-342.
NACHTSHEIM, H. 1955. Frequency and distribution of pathologic genes in human populations. The effect of mutation rate and mutagenic factors, selective pressure and counter-selection. Eugen. Quart. 2 (1): 9-17.
SANDERS, J. 1933. Inheritance of harelip and cleft palate. Genetica 1 5 : 433-510.

2. That the counselor is not dealing

STEINBERG, A. G. 1955. Heredity and diabetes. Eugen. Quart. 2 (1): 26-30.

merely with gene frequencies and Men- VAN DER WOUDE, ANNE. 1954. Fistula labii inferioris

delian ratios but with people, who are

congenita andits association with cleft lip and palate. Am. J. Human Genet. 6 (2): 244-256.

