Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Patterns of discovery in mental deficiency
Gordon Allen M.D.
To cite this article: Gordon Allen M.D. (1957) Patterns of discovery in mental deficiency, Eugenics Quarterly, 4:4, 206-207, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1957.9987331 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1957.9987331
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:24

PATTERNS OF DISCOVERY IN MENTAL DEFICIENCY*
GORDON ALLEN, M.D.
Laboratory of Socio-environmental Studies National Institute of Mental Health National Institutes of Health Public Health Service
Department of Health, Education and Welfare

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

O CIENCE CANNOT BE understood in terms of any one method, and advances therefore deserve to be studied for their pattern as well as for their content. In genetic research on mental deficiency, patterns may be discerned at three levels. First, the genetic mechanisms are of four general types and determine four major patterns of research. Each of these will be illustrated here with a specific type of mental defect. Second, for each specific defect, past research follows lines which cut off or open up avenues of future exploration. Third, because genetics is in part an exact, in part a natural science, individual discoveries in mental deficiency illustrate the multiplicity of scientific methods: simple description, deduction, induction and intuition. Furthermore, the large dependence of practical developments on theoretical advances is repeatedly demonstrated in this field.
Research in mongolism illustrates the first major pattern, characterizing those defects in which heredity plays a subtle role or none at all. These offer the greatest challenge to genetic theory and method. The history of mongolism, in particular, presents a pattern of contradictory observations and false hypotheses that should make all students wary. Apparently a unitary disease, it seemed at the turn of the century to have several different causes. Abnormalities of gestation, widely reported, were often too late to fit embryological theory, and the apparent importance of high
*Condensed from a paper read at a Symposium on Progress in Genetic Psychiatry given by the Eastern Psychiatric Research Association, New York City, October 12, 1957.

maternal age was challenged by countless exceptions. When evidence for heredity began to accumulate, this too contradicted itself. Beginning with Jenkins (3) in 1933, theories developed a sophistication that made them stable or stubborn in the face of such recent findings as mongolism in two of three babies born to mongoloid mothers (7), mongolism in both of opposite-sex twins, and mongolism in one of monozygotic twins. An undercurrent of genetic research has now culminated in a discovery and hypothesis by Penrose (5) that may again be tangential or may be the long-sought key.
Phenylketonuria is a rare, severe form of mental deficiency associated with urinary excretion of phenylpyruvic acid. It typifies the inborn errors of metabolism, and its specific historical pattern shows scientific exploration at its best (4). At the lowest pattern level, the fruitfulness of the original chemical discovery in 1934 is an instructive contrast to the sterility of an earlier pedigree description of a family now known to have had phenylketonuria. In two decades following discovery of the laboratory test for this disease, the chemical deviations were enumerated, the fundamental error identified, and a rational therapy found. Not satisfied with this knowledge, geneticists have pressed on and devised a reliable test for heterozygous carriers (2). Among avenues thereby opened for future work is direct examination of the alleged role of the phenylketonuria gene in other mental disorders.
The third major research pattern involves the familial anatomical diseases. As

206

207

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

an example, Recklinghausen's neurofibro- own heredity, and that, by assortative

matosis ischaracterized by skin tumors and mating, it continually accumulates its own

may be accompanied bymental deficiency. kind of both. Early workers demonstrated

Though it was one of the earliest diseases the continuous distribution of intelligence

to be identified as a Mendelian dominant, and Roberts (6) was able to fit all morons

the pathogenesis of neurofibromatosis in into the Gaussian curve for the general

biochemical terms is not yet even surmised. population. This tends to discount reces-

Genetic interest in such diseases has neces- sive heredity in high-grade defect, and to

sarily been epidemiologic. The numerous merge the etiological problems withgen-

sporadic cases were early cited as evidence eral problems of intelligence and education.

of mutation in man, but variable expres- Geneticists long ago discovered a prin-

sion confused the picture. Two recent ciple that has not yet been sufficiently

monographs have made neurofibromatosis appreciated in connection with mental de-

one of thebest known diseases in popula- ficiency. Heredity sets no absolute limits to

tion genetics . The model study byCrowe a person's intelligence, but determines at

et al. (1) established thefrequency of the conception a roughly bell-shaped distribu-

disease, its virtually complete penetrance, tion of potentialities constituting his "reac-

and its mutation rate. Combining clinical tion norm." This concept shows a reassur-

and genetic acuity, these authors alsode- ing convergence of genetic and behavioral

tected four cases that fulfilled the criteria thought.

of somatic mutation (gene change re-

stricted to part of the body) and thereby opened another line of investigation.
Quantitative inheritance, the fourth genetic mechanism in mental subnormality, is represented par excellence in theclassic familial defectives, Goddard's morons. Its history illustrates thepre-Mendelian roots

SELECTED REFERENCES
1. CROWE, F. W., SCHULL, W. J. and NEEL, J. V.,
Multiple Neurofibromatosis. Thomas, Springfield, 181 pp., 1956. 2. HSIA, D. Y., et al., Detection by phenylalanine tolerance tests of heterozygous carriers of phenylketonuria. Nature, Lond., 178: 1239, 1956. 3. JENKINS, R. L., Etiology of mongolism. Am. J. Dis Child. 45: 506-519, 1933.

of genetics, the need for cooperation between the behavioral and biological sciences, and the problems of scientific enquiry in emotionally charged fields. Exemplified in the Kallikaks, these patients are close to the heart of the nature-nurture controversy. Early clarification came with the

4. JERVIS, G. A., Phenylpyruvic oligophrenia (phenylketonuria); Genetics and the Inheritance of Integrated Neurological and Psychiatric Patterns, Baltimore, Williams and Wilkins, pp. 259-282, 1954.
5. PENROSE, L. S., Observations on theaetiology of mongolism. Lancet, Lond. 2: 505-509, 1954.
6. ROBERTS, J. A.F.,The genetics of oligophrenia. Congres Int. Psychiat, Paris, Rapports 6:55-117, 1950.

gradual recognition that a family tends to 7. SAWYER, G. M. and SHAFFER, A. J., Reproduction

propagate its own culture as well as its

in a mongoloid: A follow-up. Am. J. Ment. Defic. 61: 793-795, 1957.

