Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The acquisition of inherited characters by evolution
James C. King
To cite this article: James C. King (1959) The acquisition of inherited characters by evolution, Eugenics Quarterly, 6:4, 249-253, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1959.9987421 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1959.9987421
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

THE ACQUISITION OF INHERITED CHARACTERS BY EVOLUTION

JAMES C. KING
Columbia University

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

Two recent books dealing with scientific epistomology, Personal Knowledge by Michael Polanyi and Patterns of Discovery by N. R. Hanson, establish very strikingly the importance of the subjective set of the investigator in the interpretation and synthesis of scientific data. All human beings as amateurs, scientists and philosophers as professionals, have an irresistible urge to tidy up what they know in a comprehensive system of explanatory beliefs. Such a system gives the individual aesthetic and spiritual satisfaction. People differ in the degree of comprehensiveness and internal consistency which they demand of their systems, but every man's system is influenced by the attitudes and axioms which he has come to accept in the course of arriving at the age of reason. So strong are these personal Gestalts that even trained scientists when they sense the same phenomena often perceive quite different things. The simple nineteenth-century faith in the possibility of achieving absolute objectivity seems to have taken off with a velocity rapidly approaching 186,000 miles per second.
Three current books1 on evolution illustrate beautifully how three contemporary geneticists, setting out to communicate to the public something of the nature and meaning of their specialty,
1 L. C. Dunn, Heredity and Evolution in Human Populations, Harvard University Press (1959) ; P. M. Sheppard, Natural Selection and Heredity, Philosophical Library (1958); and Conway Zirkle, Evolution, Marxian Biology, and the Social Scene, University of Pennsylvania Press (1959).

come out with three utterly different messages. From Sheppard we get an admirably lucid, closely reasoned summary of the essentials of genetic theory and clear analyses of many of the processes through which organisms and their environment interact to produce evolutionary change. Dunn also gives a clear and succinct summary of genetic principles -- somewhat less comprehensive than Sheppard's but probably more digestible for the undedicated layman. Approaching the subject of genetics and evolution as it applies to human populations, he treats us to a mature essay pervaded by the assurance which comes from great knowledge and also from the fearless recognition of the enormity of our ignorance. Zirkle sees in the present state of the science of genetics a conspiracy to subvert it, and he produces a political tract.
To deal first with the conspiracy charge. Zirkle is convinced that the educated public is kept insulated from sound knowledge of genetics because of powerful influences in literature and social science which are consciously antigenetic. These influences stem from Marxism which has insinuated its own brand of false biology into the thinking of our social scientists and literati. The power of these false doctrines is so great that we are denied the benefits which would accrue to us through the application of true, objective genetic principles.
Zirkle accurately points out that Marx

249

250 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

and Engels avidly accepted Darwin's theory of evolution because it fitted admirably into their concept of materialism, that they completely reject Malthus, however, and that they held firmly to the doctrine of the inheritance of acquired characters. He goes on to show that Marxian theology, as it has developed in Russia, has retained these tenets and has supplemented them with a rejection of Weismann, of Mendel and of any program of eugenics.
Beyond this point Zirkle sees patterns which constitute the conspiracy. Anyone who criticizes Malthus, Weismann or Mendel, who can contemplate the inheritance of acquired characters or who is not an ardent eugenicist as Zirkle understands the term is a Marxist, overt or covert. The key attitude most accurately diagnostic of this heresy is a lack of enthusiasm for eugenics. The roster of heretics is long and astonishing. It includes, among others, Alfred Lord Tennyson, Alphonse Daudet, George Bernard Shaw, Jack London, Lester Frank Ward, William F. Ogburn, L. C. Dunn, Th. Dobzhansky and Bentley Glass.
It is regrettable that anyone so well grounded in the history of biology and of genetics should have allowed himself such an emotional field day in print. What Zirkle entirely ignores is that intellectual systems, like evolution, are opportunistic constructions, made of what is conveniently at hand. Man's brain is not merely a memory computer; it is emotionally weighted. Criticism of theories of population pressure, of the struggle for existence, of the unchanging germ plasm are quite understandable as reactions against the arrogance and distortion with which these doctrines have been preached by some of their supporters. Such reactions are

not evidence of a communist conspiracy. But what is more, it is a frightening prospect if criticism or skepticism of some scientific belief is to be taken as evidence of political heterodoxy. What will happen to science and to freedom of thought if accepted beliefs are to be elevated above criticism?
It is part of the catechism of science that all hypotheses and systems are fair targets for experimental or speculative attack. Yet a theory once accepted often picks up a momentum which allows it to coast on in spite of well-founded and persistent criticism. Genetics illustrates this tendency in its apotheosis of the single gene as the basis of anatomical, physiological and behavioral adaptation. In all three of these works this basic motif keeps bobbing up.
In pre-Darwinian days probably the greatest obstacle to the formulation of a theory of organic evolution was the prevailing doctrine of catastrophism or progressionism. Great upheavals had occurred from time to time in the earth's history, producing mountains, gorges and other dramatic features of the landscape and eliminating at the times of these disasters whole faunas which were then replaced by new casts of animals. With such a picture firmly in one's mind, why waste effort constructing a theory of gradual change in animals and plants? It was not until geology had become anti-catastrophic and uniformitarian, emphasizing the slowness and constancy of the cycle of erosion, that a theory of organic evolution could be fitted in.
Once formulated the doctrine of evolution needed a theory of inheritance to explain response to selection. No such theory was available, and for forty years the evolutionists floundered. When a theory of heredity did appear with the

251

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

discovery of Mendel in 1900, it by no means satisfied the evolutionist. It was paniculate and explained why variation did not disappear through blending, but its emphasis on pairs of alternate alíeles producing contrasting forms in fixed ratios was a new sort of catastrophism. One seemed to be back in preLyellean geology. The evolutionist was not looking for an agent that produced strikingly different forms in a single step. He wanted something that would explain changes occurring gradually by the repeated addition of small increments.
Thirty years after the discovery of Mendel the work of Fisher, Haldane and Wright began a synthesis of genetics and evolution. Developments since 1930, multifactorial and polygenic systems for explaining continuous variation, the development of the concept of the population and recent evidences that the gene pool is an integrated whole rather than a fortuitous collection of atomistic genes have made genetics -- potentially at least--as gradualistic and uniformitarian as the cycle of erosion. All three of these authors are, of course, aware of these developments and all specifically refer to them. But in the excitement of controversy or in concentrating on an involved explanation, the geneticist still displays a weakness for the old 3:1 war paint.
In discussing a program for eliminating feeblemindedness, Zirkle falls back on a single gene "to avoid the complications of modifying genes." Dunn very aptly points out that differences in visible human characters must result from many genes of small effect; he cites evidence of an adaptive interaction between the ABO and the Rh blood group systems and he suggests "that selection in the long run acts on com-

plexes of genes, on whole genotypes rather than on the effects of single alleles." But these very exciting observations are made almost incidentally and are never exploited or driven home. The emphasis remains on the analysis of the frequencies of alíeles at single loci--the ABO locus, the Rh locus, that for sicklecell anemia.
Because he deals primarily with natural selection, Sheppard makes one particularly aware of the great inertia of the theory of the single particulate gene. One keeps being asked to picture selection choosing between this and that alíele at some single locus. Polymorphism is the presence of two--or at most a small number--of contrasting types controlled by major switch genes; it is catastrophic, not part of a smoothly continuous distribution. There is a chapter entitled "Polygenic Inheritance and Selection' but even here the polygenic system appears as just a more complicated substitute for a single gene. The concept of an integrated genetic system is simply not to be found in the discussion. This is most obvious in the section labeled "The Founder Principle" dealing with Mayr's famous paper, "Change of Genetic Environment and Evolution." The main point of Mayr's argument is lost in Sheppard's summary.
Natural selection is, of course, no independent force. It is merely a name for the reactions continuously going on between living things and their environment. These reactions are extremely complex. They can be studied only by analytical simplification -- extracting a part of the process and describing or measuring it in isolation. But the process itself remains unbelievably complex and must be resynthesized to be visualized or appreciated; it is not just the

252 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

sum of even a large number of isolated computations. Its parts fit together dynamically. In a very real sense it is alive; it is a phase of life. If one were to personify it, it would be a sprightly, mischievous Artemis of such competence and versatility that she played her role with absent-minded virtuosity. Sheppard's analysis suggests instead a bovine Hera who accomplishes her task by application, concentration and resignation. One feels that one has been given the cold numbers but no glimpse of the divine vision.
Few students of intellectual history would quarrel with the statement that the three most influential thinkers of the nineteenth century were Darwin, Marx and Freud. The Lysenko controversy has made all geneticists professionally aware of Marx even though it may not have engendered in all of them a deep appreciation of his position and influence. Freud, however, is either ignored or actively rejected by the great majority of geneticists. It is interesting that in these three volumes there is only one reference to Freud and that merely an incidental one in a quotation cited by Zirkle. Nowhere is there any reference to his work or contributions. The same is true of Darwin's Century by Loren Eiseley.
The importance of Freud does not lie in the details of his psychological theories nor in the neat and rigid theological systems which have been constructed by some of his disciples. His importance lies in his having emphasized the role of the irrational and the unconscious in human behavior and the way in which the individual personality is synthesized by a progressive integration of irrational and unconscious elements during development.
These ideas have been widely assimi-

lated in many fields--medicine, particularly psychotherapy, psychology, the social sciences, the arts. They are as generally influential in the intellectual life of today as is the doctrine of organic evolution. But genetics gets along without them.
Except for the mention of blood groups, Sheppard avoids all questions of human evolution. Zirkle's quarrel with Marxian biology is that it is depriving us of the benefits of a positive eugenics program which would raise the level of human intelligence. He does not define intelligence. He seems to equate it with the I.Q., but he also relates it to the total technical competence of a society. Civilizations fall when they lose too many of their genes for intelligence. This assumption that intelligence is a single definable entity, measurable on a linear continuum, under very simple genetic control and a guarantee of everything desirable in human behavior indicates a complete innocence of current developments in psychology. But this deduction is unnecessary; there is an explicit footnote on page 270.
Dunn takes no such position. He refers not to intelligence but to wits, brightness, mental ability, intellectual performance. He doubts that Galton was justified in assuming that success by itself was proof of gene-determined ability. He points out that other characters such as emotional stability are quite as important as brilliance. Dunn's position is that we just don't know--a truly admirable one for it accurately fits the factual situation. But for the student of human evolution the problem of understanding the relation between human behavior and genotype is still there. In order to deal with it, one must know something of psychic ontogeny just as one must know something of embryol-

ogy in order to understand the evolution of anatomy. It has taken a hundred years to get Darwin and Mendel together; it is obviously going to take a few more decades to work Freud into the partnership.
Some day someone will synthesize all these fragments--the integrated genetic system, the population, physical development, biochemistry, psychic develop-

253
ment, culture and natural selection in one grand concept which will reverberate through human minds with a crescendo like that which accompanies a tropical dawn. In Dunn's book one senses a tentative approach in this direction, but what we get is a faint suggestion of the rosy fingers as one might see them on a November morning in New England. Maybe it just isn't time yet for sunrise.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Contents.

July 1959, Volume 51, Number 2.

NOTES OF THE QUARTER

THE PRESIDENCY -- SIR CHARLES DARWIN -- MR. GEOFFREY ELEY -- A MAJOR ADVANCE IN HUMAN GENETICS -- RATS, MAN AND THE WELFARE STATE -- GENETIC HAZARDS -- AMERICAN ATTITUDES TO HUMAN GENETICS AND EUGENICS -- EDUCATION AND AGE AT MARRIAGE IN THE U.S.A.
-- THE FERTILITY OF DIFFERENT SECTIONS OF THE UNITED KINGDOM POPULATION -- SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL DIFFERENCES IN FERTILITY -- POPULATION AND ETHICS -- DEMOGRAPHIC ACTIVITIES -- MENTAL HEALTH RESEARCH FUND -- DEMOGRAPHIC FACTS -- OUR CONTRIBUTORS

Physique and Family Structure Eugenics and Future Society Migration and Race Mixture from the Genetic Angle
Race and Intelligence
Notes and Memoranda Reviews of Books Periodicals
The Population of Great Britain: Some Facts Correspondence

R. W. Parnell Harry L. Shapiro Macfarlane Burnet
P. E. Vernon

THE EUGENICS SOCIETY, 69 Eccleston Square, London, SW.l

CASSELL & COMPANY LTD 35 RED LION SQUARE, W.C.I

Price: Five Shillings per issue and Twenty Shillings per annum, post free Issued free to Fellows and Members of the Eugenics Society

