Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Recent developments in the study of inherited anemias
Anthony C. Allison
To cite this article: Anthony C. Allison (1959) Recent developments in the study of inherited anemias, Eugenics Quarterly, 6:3, 155-166, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1959.9987409 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1959.9987409
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles Citing articles: 7 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

Vol. 6, No. 3,September, 1959

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN THE STUDY OF INHERITED ANEMIAS

ANTHONY C. ALLISON*
National Institute for Medical Research London

T
J. HE STUDY OF INHERITED ANEMIAS re-
ceived great impetus from the demonstration of Pauling, Itano, Singer and Wells (1949) of the presence of an abnormal hemoglobin in sickle-cell disease. In the succeeding decade research in this field has expanded enormously and produced results of considerable general interest The rate of progress still shows no sign of declining, and it is to be hoped that the next ten years will prove as fertile as the last.
The developments have followed three main directions. Widespread application of filter paper electrophoresis has led to the recognition of more than thirty varieties of human adult hemoglobin and three varieties of human fetal hemoglobin. The overall distribution of the hemoglobin types in various human populations has been determined. This may be termed the classificatory phase of development of the subject--analo-
*Dr. Allison is Secretary of the Human Genetics Committee of the Medical Research Council.

gous to the phase of systematic description of flora and fauna in a new continent. Inevitably, there has been terminological confusion, and in their eagerness to describe new hemoglobin types some workers have relied on inadequate criteria for characterization, as Beaven and Gratzer (1959) have emphasized. On the other hand, some hemoglobin types thought to be the same have been shown to differ, e.g. the three varieties of D mentioned below. Powerful techniques for establishing identity or non-identity are now available, in particular peptide analysis, and in a few years many of the mutant forms will be chemically denned.
This represents the second major development in the field. The effect of several mutations has been identified as the replacement of one amino acid residue by another in half-molecules of hemoglobin. Moreover, it has become evident that the two unlike polypeptide chains of the hemoglobin molecule are synthesized under independent genetic

155

156 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

control. The results have illuminated the genetic control of protein synthesis, which is a key problem in biology.
The third line of development has been concerned with the population genetics of the abnormal hemoglobins. It has been established that the high frequencies of the sickle-cell gene in many populations are due to a balance of powerful selective forces, some tending to increase and others to decrease the frequency of the gene. And it has been shown that as a rule any two abnormal hemoglobin types tend to be mutually exclusive in populations. These represent the best-understood examples of polymorphism and natural selection in man.
Another series of investigations of inherited anemias has also yielded results of general interest. These have been on the sex-linked trait for deficiency of the erythrocyte enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. The trait is responsible for susceptibility to hemolysis on exposure to primaquine and other drugs and to fava beans. The high frequencies of this trait in many populations makes it a true polymorphism -- one of the most remarkable sex-linked polymorphisms in any species.
Results of recent investigations of other inherited serum-protein differences --in particular, transferrin and haptoglobin types--show them to be analogous in some ways to the hemoglobin types, although there are certain interesting differences. These topics have been selected for discussion in this paper. No attempt has been made to cover the field comprehensively. General reviews are available on inherited hemolytic anemias (Dacie, 1954; Wintrobe, 1956),human hemoglobins (Itano, 1957; Beaven and Gratzer, 1959), primaquine sensitivity (Beutler, 1959) and hapto-

globins (Allison, 1959a).
MUTATION AND HEMOGLOBIN TYPES
The genetic control of protein synthesis is an important problem in biology. This is so because protein enzymes appear to be responsible for the synthesis of all other bodily constituents, including complex polysaccharides and lipids, ribonucleic acid (RNA--Ochoa and Heppel, 1957) and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA--Kornberg, 1957). By contrast, proteins cannot synthesize other proteins; evidence is accumulating that proteins are synthesized by microsomal particles and soluble cellular components containing RNA (see Crick, 1957; Work, 1959). This appears to be true also of hemoglobin (Schweet, Lamfrom and Allen, 1958). It follows that to exert their effects on the metabolism of cells genes have to act through proteins. Many workers believe that the sequence of bases along a span of chromosomal DNA determines uniquely ' the sequence of amino acids in the polypeptide chain of a protein (see Crick, 1957). This presumably takes place through the agency of a specific RNA-containing intermediate. A mutation or change in the basesequence of a particular length of DNA would be expected to change the sequence of amino acids in the corresponding polypeptide chain.
Using the technique of peptide analysis developed by Sanger, Ingram (1957) and Hunt and Ingram (1958) have shown that precisely this occurs. The only detectable difference in hemoglobins S and C from A lies in the substitution of a valine and a lysine residue, respectively, for glutamic acid in each half-molecule. The differences in charge produced by these substitutions are sufficient to account for the overall differences in electrophoretic mobility of the

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

hemoglobin types. This small substitution has dramatic consequences: the change in charge allows the sickle-cell hemoglobin molecules to aggregate when deoxygenated and so brings about the sideling of erythrocytes, hemolysis and vascular obstruction characteristic of sickle-cell disease. Since it is likely that the sickle-cell and hemoglobin C genes have arisen as mutations from the normal allele, the effect of mutations can be defined as the replacement of one amino-acid by another in the gene products. On any coding hypothesis this is unlikely to involve change of more than a few base pairs of the DNA double helix; and it could be due to alteration of a single base pair. Benzer (1957) has defined a "muton" as the smallest genetic element that, when altered, can give rise to a mutant form of organism, and a "recon" as the smallest unit in the unidimensional array of genetic units that is interchangeable, but not divisible, by genetic recombination. His estimate of recon size, based on recombination studies in bacteriophage, is about 5 nucleotide pairs. Rosenberg, Sirotnak and Cavalieri (1959) have presented evidence that DNA fragments of the same order of size can bring about transformation in pneumococci. The evidence just quoted suggests that a muton is no bigger.
Benzer, Ingram and Lehmann (1959) reported the results of peptide analyses of three samples of an abnormal hemoglobin that were all thought to be D because they showed an electrophoretic mobility similar to that of S but had solubilities within normal limits. The three hemoglobins were found to be different from one another and from normal adult hemoglobin (HbA). This result raises the question whether other hemoglobins characterized by electro-

157
phoresis are the same. In fact, many abnormal forms of hemoglobin may not differ from HbA electrophoretically. In general it is clear that numerous mutant form of hemoglobin exist, some being physiologically normal and others defective, e.g. sickle-cell hemoglobin and the varieties of hemoglobin M that undergo spontaneous oxidation in methemoglobin (see Gerald and George, 1959).
Other developments have been reported by Ingram (1959). In hemoglobin E once again a glutamic acid residue of A is replaced by lysine, involving a change of two units of electric charge, in each half-molecule. However, this mutation is in a different peptide from the S and C mutations, and hence affects a different part of the molecule. The D/J mutation affects the same peptide as is altered in E, but not necessarily the same amino acid. The Da and I mutations both involve another peptide.
Peptides and proteins from different species often differ by single amino-acid substitutions (see Allison, 1959b), and again it is reasonable to suppose that each of these arose by single mutational steps. It seems clear that mutations do not affect all parts of the hemoglobin molecule with equal frequency but are particularly common at certain sites. The same is true of other proteins. Thus, the only differences in insulins from different species appear to lie in the 8-9-10 sequence of residues within the intrachain disulphide bridge of the A chain (Harris, Sanger and Naughton, 1956; Ishihara, Saito, Ito and Fajino, 1958). The inference is that some parts of the DNA chain are inherently more unstable than others. Benzer and Freese (1958) have produced evidence that this is true of the bacteriophage chromosome both spontaneously and in the presence of a mutagen.

158 Eugenics Quarterly

INDEPENDENT GENETIC CONTROL OF
HEMOGLOBIN POLYPEPTIDE CHAIN
SYNTHESIS
In this discussion it will be assumed that normal adult and fetal human hemoglobins each have a unique amino acid sequence. The molecules consist of two identical halves, as shown by X-ray crystallography (see Kendrew and Perutz, 1957). In each half of the molecule there are two different polypeptide chains, a and j8, which are characterized by the N-terminal amino-acid sequences valine leucine- and valine histidine leucine-, respectively. Recently (Hunt, 1959) it has been shown that human fetal hemoglobin (HbF) hastwo a chains identical with those in HbA and two other chains, that can be termed y, having N-terminal glycine (Schroeder and Matsuda, 1958).
An attempt will now be made toprovide an explanation for the genetic control of hemoglobin synthesis (see Figure 1). Evidence has accumulated that the

genes for the abnormal hemoglobins G and Hopkins 2 (Ho2) are inherited independently of the sickle-cell gene (Schwartz, Spaet, Zuelzer, Neel, Robinson and Kaufman, 1957; Smith andTorbert, 1958). This implies that more than one locus is concerned in hemoglobin synthesis, and the simplest inference is that each of two loci controls the formation of one polypeptide chain. The genes controlling the synthesis of normal a, j3 and y chains can be termed HbaA, HbpA and HbyF, respectively (Figure 1).
The sickle-cell and hemoglobin C molecules differ from the normal molecule at the same site, which must lie in the /?-chain since it does not affect HbF. The D/J and E hemoglobins differ from HbA in the same chain asS and C, whereas the Da and I mutations differ from HbA in the other chain (Ingram, 1959).
The normal individual may therefore be designated Hbc^/Hba^,

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

GENES

Hh'oc

CHROMOSOMAL DNA

LI i riTrm

D' E S I

TEMPLATE RNA

i i i 11 i 11 mil

i \fd i i i i i r n D«'lGsHo?
i m m iTTl

ITTT
Ba Fe?

POLYPEPTIDE CHAINS
PROTEIN MOLECULES

HbA

I4
"OOOOOOOOGly4 Ba Fe? Y
HBF

FIGURE 1
Diagram o£ the supposed relationships between the hemoglobin genes and the proteins whose synthesis they control. The arrows indicate the position of the changes in chromosomal DNA and polypeptide chains involved in mutations. Thus, S and C affect the same amino-acid, D and E the same peptide but not necessarily the same amino-acid. However, it isnot meant to imply that the latter peptide is closer to the N-terminal than the peptide involved in the S and C mutation. Hemoglobin G. is the G of Schwartz et al.

HbyF/HbyF> the carrier of the sickle-cell trait Hbo^/HbcA, Hbp/HbpP, Hb^/ HbyF, the carrier of the hemoglobin I train HbcA/HbcJ, Hbp*/Hbp*, HbyF/ HbyF, and so forth.
Evidence consistent with this hypothesis has been obtained by recombination of dissociated molecules (Singer and Itano, 1959; Itano and Singer, 1959; and unpublished observations of theauthor). It has been known for some years that under mildly acidic conditions HbA breaks down into half-molecules. Recent evidence has shown that this is an asymmetric process, the subunits containing aa and f}f$ chains, respectively. When mixtures of A + S, A + C and S + C hemoglobins are allowed to dissociate, the subunits are exchanged, but the molecules retain their original charge (Figure 2). When mixtures of S or C and I or Hopkins 2 hemoglobins areallowed to dissociate and recombine,however, approximately one-fourth of HbA is formed, along with a hybrid abnor-

159
mal molecule (Figure 2). This is the result expected if the abnormalities in the S and C molecules on the one hand, and the I and Ho2 molecules on the other, are located in different polypeptide chains. A subject with S and Ho2 hemoglobins described by Smith and Torbert (1957) wasfound to have HbA, which suggests that the hemoglobin polypeptide chains are synthesized independently and recombine at random in the erythrocyte precursors.
The older dogma of "one gene, one enzyme" can now be replaced by "one cistron, one polypeptide chain." The interpretation given above of the genetic control of hemoglobin synthesis leads to certain verifiable predictions. Thus, when abnormal forms of foetal hemoglobin are replaced by normal adult hemoglobins (Fessas and Papaspyron, 1957; Ager and Lehmann, 1958) the abnormality should lie in the y chain. And adult hemoglobin variants such as Da, I and Hopkins 2 with-abnormal « chains

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

MIXTURE

ACID DISSOCIATION

SA RECOMBINATION

aA
FIGURE 2
Diagram showing the recombination of hemoglobins dissociated into half-molecules by acid. The asterisk shows transfer of a radioactive label. The -f. and -- signs represent differences in electric charge from HbA polypeptide chains.

160 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

should be accompanied by abnormal fetal forms. Verification of these predictions would be additional evidence in favor of the hypothesis.
POPULATION GENETICS OF
ABNORMAL HEMOGLOBINS
When a major gene mutates, the new allele is generally disadvantageous. The reasons for this are sufficiently obvious. Mutations are random changes relative to the needs of the organism, and when they occur in any highly organized system, such as the human body, they are more likely to be harmful than useful. Occasional mutations are advantageous and then the mutant genes spread through populations, replacing the original genes at the loci concerned. This process has actually been witnessed in populations of insects and microorganisms. Thus, during the past fifty years melanic mutants of many species of moths have become common in industrial areas because they are better camouflaged and less subject to predation than the original forms (Ford, 1956). The spread of insects resistant to DDT and other chemicals, and of bacteria resistant to drugs, has been reviewed by Crow (1957) · These are dramatic examples of changes in the genetic compoposition of natural populations of organisms in response to powerful selective agencies.
In other circumstances the spread of a mutant gene which is initially advantageous is checked at a certain point, so that both the mutant and the original gene persist in the population indefinitely. This is the situation known as polymorphism. As Fisher (1930) showed, it will arise when subjects heterozygous for two genes are favored by selection over both homozygotes.

One of the best examples is provided by the sickle-cell gene which has remained common in parts of Africa and elsewhere despite the fact homozygotes develop a severe anemia from which most die in childhood. Allison (1954a) recognized that the trait is common only where malaria is hyperendemic. He was able to show (1954b) that children carrying the sickle-cell trait are resistant to malignant tertian malaria, so that they stand a better chance of surviving through the dangerous years of first exposure to the disease--before immunity is built up--than children without the trait. There is now substantial evidence that this view is correct (Allison, 1957; Vandepitte and Delaisse, 1958; Raper, 1959).
It is therefore justifiable to conclude that the sickle-cell gene--initially a rare mutant -- has been favored by natural selection in malarious areas, so that it has increased in frequency until the advantage of the heterozygote is counterbalanced by the disadvantage of the homozygote, after which it has remained relatively constant. High frequencies of the sickle-cell trait have been recorded in malarious parts of Africa, Sicily, Greece, Southern Turkey, Southern Arabia and India. The incidence of the trait in some African tribes is about 40 per cent, which implies that the sicklecell heterozygote has about a 25 per cent better chance of reproducing than the normal homozygote. If the environment were to change in such a way that the advantage of the sickle-cell heterozygote were eliminated, the frequency of the sickle-cell gene would be expected to fall. This may well have happened within three centuries in the Negro population of the United States, amongst whom the frequency of the sickle-cell gene (4 per cent) is now considerably lower than

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

expected from their African ancestry even when allowance is made for white and Indian admixture.
Because of the magnitude of the selective forces involved, it has been possible to demonstrate the effects of selection in another way. Allison (1956) found that in populations of African infants tested at an age prior to mortality from sickle-cell disease and malaria, the ratios of the three genotypes were close to those expected from the random mating hypothesis. However, in the parental population there was a significant excess of sickle-cell heterozygotes and deficiency of sickle-cell homozygotes. This is direct evidence that the heterozygotes have a greater chance of surviving to reproductive age than other genotypes. Confirmatory observations from the Belgian Congo have been published by Vandepitte and Delaisse (1958).
An interesting complication is introduced into the situation in West Africa, where the hemoglobin C gene is common. The tendency for sickle-cell and hemoglobin C molecules to form mixed aggregates produces a well-known variant of sickle-cell disease in subjects who inherit a sickle-cell gene from one parent and a hemoglobin C gene from the other parent. This syndrome was described by Kaplan, Zuelzer and Neel (1951) and numerous cases have been reported from the United States and West Africa. More than one per cent of children born in Ghana have hemoglobin C : sickle-cell disease. Allison (1955) postulated that because of the disadvantageous effects of the sickle-cell and hemoglobin C genes in combination, the two genes must tend to be mutually exclusive in populations. This was subsequently found to be the case. Hemoglobin C is present in all West African territories, the incidence

161
of heterozygotes rising to 29 per cent in northern Ghana, and as the frequency of hemoglobin C increases that of the sickle-cell trait falls (Allison, 1956; Edington and Lehmann, 1956). An apparent exception occurred among Liberians, who were reported to have low frequencies of both the sickle-cell and hemoglobin C genes. However, the recent demonstration of a relatively high frequency of carriers of thalassemia in the population (Olesen et ah, 1959) provides an explanation for the low frequency of the other genes, which are known to be disadvantageous in combination with thalassemia.
Thus powerful selective forces appear to have stabilized the frequencies of the abnormal hemoglobin genes in complex genetic equilibria in West Africa. The same sort of situation almost certainly obtains in other human populations in which the genes for abnormal hemoglobins are common. Among many Mediterranean peoples the thalassemia trait has persisted in frequencies up to 20 per cent although the homozygous condition is nearly always lethal. In several South East Asian countries, such as Burma, Thailand and Indonesia, the genes for hemoglobin E, thalassemia and hemoglobin H are all common despite the fact that individuals who inherit two abnormal genes are liable to hemolytic anemias of varying degrees of severity. The most plausible inference is that the possession of a single abnormal gene is advantageous, but the selective agencies involved have not yet been investigated. -
GLUCOSE-6-PHOSPHATE DEHYDRO-
GENASE DEFICIENCY IN
ERYTHROCYTES
It has been known for several years that some individuals of Negro, Mediter-

162 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

ranean or East Indian origin are liable to hemolysis when given therapeutic doses of the antimalarial primaquine and other drugs. The sensitivity was shown by Beutler and his colleagues (see Beutler, 1959) to be due to a specific defect in erythrocytes. The most striking change, and possibly the primary genetic defect, is reduction in activity of the enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
(Carson et al., 1956). Associated with this is "glutathione instability"--diminution in the amount of reduced glutathione in cells incubated with acetylphenylhydrazine. The trait appears to be sex-linked with full expression in male hemizygotes and variable expression in female heterozygotes (see Childs et al., 1958). This trait is also responsible for "favism," a severe hemolytic diathesis produced in sensitive subjects
(usually in Mediterranean countries) following ingestion of fava beans. Hence there is reason to believe that the trait is potentially harmful, despite which it has attained high frequencies (up to 30 per cent) in some human populations. The possibility that the trait is protective against malaria again arises, as Motulsky and Campbell (1959) have recently emphasized. The distribution of the trait certainly corresponds remarkably well with that of malignant tertian malaria, and the malaria parasites are known to require reduced glutathione for growth. The sex-linkage makes the polymorphism of general interest, for it might be maintained by advantage of the male hemizygote alone, although recent theoretical studies suggest that some advantage of female heterozygotes is also required (Mandel, 1959).
OTHER SERUM PROTEIN
POLYMORPHISMS IN MAN
Three sets of genetically controlled

differences in human serum proteins have recently been analyzed. They concern different proteins and appear to be inherited quite independently of one another. The first affects the haptoglobins, serum proteins that have the specific property of combining with hemoglobin. Smithies (1955), using electrophoresis with starch gels as supporting medium, showed that the sera of normal subjects fall into three groups. It has since become clear that the determinant proteins are haptoglobins, and the sera are now referred to as type 1-1, 2-1 and 2-2. The mode of inheritance of the three types suggests that they are controlled by a single pair of allelic genes, Hp1 and Hp2 (Smithies and Walker, 1956); there are, however, exceptions mentioned by Allison (1959a). In type 1-1 a single haptoglobin component is seen, but in types 2-1 and 2-2 numerous haptoglobins bands, characteristic of the two types, are seen on starch gel electrophoresis of sera. This system is of unusual interest in relation to the genetic control of protein synthesis, for not only does the heterozygous individual produce proteins different from those in either homozygous type, but also in two of the types the haptoglobins consist of several fractions. No other genetic system is known in which a single locus controls the specificity of more than one protein (Allison, 1959b). The difficulty has been resolved by the demonstration that the type 1-1 haptoglobin is a monomer while in the other two types the haptoglobins form a series of polymers (Allison, 1959c). One other observation is of interest. A relatively high proportion of Africans lack demonstrable haptoglobins. This is likely to be a congenital lack in at least some cases, since it has been observed also in American Negroes (Giblett, 1959). The absence of

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

haptoglobins in Africans is remarkable from the point of view of population genetics. The individuals concerned must have recurrent hemoglobinemia from malaria in childhood, which in the absence of haptoglobins would be expected to lead to significant iron and protein depletion (haptoglobins prevent loss of hemoglobin in the body through the urine). Hence one would deduce that the absence of haptoglobins would be disadvantageous, in spite of which the trait remains remarkably common. The simplest explanation is that persons heterozygous for the factor concerned are favored by selection. At present we do not know even where to direct our search for such an advantage.
The second group of serum proteins showing genetically controlled variation are the beta-globulins binding iron, the transforms. Several transferrin types differing in electrophoretic mobility have been described. Both the normal and the abnormal molecules can carry iron, and they are closely related antigenically (Smithies, 1959; Allison, 1959d). The molecules may differ from one another only in small details of structure, as in the case of the hemoglobin types. Genetically controlled variation in gammaglobins has also been described on the basis of serological tests (see Harboe and Lundervall, 1959) but has not been defined chemically.
ABNORMAL HEMOGLOBINS AS A
WORLD PROBLEM
In large areas of Central Africa, from Tanganyika in the East to Sierra Leone in the West, the sickle-cell trait is present in most tribes in frequencies of the order of 20 per cent. About 1 per cent of children born have sickle-cell disease, the incidence rising to 4 per cent where

163
the sickle-cell trait frequency is at its upper limit of about 40 per cent. In many Mediterranean populations the frequency of thalassemia trait is of the order of 10 per cent, rising to 20 per cent in some places. On an average about one child in 400 born in these areas has thalassemia major. Both the thalassemia and hemoglobin E genes are common in South East Asia, the frequency of the latter rising to above 20 per cent in Thailand. It is likely that about 1 per cent of children in this whole region will be born with susceptibility to hemolytic disease--either through homozygosity for an abnormal hemoglobin gene or double heterozygosity for two (thalassemia and hemoglobin E). So there is no doubt that the abnormal hemoglobins present a world problem of considerable magnitude, many millions of people carrying the genes concerned.
Two general conclusions are of interest from the eugenic point of view. In the first place it is clearly undesirable for two persons carrying abnormal hemoglobin genes to have children. One child out of four would inherit the predisposition to a chronic and painful disease. And the widespread dissemination of this knowledge among susceptible populations who are sufficiently educated to understand its implications seems worth while. However, the possibility of obtaining co-operation in this respect among the majority of the African and Asian populations concerned seems small. The second point is that in societies with adequate medical care the frequency of abnormal hemoglobin genes should gradually fall--unlike genes predisposing subjects to diabetes mellitus and some other conditions which will gradually accumulate.

164 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

The question arises whether there is any hopeful prospect of treatment of inherited anemias. The answer to this at present seems to be in the negative. There is clearly no possibility of simple substitution therapy like that of insulin in diabetes mellitus and thyroid hormones in hypothyroidism. One possibility--at present only of theoretical interest--remains, that of substituting normal erythrocyte precursors for the abnormal ones in inherited anemias. Work of this kind has already been successfully undertaken in experimental animals. Russell, Bernstein and Smith (1958) have used mice carrying deleterious genes of the PF-series which in double dose produce a severe macrocytic anemia. Anemic animals were irradiated to destroy their red cell precursors and given injections of normal (w/zo) cells. The donor cells survived for long periods and functioned normally when the donors were from the same inbred strain of mice (isologous implantation). In a high proportion of cases isologous implantation was successful even without prior irradiation. However, homologous implantations (from unrelated mice) were unsuccessful. This is the rub from the point of view of application to human subjects, since implantations would always have to be homologous. Not only is there a danger of an immunological reaction of the host against the graft, but also of a reaction of the graft against the host producing "secondary disease" (see Medawar, 1958). One possibility is giving newborn children with hereditary anemias repeated injections of foreign normal human hemopoetic tissue. In this way it has been possible to induce, for example, tolerance in rats to foreign erythrocytes (Nossall, 1958). The degree of "immunological maturity" of the newborn human, and whether tol-

erance to foreign antigens can be induced, is still unknown, however.
The whole question of homologous implantations of bone-marrow cells in man is at present under intensive study, both from the point of view of treating subjects who are severely anemic after irradiation and in attempts to destroy leukemic cells by irradiation and substitute normal cells. The results will be watched with considerable interest, since on general grounds it is likely that implantations of normal blood-forming tissue would be at a competitive advantage against sickle-cell or thalassemic blood-forming tissue whereas they would be at a competitive disadvantage against fast-growing leukemic tissue.
At present, only general measures can be adopted, such, as giving blood transfusions and making sure that subjects with sickle-cell disease avoid general or local deoxygenation. Thus, individuals with sickle-cell disease or any of its genetic variants should not fly in aircraft at all, and sickle-cell trait carriers should not fly at high altitudes in unpressurized aircraft. Since about 8 per cent of American Negroes have the trait, this represents a military problem to which due attention is being given. And any situation that would lead to acidity of erythrocytes, which promotes deoxygenation and sickling, should be avoided.
In general, the spectacular progress has been made in the recognition and study of biochemical differences in hemoglobin types, serum protein types and other characters in the last few years (see Allison, 1959b) is likely to continue as refined methods of analysis are applied to more and more bodily constituents. Already an enormous amount of chemical variability has been revealed--and also antigenic variability--which will at

165

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

some stage be amenable to chemical definition. Theuniqueness of the individual's chemical constitution is reflected in the reaction against homografts, which are tolerated only between uniovular twins or among highly inbred animals (Medawar, 1958).
REFERENCES
ACER, J. A. M. and LEHMANN,H., 1958. Observa-
tions on some "fast" haemoglobins, K,J, N and "Bart's." Brit. Med.J. i : 929. ALLISON, A. C., 1954a. The distribution of the sickle-cell trait in East Africa and elsewhere, and its apparent relationship to the incidence of subtertian malaria. Trans. roy. Soc. trop. Med. Hyg. 4 8 : 312.
, 1954b. Protection afforded by the sickle-cell trait against subtertian malarial infection. Brit. Med.J. i : 290.
, 1955. Aspects of polymorphism in man. Cold Spr. Harbor Symp. quant. Biol. 20: 239.
, 1956. The sickle-cell and hemoglobin C genes in some African populations. Ann. hum. Genet. 2 1 : 67.
, 1957. Malaria in carriers of the sickle-cell trait and in newborn children. Exp. Parasit. 6 : 418.
, 1959a. Haptoglobins Blut 5 : (in press).
, 1959b. Metabolic polymorphisms in mammals. Amer. Nat. 9 3 : 5.
, 1959c. Genetic control of human haptoglobin synthesis. Nature Lond., 1 8 3 : 1312.
, 1959d. Identification of human serum proteins binding iron, copper and thyroid hormones by starch gel electrophoresis. Experientia (in press).
BEAVEN, G. H. and GRATZER, W. B., 1959. A
critical review of human haemoglobin variants. J. clin. Path. 1 2 : 1, 101. BENZER, S., 1957. The elementary units of heredity. In The Chemical Basis ofHeredity, Ed. McElroy and Glass, Baltimore, Johns Hopkins Press.
BENZER, S., INGRAM, V. and LEHMANN, H., 1959.
Three varieties of human haemoglobin D. Nature, Lond., 182: 852.
BENZER, S. and FREESE, E., 1958. Induction of
specific mutations with 5-bromouracil. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., Wash. 4 4 : 112. BEUTLER, E., 1959. The hemolytic effect of primaquine and related compounds--a review. Blood 1 4 : 103.
CARSON, P. E., FLANAGAN, C. L., ICKES, C. E. and
ALVINC, A. S., 1956. Enzymatic deficiency in primaquine-sensitive erythrocytes. Science 1 2 4 : 484.

CHILDS, B., ZINKHAM, W., BROWNE, E. A., KIMBRO, E. L. and TORBERT, J. V., 1958. A genetic
study of a defect in glutathione metabolism of the erythrocyte. Bull. Johns Hopkins Hosp. 102: 21. CRICK, F. H. C., 1957. On protein synthesis. Symp. Soc. exp. Biol. Cambridge 1 2 : 138. CROW, J. F., 1957. Genetics of insect resistance to chemicals. Ann. Rev.Entomol. 2 : 227. DACIE, J. V., 1954. The Haemolytic Anaemias. London, Churchill.
EDINGTON, G. M. and LEHMANN, H., 1956. The
distribution of hemoglobin C in West Africa. Man 5 6 : 34.
FESSAS, S. and PAPASPYROU, A., 1957. New "fast"
hemoglobin associated with thalassemia. Science 126: 1119. FISHER, R. A., 1930. The genetical theory of natural selection, Oxford Clarendon Press. FORD, E.B., 1956. Moths, London, Collins.
GERALD, P. S. and GEORGE, P., 1959. Second
spectroscopically abnormal methemoglobin associated with hereditary cyanosis. Science 1 2 9 : 393. GIBLETT, E. R., 1959. Haptoglobin types in American Negroes. Nature, Lond. 1 8 3 : 192.
HARBOE, M. and LUNDEVALL, J., 1959. A new
type in the Gm system. Acta Path. et Microbiol. Scand. 4 5 : 357.
HARRIS, J. I. F., SANGER, F. and NAUGHTON, M. A.,
1956. Species differences in insulin. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 6 5 : 427. HUNT, J. A., 1959. Identity of the -chains of adult and fetal human haemoglobins. Nature, Lond. 1 8 3 : 1373.
HUNT, J. A. and INGRAM, V. M., 1958. Allelo-
morphism and the chemical differences of the human haemoglobins, A, S andC. Nature, Lond. 1 8 1 : 1062. INGRAM, V. M., 1957. Gene mutations in human haemoglobins: the chemical difference between normal andsickle-cell haemoglobin. Nature, Lond. 180: 326.
, 1957. Chemistry of the abnormal haemoglobins. Brit. Med. Bull. 1 5 : 27.
ISHIHARA, Y., SAITO, T . ITO, Y. and FAJINO, M.,
1958. Structure of sperm- and sei-whale insulins and their breakdown by whale pepsin. Nature, Lond. 1 8 1 : 1468. ITANO, H. A., 1957. Thehuman hemoglobins: their properties and genetic control. In Adv. Prot. Chem. 1 2 : 215. New York, Academic Press.
KAPLAN, E., ZUELZER, W. W. and NEEL, J. V.,
1951. A new inherited abnormality ofhemoglobin and its interaction with sickle cell hemoglobin. Blood 6 : 1240.
KENDREW, J. C., and PERUTZ, M. F., 1957. X-ray
studies of compounds of biological interest. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 2 6 : 327. KORNBERC, A., 1957. Pathways of enzymatic synthesis of nucleotides and polynucleotides.

166 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

In Thechemical basis of heredity. Ed. Mc.Elroy and Glass. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins Press, p. 579.
MANDEL, S. P. H., 1959. Stable equilibrium at a sex-linked genetic locus. Nature, Lond. 183: 1347.
MEDAWAR, P. B., 1958. Thehomograft reaction. Proc. Roy. Soc.B. 149: 145.
MOTULSKY, A. G. and CAMPBELL, J., 1959. Simple
screening method for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in erythrocytes. Blood (in press).
NOSSALL, G. J. V., 1958. Induction of immunological tolerance in rats to foreign erythrocytes. Nature, Lond. 180: 1247.
OCHOA, S. and HEPPEL, L. A., 1957. Polynu-
deotide synthesis. In The chemical basis of heredity. Ed. Mc.Elroy and Glass. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins Press, p. 615.
OLESEN, E. B., OLESEN, K., LIVINCSTON, F. B.,
COHEN, F., ZUELZER, W. W., ROBINSON, A. R. and NEEL, J. V., 1959. Thalassaemia in Li-
beria. Brit. Med. J. i :1385.
PAULINO, L., ITANO, H. A., SINGER, S. J. and
WELLS, I. C., 1949. Sickle cell anemia--a molecular disease. Science 110: 543.
RAPER, A. B., 1959. Further observations on sickling andmalaria. Trans, roy. Soc. trop. Med. Hyg. 5 3 : 110.
RHINESMITH, H. A., SCHROEDER, W. A. and
MARTIN, N., 1959. The N-terminal sequence of the ß-chains of normal adult hemoglobins. J. Amer. chem. Soc.8 0 :3358.
ROSENBERG, B. H., SIROTNAK, F. M. and CAVALIERI,
L. F., 1959. On the size of genetic determinants in pneumococcus and the nature of thevariables involved in transformation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. Wash. 4 5 : 44.
RUSSELL, E. S., BERNSTEIN, S .E. and SMITH, L. J.,
1958. Permanent implantation and continuing function of normal blood-forming

tissue in genetically anemic hosts. Proc. 10th Internat. Congr. Genetics, Montreal, p. 244.
SCHWARTZ, H. C., SPAET, T. H. ZUELZER, W. W.,
NEEL, J. V., ROBINSON, A. R. and KAUFMAN,
S. H.,1957. Combinations of hemoglobinC., hemoglobin S and thalassemia occurring in one family. Blood 1 2 : 238.
SCHWEET, R., LAMFROM, H. and ALLEN, E., 1958.
The synthesis of hemoglobin in a cell-free system. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., Wash. 4 4 : 1029.
SCHROEDER, W. A. and MATSUDA, G., 1958. N-
terminal residues of human fetal hemoglobin. J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 8 0 : 1521.
SINGER, S. J. and ITANO, H. A., 1959. On the
asymmetrical dissociation of human hemoglobin. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. Wash. 4 5 : 174.
SMITH, E. W. and TORBERT, J. C., 1958. Study of
two abnormal hemoglobins, with evidence for a new genetic locus for hemoglobin formation. Bull. Johns Hopkins Hosp. 102: 39.
SMITHIES, O., 1955. Zone electrophoresis in starch gels: group variations in the serum proteins of normal human adults. Biochem. J. 6 1 : 629.
, 1959. Thegenetic control of trans-
ferrins in humans. Biochem. J. 7 2 : 121.
SMITHIES, O. and WALKER, N. F., 1956. Notation
for serum-protein groups and genes controlling their inheritance. Nature, Lond. 178: 694.
VANDEPITTE, J. and DELAISSE, J., 1958. Sicklémie
et paludisme. Aperçu du probleme etcontribution personelle. An. Soc. beige Med. trop. 37: 703.
WINTROBE, M. M., 1956.Clinical hematology 4th ed. London, Henry Kimpton.
WORK, T . S., 1959. Protein biosynthesis: some conecting links between genetics and biochemistry. Proc. Growth Symposium Ed. R. O. Erickson, Madison, Wis. (in press).

