Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Report on a conference: The transmission of schizophrenia
Arnold R. Kaplan
To cite this article: Arnold R. Kaplan (1967) Report on a conference: The transmission of schizophrenia, Eugenics Quarterly, 14:4, 302-304, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1967.9987743 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1967.9987743
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:29

Communication

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

REPORT ON A CONFERENCE: THE TRANSMISSION OF SCHIZOPHRENIA
ARNOLD R. KAPLAN Laboratory of Medical Genetics
Cleveland Psychiatric Institute

The Foundations' Fund for Research in Psychiatry sponsored a Conference on the Transmission of Schizophrenia during the last week of June, in Dorado, Puerto Rico. The 66 invited participants, mostly Americans, included one from South America, four from Canada, and seven from Europe. The primary emphasis of the conference involved evaluations of genetic factors relevant to schizophrenia. No reviewer may do justice to all aspects of a great and extensive conference of this kind. The present brief report discusses some of my impressions of only a few of the conference highlights. The formal proceedings are currently being edited by David Rosenthal for future publication.
The conference indicated no controversy over whether or not genetic differences, or sociocultural variables, or intrafamily dynamics, are relevant to the etiology of schizophrenia. The etiological relevancies of all these factors were demonstrated and explored. Genetic effects are expressed only in environmental milieux which facilitate their expression, and environmental effects are expressed only in those genotypes which provide the appropriate biological milieux. The major conceptual difference occurred between proponents of specific etiologic factors and those favoring nonspecific multiple etiologies.
David Rosenthal's discussions emphasized a concept of schizophrenia etiology involving interaction of hereditary di-

athesis and stress. Seymour Kety favored the diathesis-stress concept with genetic heterogeneity providing a constitutional basis for the diathesis. A great many genes are relevant to functional differences associated with personality variables. Thus, Kety suggested that disruptions in the complex systems which occur in schizophrenia involve interactions of many genes. He therefore indicated his preference for a polygenic model relevant to genetic predisposition. Kety discussed the conceptual differences between models involving homogeneous polygenic factors versus models involving heterogeneous polygenic factors. He pointed out that the great range of schizophrenic manifestations, even in close biological relatives, does not indicate that schizophrenia is a unitary disorder, or that the diathesis involves only a single genotype. Leon Eisenberg added the observation, on models of polygenic theories, that the effects of specific genes become more trivial as they become less finite.
The conference's outstanding proponent of a single-gene theory of predisposition for schizophrenia was Eliot Slater. He found that the statistical morbidity risk for offspring of schizophrenic index cases, like that for siblings of schizophrenics, was about 11 percent in his studies. The similarity of observed risks in siblings and in parents of index cases suggests the involvement of a dominant

302

Vol. 14, No. 4

Communication

303

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

gene rather than recessive or multiplelocus genetic factors.
Slater debunked criticisms which have attacked the late Franz J. Kallmann's objectivity, pointing out that reexamination of Kallmann's data with the most conservative selection showed a concordance rate of 50.0 percent for monozygotic twins compared to 6.0 percent for the dizygotic twin pairs, clearly supporting a primary genetic basis for schizophrenia. Slater contended that genetic factors are largely responsible for most of the cases of schizophrenia. He emphasized, however, that the disorder can occur even without the presence of the schizophrenia-predisposing genetic factor which is usually present.
James Shields presented an extremely thorough review and discussion of the literature relevant to genetic factors in the etiology of schizophrenia. The specific genetic theories involve the requirement of a specific genotype for most cases of predisposition to schizophrenia. Their differences involve the nature and mode of transmission of the schizophreniapredisposing genotype.
Manfred Bleuler discussed the genesis of schizophrenia and emphasized his disagreement with all the somatic theories, because no medical or somatic basis for schizophrenia has yet been demonstrated: "Most schizophrenics are endocrinologically healthy and most endocrinological patients are not schizophrenic." Bleuler emphasized his belief that development of the schizophrenic psychosis is basically the result of psychological processes. He believes that genetic differences contribute to constitutional differences regarding predisposition to schizophrenia, and that the relevant psychological processes involved in developing the psychosis result from combinations of two groups of

factors: inherited predispositions and life experiences. He stated, however, that the available data oppose any general concept involving a specific gene or a specific psychological condition or a specific environmental stress. All schizophrenics manifest one characteristic in common--a disharmony in personality. Nevertheless, no specific therapy for schizophrenia has been discovered. Bleuler considers each case of schizophrenia to be unique in terms of etiology and course. Thus, different combinations of different genotypes and different environments and life experiences may facilitate the development of schizophrenia. The basic conceptual difference between Bleuler and the proponents of the specific genetic theories concerns his concept of multiple etiologies involving various genotypes--versus the concept involving a specific genotype in predisposition to schizophrenia.
H. B. M. Murphy discussed sociocultural variables associated with differences in schizophrenia incidence. Conflicts between minority subculture affiliation and the predominant culture, and various forms of social isolation, have been shown to be relevant variables. Melvin Kohn discussed the incidence and prevalence rates of schizophrenia as related to socioeconomic level and urban environment. Relatively high rates among members of the lowest socioeconomic levels characteristically occur in the moderatesize and larger cities, but not in smaller communities. Murphy suggested that the above observations reflect concentrations of evocative factors for the disorder rather than selection of transmissive factors.
The general consensus indicated acceptance of various kinds of factors discussed as being relevant to the etiology of schizophrenia. The relevancies of

304

Communication

Eugen. Quart.

genetic, as well as of social and cultural variables, were demonstrated and accepted. The liveliest discussions involved conceptual differences regarding general

involvement of specific factors. The nature and mode of transmission of the relevant genetic factors remained controversial.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

