Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The Malthusian heritage in contemporary life
Samuel M. Levin
To cite this article: Samuel M. Levin (1964) The Malthusian heritage in contemporary life, Eugenics Quarterly, 11:1, 46-55, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1964.9987573 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1964.9987573
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

THE MALTHUSIAN HERITAGE IN CONTEMPORARY LIFE

SAMUEL M. LEVIN
Professor Emeritus of Economics Wayne State University Detroit, Michigan

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

The extraordinary upsurge of world population in recent years, and the prospect of a doubling of the vast total of more than 3 billion in approximately 35 years, have naturally turned the attention of people to the fateful consequences of human redundancy, underscored by Malthus. It is worthy of note that the English thinker--whose interpretation of the population problem of mankind has so remarkably influenced the minds of later generations of workers in this field --was born in 1766, and that bicentennial commemorations of his achievement may therefore be expected in the days ahead.
The period since the publication of the first edition of his Essay on the Principle of Population in the closing years of the eighteenth century has been marked by startling developments in science and technology, by world wars, new and widespread political upheavals, the emergence of communistic power, and the unleashing for human manipulation of atomic energy. Yet despite the great widening of scientific, social, and technical knowledge in these eventful years, the ideas brought to light by Malthus have not lost their relevance to the men and women of our day.
It is symptomatic of this interest that the eminent biologist Dr. George W. Beadle (1958 Nobel Prize winner and now President of the University of Chicago) asserted a few years ago, in view of the high birth rate level in the United States and other industrialized countries, "Indeed, this phenomenon raises the

question of whether Malthus was not fundamentally right, in spite of his many detractors of recent times." In a similar vein, the Founding Conference of the World Population Emergency Campaign, held at Princeton, New Jersey, in March 1960, after pointing out that if the fantastic growth of population continues during the next decades, "the pauperization of humanity will stagger the imagination," declared: "We are reaching a historic crisis recalling Malthus' most pessimistic warnings."
What explains the persistence of this image, even though Malthus, it has been said, was "the best abused man of the age"? A number of considerations come to mind. It was he who demonstrated that the subject of population was of momentous importance to the modern world. Viewing mankind as part of "animated life," he clarified the relationship between the immense human "power of increase" and the bounds set by the limitations of room and subsistence, a problem of major importance in the current period. He explored and expounded the consequences of what our National Academy of Sciences has highlighted in its publicized report of April 1963 as "the problem of uncontrolled population growth." He examined the implications of varying numbers on an array of economic circumstances, such as wages, standard of living, price, cyclical fluctuations, taxation, employment, and the tendency to diminishing returns in agriculture. He delved deeply into the complex of factors that hold population in

46

Vol. 11, No. 1

Malthusian Heritage

47

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

leash, probing into the nature of the checks or obstacles "which repress the superior power of population," and explained the subject more forcefully, systematically, and challengingly than had been done up to his time.
It was Malthus who stressed the thought that the time had come for individuals to assume the responsibility of an intelligent control of the birth rate. From the time of the appearance of the second edition of his essay in 1803 he featured the need for a new check which he called moral restraint; in other words, the seemingly rational procedure of deferring marriage until one "has a prospect of supporting his children," with the requirement of moral conduct during the period of waiting. He elaborated his views in terms of broad principles, embracing different types of human society, from ancient times to his own day, under conditions varying from those prevalent among primitive South Sea islanders to the inhabitants of European countries.
Malthus saw the population problem of mankind not merely as a subject for theorizing, but also as a groundwork of reference, a criterion for the determination of appropriate governmental and institutional policies in dealing with the poor laws, assistance to the aged, education, emigration, and the like; for enunciating a fresh point of view, as illustrated by his thoughts on the subject of war; or for evaluating an untried economic order, as that of common property. It was his dissertation on this baffling problem that prepared the way for the formulation of the theory of natural selection. In the words of John R. Commons, it has also given us "the biological foundation of the principle of scarcity," the order of existence which makes man "work, think, and plan for future progress."

In anticipation of current ideas, Malthus stressed the importance of disseminating knowledge among the poor on marriage, births, deaths, and responsibility for the care of family, in the hope of "raising their condition." Though beset by critics, he nevertheless won the support of a considerable number of followers: Indeed, in the late twenties of this century, Edward M. East of Harvard University voiced the opinion, perhaps somewhat too positively, that "the law of population, enunciated by Malthus, shorn of its unnecessary subsidiary propositions, is considered incontestable by nearly all the eminent economists who have expressed themselves and by all the biologists who have looked at it carefully."
UNDERESTIMATION OF POTENTIAL GROWTH
Thus it may be said that, to Malthus perhaps more than to anyone else, the credit is due for making the subject of population a part of the public consciousness, for winning a commanding place for it in contemporary thought, and--what is particularly significant in our day--for stressing the price we pay if "we multiply too fast." The warning, "We die miserably of poverty and contagious diseases," is a stern reminder of nature's unfailing retribution if foresight gives way to a thoughtless irresponsibility in this regard.
Such admission, however, does not mean that Malthus was fearful of the threat of a greatly accelerated population growth in the here and now; a socalled explosion of population in a single country or in the world as a whole, fulfilling itself in rapid and heedless rates of increase. His original reference to a doubling period of twenty-five years or less is nothing more than an illustration of what may transpire under exception-

48

Levin

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

ally favorable conditions. In contrast to the dread forebodings of the current period, he heralded the opinion, with reference to the principal states of modern Europe, that "instead of doubling their numbers every twenty-five years, they require three or four hundred years or more for that purpose." Even in respect to his own country, one encounters a similar underestimation of potential growth in the statement that it might, "in the course of some centuries, contain two or three times its present population."
But multiplying too fast is the kind of problem characteristically emphasized in the demographic literature of the postwar period. Some parts of the world have doubled their numbers in 30 years or less. The recent report of the National Academy of Sciences indicates that industrialized countries, including the United States, the Soviet Union, Canada, and Argentina, are doubling in 30 to 40 years. The low-income and less-developed areas with two-thirds of the world's population are actually accomplishing this result at rates varying from a mere 20 years to 40.
It is worthy of note that Malthus evinced a genuine concern for human wellbeing, and as his thought matured, it tended to reflect a ripening hope in the forces that make for progress. "The evils resulting from the principle of population," he averred, "have rather diminished than increased." Not only did he assert his confidence in the "gradual but progressive improvement of society," but he concluded his treatise, in the several British editions, published from 1803 to 1826, in the confident hope that the "virtue and happiness of mankind" will to no unimportant extent be influenced by "the brilliant career of physical discovery," and partake in its success.

SOME MALTHUSIAN IDEAS
The Malthusian exposition was given to the world before the epoch-making contributions of Darwin and Mendel and before the development of the basic elements of scientific genetics. When he wrote, there was only a limited knowledge of chemistry and physiology and a dearth of relevant data of an economic and sociological character. Though efficiency methods in industrial operations, agriculture, transportation, and the medical arts were making notable advances, no one dreamed of antibiotics, of radar, of atomic power, nor of venturing into interplanetary spaces. Thus statements which nowadays would be deemed archaic, anachronistic, or ill-advised are to be found in his work; and a goodly number of his expectations and prognostications have fallen short of accuracy.
Malthus does not envisage the prodigious increase in man's ability to provide himself with food. He is incredulous of the possibility of women having resources sufficient to support their children. His notion that our society will always consist of proprietors and laborers does not comport with events in Russia or China. His belief that war is becoming less fatal and destructive than in the past is far afield from actuality in a world spending vast sums for rockets and missiles and increasing its stockpile of atomic and hydrogen bombs. The opinion that "few things are more difficult than to inspire new tastes and wants" suggests something remote in an age characterized by huge expenditures for advertising and by the inflated role of mass media of communication and control. His underrating the seriousness of the problem of the absolute number of people seems odd in the face of teeming multitudes in sundry lands and in numerous urban areas throughout the

Vol. 11, No. 1

Malthusian Heritage

49

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

world. And the injunction of moral restraint, though not entirely disregarded, is an unimportant precept in comparison with the widening interest in techniques of contraception.
It is also to be remembered that this preceptor of demographic, economic, and moral principles was functioning in the 90's of the eighteenth century as an Anglican curate and that he continued through his lifetime to cherish Christian precepts and doctrine. He accordingly took pains to offer some assurance that his thoughts on the human tendency to reproduce and its implications were not irreconcilable with the Christian religion. Thus, notwithstanding his disapproval of redundancy, he disclaimed harboring an antipathy to population increase. He even went so far as to point out that "it is an object of the Creator, that the earth should be replenished," though such statement seems to have been amanner of conceding to his theological prepossessions. It seems that what he had in mind was a population whose growth was proportioned to the increase of food; in his own words, one kept "within the limits of the food, though constantly following its increase." The theme, a recurrent one in the Essay, was climaxed by the opinion that once the desired proportion was realized, the two main purposes should be "a great actual population and a state of society in which abject poverty and dependence are . . . but little known." These two objects, he optimistically declared, were far from being incompatible.
To expect his pronouncements, in regard to the above-mentioned subjects to work out in ideal harmony with the ultimately realized circumstances would be seeking the impossible. Malthus did not consider himself as endowed with the gift of prophecy, and many of his ideas

are recognizable by an eighteenth or early nineteenth century savor. But weighing against these features of his thought is the fact that he, more than any demographer of a later day, turned the minds of people the world over to the overshadowing importance of developments concerned with human selfmultiplication.
SIGNIFICANT CONTRIBUTIONS
As this problem is influenced by many interrelated conditions of life, it is not surprising that Malthus betook himself to evolve a broader meaning and to give a new emphasis to the concept of individualism, a point of view still widely influential in our day, forcefully reaffirmed in a 1960statement by the Catholic bishops of the United States, and generally highlighted by our business and political spokesmen. He longed for a society where the happiness of the whole is the result of the happiness of individuals. Not only did he subscribe to the argument elaborated by Adam Smith that natural liberty in the economic sphere widens the opportunity offered to individuals to strive to better their conditions, but he proceeded to give the individualistic motif, often referred to as "self-love," ample room to maneuver in.
Such striving, as Malthus conceived it, buttressed the individual's sense of responsibility, self-reliance, marital prudence, and ability to support a family. It impelled laborers to fend off what he regarded as an inborn disposition to indolence. It was linked to his critical discussion of "systems of equality" or common property, to the economic advantages of competition, and to types of indulgent provisions for relief that tended to become "systematic and certain" rather than merely "occasional and discriminate."

50

Levin

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

This kind of idea-system paved the way for the strictures of artificial checks, such as those implied by the new birth control proposals, because Malthus regarded them as unnatural, immoral, and marked by a "tendency to remove a necessary stimulus to industry." It also led to his condemnation of the poor laws, because they were presumed to constitute a direct encouragement to ill-advised marriage by removing from the individual the responsibility imposed by the law of nature for the care of his offspring.
The advent of activity at various times in nineteenth century England and America to promote methods of voluntary control of conception is an impressive illustration of Malthus' influence on the thought and strivings of his day and of succeeding generations, even though the methods described by the neoMalthusians were not to his liking. Actually, however, this movement which has not only persisted to our own time, but has in recent years witnessed the initiation of ambitious, publicly sponsored programs of contraceptive services in various countries of the world and in scores of American communities, was inspired by the convincing character of the Malthusian analysis. What followed was a widespread willingness to accept the conclusions on the evils of redundancy but a positive indisposition, particularly on the part of the group of radically minded men and women who agitated for new birth control methods, to espouse the cause of moral restraint. It did not seem unwise to denounce the impracticability of a proposal which sought to impose the obligation of late marriage conjoined with moral conduct on the poorer elements of society, and to urge instead recourse to new, voluntary, contraceptive procedures which could be used effectively to limit the

birth rate without yielding to unfamiliar and inconvenient worriments.
Malthus did, however, make a number of exceptions to the rule of self-help. The idea of a national education plan, a seeming deviation from this rule, was justified by the need to dispel the ignorance of the "laboring classes," respecting the real nature of their situation, and to correct the distorted notions on population entertained by them because they had been misguided by the higher classes of society. It would, moreover, contribute to their spirit of personal pride and independence and imbue them with an effectual motivation for self-improvement, industry, and better standards.
It may be doubted whether a single comprehensive review of the background elements of modern population trends has appeared since the turn of the century that has failed to take cognizance of Malthusian ideas. The words "Malthusian" and "Malthusianism" have won a place for themselves in the terminology of English and other languages in much the same way as "Newtonian" and "Darwinian." Nor is recognition inconspicuous in the economic field, for Malthus who had been named Professor of History and Political Economy in the East India College at Haileybury in 1804, was in the van of economic thinkers of his day. He was the author of a long list of pamphlets on vital economic problems confronting the nation and a volume on The Principies of Political Economy published in 1820. Indeed, the renowned British economist Alfred Marshall regarded the Essay on Population (revised and considerably enlarged in the Second and subsequent editions) as one of the basic foundations of the science of political economy.
It was Malthus who used the term

Vol. 11, No. 1

Malthusian Heritage

51

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

"full employment," a concept subsequently elaborated by John Maynard Keynes, which facilitated the development of a broad program of policy in a number of industrialized or economically advanced countries, and loomed prominently as an objective of American economic policy in President Kennedy's State of the Union message to Congress of January 14, 1963, and in his message on tax revision ten days later. So greatly impressed was Keynes by Malthusian economic thought that he admiringly declared, "If only Malthus, instead of Ricardo had been the parent stem from which nineteenth century economics proceeded, what a much wiser and richer place the world would be today." In point of fact, Keynsian economic analysis which has had much to do with the determination of national economic policies in America and overseas' countries since the days of the 30's has to a marked extent drawn its inspiration from Malthusian sources.
How contact with the Malthusian line of thought engendered a fresh and significant point of view is brilliantly illustrated by the experience of the two eminent nineteenth century naturalists, Darwin and Alfred Rüssel Wallace, who brought into being the modern theory of evolution. Both acknowledged their indebtedness to Malthus for their ability to distinguish and interpret the main process which plays a decisive role in the evolutionary drama, natural selection. In alluding to this experience in his autobiography, Darwin declares, "Here, then, I had at last got a theory by which to work . . ."
From that moment a light was at hand to dispel the darkness that shrouded the path of evolutionary change. And, surprisingly, this happened in spite of the fact that certain Malthusian conceptions

could not be unreservedly aligned to the new evolutionary standards. It is true that he used the term "struggle for existence" and took note of variations in animal life. But he set store by the constancy of the laws of nature. Indeed, he regarded such constancy as an inviolable principle; and to accept what seemed to him extravagant speculations that failed to set limits to change, in respect to plants and animals, meant the destruction of the ability to reason from effects to causes. With regard to man, he overconfidently declared, "In human life, though there are great variations from different causes, it may be doubted whether, since the world began, any organic improvement of the human frame can be clearly ascertained."
In his endeavor to confute the claims of the proponents of organic perfectibility. Malthus found himself dealing with questions which may well be considered as coming within the purview of modern eugenics; e.g., the capacity for improvement in plants and animals; improvement by attention to breed; the difference between a small improvement the limit of which is undefined, and an unlimited improvement. He admitted that by an attention to breed "a certain degree of improvement similar to that among animals might take place among men," and conceded that size, strength, complexion, and even longevity, were transmissible. He decided, however, that "since the human race . . . could not be improved in this way, without condemning all the bad specimens to celibacy, it is not probable that an attention to breed should ever become general."
Among other things, Malthus directed his attention to more self-reliant standards of character and of life, a desideratum to achieve the purpose of widening the domain of human happiness instead

52

Levin

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

of indulgence in a reckless propagation of the species. His efforts to win the individual to the cause of marital prudence and to induce the kind of wisdom in governmental and institutional conduct that helps to build up a spirit of independence come under this head. Related to this attitude is the overriding idea that the principle of population can be used advantageously as a ground of reference in the attempt to reach intelligent decisions on crucial problems facing our society.
The desirability of this kind of procedure in order to test out the merit of a major national policy seems to have appealed to the members of the Draper Committee, appointed by President Eisenhower "To Study the United States Military Assistance Program." In its Third Interim Report, submitted to him under date of July 13, 1959, the Committee stated that "the increase in food production in most of the underdeveloped countries has been falling behind the increase of population." It proceeded to recommend, among other things, that "the United States assist those countries with which it is cooperating in economic aid programs, on request, in the formulation of their plans designed to deal with
the problem of rapid population growth
ft
We may well remind ourselves in this critical period that Malthus' own principal plan for amelioration pivoted on the belief that human beings had the power to act with foresight and discretion. He hoped that they might be willing, under the dictates of reason and morality and for their own welfare, to devote themselves to better standards of self-discipline. His philosophy naturally led to a consideration of the parlous state of freedom in his day and threats to its survival--on a world scale, a major issue

of our time. Indeed, the Malthusian warning of the way misery, with its accompanying debasement of life and character, jeopardizes human liberties and promotes despotism may well serve as a beacon in a time characterized by Communist pressure and aggrandizement.
CRITICISMS AND REFUTATIONS
There is, of course, no denying the widespread antipathy to many of this persistent expositor's proposals and beliefs. An outpouring of refutations greeted him in his life time. Contemporaries such as Godwin, Hazlitt, and Michael T. Sadler came forth with trenchant criticisms. Sadler's two volume work, The Law of Population, published in 1830, induced Macaulay to say in a review which appeared in July of the same year, "Mr. Malthus is attacked in language which it would be scarcely decent to employ respecting Titus Oates."
The attacks were largely on the ground of religious heresy, of his being an apologist of conservatism, of upper class selfesteem, and the lightness of the estab lished order of class privilege, though in his own day he was, in a measure, suspect on the score of the unconventionality of some of his ideas. His proclivity to an honest and well-intentioned reasonableness, his readiness to rebuke the upper classes for misleading the common people, and his pointing to flaws in the existing order of private property, did not shield him from the characteristic taunts. It is not surprising that the Marxian reaction to Malthusian ideas was one of caustic disapprobation and that the French social theorist Proudhon, writing in August 1848 after the outburst of the revolutionary ardor of that year had appreciably subsided in his country, should have declared, "Who will tell me

Vol. 11, No. 1

Malthusian Heritage

53

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

that the principle of Malthus is not the whole of the counter-revolution?"
But to cast Malthus into the discard seems unlikely, if not impossible. The phenomenon of an unprecedented acceleration of the rate of human increase and of an extraordinary sprawl of mass life has materialized and with a more ominous impact than originally imagined. As regards the United States, it has already resulted in the attainment in 1963of 190million inhabitants, which even with some allowance for a decline in the fertility rate will grow to 225million by 1975. Nor can it be denied that such checks as extreme poverty, undernourishment, disease, famine, and war, continue to exact their dread toll, notwithstanding food surpluses in this country and the spectacle of a remarkable speed-up in technological achievement.
THE ROOM ASPECT OF THE POPULATION
PROBLEM
The room aspect of the population problem with its weight of perplexities has, in recent years, been placed in the focal point of interest. The English savant lists both room and food as nature's determinants which fix the reproduction of plants and animals within prescribed bounds. It is also worthy of note that he underscores his aversion to the urban type of environment by placing "great towns" in the category of positive checks, and by bracketing them with manufactories as places characterized "by the silent though certain destruction of life."
What this glut, confined within the earth's known limits, means (except, perhaps, to space enthusiasts who cheerfully fondle the hope of colonizing extraterrestrial areas of the solar system) may be illustrated by the incursion of new multitudes into our already oversized and overcrowded cities, a condition necessi-

tating lavish and ever-mounting expenditures in a strained effort to meet newly arising difficulties. The picture is darkened by air, water, and soil pollution, the traffic turmoil, staggering appropriations for relief, and the clearing of what is left of the countryside and areas of rustic beauty to make room for a rash of pressing real estate developments. Nor can we shut our eyes to the education crisis rampant in this country, a situation synchronizing with the need to find some 2 million new jobs annually, a slowdown in the nation's rate of economic growth, an overcharge of unemployment, and industry's acknowledged tendency to require higher standards of education and training as qualifications for new employment.
Perhaps it was the squalid manifestations of the swarming mass life that Emerson had in mind when he wrote, "If government knew how, I should like to see it check, not multiply population. . . . Away with this hurrah of masses . . . ." It is significant in this regard that Paul B. Sears, in his 1957 presidential address to the American Association for the Advancement of Science (reflecting the tradition of Malthus and Darwin) found it necessary to inform his audience that, at the rate of increase in the United States and with the amount of space occupied by man's physical body, it would be less than 700 years until there was standing room only. There would be room, he said, not without a comic touch, "for exactly 4,646,400 people in each square mile." Consonant with this mood is the view of the celebrated physicist Edward Teller that "the theory of Malthus may well be the most plausible," in view of the possibility "that ultimately the population of the earth will be limited not by any scarcity but rather by our inability to put up with each other."

54

Levin

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

IMPACT ON OUR TIME
Malthus' distinctiveness as an outstanding figure isnot the outcome of any providential foresight on his part, nor the profound character of his dialectic on points at issue. Indeed, he himself took note of a number of questionable statements in hiswork, andmade explanations and corrections. Despite his theory, he failed to anticipate the magnitude and speed of twentieth century developments; e.g., thestupendous flood tide of world numbers and the extraordinary population growth in economically backward countries, owing mainly to the availability of modern medicine, facilities ofsanitary engineering and public health, and the marked curtailment of the death rate.
He did,however, undertake to explore the phenomenon of human prolification with thoroughness, insight, and dedication, giving to the world the classic exposition of this subject. He sawit asa problem of surpassing importance in human experience, one which had a farreaching influence on the destiny of individuals, families, and nations. The result was first of all a succession of his own books, articles, and letters, spanning more than three decades, concerned with sundry aspects of this problem, and a consideration of ways of improving the lot of mankind, caught in a vice, fixed by the geometric ratio on the one hand and the arithmetic on the other; secondly, an impetus for continuing investigation andwidening research in anew field of study, the modern science of demography.
Judging by the place Malthus has won for himself in demographic literature, the consideration given to his thoughts by leading economists, and the impactof his contributions on theminds of workers in such fields as government, history,

sociology, and evolution, can there be any question that he hasbecome a symbol for points of view significant to contemporary society? Out of the seedbed of his ideas new insights, motivations, and choices have come to the foreground and have left their impress on human purpose and conduct. Notwithstanding the obsolescence of a number of his opinions, some fanciful speculations, reflecting mainly the unforgotten role of his religious outlook, and the time spanbetween an early nineteenth century generation andourown, it is certain that his conceptions will continue togive light to people coming togrips with a number of difficult problems facing the society of our day.
REFERENCES
BEADLE, GEORGE W. Uniqueness of man. Science 125: 11.
COMMONS, JOHN R., 1934. Institutional Eco-
nomics. Macmillan Co.,NewYork. pp. 245246. COOK, ROBERT C., 1951. Human fertility: The modern dilemma. William Sloane Associates, New York. pp. 53-54. DARWIN, CHARLES. The autobiography ofCharles Darwin. Harcourt Brace and Company, p. 120.
. The origin of species, Ch. 3. DETROIT NEWS, 1960. Statement byRoman Catho-
lic Bishops o£ the United States. Nov. 20, 1960. EAST, EDWARD M., 1928. Mankind at the crossroads. New York. p. 59.
EMERSON, RALPH WALDO. The conduct of life.
A. L. Burt andCompany, p. 219. KEYNES, J. M. Essays in biography. Harcourt,
Brace and Company, p. 140. Ibid., p. 144. LEVIN, SAMUEL M. Marx vs. Malthus. Papers
of the Mich. Acad. Sci., Arts and Letters. 22: 243-258. .
. Malthus' conception of the checks to population. Human Biology, 10:219 (Note 18).
. Malthus on war. Papers of the Mich. Acad. Sci., Arts, and Letters, 4 3 : 233-247.
MACAULAY, THOMAS B., 1830. Sadler's law of
population. Edinburgh Review, July 1830. MALTHUS, THOMAS R. 1798. First essay on popu-
lation. Reprinted byMacmillan & Company, Ltd., London, 1926. pp. 61-62.
. An essay on the principle of population. 7th ed. Everyman's Library, Vol.1, Chapters I and II.

Vol. 11, No.1

Malthusian Heritage

55

. Ibid., Vol. II.pp. 1-29; First edition,
Ch. X. . Ibid., p. 9; First edition, pp. 163-171. . Ibid., p. 19. . Ibid., pp. 56, 65. . Ibid., p.152. . Ibid., pp. 157, 161, 172, 174, 261. . Ibid., p.174. . Ibid., pp. 186-187.

. Ibid., 261-262. National Academy of Sciences. 1963. The growth
of world population. Washington, p. 9.
THE NEW YORK TIMES, 1960. International edi-
tion, May 8, 1960.
PROUDHON, PIERRE-JOSEPH. The Malthusians. The
Freeman Press, Berkeley Heights, N. J. p. 15. SEARS, PAUL B. The inexorable problem of space.
Science, 127: 11.
TELLER, EDWARD. Quoted in Science, 128: 636.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

