Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
II. Tested intelligence and family size
Anne Anastasi
To cite this article: Anne Anastasi (1954) II. Tested intelligence and family size, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:3, 155-160, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987185 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987185
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

II. TESTED INTELLIGENCE AND FAMILY SIZE
Methodological and Interpretive Problems
ANNE ANASTASI
Graduate School Fordham University

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ATHIN THE PAST THREE decades, the relationship between intelligence test scores and family size has been repeatedly investigated. Among such studies, the outstanding examples are the surveys conducted on nearly complete samples of 11-year-old Scottish children (22, 23) -1 In all investigations in which the intelligence test scores of unselected school children were correlated with number of siblings, the results have been quite consistent. The correlations are invariably negative and cluster numerically in the .20's or low .30's (4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 14,
17, 21, 22, 23, 26). Within certain more narrowly defined subsamples of the general population, results vary. For example, among college students, nearly all surveys agree in finding no significant correlation between intelligence and size of sibship (12, 18, 25, 29, 30). Similarly, there is some evidence that within the professional class the correlation may be zero or even positive, while within other occupational categories it is negative (cf. 5). On the other hand, the usual negative correlation in the .20's was found within a group of intellectually superior children tested at the elementary school level (27).
Data on the relation between parental intelligence and number of offspring are very meager, but suggest an absence of significant correlation, especially when completed families are studied (9) or when amount of parental education is ruled out (32) .2 It cannot be assumed that the relationship between intelligence and number of siblings is the same as that between intelligence and number of offspring. In this
1The numbers in parentheses refer to an appended bibliography.

connection, it should be recalled that the correlation between parental and child intelligence is only about .50, thus leaving room for considerable variation. Moreover, we cannot assume that children coming from larger families will themselves have correspondingly large families. Among other factors, social mobility will affect the fertility pattern of such individuals. More direct information on the relationship between parental intelligence and number of offspring would be helpful in disentangling the causal interrelations of factors.
Theoretical Analysis of Causal Relations
The problem of causal relations is a far more difficult one than that of determining correlations. It is especially important in this connection to differentiate clearly between plausible hypotheses and empirically established facts, and to ferret out tacit assumptions which may underlie our interpretations. For example, if we define intelligence in terms of hereditary predispositions, we shall logically preclude the possibility of discovering that certain individual differences in intelligence may be unrelated to gene constitution. It is more consistent with scientific method to employ definitions which do not prejudge the data but which permit the maximum freedom of interpretation.
We may, of course, define the word "intelligence" to mean anything we choose. All studies on intelligence and family size, however, have employed intelligence test
2In a critique of this study (20), there appears to be a misunderstanding of the data reported. Subjects' intelligence correlated --.02 with number of offspring, but --.12 with number of siblings.

155

156 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

scores as their index of intelligence. It is evident, therefore, that our interpretations must take intelligence test scores as their point of departure.
When intelligence is defined in such terms, we may recognize three distinct etiological mechanisms whereby the obtained correlations between intelligence and family size might result. It is understood, of course, that the actual causal relations may involve any combination of two or all three of these mechanisms. First, there may be inherited structural factors (neural, glandular, etc.) which limit the sort of intellectual development measured by current intelligence tests. The less intelligent parents would thus transmit their structural limitations to their offspring. The obtained correlations would then result from the fact that, within a given culture, persons with inferior heredity tended to have more offspring.
A second familiar explanation attributes individual differences in children's intelligence to psychological caiïerences in the environments provided by parents of varying intellectual levels. In this case, the correlations between family size and intelligence of offspring would again result from a tendency for the less intelligent parents to have more children, but heredity would not be involved. It should be added that the child's intellectual development may be influenced, not only by the nature and extent of direct intellectual stimulation afforded by his home, but also by emotional and motivational factors deriving from the "social climate" of the home. There is a growing body of data pertaining to differences in child-rearing practices in various socioeconomic levels and other sub-cultures (3, Ch. 23 and p. 734). Some of these differences, such as the degree to which verbalization and exploratory behavior are encouraged or discouraged, are likely to influence the child's intellectual development.
A third possible interpretation is based upon size of family itself as a causal factor.

For example, a larger family--at least in certain socio-economic levels--would reduce the per capita funds available for education, recreation, suitable housing, proper food, medical attention, and other environmental requisites. From a psychological viewpoint, another important factor is the degree of adult contact provided in families of different sizes. Available evidence suggests, for example, that such contact may be the most important single factor in linguistic development (3, pp. 335-339; 16). And it is well known that verbal ability plays a major role both in educational progress and in intelligence test performance. Whatever the specific factors involved, the causal mechanism under consideration is independent of the intellectual level of parents. A crucial test of this hypothesis would thus be found in the correlation between size of sibship and intelligence of offspring, when intellectual level of parents is held constant.
It is clear that the three hypotheses differ significantly in both their theoretical and practical implications. One fact remains, however, regardless of which hypothesis, or combination of hypotheses, may ultimately prove to be correct. Insofar as a significant negative correlation is conclusively established between intelligence test performance and family size, it follows that mean intelligence test scores of the population should decline slowly in successive generations, unless other counterbalancing influences operate. Theoretically, such counteracting factors might be genetic (cf., e.g., 19). It is more likely, however, that they would be environmental.
Implications of Follow-up Surveys
In an effort to obtain direct evidence regarding the predicted decline, follow-up procedures have been employed, whereby comparable samples are tested under similar conditions after a lapse of several years. Again the most notable example of such a study is to be found in the Scottish survey

157

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

(23, 24), in which a second approximately region of Eastern Tennessee showed a 10-

complete sample of 11-year-old Scottish chil- point rise in median IQ (31). During this

dren was given the same group intelligence interval, the socio-economic and education-

test 15 years after the testing of the initial al conditions of this region had greatly im-

I sample. As is now well known, this survey proved. The second sample tested in this

revealed a small but significant rise in mean survey was closely comparable to the first,

score, rather than a decline. Similar gains the children coming largely from the same

have been found in other surveys. Although not so extensive or so well controlled as the Scottish survey, especially with regard to comparability of samples, these other surveys have yielded consistent results.3

families in the two cases.
That intelligence test performance is susceptible to improvement as a result of education has been more directly demonstrated in at least two investigations in which persons who had been tested following a uni-

Reference may likewise be made to cer- form period of universal education were

tain relevant data gathered incidentally, as retested after 10 years in one case and after

by-products from other types of testing pro- 20 years in the other (13, 15). In the inter-

grams. Thus an analysis of the intelligence vening years, members of these groups had

test performance of American soldiers in received varying amounts of further educa-

World Wars I and II indicated that the tion. Both studies report significant rela-

level of performance had improved to such tionships between amount of subsequent

an extent that the median score of the later schooling and retest performance, when

sample corresponded to the 83rd percentile initial scores are held constant.

of the earlier sample (28). This rise in score paralleled an increase in amount of education, the mean being at the 8th grade for the first sample and at the 10th grade for the second. It is also noteworthy that a survey of the intelligence test performv anee of American high school students over a 20-year period suggested that this, too, had improved, despite the marked increase in the proportion of students enrolled in high school (11). Since a larger propor-^ tion of the total population was attending high school at the end than at the beginning of this 20-year period, a decrease in mean score would be expected, unless the total population had improved sufficiently to counteract such a drop.

A question that is frequently raised in connection with all such improvements in test performance pertains to the role of test sophistication and other conditions which might spuriously raise test scores. Fundamentally, the answer to this question depends upon the breadth of the effect (1; 2, pp. 52-56). Any influence which is restricted to the test performance itself and does not correspondingly affect the criterion behavior which the test is designed to predict would of course reduce the validity of the test. But the broad educational and social conditions under consideration can be expected to affect the individual's overall intellectual development, rather than being restricted to the particular samples

When educational and other environ- of behavior included in psychological tests.

mental conditions within a given commu-

nity improve conspicuously, larger rises in test scores may be observed over even short-

Methodological Problems

er intervals. Thus a 10-year follow-up con- Apart from questions of interpretation, ducted in a relatively isolated mountainous investigations of the relationship between

3In the relatively few instances in which discrepant findings are reported, lack o£ comparability of samples seems to provide an adequate explanation.

family size and intelligence are beset with methodological pitfalls. Since the obtained correlations are so low, the operation of

158 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

selective factors, however slight, may produce a completely spurious result. An example of such a selective factor is provided by a study conducted within an American women's college (25). Within the entire group of 2261 entering students for whom test scores were available, a significant inverse relation was found between test scores and number of siblings. This relationship disappeared, however, when the records of those whose older sisters had attended the same college were excluded. Presumably somewhat lower entrance requirements had been applied to those whose siblings had previously matriculated. Such students would also be likely to come from larger families. Many other examples of institutional selective factors could readily be cited. It is when such factors affect the correlation between the variables under consideration that they create a particularly serious problem.
Nor are more general samples free from selective factors. Thus in a sample of children between, let us say, the ages of 8 and 14, individual large families will appear repeatedly within the sample, the number of re-appearances being directly proportional to the size of the family. A family containing five school-age children, for example, would appear five times in the sample. Any chance conditions characterizing individual large families would thus be spuriously magnified in the sample. Nor would ordinary sampling statistics be strictly applicable to such samples. It is partly to avoid such difficulties that single-age samples, such as 11-year-olds, have been utilized. Even in such a carefully chosen sample, however, certain selective factors will operate. For example, large families will be over-represented, since by chance a child of any specified age is more likely to be found in a large family than in a small one. Such a sample is therefore not representative of existing families, nor of the parental populations. With regard to the child population, it can be argued that large families

should be over-represented, since they contribute more members to the population. Nevertheless, certain types of comparisons may be distorted through the use of a single-age sample.*
In the case of follow-up studies conducted within a limited area, such as a single city or county, any selective migration which may have occurred in the interim will reduce the comparability of initial and subsequent samples. Similarly, differences in thoroughness of sampling procedures on successive testings may introduce differential selection. For example, subjects in lower socio-economic levels or those who are physically less fit are more likely to be excluded when sampling coverage is less adequate.
Another recurrent difficulty arises from the presence of incomplete families in the sample. This factor may operate in a number of different and not entirely predictable ways. All children from such incomplete families are, of course, classified as coming from somewhat smaller families than will eventually be the case. This may have the effect of classifying lower test-scorers (from the ultimately larger families) into a category of higher test-scorers (from smaller families). Such a procedure would thus reduce the obtained differences in test scores .between the various family-size categories. On the other hand, when a negative correlation is found between intelligence and family size in a sample of incomplete families, it may simply reflect the tendency for persons of lower intelligence to begin having children earlier. Should such persons also stop having children earlier than the more intelligent members of the community, the correlation would disappear when completed families are studied. There is evidence that, at least in one rural American community, such was actually the case
(9). It should be noted, of course, that if the
4Cf., e.g., the analyses of order of birth and of maternal age reported in 23 and 24, respectively.

159

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

less intelligent parents begin having chil- standardization samples, and lack of com-

dren earlier than the more intelligent par- parability of units. A particularly danger-

ents, they will contribute more individuals ous practice, which should be avoided if at

to the population in the long run, through all possible, is that of converting scores

more frequent generations. For example, if each successive generation begins to bear children at age 20, there will be five generations per century; while if childbearing begins at age 25, there will be only four generations. Nevertheless, the effect upon the intelligence level of the population would be less if the duller parents merely began to have children earlier than the brighter, than it woud be if the duller also had larger completed families than the brighter.

from one test to another. Nor is it advisable in precise studies to use the traditional ratio IQ. This measure has many disadvantages which can be avoided by employing standard scores or deviation IQ's.
Finally, it must be noted that gence" is not a unitary function. Research on the organization of abilities has revealed a number of relatively independent traits or group factors (cf. 2, 3). As examples may be mentioned verbal comprehension, word fluency, speed and accuracy of numer-

Age of parents is a factor which needs to ical computation, spatial visualization, per-

be considered in its own right. The smaller ceptual speed, associative memory, and

families in a sample may include a rela- numerical reasoning. A single global score,

tively large proportion of incomplete fami- such as an IQ on an intelligence test, mea-

lies of younger parents. Such parents are ures a conglomerate of heterogeneous abil-

likely to be better educated than the older ities combined in unknown proportions.

parents of the completed families, owing to Let us suppose that two individuals obtain

the progressive rise in educational level of an IQ of 120 on the same intelligence test.

the population. The better educated par- The first may have done so because he ex-

ents would in turn provide a more favor- cels markedly in verbal comprehension, is

able environment for their offspring. Thus about average in numerical reasoning, and

when incomplete families are included in is slightly inferior in spatial visualization.

the sample, the differences in parental age, The second may have obtained the iden-

coupled with the rising level of general tical score by virtue of a superior perform-

education, might be sufficient to account ance in numerical reasoning and spatial

for the negative correlation found between visualization and a low average performance

family size and intelligence.

in verbal comprehension. Such a state of

As we pass from sampling problems to testing problems, we must consider such questions as the reliability of the measuring instrument, a question which assumes special importance in view of the small group differences in scores which must be de-

affairs obviously makes for ambiguity. It is certainly more precise to describe the individual's intellectual status in terms of a profile of scores on the traits identified through factor analysis, rather than in terms of a single, hodgepodge IQ.

tected in such studies. It is also desirable In conclusion, it may be well to consider

that the test cover an adequate difficulty the sort of experimental design suggested

range, to permit a proper determination of by the theoretical and methodological ques-

the ability of persons at the extremes of the tions which have been discussed. The ideal

distribution.

investigation should begin with the testing

The use of different tests, or different of young people prior to their educational

forms of the same test, in follow-up studies and vocational differentiation, i.e., after all

presents a number of problems, such as have completed a uniform period of re-

variation in functions tested, differences in quired schooling. Preferably the tests

160 Eugenics Quarterly

should consist of a differential aptitude Additional questions can be answered if

battery yielding a profile of scores rather test scores of the children of these persons

than a single global score. The subjects are studied. But many problems can be

should be followed up until the age when solved even prior to this step. From a prac-

all, or nearly all, of their families are com- tical viewpoint, such a program is not too

pleted. Age of both parents at the birth of unrealistic, especially in nations whereuni-

their first and last child should be noted. form psychological tests are administered

, Records should also show deaths, unmar- in the school system and where detailed

ried persons, and childless marriages. In- census data are regularly collected. From

formation should likewise be gathered on a theoretical standpoint, this approach

occupation, income level, and amount of would help to separate the many interre-

subsequent education for each member of lated variables which are now so intricately

the group.

intertwined.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

REFERENCES

1. ANASTASI, ANNE, The concept of validity in the interpretation of test scores, Educ. Psychol. Measmnt., 1950, 10, 67-78.
2. , "Psychological Testing," New York Macmillan, 1954.
3. , and FOLEY, J. P., JR., "Differential
Psychology" (Rev. Ed.), New York, Macmillan, 1949. 4. BRADFORD, E. J. G., Can present scholastic standards be maintained?, Forum of Education, 1925, 3, 186-198.
5. BURT, C., "Intelligence and Fertility," London, Hamilton, 1946.
6. CATTELL, R. B., "The Fight for our National Intelligence," London, King, 1937.
7. , The fate of national intelligence; test of a thirteen-year prediction, Eugen. Rev., 1951, 42, 136-148.
8. CHAPMAN, J. C., and WIGGINS, D. M., Relation
of family size to intelligence of offspring and socio-economic status of family, J. Genet. Psychol., 1925, 32, 414-421.
9. CONRAD, H. S., and JONES, H. E., A field study of the differential birth rate, J. Amer. Stat. Assoc., 1932, 27, 153-159.
10. DAWSON, S., Intelligence and fertility, Brit. J. Psychol, 1932, 23, 42-51.
11. FINCH, F. H., Enrollment increases and changes in the mental level, Appl. Psychol. Monogr., 1946, No. 10, pp. 75.
12. HIMMELWEIT, H. T., Intelligence and size of family; their relationship in an adult group of high educational standard, Eugen. Rev., 1948, 40, 77-88.
13. HUSÉN, T., The influence of schooling upon IQ, Theoria, I951, 17, 61-88.
14. LENTZ, T., JR., Relation of IQ to size of family, J. Educ. Psychol., 1927, 18, 486-496.
15. LORGE, I., Schooling makes a difference, Teachers Coll. Rec, 1945,46, 483-492.
16. MCCARTHY, DOROTHEA, Language Development in Children, in L. Carmichael (Ed.), "Manual of Child Psychology," New York, Wiley, 1954.
17. MACMEEKEN, A. M. "The Intelligence of a Representative Group of Scottish Children," London, Univer. London Press, 1940.

18. MAXWELL, J., Intelligence and family size of college students, Eugen. Rev., 1951, 42, 209210.
19. PENROSE, L. S., The supposed threat of declining intelligence, Amer. J. Ment. Def., 1948, 5 3 , 114-118.
20. ROBERTS, J. A. F., The negative association between intelligence and fertility, Human Biol., 1941, 13, 410-412.
21. , et al., Studies on a child population, III: Intelligence and family size, Ann. Eugen., 1938, 8, 178-215.
22. SCOTTISH COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN EDUCATION,
"The Intelligence of Scottish Children: A National Survey of an Age Group," London, Univer. London Press, 1933.
23. , "The Trend of Scottish Intelligence," London, Univer. London Press, 1949.
24. , "Social Implications of the 1947 Scottish Mental Survey," London, Univer. London Press, 1953.
25. SHUEY, AUDREY M., Intelligence of college women as related to family size, J. Educ. Psychol., 1951, 42, 215-222.
26. SUTHERLAND, H. E. G., and THOMSON, G. H.,
The correlation between intelligence and size of family, Brit. J. Psychol, 1926, 17, 81-92.
27. TERMAN, L. M., et al., "Genetic Studies of Genius," Vol. I, Stanford, Calif., Stanford Univer. Press, 1925.
28. TUDDENHAM, R. D., Soldier intelligence in World Wars I and II, Amer. Psychologist, 1948, 3, 54-56.
29. WARBURTON, F. W., Relationship between intelligence and size of family, Eugen. Rev., 1951, 43, 36-37.
30. , Relationship between the intelligence of students and size of family, Eugen. Rev., 1952, 4 3 , 188.
31. WHEELER, L. R., A comparative study of the intelligence of East Tennessee mountain children, J. Educ. Psychol, 1942, 3 3 , 321-334.
32. WILLOUCHBY, R. R., and COOGAN, MARGUERITE,
The correlation between intelligence and fertility, Human Biol, 1940, 12, 114-119.

