Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The status of human genetics in Western Europe
Kurt Hirschhorn M.D.
To cite this article: Kurt Hirschhorn M.D. (1958) The status of human genetics in Western Europe, Eugenics Quarterly, 5:4, 195-199, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1958.9987372 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1958.9987372
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

Eugenics QuarterlyVol. 5, No.4, December, 1958

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

THE STATUS OF HUMAN GENETICS IN WESTERN EUROPE*
KURT HIRSCHHORN, M.D.
The Department of Medicine New York University
Post-graduate Medical School

M..osT EUROPEAN MEDICAL SCHOOLS have
some form of more or less organized teaching program in human genetics. These programs may be organized by groups ranging from a large, well-staffed institute to a single individual belonging to a clinical or basic science department. In almost all cases these groups are engaged in active research in genetics, and many of the individuals involved do some heredity counseling. An attempt is made here to summarize the most important activities of these groups in the fields of research, education and counseling.
Sweden
Because of the accurate records available in Swedish churches and due to the presence of many isolated communities, Sweden has been very active in the field of human genetics. In some cases it is possible to trace families back to the sixteenth century with accurate information as to life-
*This article is based on a study of human genetics made in Europe during the year 1957-1958. A travel and study grant from the Population Council, Inc., and the John Bergquist Fellowship of the American-Scandinavian Foundation made this study possible. The majority of the author's time was spent at the State Institute for Human Genetics in Uppsala, Sweden, but most of the centers and individuals interested in human genetics were visited.

span, fertility and consanguinity. For this reason much of the research has been in the field of population genetics.
In Uppsala, Professor Jan A. Book is the director of the State Institute for Human Genetics. His predecessor, the late Professor Gunnar Dahlberg, is well known for his basic mathematical treatment of twin studies and other aspects of population genetics. Professor Book has produced important work in the study of isolated populations, consanguinity, and the genetics of mental disease, especially schizophrenia. Dr. Marco Fraccaro, the assistant director, is also engaged in some excellent population studies, as well as heading the new program of cellular genetics by tissue culture methods. One aspect of this program is the study of chromosomal aberrations in radiated human cells. Other studies in progress are a survey of offspring of radiated parents, an evaluation of maternal age on congenital malformations, a systematic mapping of blood types in Sweden by Dr. L. Beckman and a study of the inheritance and detection of hétérozygotes of juvenile amaurotic idiocy. In addition, the Institute is developing a full program of biochemical genetics under Dr. P. O. Nyman, including, among others, a study of the inheritance of serum proteins. Professor Book is in

195

196 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

charge of a course in medical genetics at drawing information from schools for the

the medical school, and both he and Dr. mentally deficient, the blind and the deaf,

Fraccaro are consulted in cases requiring from selected hospital departments and

heredity counseling. The Institute is oc- from the Central Bureau of Statistics, the

casionally called upon to render a decision latter supplying him with the names of all

in a paternity dispute. This institute is twin births in Norway. The purpose of

one of the best equipped and most modern this register is mainly as a source for study

of the European centers and carries great material, but it is also helpful for counsel-

potential as a future leader in human ge- ing. Dr. Mohr is also undertaking a study

netics research.

attempting to estimate increase of rates of

In Stockholm, activity in human genetics mutation due to age and to radiation. He

is concentrated in the Psychiatric Institute is occasionally called upon to aid in ques-

of the University, where Professor Sjögren tions of disputed paternity.

and Dr. Alström have described a number of new inherited syndromes associated with Denmark

mental deficiency. They have also been One of the oldest centers for the study of

active in assessing the incidence and eti- human heredity is the University Institute

ologies of mental defects in North Sweden. for Human Genetics in Copenhagen, di-

Dr. Alström has been interested in the rected by Professor Tage Kemp. The In-

question of the inheritance of epilepsy. stitute has the oldest existing heredity reg-

This institute does the bulk of heredity ister, with information about the majority

counseling in questions of mental defi- of cases of mental disease, blindness, deaf-

ciency in Sweden.

ness, epilepsy and twin births in Denmark.

In Lund, at the Institute of Genetics, The principal uses made of this register afe

Dr. C. A. Larsson is the human geneticist, for twin studies and in counseling. The

responsible for teaching the course in the Institute handles about 1500 cases of coun-

medical school and for heredity counseling seling a year, 90 per cent of which are cases

in this area. He is at present engaged in a of application for legalized abortion or

far-reaching population study of South sterilization. In such cases the register is

Sweden with the special purposes of study- used as one of the criteria for the presence

ing rates of consanguineous matings and of deleterious genes. Dr. M. Hauge and

their effects, as well as estimating the inci- Dr. Harvald are attempting to assess the

dence and etiologies of mental deficiency. hereditary influence on various diseases by

At the same institute Dr. Reitalu is study- means of twin comparisons. Dr. Hauge is

ing the nature of the sex chromatin in the also engaged in studies on the inheritance

nuclei of human and other mammalian of uric acid levels, the effect of parental

cells. radiation upon the offspring, and the effect

Norway

of certain serum protein fractions. Dr. Schultz-Larsen is working on the elucida-

In Oslo, Dr. Jan Mohr is in the process tion of the microstructure and ultrastruc-

of building up an essentially new unit of ture of human sperm. Dr. U. Nielsen is

human genetics. He is charged with teach- evaluating mental disease in twins. Profes-

ing the course at the medical school, and sor Kemp is in charge of the course given

he is doing a moderate amount of counsel- at the medical school, which includes a

ing. His special interests, as reflected by course in biostatistics.

the activities of his department, lie in the direction of serological and blood protein Germany

inheritance. He is attempting to set up a Despite the absence of an organized de-

central heredity register for all of Norway, partment of human genetics in Hamburg,

197

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

Dr. W, Lenz of the Department of Pediatrics is doing a great deal of work on the topics of congenital malformations, mongolism and other related fields. He is also called upon to do heredity counseling, as well as consultations for the other clinical departments.
Professor O. v. Verschuer is the director of the University Institute for Human Genetics in Muenster. The principal activity at this time is the establishment of a heredity register for the Muenster area by Dr. Ebbing. The purposes of this register are the estimation of incidence rates and mutation rates for certain diseases, and as a source for case material in future studies. The population and clinical work is led by Dr. Koch and includes a recent study of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis by Dr. Haberland. Dr. Degenhardt is working on the production of congenital malformations by anoxia in experimental animals. Professor v. Verschuer is in charge of the course at the medical schools and is. himself interested in twin research.
A visit was not made to the Max Planck Institute for Hereditary Biology in Berlin, where Professor Nachtsheim and Dr. Vogel have been working on problems of human genetics, nor to the Department of Human Genetics at the University of Goettingen. The new director of this department is Professor Becker, who has worked in the past on neuromuscular disorders.
Holland
At the Institute for Preventive Medicine in Leyden, Dr. J. van den Bosch has a department of human genetics. He is engaged in studying the incidence and mode of inheritance of a number of traits, including hemophilia, muscular dystrophy, optic atrophy and microcephaly. He has developed a method for finding the asymptomatic hétérozygotes in Marie-Tooth disease by electromyographic tests. He has a fairly heavy schedule of counseling and consultation, as well as being in charge of the course in medical genetics at the Uni-

versity. Dr. Waardenburg has recently retired from active teaching and is in the process of writing a book on medical genetics.
The Institute for Human Genetics at Groningen, where Professor Polman is the director, was not visited.
Italy
In Rome, the Institute for Medical Genetics and Twin Research, Professor L. Gedda, director, has some of the most modern and beautiful equipment seen on this trip. The facilities for in-patients are excellent. The principal activity at this time is in the preparation and editing of a sixvolume "Treatise on Medical Genetics," to be published in the near future. In general, the main interest of the institute is in the field of twin research.
At the Institute of Genetics in Pavia, under the direction of Professor Buzzatti-Traverso, the principal activity is in the field of microbial, drosophila and yeast genetics. However, Dr. L. Cavalli-Sforza is engaged in work on human population genetics. He has studied the structure of some North Italian isolates, is interested in the relation of certain anthropométrie and blood-group characters to disease, and is planning to study the distribution of blood groups in Italy. Recently, Dr. DeCarli has begun work on human tissue in an attempt to find genetic markers in somatic cells. By this method many problems in human genetics could be solved by methods now used in unicellular organisms.
In Milan, Professor L. Gianferrari of the Department of Biology also heads a unit of human genetics. Most of the work there has been concerned with the inheritance of cancer. Dr. Morganti has been mapping out the blood-group distribution of North Italy, while Dr. A. Serra has recently com-" pleted- an exhaustive survey of consanguineous marriages in North Italy. Professor Gianferrari also teaches the course in human genetics at the medical school.
Dr. R. Ceppellini of the Department of

198 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

Genetics in Turin has been able to define the inheritance of the Lewis blood groups and has recently demonstrated the allelity of the genes for thalassemia and sickle cell hemoglobin. He has long been active in the study oí the reasons for and effects of thalassemia and is now studying the effects of polymorphism in small populations. He also teaches the courses of general and human genetics at the University of Turin.
The Institute of Genetics in Naples, gaged in studying the incidence and mode was not visited. However, the human geneticist from that institute, Dr. M. Siniscalco, who has done much to clarify the population genetics of thalassemia, discussed his work at length with the author. He now plans to concentrate on a study of the inheritance of human serum proteins, as well as the development of human tissue culture for genetic studies. Switzerland
The Department of Human Genetirs in Geneva is associated with the ophthalmology clinic, whose director, Professor Franceschetti, has long worked in defining the inherited diseases of the eye. Dr. D. Klein has recently completed a study of the muscular dystrophies and is doing work on the population genetics of several Swiss and French isolates. Both Professor Franceschetti and Dr. Klein are teaching the course in medical genetics at the university and are doing a good deal of heredity counseling.
France
In Paris there is activity in human genetics at three places: the Department of Medical Genetics, the Department of Pediatrics, and the National Demographic Institute. The course in the medical school is taught primarily by the Department of Medical Genetics, while counseling is shared by this department with the Department of Pediatrics.
The Department of Medical Genetics is directed by Professor Lamy. Dr. J. Frézal has completed population studies on the

incidence and inheritance of retinoblastoma and anencephaly. He is at present interested in surveys and evaluations of aminoacidurias in children with mental deficiency and other illnesses. Dr. J. deGrouchy has made a study of the genetic effect on congenital heart disease and is now examining normal and abnormal hemoglobins by electrophoretic methods.
At the Department of Pediatrics, Professor Turpin, director, De. Lejeune has just completed a large-scale study of the effect of parental radiation on the sex-ratio of the offspring in an attempt to evaluate the appearance of lethal sex-linked mutations. He is doing a long-term study of children, who were irradiated in utero, to observe whether any unfavorable mutations had occurred. He is utilizing aminoacid chromatography of urine and serum in the differential diagnosis of mental deficiency and other illnesses. He has recently begun to use tissue culture of human cells in an attempt to find chromosomal aberrations in cells from patients with known inherited diseases.
At the National Demographic Institute Dr. J. Sutter is concentrating on population studies of selected areas of France for the study of rates of consanguineous matings and their effects, differences in sexratio, and the question of linkage of hair color with inherited defects in dentition.
Great Britain
One of the leading and also most active institutions for the study of human genetics in Europe is the Galton Laboratory of University College in London. The director, Professor L. S. Penrose, has contributed some of the basic formulations for the mathematical study of human inheritance. He has made studies of mental deficiency, anencephaly, and a variety of other subjects in the field of human genetics. At present he is engaged in attempting to reproduce mechanically the various functions attributed to chromosomal material for the purpose of self-duplication. The staff of the

199

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

Laboratory consists of specialists in biostatistics, population genetics, serology, cytology, developmental genetics, and so forth, thereby representing a well-rounded team for the study of all aspects of human genetics.
Associated with the Galton Laboratory, but working in the Biochemistry Department of the London Hospital Medical School, Dr. H. Harris has done some of the pioneer work in the analysis of the inheritance of haptoglobins and beta-globins by combining biochemical techniques with genetic studies. He has also been instrumental in the elucidation of some of the mechanisms of the aminoacidurias and of hypophosphatasia. His forthcoming book on Human Biochemical Genetics will fill a great need in bringing together the many recent advances in this rapidly growing field.
Also collaborating with Dr. Harris are Professor Dent and his coworkers at the Department of Medicine of University College Hospital. They have been instrumental in defining some of the clinical entities produced by inborn metabolic errors.
Also in London, at the Hospital for Sick Children, Dr. Fraser-Roberts heads a unit for medical genetics. He is primarily engaged in a study of the relationship of blood groups to diseases. He has recently completed a large-scale study on the genetic influence on essential hypertension. He also contributes a fair amount of his time to heredity counseling.
Visits were not made to Professor Stevenson's department at Oxford and Professor

Póntecorvo's department at Glasgow. The former is primarily concerned with population studies and their public health aspects, although Dr. Allison is active in the field of human biochemical genetics. In Glasgow the emphasis at this time is on human tissue culture, with a view of defining some questions of human inheritance on a cellular level.
Summary and Conclusions
An attempt has been made here to review the salient features of the activity in human genetics in Western Europe at this time. The striking impression is the universal interest of the medical schools in encouraging teaching and research in this field. It becomes quickly apparent that there is a vast difference in the attitude and activity of U. S. medical schools in this subject as opposed to the European ones. The importance of organized departments of human genetics as unifying factors of many fields of basic and clinical research is gradually becoming more obvious. As our understanding of the basic mechanisms of enzymatic and metabolic behavior grows, and as we learn to appreciate the importance of certain inherited characteristics on population structure, we shall turn more and more to the human geneticist for guidance and as a unifying force in medical research. The need for teaching genetics to the medical student is great. The time has come to learn a lesson from our European colleagues and to encourage the establishment of departments of human genetics in all of our medical schools.

