Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Contributions of the first international congress of human genetics: An analysis of the proceedings
Jean Sutter M.D.
To cite this article: Jean Sutter M.D. (1958) Contributions of the first international congress of human genetics: An analysis of the proceedings, Eugenics Quarterly, 5:2, 67-72, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1958.9987354 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1958.9987354
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

Vol. 5, No. 2,June, 1958 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE FIRST INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF HUMAN GENETICS
An Analysis of the Proceedings*
JEAN SUTTER, M.D.
Institut National d'Etudes Démographiques, Paris

The editors of these reports should be RIIS, FUCHS, JOHNSEN, and MOSB-

congratulated for they have succeeded in ECH have shown in several communica-

classifying some 213 communications in a tions what may be hoped for from anew

very satisfying way. To read them is re- cytological technique, which consists of ex-

freshing. Human genetics, a young science amining the cells of the amniotic fluid,

with great promise, is developing rapidly which can be extracted during the twelfth

and the field of scientific activity which it week of pregnancy. By this means we can

encompasses is constantly being extended. determine the sex of the infant, its blood

At oneextreme, the genetics of population, group, possible incompatibilities, anoma-

in order to assess the mode of genie dis- lies of the chromosomes, etc. This method,

persion in isolates, has reached the point which is steadily being developed, can have

of taking account of data as complex as great importance from the point of view

those of cultural anthropology, while atthe of eugenics, since it permits in certain cases

other, under the influence of biochemical prenatal detection of an hereditary an-

research, we note the gradual formulation omaly.

of a molecular genetics. Between these two In a very interesting report, R. J. WIL-

extremes, within which lie all the phe- LIAMS shows that, just as there exist im-

nomena of human life, countless areas are portant anatomical differences between one

being defined in which specialists and doc- human organism and another, the same is

tors are exercising their talents. The orig- true in the areas of the blood groups, en-

inal contributions of the congress and the zymes, excretions, nutrition, and physio-

bearing they have on future studies inhu- logical and pharmacological sensitivity to

man genetics will be considered here.

different chemical products. Individual

Our analyses will start with cytological structures are the expression of genie dif-

and chemical genetics and then take account of more complex areas.
FORD andHAMMERTON explain how technical development led us to discover that man has only 46 chromosomes instead of 48 asheld in theclassical view-- (TJIO).
SACHS, DANON, FELDMAN, SERR,

ferences, not only in taste sensations in P.T.C. but for a large number of substances.
Enzymes. A specific enzyme controls the congenital inability to utilize galactose (ANDERSON). Theheredity of theosteoarticular system, in GIORDANO'S histological researches, points toward enzymes.
EDGAR studies disturbances in the me-

tabolism of lipides; BEAR, the question

*Proceedings of the First International Congress whether the deficiency which causes Wil-

of Human Genetics, Copenhagen, August 1-6, 1956. Edited by Tage Kemp, Mogens Hauge and Bent

son's

disease

is principally

that

of copper

Harvald. Published in 5 parts, each of which can or of an amino-acid. PFÄNDLER describes

be obtained separately. S. Karger, Basel, NewYork, 1957.

metabolic disturbances in porphyria, cysti-

67

68 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

nosis, and Niemann-Pick's disease. LEHMANN shows the existence of a pseudocholinesterase of genetic origin. YI YUNG HSIA and his collaborators show that hétérozygotes carrying the phenylcetonuric gene oxidize phenylalanine less easily than other individuals; LEUCHTENBERGER and his collaborators, that in the hereditary type of rectal polypoida there exists an evident excess of DNA; TAILLARD and his collaborators, that congenital rachitis is a phosphoretted diabetes due to a dominant gene. Carriers can be detected. CODOUNIS presents a satisfying genetic study of cyanosis due to methemoglobin.
The medical section includes practically the whole field of medicine.
Heredity and the development of congenital athyreotic myxedema gives rise to an interesting discussion between BERNHEIM, BERGER, UZAN, CHAMBRON, on the one hand, and MOSBECH, BARTELS, UHRBRAND, on the other. The parents and relatives of myxedematous children have thyroid disturbances (even if they seem normal), which are discoverable by radioactive iodine. Certain facts are still under discussion. Diabetes mellitus, a very interesting disease from the viewpoint of eugenics since it occurs so frequently, was the subject of two very important papers. PYKE shows that the preponderance of this disease among females applies to married woman; unmarried women react like men. He concludes that parity is responsible for this condition and not obesity or the menopause. DITZEL, WHITE, and SARGEANT have investigated the number of diabetics borne by 100 diabetic women who are married and mothers of families; they have observed 375 times more diabetics in offspring of diabetic mothers than in the general juvenile population. The importance of this discovery can be well imagined in the area of natural selection and in the maintenance of genie balances in a population!
Neurology. There are about ten papers on neuromuscular dystrophies. Agreement

among specialists on this difficult question is not complete. WALTON, for example, notes that the present classification has always been subject to question; he proposes a new one closer to reality. We should note a review by BECKER on the genetics of muscular dystrophy.
Psychology-Psychiatry. FULLER gives evidence, from comparative animal studies, as to the part of genetics in determining behavior. MAXWELL, in an all too brief communication, presents documents concerning 654 families, in order to resolve the problem of the relations existing between the intellectual level of parents and children. JUEL-NIELSEN announces the coming publication of a study of nine pairs of twins brought up separately--a rich contribution to a question which intrigues psychologists. We should also note two reports by KALLMANN and his collaborators, one on the evolution of intellectual faculties among maturing MZ twins, the other on the psychogenetics of personality organization, still by means of the study of twins.
Alcoholism was the subject of two papers. In one, KAIJ studies severe alcoholism in 174 pairs of twins. DEUSSEN considers the heredity of criminality by studying the cases of 500 young delinquents.
In psychiatry proper we note a remarkable and exhaustive study by A. J. LEWIS on the offspring of parents, both of whom are afflicted by mental illness. His personal documentation is important. In a related area REED studies the importance of the heredity of mental deficiency in 150 complete pedigrees. He confirms that, in the course of generations, the anomaly tends to decrease. The non-affected children have LQ.S which measurably approach the average of the population. In both cases, the problem of mutations in the psychical order is presented. MITSUDA admirably states the problem of the homotypia of the great psychiatric syndromes: schizophrenia, manic-depressive psychosis, epilepsy. The pathological effects of consanguinity were the subject of several presentations. SLA-

69

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

TER (England), ÖDEGAARD and HERLOFSEN (Norway) arrive at rather opposite results: the former found evidence of the predominance of schizophrenia, the latter two that of manic-depressive psychosis. LARSON studies the cases of mentally deficient offspring in relation to control groups. PHILIPSEN points out that, in Denmark, 400 pairs of twins are available for the study of mental illnesses by this method. KALLMANN shows, in another area, the significance of the method in the study of mongolism. OSTER gives an excellent summation of the etiology of mongolism.
Ophthalmology. Papers here were relatively numerous, ranging from the particular to the general. We shall limit ourselves to the most important facts and the most instructive monographs. FRANCESCHETTI and KLEIN have reported the case of a family-->a very interesting one for genetic theory--where a pronounced form of Daltonism was inherited. WAARDENBURG describes the six different classes of hereditary optic atrophy, SORSBY the dominant lesions of the fundus, etc.
Cancers. KOLLER emphasizes the rôle and the importance of mutation, variation, and adaptation in neoplastic growth. The masses of cells must be thought of as an ordinary population with all its characteristic qualities. This is an interesting concept for understanding findings which often seem so contradictory in this field of study. MORGANTI, GIANFERRARI and their collaborators have shown that only certain cancers seem to have a familial incidence. An interesting account is presented by PELLER of cancer in children, the rate of which is relatively high. NIELSEN shows that, in Denmark, 849 pairs of twins are available for the study of cancer.
Bones and Joints. Into this still obscure area three papers have brought some clarification (STECHER, DE BLECOURTMEINDERSMA, McKUSICK). THYMANN attempts to apply the method of twins to these studies. Polydactylism (DE-

MARINIS), short thumbs (STECHER), dysostosis cleidocranialis (WITKOP-OSTENRIJK) have also received attention.
Other reports to be noted are those which deal with abnormalities of the teeth (SCHULZE), of the enamel (WITKOP), the genetics of gargoylism and hemochromatosis (LAMY and collaborators), hereditary acromelalgia (HUIZINGA), the genetic aspects of atherosclerosis (ADLERSB E R G ) a n d congenital cardiopathies (KHERUMIAN and collaborators).
Experimental pathology. NACHTSHEIM gives an excellent summation of the possibilities of animal experimentation for securing data on human genetics of which MOTULSKY (hemolytic anemia), DEGENHARDT and VETUKHIV give examples.
Physical anthropology. Unfortunately, the papers here were not numerous. SARAH H. HOLT concludes, from her many studies on fingerprints, that they are doubtless determined by a small number of genes; intercorrelations among characteristics are rare. PONS also emphasizes the striking independence existing among the elements. HARRESON and OWEN suggest a spectrophotometric technique permitting scientific. estimates of skin color; TANNER, that the rate of growth and the height of the adult are independent; TWISSELMANN, that during their growth, mulattos of the Belgian Congo have anthropométrie characteristics which are nearer the Negro than the white.
Blood groups is the area in which most new concepts have been developed in recent years (FISHER). Emphasis has been laid upon their geographic and anthropological distributions (for the more common groups, MOURANT, for the rarer ones, LEVINE), but the field of incompatibilities has been markedly enlarged: the ABO incompatibility in the hemolytic disease of the newborn (WOOLF) and a very important addition which seems quite definitive --the associations between blood groups and diseases of the digestive tube. FRA-

70 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

SER-ROBERTS gives a masterly summation of the question, but those of BUCKWALTER, CLARKE and SHEPPARD, and BENTALL, on the same subject, are also of great interest. This new field of genetics seems to be developing rapidly. Already ZEITINOGLU has found a relationship between diabetes mellitus and ABORh, McCONNELL and SHEPPARD between the secretory characteristic and digestive ulcers, MAYR and his collaborators between certain groups and chromatophobe adenoma of the pituitary. The application of blood groups to legal medicine is being actively promoted. Very complete reports on the detection of paternity were made by K. SALLER, HARRASSER, WICHMANN, JONSSON, GÜRTLER; BAUMEISTER allies the blood groups to a more purely biométrie method of identification of paternity.
Mutations. The report of H. J. MULLER, as well as that of L. S. PENROSE, presented to the congress two rather opposite concepts, already familiar to experts. For MÜLLER, mutations are a real burden. The genie balances of the centuries, already gravely upset among human populations by the disappearance of natural selection, risk being even more disturbed by the probable increase of mutation rates as a result of radiation. All this creates a real threat to the species. In basic agreement, PENROSE believes that possible damage due to medical and industrial uses of radiations can be combated by Western public health methods which are now spreading throughout the entire world. Although holding somewhat opposed views on the danger of induced mutations, MÜLLER and PENROSE are in agreement on the necessity of research to support their positions, which still remain at a theoretical level.
T. C. CARTER, also, admirably states the "empiric" problem. He shows that much remains to be done in order to evaluate the effect of radiation. It is important to be aware of two aspects: the genesis of

mutants and their elimination; the latter has been studied very little. It is doubtless wrong to put too much faith in mathematical patterns which may differ greatly from the actual situation. In order to evaluate the speed of the elimination of mutants, it is necessary to know the elements which come into play in the balance established between mutation and selection, on the one hand, and in that which is determined by opposing forces of selection, on the other, when, for example: (a) the hétérozygote is at an advantage; (b) or is the central phenotype in polygenic systems; (c) a variation in time or space exists as a function of the environment. These last three circumstances, together with the fact that the heterogeneity of human populations is deep-seated, lead us to think that the danger arising fiom an increase in the mutation rate has doubtless been overestimated, but there is much work to be done to establish this conclusion. Concerning the effect of radiation, which follows naturally from the preceding considerations, it must be recognized that the study of the offspring of individuals exposed to radiation at Hiroshima and Nagasaki has not produced the brilliant certitude expected. J. V. NEEL and W. J. SCHULL, who directed this large investigation, state: "In order to avoid all possible misunderstandings we hasten to state that under no circumstances can this study be interpreted as indicating that there were no genetic consequences of the atomic bombings. The interpretation is simply that conclusive effects could not be demonstrated." The first results from an investigation on a much more modest scale by TURPIN, LEJEUNE and RETHORE, on the offspring of 786 subjects treated by pelvic radiotherapy, cause their authors to be equally reserved: "Given the relative inconclusiveness of our sampling and the scantiness of absolute figures, the facts reported cannot constitute a formal proof of the production of mutations in man by ionizing energy, but this latter hypothesis can be considered

71

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

the only 'probable' explanation of the peculiarities observed." Elsewhere, BRANDT shows how the different geographical areas of the United States are affected differently by the radioactive fallout which follows experimental explosions; this is of great interest for geneticists.
The numerous papers and discussions related to the genetics of population reveal the vigor with which this important branch of genetics is developing. HALDANE brings forward the problem, fundamental for man, of natural selection; COOK, as well as McKEOWN, shows how old-time genie balances are disturbed by demographic changes of the industrial era. F. OSBORN describes historical changes in demographic factors, which are of essential interest for the genetics of population. He studies in succession differentiation in the death rate and in the birth rate, mate selection and the break-up of isolates, or fusion of multiple partial populations into larger populations. Tage LARSSON groups demographic influences into thirteen factors, whose reciprocal action control the genetic compositioin of populations. AUBENQUE reports how census data can serve genetics; ASCHNER and POST, showing first how modern therapy disturbs the old balance of genetic disorders, estimate the possibilities of the extension of diabetes mellitus. In five to ten generations, doubling of the frequency of dd homozygotes may be seen, which confirms the study by DITZEL and his collaborators previously reported.
The editors have gathered practical applications of the models of the genetics of population under one heading: Genetic Implications of Demography. In this very promising area are two excellent accounts, one by LEHMANN, the other by A. C. ALLISON, who evaluate studies of genetics of population on abnormal hemoglobins. GARTLER and his collaborators show how yS-amino-iso-oxybutyric urinary acid is distributed.
The study of isolates proper is the subject of many communications. SUTTER

and TABAH show how methodology must

henceforth adapt itself to the multiple con-

ditions offered by the framework of consan-

guinity within groups of different types.

CAVALLI-SFORZA reports show he stud-

ied, from 1927 to 1951, the evolution of

marriage customs in 273 parishes of the

province of Parma. Isolates are also dis-

cussed in the following studies of demo-

graphic genetics: Polar Eskimos (SUT-

TER and TABAH), the Dinkas (ROB-

ERTS) ; blood groups of the Malagazy of

Madagascar (SINGER and BRAIN) ; the

Copts and Mohammedans of Egypt (SOLI-

MAN) ; the inhabitants of Easter Island

(WILHELM and SANDOVAL) ; the Dutch

according to their religion (OOSTINGH) ;

the French Basques (NIJENHUIS), and

the Basques of Idaho (LAUGHLIN and

his collaborators.) C. J. WITKOP indi-

cates that, in the United States, 28 well-

defined isolated groups are now established.

The study of one of these, which comprises

5,000 persons of three different races, fur-

nishes material so important that to many

this work has been a revelation. GINI

brings out interesting facts on the physical

assimilation of immigrants in Italy and

the disappearance of the Nordics who set-

tled in Greenland.

-*

We have surveyed the field covered by human genetics during the congress. The methods which were the subject of a special session should now be noted. The twin method was the subject of two reports: VON VERSCHUER on the general results which we owe to it, WAARDENBURG on its value in itself. The latter questions, in toto, the absolute value ascribed to it a few years ago. The interesting communication of MIJSBERG, adducing the possible existence of a third variety of twins, confirms these reservations. WALKER reminds us of the number of means at our disposal to determine the category to which they belong. SIMONDS presents 300 cases of tuberculosis among twins and their families.
Consanguinity as an indirect method of estimating the frequency of recessive genes

72 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

was utilized by BOOK (morbidity), SLATIS and REIS (lethality), RÜDIN (anomalies) .
In summation, methodology was weakly represented, which is greatly to be regretted, for, although brilliant, this first congress did not proceed without revealing certain weaknesses, specifically in the area of technique. In general, little pioneering was observed in acute problems, such as linkage, polygenic heredity, phenomena of association, biométrie and statistical analysis and others. Linkages were the subject of only a few reports: multiple allelomoTphic genes (OAKLAND), congenital ptosis among MNS8 blood groups (HÖSLI, HÄSSIG, FRANCESCHETTI) ; aphasia of the Vertex and blood groups (HURON and his collaborators). Polygenic heredity was the subject of only one paper by KEITER; rarely was it alluded to, except by KALLMANN and the anthropologists. Biometrie analysis was the subject of only a brief report by C. A. B. SMITH. It is possible, fortunately, to judge elsewhere the importance of the subject of distributions, since both MIALL and OLDHAM and FRASER-ROBERTS have shown that arterial tension, as it is studied in medicine, represents only the tail of a normal distribution. This is surely an important finding. The report by BERGLIN on the measure-

ment of penetrance permitted BATEMAN to show a certain confusion prevalent in regard to the principle itself. The debates frequent in medical discussions as to whether a characteristic is dominant or recessive have amply shown that classic Mendelian technique is uncertain in its application to man. CUENDET and STREIFF have even questioned dominance and recessiveness in favor of an intermediate heredity. As a result of all this, the most modern methods have not yet penetrated far enough into the area of genetics, especially medical genetics; specialists must be developed as quickly as possible on a broader basis.
We regret, finally, that eugenics occupied only a very small place in this congress. SKYDSGAARD discussed the eugenics of blindness with a view to prevention; VAN ZONNEVELD and POLMAN, the hereditary factors in longevity. This is not a great deal of material, even if one adds the important report by REED on heredity counseling and its social usefulness. However, does not the future depend on our knowledge of the normal man and on study of the best stock? For a sound eugenics to develop, it is urgent that genetics find its place in every course of study, as GORDON remarked, and that the public be better informed on its problems (SCHEINFELD) .

