Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Heredity counseling
F. E. Stephens
To cite this article: F. E. Stephens (1954) Heredity counseling, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:4, 261-263, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987207 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987207
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

HEREDITY COUNSELING Muscular Dystrophy and Cancer

F. E. STEPHENS
Director
Laboratory of Human Genetics University of Utah

Discussions of problems in heredity counseling arepresented in each issue of EUGENICS QUARTERLY.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

T
X HE FUNCTION of genetic counseling is to supply, so far as possible, a scientific basis on which the recipients can make intelligent decisions about problems of heredity. Sometimes the facts will discourage the parties concerned from marrying, or at least from having children. In other instances, what seemed to be a threatening barrier to marriage or reproduction is completely removed. There are still other cases where the absence of data on the inheritance of human traits leaves the counselor with little that he can do to help his troubled inquirers. Let us consider some specific problems dealing with different human traits.
Progressive muscular dystrophy is a trait which is receiving much attention on the radio and in the public press. From the standpoint of genetic counseling, several interesting problems are involved. Muscular dystrophy is not just one disease, as is commonly thought, but may be any one of several. The first step, therefore, before genetic counseling can be given, is to secure the proper diagnosis. This can be done best by a physical examination and by a careful study of the family history. The condition of each patient should be diagnosed so far as possible in the light of his family history. Three common forms of muscular dystrophy are Facio-scapulohumeral (FSH) Muscular Dystrophy, Myotonia Dystrophica, and Childhood Muscular Dystrophy. They all produce muscular wasting for which there is no known cure. In many cases, the only medical diagnosis which will be given by a

physician is progressive muscular dystrophy. Since the disease is not too commonly seen by doctors, incorrect diagnoses are sometimes given. Recently a man came to our laboratory, who had been to a clinic in a neighboring state. His case had been diagnosed there as FSH Muscular Dystrophy. When examined here by doctors who were used to seeing many cases of this disease, he was found to be suffering from Spondylitis, not from muscular dystrophy.
FSH Muscular Dystrophy is inherited as a simple autosomal dominant trait. An affected patient with this disease might come to a counselor with such questions as the following: (1) What are the chances of an affected parent transmitting this trait to his or her children? (2) If a person is only slightly affected, can he transmit the trait in a more severe form to his children? (3) If he should marry another affected person, would the children be more apt to have a more severe form of the disease?
In answer to the question, the counselor could tell the patient that since every FSH Muscular Dystrophy patient has one affected and one normal parent, he carries one normal and one affected gene. His child therefore stands an equal chance of receiving either one or the other of these genes and hence may be either affected or normal.
As for the second question--does the severity of the disease in the parents determine the severity of the disease in the children--the answer is "no." A person having the disease in a slight form may transmit

261

262 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

it in a severe form, or the child of a severely affected parent may be only slightly affected.
Because we have no cases where two affected persons have married and had children, the third question could not be answered satisfactorily. It is quite possible that the condition would be much more severe, or even be lethal in the homozygous state, which could be secured only from the union of two affected individuals.
These questions, if asked about Myotonia Dystrophica, could be answered in very much the same manner, except that the counselor would probably emphasize the fact that this disease is a syndrome (a group of symptoms or traits) having a variety of expressions. A person having only one of the symptoms, such as cataract, may have children showing the entire syndrome. The reason for this is not well understood.
In these and other dominant traits, our concern is apt to be centered upon the reproductive ability of the affected individuals only. The question of whether or not normal sibs of the affected individuals might transmit the same disease should also receive careful consideration. Frequently these individuals do not marry or fail to have children because of fear of transmitting a trait which appears in their families or in their relatives. In many cases these individuals are splendid people and should not be deprived unnecessarily of the opportunity of parenthood. An interesting incident which happened in our laboratory emphasizes this point. A man and his wife came to the laboratory to ask about the inheritance of some trait in which they were interested. While there, they asked the counselor if he knew how muscular dystrophy was inherited and referred to a large kindred where FSH Muscular Dystrophy was found. They were told that it was inherited as a dominant trait. This could be said with assurance, since the laboratory has records of seven generations of this particular kindred. They then asked about a young man

who came from a family of this kindred, which had several bad cases of FSH Dystrophy. They were told that the young man had been examined twice by an expert and declared free from the disease, and that he therefore was no more apt to transmit the disease than any other normal person in the population. They were quite shocked, since they had induced their daughter to break a marriage engagement with this young man because of fear that he would transmit muscular dystrophy to his children.
With Childhood Muscular Dystrophy the problem is quite different. The disease is inherited as a sex-linked recessive trait and is found in young boys who seldom, if ever, have children. The question is: where did the trait come from, and who can transmit it? The answer, of course, is that the trait came from the mother and can be transmitted by approximately one-half the sisters and by other female relatives who happen to be carriers.
In our records of Childhood Muscular Dystrophy is a family of five children, four boys and one girl. Three of the boys are badly affected, all being confined to wheel chairs. The other brother and the sister are normal. What can the genetic counselor say to the normal brother and sister? He can tell the brother that there is no danger of his ever transmitting this disease to his children. If he had inherited the defective gene, he would have shown the trait. He drew the lucky number. With the normal sister, the situation is different. She may be a carrier. If she is, she may transmit the defective gene to her sons or to her daughters. If the daughters receive it, they will not show the trait but will be carriers. Geneticists can render a very great service by discovering characteristics by which carriers can be detected. So far this has not been possible with sex-linked muscular dystrophy. It is possible in some other traits, however. In Choroideremia, an eye disease, the eye specialists can detect the

263

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

carriers by a careful examination of the eyes. Here again, because of genetic discoveries, the counselor might remove the barrier which would prevent many otherwise qualified women from becoming mothers and at the same time remove the doubt about the real carriers possessing the defective gene.
In dealing with sex-linked recessive traits, one must be ever watchful of the females. They seldom show the trait but are the ones who usually transmit it. In our files is the record of a kindred showing a sexlinked recessive trait diagnosed as microphthalmia. In one sibship of this kindred, there were two blind boys and several normal brothers and sisters in 1947. The chances of their transmitting this trait to their children was explained to all of them. Six years later one of the blind boys who had in the meantime been married, called the genetic counselor and said that his wife was expecting a baby and asked what its chances were of being blind. He also said that one of his married sisters, who previously had one normal son and one normal daughter, had just given birth to a blind son. Here is a case where the normal daughter was a far greater risk than her blind brother, so far as the immediate offspring were concerned. None of the blind son's children would be expected to show the trait. If he had a son, it would be normal, without even carrying the defective gene. If he had a daughter, she would not show the trait but would be a known carrier. In the case of the sister, who happened to be a carrier in this case, half her sons would be expected to be blind and half of her daughters would be expected to be carriers.
A more difficult problem for the genetic counselor deals with diseases such as cancer. The nature of the inheritance of a few special types of cancer is understood, but we know little about the genetics of most common forms of this disease.
A woman who has a mother and two sis-

ters who have died with breast cancer appears before a genetic counselor to find what her chances are of developing cancer of some kind. In the light of present knowledge, what information can the genetic counselor give her? While we know but little about the genetics of breast cancer, there are a few things which might be helpful that the counselor could tell her. (1) There is little evidence that she is more apt to develop other types of cancer than anyone else in the general population. (2) Breast cancer is so frequent in the general population that chance alone could account for a few cases of cancer concentration such as found in this family, even if no heredity factor were involved. (3) While present work shows that close relatives of people suffering from breast cancer are slightly more apt to develop this type of cancer than other pepole taken at random from the general population, the genetic mechanism involved is not known. There is not sufficient data available at the present time to warrant a genetic counselor discouraging an otherwise prepared woman from assuming the responsibility of motherhood. While her chances of having breast cancer are slightly increased, other factors than heredity may also be involved; having children decreases the chance of breast cancer.
Genetic counseling needs more data on the inheritance of human heredity traits. These data should be accumulated at the various counseling centers and should be used as a basis for counseling. If family histories are continually accumulated over a long period of time, they will eventually become a most valuable treasury.
In conclusion, we might say the genetic counselor should base his counseling on available data on human genetics, that he should recognize the importance of counseling those free of genetic risk as well as those having risks, and that he should do everything to help accumulate data on human inheritance on which sound genetic counseling must depend.

