Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Genetics in the atomic age
Curt Stern
To cite this article: Curt Stern (1956) Genetics in the atomic age, Eugenics Quarterly, 3:3, 131-138, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1956.9987281 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1956.9987281
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4 View related articles Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

Vol. 3, No. 3, September, 1956

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

GENETICS IN THE ATOMIC AGE* This is the first article in a series on Genetics and Radiation.

CURT STERN
The University of California

G.IENETICS HAD AN INNOCENT YOUTH, 3S
many a science. What quieter birthplace could be imagined than the walled garden of the monastery in which Johann Gregor Mendel grew the peas from which he learned the first laws of inheritance? Yet the seclusion of the origin of genetics was deceptive. When, in 1865, Mendel wrote down his modest report "Experiments on Plant Hybrids," he knew that Darwin's theory of evolution had caused an outbreak of emotions among millions of thinking people. He realized that the findings on crosses of garden peas had their full bearing on the issues of creation and evolution which inflamed the minds of men.
It has often been regretted that Mendel's work remained largely unnoticed until it was rediscovered in the first year of thenew century. There is at least one compensation for this delay. It saved genetics from being drawn into the Darwinian controversy when it was at its most embittered stage. By 1900 the storm had diminished greatly and genetics could develop healthily within the confines of the universities and research institutes.
When, however, several decades later, genetics came of age, it could not escape the raids of illegitimate invaders. First, its findings on animals and plants were uncritically and malevolently applied to man, and racial bigotry and crime were justified by appeal to a pure science. Then, the opposite happened. Lysenko, in Russia, for reasons which have never been fully understood, was empowered to crush the brilliant
*Anaddress given on April 14, 1955 before the
International Council for Exceptional Children.

group of geneticists in his country and to label them as reactionary and despicable.
Genetics thus may serve as a striking example of the close interrelations of all human activities. Science and politics, philosophy and religion, art and social doctrines, technology and the theories and practices of government do not exist in separate compartments but interact constantly in many ways, sometimes subtly, at other times violently, to mankind's benefit one day and to its detriment another.
We are just now at the beginning of an era in which genetics once more comes into the foreground of public attention. This time the demands on this science are fully legitimate. We have known for nearly 30 years that radiation, from X-ray tubes and from radioactive substances, can change the hereditary elements of animals and plants. Herman J. Muller, the discoverer of this artificial transmutation of the genes, was rightly hailed as the first man to succeed in interfering at will with those processes of nature which until then had restricted genie changes to rare and inaccessible events. Since that time the science of radiation genetics has expanded into a whole field of its own. Much of its results lie in the realm of fundamental knowledge. The students of evolution in animals and plants, of the microscopic anatomy of the cell nucleus, of the action of genes in the functioning of cells and in development--all have gained new tools and new insights into their problems. But Muller himself was and is not only a great searcher of the unknown. He is at the same time a man aware of immediate social obligations. In the

131

132 Eugenics Quarterly-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

first announcement on the induction of mutations by irradiation of the fly Drosophila he called attention to the significance of this finding to all men and women. What radiation does to the genes of flies, it undoubtedly also does to the genes of man. X-rays are used for diagnosis and treatment, including sometimes for producing fertility by stimulating ovarian function and for causing temporary sterility by suppressing the formation of sperm. We must count on mutations in the germ cells being produced by these irradiations, mutations which will appear in the descendants of the irradiated individuals. Muller warned medical men of the consequences of their acts. You must weigh, he said, the benefits to the treated individual against the harm to the race. The fight was joined. Why should there be harm in mutations, the opponents asked. Does evolution not mean progress and does it not depend on mutations? Moreover, some physicians added, give us proof that irradiation causes mutations not only in flies but also in man. The gynecologists would say: we have treated with X-rays the ovaries of numerous women and to their happiness many children were born to them. All were fine, healthy specimens. Some of these by now are adult women themselves and have had babies of their own. Again, no ill effects, no noticeable changes have appeared.
Harm by mutations, the geneticists replied, is a matter both of fact and theory. Actual study has shown that the overwhelming majority of changed genes are detrimental to the well-being of the individual. Some kill outright, early or late in embryonic development. Others cause visible abnormalities of external or internal organs. Still more lead to defective functioning of blood or nerves or stomach or glands. This evidence is clear. It is supported by reason. Man, like any other organism, is the achievement of long periods of evolution. He has been brought to a peak of internal adaptive perfection. Change any part of it and the result most

likely will be for the worse. Who has ever heard of a finely adjusted watch being improved or even left unimpaired when one of its wheels is replaced by another of different kind? Should one expect better results from changes in the genes of an organism? Yet, the appeal to the past power of evolution raises a new question. The adaptive peak which any species represents is never absolute. Evolution is the attainment of other new peaks. It is a continuous process. It depends on genie changes as its raw material, and it implies the existence of harmless mutations. These statements are true, but evolution takes on different values if applied to plants and animals or to man. Evolution is a cruel process, sacrificing innumerable unsuccessful trial specimens for the survival of the few successful ones. We can afford to irradiate bacteria and moulds in order to create mutations for the production of desired chemicals or for higher yields of antibiotics. Billions of useless individuals can be discarded unconcernedly so as to select a single desirable one. Likewise we can induce mutations in barley or peanut plants and without remorse save only the very small minority which suits our purposes. But applied to man, the harmful induced mutations must weigh on our conscience. The possibility of some favorable ones cannot be balanced against the certainty of the majority of unfavorable mutations.
Why, however, have the physicians not seen evidence for mutations caused by irradiation of human individuals? The geneticist's answer to this question needs some elaboration. As a preamble he would voice the conviction that man as a biological species has never been found to be outside of the laws of organisms. Mutations can be produced by radiation in viruses, bacteria, yeasts, tobacco plants, flies, wasps and mice. It seems impossible that the genes of man should be immune to changes which the genes of all other forms of life must endure. The fact that no mutations have been the obvious consequences of ir-

133

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

radiation by X-rays in man must have a particular reason. It is indeed at heart a very simple one: insufficiency of numbers. Well-documented reports on the "many" children produced by mothers or fathers whose sex glands had been relatively heavily treated with X-rays probably cover no more than a few hundred babies, and the number of recorded grandchildren of the treated parents is perhaps less than a score. This is not the kind of material to which the geneticist is accustomed who rather deals with thousands and millions of individuals. Moreover, his plants and fruitflies can be exposed to much heavier doses of X-rays than are ever applied to his fellow men, and, therefore, he expects less numerous genie changes in humans.
The offspring of treated patients are not the only ones in which one can search for mutations. There are also the children of professional radiologists who themselves over the course of years often had been exposed to considerable radiation from X-ray tubes. There are some surveys of such children, but again the records are limited and the results not clear. Finally, there is one more group of people, the largest and most intensely studied: the children of those who, living in Hiroshima and Nagasaki in the fatal days at the close of the great war, survived the inferno of the two atomic bombs. The radiations sent out by these weapons are similar in effect to those of X-rays and should have resulted in human mutations. When the war was over, the National Academy of Sciences as directed by the President of the United States, and with the cooperation of the Japanese Government, Japanese physicians and midwives, established a research organization to determine the after-effects of the atomic bombings. Willingly and yet hesitatingly, the geneticists participated in this effort. They were willing to rescue knowledge from the misfortune of war but hesitating since it was uncertain how much knowledge could be gained. It was possible to make calculations in advance to gauge

the results of mutations in the descendants of the exposed parents. Such calculations had to be based on the best studies available, data from flies, not man. Some adjustments could be made in these calculations, taking into account aspects in which the genes of flies and man differed. At best, reasonable guesses, not sharp predictions could come from such procedures.
What, then, were the expectations? Let us assume that the sex glands of a group of the heaviest irradiated survivors in the two cities had received an average dose of 100 so-called rontgen units of radiation, a dose comparable to that accumulated by the sex glands of patients who have been given a good many abdominal X-ray exposures. It may be estimated that perhaps 15 per cent of all children from an exposed and a nonexposed parent, or perhaps 30 per cent from two exposed parents, carry some one induced, mutated gene. Few mutated genes, however, produce their effects in the children of the exposed parents. Three main kinds of genes can be distinguished: fully dominant, irregularly dominant and recessive genes. All fully dominant genes but only a small fraction of the other two kinds become noticeable in the first generation. The fully dominant ones probably represent less than one in a hundred of all mutated genes. In detail, the action of these genes varies. There are those which severely disturb the development of the embryo and thus lead to death and abortion, sometimes so very early that the mother may not even have been aware that she had conceived. There are others which will bring forth malformations or malfunctioning, slight or serious. Very rarely only will the word "monster" be in order.
One in a hundred fully dominant out of 15 or 30 per cent of induced genes corresponds to only about one in 700 or one in 350 children visibly different from what they would have been, had their parents never been exposed to artificial irradiation. To these may be added from one exposed parent perhaps another one in 900 children

134 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

or from two exposed parents one in 450 five instead of the average expectation from

who might be malformed because an ir- non-irradiated parents of 6 malformed chil-

regularly dominant gene gained expression dren does not suggest that radiation re-

or because an induced recessive gene had duced the number of abnormals. It is sim-

met in fertilization another recessive of its kind. Altogether the induced dominant and those few recessive genes which might be expected to produce visible effects in the first generation would account for around 2 to 5 malformations among a thousand children. Now, it is a fact well known to students of public health that more than 1 per cent of children from average non-exposed parents are visibly, though often very slightly, malformed at birth and that very many more show some unfavorable qualities in later life. If we could observe 1,000 children from parents both of whom were exposed to the 100 "r" dose we would, in any case, expect more than 10 of them to be

ply a chance fluctuation compatible with what could have been predicted. One obtains somewhat larger numbers if children are included who had only one instead of two heavily exposed parents. This raises the total to nearly 1800 children, 21 of whom showed some malformations. Clearly, again this number constitutes no evidence for an effect of the exposure of the parents upon their children since the difference between the average expectation of 18 malformed children and the actually found number of 21 may very likely have been due to chance. Even the more extensive data are still too small to permit the drawing of a valid conclusion.

malformed at birth independently of the The studies in these Japanese cities are radiation exposure of the parents and per- still under way. There are many more chil-
haps an additional 5 children to be ab- dren whose parents had been less heavily

normal due to the heavy radiation exposure exposed than those considered here. No

of both progenitors. The difference be- fcomplete report has yet been published on

tween 10 or 15 abnormal out of 1000 chil- them. However, the statistical advantage of

dren born would not entitle one to any the larger number of children in this group

definite conclusions. Chance, and other is counter-balanced by the statistical disad-

causes, constantly bring about small fluctu- vantage-that the theoretically calculated ef-

ations in the number of defectives born so fect of the weaker irradiation would be

that even without any radiation exposure much less than among the children we have

the number of abnormal children among discussed. So it may be expected again that

1000 births may easily from one year to the no obvious evidence for an increased num-

next be as low as 5 or as high as 15. Thus, 'ber of malformations will be found.

as long as the total number of children born to heavily exposed parents is relatively small the calculated increase of abnormals would remain undetectable.

Can we then draw no conclusions from the painful, laborious and costly studies in these cities? There are indeed important conclusions. One of them is as follows:

This is the situation concerning the chil- Man's genetic sensitivity to irradiation can-

dren born in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Al- not be very much larger than that of other

though tens of thousands of children ex-, organisms. If it were a hundred times

elusive of those who were on their way in higher than in flies, then even the limited

1945 were later born to people who were Japanese data would have shown a clear

exposed to the bombings in the two cities, increase of defective offspring. Mice, it

only about 600 children came from parents appears from recent studies, are genetically

both of whom had survived heavy irradia- more sensitive than flies, but again it seems

tion. Among these 600 children were 5 as if the sensitivity of human genes cannot

abnormal ones, or somewhat less than 1 be very much larger than that of mice. An-

per cent. Obviously, the finding of only other conclusion is this: If man's sensitivity

135

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

is about the same as that of other organisms, then the findings in Japan are fully within genetic expectation, or, stated a different way, there is no reason to assume that unfavorable mutations have not been induced. Had more heavily exposed couples survived in Japan so that they might have produced not 600 but 600,000 children, then there is good reason to believe that beyond the 6000 malformed children expected in any population of this size additional many hundreds would have been malformed as the result of the radiation damage to their parents. With such large numbers we might well have expected undeniable evidence for the ill-effects of radiation on human genes.
We have dealt with the immediate offspring of the unfortunate inhabitants of the two Japanese cities. What may be expected of future generations? It is here that we encounter particularly the problem not only of fully dominant but also of the irregular dominant and of the recessive mutations presumably induced. The fully dominant mutations, those which should have appeared immediately, would have a chance to reappear in about half of the children of those who showed their effect themselves. Since the number of such first generation individuals with induced defects was so small as to have been beyond recognition, the effect of fully dominant mutations on future generations is equally negligible. The facts are peculiarly different for the irregular dominant and the recessive mutations. As was said earlier, there may well have been induced over one hundred times more such mutations than fully dominant ones. Therefore, among the 600 children from . two heavily exposed parents there may have been no less than 200 or 300 who unknown to themselves and others carry an induced irregularly dominant or recessive gene. These children, when adults, will transmit their unfavorable gene to about half of their offspring, and, usually, this fact will again remain without obvious consequences. Only rarely will an irregu-

larly dominant gene express itself in the next generation or will the spouse of a person who carries a recessive gene also contain, again unknown to himself, one such recessive gene of the same kind. This would be due to the fact that any one mutation induced by radiation has also occurred many times before spontaneously in earlier generations and has been transmitted from generation to generation. When the two spouses happen to carry the same recessive gene, then there will be a chance for the production of an abnormal child due to the coming together of two like genes from both parents. Among the possibly 200 first generation people who carry an induced irregularly dominant or a recessive gene, hardly any more than 3 or 4 will find a spouse with a recessive gene like their own. Altogether, the marriages of persons carrying an induced irregularly dominant or recessive gene may contribute 1 or 2 newly defective individuals. Since, however, among the future children from the 600 first generation individuals from heavily exposed Japanese there will be "spontaneously," regardless of the exposure, around one per cent abnormal ones, the additional 1 or 2 induced defectives will not be discernible. In a similar manner, each successive generation is likely to bring forth the appearance of a few more defectives but their origin as due to atomic radiation will be even less recognizable. By then the remote descendants of the exposed individuals will have become so interspersed with the rest of the Japanese population that the few induced defectives will be included as an unidentifiable small fraction among the defectives of the whole country.
This, however, is not the end. While some of the actually born induced abnormals may be so badly handicapped that they die early or leave no children, other genes may possess less fatal effects although still undesirable ones. Lack of offspring among the former means that the induced mutation will die with them. With fertility of the latter their unfavorable gene may be

136 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

transmitted to further generations. Very likely, if it was an irregularly dominant gene it would disappear again from view and if a recessive it would first meet a normal gene. In either case a normal-appearing child would be born. The child, however, would transmit his abnormal gene as well as his normal gene, and, in the course of generations, again a defective child with the long ago induced bad gene would appear. So, for hundreds and thousands of years there would be occasional reappearances of the mutated condition.
There are two aspects to this situation. The first concerns the statistical phenomenon. Among the billions of individuals born in each generation on our earth, the few induced abnormal ones from the events in August 1945 have not and will not be discernible. Even in Japan alone no evidence for mutant genes is likely to be discoverable. The other aspect is the peculiarly human one which does not deal with man as a statistic but with each individual as a unique person endowed with inalienable rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. If we approach our topic, "Genetics in the Atomic Age," from this human and also, historically, truly American point of view then we can only stand bowed in sorrow and add these future unfortunates to those endless others which human folly and ill will has killed and maimed through the centuries.
The two atomic bombings which have furnished much of the basis of this discussion are events of the past. We are all concerned now with the effects which the yearly tests of nuclear weapons might have on the genetic endowment of man. All of us are normally exposed to natural radiation, from cosmic rays, from the radioactive substances which, in small amounts, occur in our surroundings, in soil, air, in the material out of which our houses are built, and from those radioactive atoms which our own bodies accumulate from food and water and air. What is the effect of this unavoidable background irradiation on our

genes? It is generally believed by geneticists that it is responsible for some of the socalled spontaneous mutations which occur perpetually in us. Not all spontaneous mutations are radiation induced, but the relative proportions of the radiation-dependent and the independent human mutations is not known. Why is there general belief among geneticists in the power of background radiation to cause mutations? Is this radiation not so low in intensity that it takes years of life until the total dose of irradiation has added up to the same amount which a single X-ray photograph of the abdomen may impart on an individual? Should we not assume that the immense "dilution" of exposure which the background irradiation represents will make it harmless? There are several reasons why this assumption is considered wrong. Thus, it has been demonstrated experimentally that given amounts of radiation produce the same number of mutations regardless of whether the radiation was administered in the concentration of 300 rontgen units per minute or, diluted 300,000 times, administered at one-thousandth of a rontgen unit per minute. Another reason lies in our knowledge of the process by which radiation induces mutations. This may be compared to that of the happenings by means of which a bullet kills or injures a man. If a single machine gun sprays a field with missiles, fewer combatants will be hit than when thousands of guns are employed. However, the effect of any individual hit will be independent of the concentration of the bullets. In the same way, the low-rate background irradiation will produce fewer mutations per time than a heavy dose, but there is no reason to believe that its proportional share of genetic changes will not be produced by it.
Tests of atomic weapons add to the natural background radiation. Some of the radioactive material produced in the test explosions comes down to earth or to the ocean within a circumscribed area whose size varies with the power of the device

137

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

and other circumstances. The rest of the radioactive material goes high up into the upper layers of the atmosphere and then slowly falls out over the surface of the planet. Much of the material loses its activity at a fast rate, but some will continue sending out radiation for thousands of years. What is the effect of fall-out on the hereditary material? We must assume that it will add new mutations just as does the natural background irradiation!
This statement is not made lightly. Scientists are trained to weigh their pronouncements more rigorously than other people. They find it difficult to say only yea, yea-- nay, nay but hedge around with phrases such as "highly probable" or "most likely." This is often annoying to their fellowmen whose accuracy is usually sufficient to meet the tests of everyday life. But even the members of a jury which may regard the evidence as incontrovertible that a man is guilty of murder should never pronounce their damning verdict without knowing in their hearts that at best the verdict is one which is true with a probability which may border on certainty but which still leaves some room for error. The statement that the recent increases of background irradiation which can be measured all around us will cause additional mutations in our genes is one for which not every last bit of evidence is in. The opposite statement, however, that no genetic damage is produced by current weapons tests runs counter to the best knowledge available. If we use the same care and respect for evidence which juries and judges are asked to apply to their decisions on human fates, then we must also convict as guilty of falsehood magazine articles who flatly declare that no harm is done by atomic tests.
Sometimes these misstatements may be launched well-meaningly in order to counteract exaggerated claims of the damage caused by fall-out. Taken in a statistical sense the presently estimated damage is vanishingly small. Recently, Professor

Sturtevant of the California Institute of Technology has calculated that, if the increase in irradiation due to fall-out continues at his estimated present rate, it will lead to the birth, each year in the United States, of some seventy children who will carry a mutation induced by fall-out atoms. Sturtevant adds that this estimate may be much too low and the actual number may be as high as 7,000. Statistically, even the last figure will have no noticeable impact. As we have seen earlier only perhaps about two per cent of these children will actually exhibit a change from normal so that, even accepting the higher estimate, observable harm may hit less than 150 individuals. If one compares this with the four million children born in our country at the present yearly rate, and the more than forty thousand of them who will be defective at birth it becomes clear that no one needs to be concerned about the effect of fall-out on the kind of children he will have or about the future of the people at large, or of mankind. Even if the types of tests which have been carried out are continued for many years and even if still more damaging amounts of radioactive material are released in tests, it will be a long time until there will be a noticeable increase of mutated individuals. Yet, as soon as we leave the statistical approach we are confronted with the fact that there will be people in the many future generations who will be born with defects and deficiencies which are the results of our present actions. What would we say if deliberately even a single innocent child, not to speak of a hundred fifty, were drawn from the newborn each year and killed, or injured for life?
There is still another side to our worries. Genes do not only exist in our germ cells, but they are equally present in each of the billions of cells which constitute our bodies. We do not transmit to our children the genes in these body cells, but we depend on their functioning for our own life and well-being. They can be changed by irradiation in the same way as the genes in germ

138 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

cells and certainly the changes again are usually for the worse. Our bodies are more complex than single cells, and the nature of the bodily, personal effects of radiation is less well understood than that of the mutations of genes which we transmit to our offspring. Whatever they are in detail, we do know of ill effects. The incidence of leukemia, in animals and in man, can greatly be raised by irradiation. Many radiologists as well as survivors of the Japanese bombings have furnished tragic testimony to this fact. Furthermore, a high mortality rate, a faster aging, as a result of irradiation, of apparently healthy animals of several species has also been observed. We are by no means certain that the effects on the frequency of leukemia and on aging can be produced by very weak doses of radiation such as coming from fall-out. But it is a possible danger to be kept in mind most seriously. Again, no one will foresee a major catastrophe. A people, however, which rightly has become concerned with the rise within recent decades of cancer of the lung must also be alert to the possibility of a rise in leukemia and of forces which might tend to shorten our lives. This awareness is necessary even though increased medical knowledge may lengthen our average life span by still more years and thus obscure a loss of weeks or months due to fall-out.
The genes have felt the import of atomic events ever since life existed. They have been under the influence of the atomic age for sixty years, since the discovery of radioactivity and of X-rays. They have been exposed to atomic warfare and to atomic tests. They will be exposed increasingly to the products of the peaceful applications of atomic energy. People will be subjected to radiations from atomic power plants, and even the best disposal of radioactive waste products from such nuclear factories will not eliminate some contamination of our planetary environment. Industrial planning and legislation will set limits to the

harm which can be predicted, but mankind will have to live with it as it lives with the knowledge of injury and death afflicted daily on thousands by fire and electricity, autos and planes, drugs and chemicals, and many other discoveries and inventions of civilization.
At present the greatest amount of atomic damage is still done by the oldest and most widely spread application of atomic knowledge, namely X-rays. The good which X-rays are doing to mankind by far outweighs the harm, but probably all geneticists are convinced that we still can greatly reduce the latter. The genetic problems of the peaceful application of atomic energy are similar in scope to those posed by X-rays. The hoped-for human benefits will have to be accompanied by a price in the well-being of some individuals. This will and should be a matter for discussion and action for many years to come.
Finally, there are the genetic problems of atomic warfare. We have discussed the genetic consequences of weapons tests. There are those who, shocked by the unavoidable causation of defective human beings, speak out uncompromisingly against such tests. They do not admit the analogy with peaceful applications where benefit together with injury appears on the ledger. There are others who believe that atomic armaments have held back the advent of wars and that the balance sheet for weapons' tests does not lack its positive entries. No one, however, can escape the conviction that war which was always evil is an unimaginable evil in the atomic age; that atomic armaments constitute at best only the most temporary postponement of needed solutions; that every man and woman must constantly endeavor to free himself from international hates and prejudices; that our daily determination must be to find peaceful ways out of mankind's predicament; and that our dedication must be not to death and destruction but to life and construction.

