Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Meetings and regent publications
Helen Hammons
To cite this article: Helen Hammons (1961) Meetings and regent publications, Eugenics Quarterly, 8:2, 108-111, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1961.9987470 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1961.9987470
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

MEETINGS AND REGENT PUBLICATIONS

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

DIABETICS UNKNOWN: Groff Conklin. Public Affairs Pamphlet No. 312, Public Affairs Committee, Inc., New York, 1961, 27 pp., 25¢ (paper).
This pamphlet stresses that about half the people in this country with diabetes don't know they have the disease. It touches upon the role of heredity in diabetes, stating very properly the very grave risks for developing the disease if both one's parents are diabetic However, some heredity counselors may differ with other risk figures given in certain family relationships. Geneticists would agree with the precautions suggested for those with a family history of diabetes: regular medical advice for possible avoidance of the condition and investigation of a possible diabetic background in a prospective marriage partner.
The pamphlet supplies useful information for detection and treatment of diabetes and outlines the great strides made in control of the disease which give diabetic women good chances for having children. The need for better research is very great, concludes the author.
It is encouraging to have the hereditary basis of a widespread disease discussed so frankly in a popular pamphlet. Organizations and individual writers have not always been willing to publicize inherited factors in common diseases because of the mistaken belief that if it's hereditary it's incurable. The future of preventive medicine may very well lie with some of the so-called "inherited" diseases, according to some outstanding geneticists today.
HUMAN GENETICS--A New Service for Min-
nesota: Human Genetics Unit, Division of Special Services. Minnesota Department of Health, Minneapolis, 1961, 4 pp. (paper).
This leaflet describes the pioneering services in human genetics of the Minnesota De-

partment of Health which may prove to be of great significance in the history of public health in this country. In 1959 the Minnesota State Legislature authorized the Minnesota Department of Health to establish a human genetics program and appoint an advisory committee. The Dight Institute of Human Genetics, one of the oldest American heredity counseling centers, and the Minnesota Human Genetics League supported this legislation. Sheldon Reed, Director of the Dight Institute, is chairman of the advisory committee.
This public health program provides for both genetic counseling and research. It replaces the consultation services formerly provided by the Dight Institute at the University of Minnesota. The Human Genetics Unit works with physicians and dentists; private hospitals, institutions, and agencies; official state and local institutions; individ uals by referral from physicians or dentists. Only general information will be supplied to individuals without referral. Requests for services should be directed to the Human Genetics Unit, Minnesota Department of Health, University Campus, Minneapolis 14, Minnesota.
CRIME IN AMERICA: Edited by Herbert A. Block. Philosophical Library, New York, 1961, $6.00.
A collection of papers, most of which have been presented at the meetings of the American Society of Criminology.
The chapter by Peter P. Lejins of the Department of Sociology of the University of Maryland discusses current theories about the influence of heredity on criminal behavior. The author reviews Lombroso's and Hooton's theories on the relation of anatomy to crime, concluding that they have had little impact on American criminology. The studies of Sheldon and the Gluecks, however, are receiving serious consideration.

108

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

Recent Publications

109

Sheldon has showed a high correlation of criminality with the body type of the endomorphic mesomorph. The Gluecks also found a high percentage of mesomorphs to be delinquent. For the first time a plausible mechanism has been suggested linking heredity with environment. An endomorph is a man of action who acts to get out of a situation instead of just displaying general weakness. An ectomorph is not a person of action. Thus different types of physique may have different patterns of response which sometimes do, and sometimes do not, lead to criminal behavior. Only a rabid environmentalist could object to this hypothesis, according to Lejins.
It is pointed out that we are only in the beginning stages of the solution of the nature-nurture dilemma but that promising steps have been made in the area of criminology. The theory of the moment is at the same time a research assignment. This volume also discusses punishment, law enforcement, and sex, sanity, and society.
POPULATION GROWTH AND MANPOWER IN THE
PHILIPPINES: A Joint Study by the United Nations and the Government of the Philippines. United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, New York, 1960, 66 pp. (paper).
There is much evidence for high fertility and a declining death rate in the Philippines, although the vital statistics for this country are very deficient. A birth rate of 46 per 1000 is indicated, but underreporting here is likely. If certain trends continue, the population could double in about 18 years. All projections point to a large population growth in the Philippines in the near future.
Fertility is only one of the subjects covered in this study which emphasizes the demography of manpower. It was undertaken not only to supply the government of the Philippines with demographic information for its planning programs but also to be of use to other countries.

National Committee on Maternal Health, Inc., New York, 1961, 8 pp. (paper).
Reports on a fall in pregnancies resulting from a family-planning program in Puerto Rico from 1949-1958. Over a thousand couples from a rural area participated. Slightly more than half received instruction and supplies at home while the rest had clinic services only. Over 300 couples underwent surgery for sterilization.
Pregnancy rates of couples prior to the family-planning service was 83 per 100 years of exposure. During the time when five birth-control methods were used, it ranged from 28.3 to 42.3. Home visits were successful in encouraging the use of contraception. The condom and the diaphragm were preferred.
THE CURRENT STATUS OF FERTILITY CON-
TROL: Christopher Tietze, M.D. Publication No. 9, National Committee on Maternal Health, Inc., New York, 1960, 18 pp. (paper).
A useful summary by a world authority of methods used to control fertility and their effectiveness in the United States and other countries. The investigation in 1955, known as the Growth of American Families Study, is cited as the most comprehensive information on the extent of contraception in the United States. Some 70 per cent of the couples in this sample had been using birth control. Contraception was practiced by 75 per cent of the Protestant and 86 per cent of the Jewish wives, but only 57 per cent of the Roman Catholic wives used it. Education made a big difference, 84 per cent of college wives employing contraception as compared with 48 per cent of the wives who had not gone beyond grade school. A larger proportion of recently married couples in the United States use contraception than in the United Kingdom. American wives use the rhythm method more than the British, but the United Kingdom relies much more on coitus interruptus.

A FAMILY PLANNING SERVICE IN RURAL PUER-
TO RICO: Christopher Tietze, MJ)., Dattatraya N. Pai, Carl E. Taylor, M.D., Clarence J. Gamble, M.D. Publication No. 8,

FILMS
A new film, The Diagnosis of Hidden Congenital Anomalies, is available free of charge

110 Recent Publications

from the National Foundation, 800 Second Avenue, New York 17. It was prepared by Virginia Apgar of the National Foundation and L. Stanley Jones of the College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University. It demonstrates to physicians and nurses a simple method for diagnosing certain anomalies shortly after birth.

The Predictive Process: Roy G. Francis. A Social Science Research Center Study, College of Social Sciences, University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras, Puerto Rico, 1960 (paper). The theory of prediction with special reference to Puerto Rico.
MEETINGS

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

OTHER PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED
Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology: Vol. XXV, Biological Clocks. The Biological Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, L. I., New York, 1960. Papers on the subject of biological clocks. Reflects the remarkable interest in biological clocks during the past ten years resulting from demonstrations that many animals navigate by the sun, using an internal chronometer.
A Symposium on Light and Life: Edited by William D. McElroy and Bentley Glass. Sponsored by the McCollum Pratt Institute of The Johns Hopkins University. The Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1961. Proceedings of the 10th McCollum Pratt Symposium held at The Johns Hopkins University in March 1960.
Elementary Human Physiology: Terence A. Rogers. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1961, $6.50. A textbook in physiology-
Classics in Psychology: Edited by Thome Shipley. Philosophical Library, New York, 1961,120.00. A collection of excerpts.
Soviet Psychology -- A Symposium: Philosophical Library, New York, 1961, 53.75. A discussion of the principles of the dominant schools of Soviet psychology and the theories underlying their educational programs by outstanding contemporary Russian psychologists.
Sociology of Crime: Edited by Joseph S. Roucek. Philosophical Library, New York, 1961, $10.00. The only publication in English which surveys broadly the sociology of crime, according to the editor.

Opening sessions of the 10th International Congress of the History of Science will be held at Cornell University and concluding sessions at the American Philosophical Society in Philadelphia. The Congress will extend from August 26 to September 2, 1961. Its president is Henry Guerlac of Cornell University. Inquiries should be addressed to the Secretary, 10th International Congress of the History of Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York.
The meetings of the biological societies which make up the American Institute of Biological Sciences are scheduled from August 27 to September 1, 1961, at Purdue University in Lafayette, Indiana. About 1,500 basic research papers, including genetics and evolution, will be given in programs arranged by 27 societies.
The Population Association of America will serve as host at the meeting of the International Union for the Scientific Study of Population which takes place at the Loeb Student Center, New York University, New York, from September 11-16, 1961. There will be sessions of interest to eugenics on factors affecting fertility in industrialized and preindustrialized countries, biological and medical aspects of mortality, and families and households. Further information may be obtained from Clyde V. Riser, Milbank Memorial Fund, 40 Wall Street, New York 5.
The 50th Anniversary of the Family Service Association of America will be celebrated from November 12-17, 1961, at the Hotel Commodore in New York City. Key members of the Kennedy administration are expected to attend. A special session will be devoted to finding out what kind of families come for help to agencies.
More than 5,000 public health specialists from this country and abroad are expected to attend the 89th annual meeting of the American Public Health Association at

Recent Publications

111

Cobo Hall in Detroit, Michigan, November 13-17, 1961. Joseph G. Molner, Health Commissioner of Detroit, is chairman of the local arrangements committee.
The fourth annual meeting of "The Society for the Scientific Study of Sex" will be held at 9:30 a.m., November 4, 1961, in the Barbizon Plaza Hotel, 106 Central Park South, New York City. The topic for the morning session is "Sex and Aging." Dis-

cussants are Dr. Harry Benjamin, Dr. Lissy F. Jarvik, Dr. Joseph T. Freeman, and Mrs. Donald Armstrong. Chairman is Dr. Hugo G. Beigel. The topic for the afternoon session is "Sex Factors in Schizophrenia" and discussants are Drs. Bernard C. Glueck, Jr., Jules D. Holzberg, Lothar B. Kalinowsky, and Sandor Rado. Chairman is Dr. Franz J. Kallmann.
HELEN HAMMONS

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

