Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Genetics in psychiatric practice
John R. Whittier M.D.
To cite this article: John R. Whittier M.D. (1958) Genetics in psychiatric practice, Eugenics Quarterly, 5:1, 9-15, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1958.9987341 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1958.9987341
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:24

GENETICS IN PSYCHIATRIC PRACTICE

JOHN R. WHITTIER, M.D.
Creedmoor State Hospital and Institute for
Psychobiologic Studies

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

B,LEULER WROTE IN 1911 THAT HE UNFORTU-
nately "could not shirk the uncomfortable duty of coining a new name" for the disease he then called "schizophrenia." Definition of the terms in this paper is an uncomfortable but equally demanding duty. Since I speak as a neurologist and psychiatrist before a group largely composed of geneticists, I will claim naïveté, take some risks, and proceed to discharge my duty.
It is often possible to find in lay writings the simplicity, directness, and meaning which medical writings sometime obscure in their magnificent and specialized terms. For this reason I will occasionally resort to Webster's Dictionary (22).
With the aid of helpful definitions I will consider (1) etiological concepts in psychiatry, (2) operational characteristics of medical psychiatric practice, and (3) genetics as a tool in these operations.
It is not generally recognized that all mental disorders have been divided into two major groups for psychiatrists (4). These groups are mental disorders characterized by diffuse impairment of brain tissue and mental disorders characterized by difficulty in adaptation. These two major groups are subdivided into three categories: (1) diseases caused by or associated with the impairment of brain tissue function, which may by acute or chronic, (2) mental deficiency, (3) disorders of psychogenic origin without clearly defined physical cause or structural change in the brain. The last is practically synonymous with the second group--mental disorders characterized by difficulty in adaptation. For medical purposes the "Standard Nomenclature of Diseases and Operations" classifies all these mental disorders under "Diseases of the

Psychobiologic Unit" (pp. 85-92). These disorders, then, are those for which a concept of etiology must be adequate.
Only two years ago the National Advisory Mental Health Council reported that "the concept of etiology as embraced by modern psychiatry differs from the simple cause and effect system of traditional medicine. It subscribes to a "field theory hypothesis" in which the interactions and transactions of multiple factors eventuate in degrees of health or sickness. This concept, although still not fully appreciated in psychiatric diagnosis or treatment today, was not new even then. Two years prior, Ewen Cameron (3) described to an annual meeting of the American Psychopathological Association how the concept of causality, including multiple causation, had taken the place of specific cause and was giving way to the idea of event sequence as "long chains of events passing forward and continually being modified by interplay with each other." Adolph Meyer, Cameron noted, had preceded him by 50 years, fighting for this concept of "multiple etiologic bases."
Textbooks and periodical literature on mental disorder characteristically refer to "factors," "components," "contributions," or "aspects" in any consideration of etiology. These references can be grouped into categories which may be termed genetic, experiential, and circumstantial (23). These terms often appear explicitly, and equally as often are tied together by terms of "interaction" or "transaction," but it may be rewarding to consider each of them in some detail.
"Genetic" is the adjective which denotes the genes and their influence manifested

9

10 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

as potential, or genotype, and expression, or phenotype. There is an unfortunate use of this adjective in dissimilar ways by the disciplines of genetics and of psychiatry. Maurice Levine has written: "In psychiatry the term 'genetic diagnosis' refers to the totality of those forces involved in the genesis and origin of current forces. Such genetic forces are hereditary or constitutional in small part but are predominantly a matter of early life experience and individual reaction" (13). In the concept being developed here, the term genetic refers to genes as specific factors contributing to mental disorder.
It has been clearly demonstrated that genes, and the behavior of the material of which they are composed and by which they are expressed, determine morphology and function of cells, tissues, organs, and the integration of these not only in an absolute sense, as in the case of Huntington's disease, but in a conditional manner depending upon the experiences and circumstances unique to the individual, as in some forms of schizophrenia.
The term "experiential" has had a general utility for many decades in psychological and psychiatric literature. From the Latin experientia (experire "to try") the noun "experience" is given prescient definition by Webster as "The actual living through an event or events; actual enjoyment or suffering; hence, the effect upon the judgment or feelings produced by personal and direct impressions." The adjective "experiential" appropriately applies to the many operations of sensation, percept and concept formation, during the interactions and transactions between the organisms and environment which characterize survival. These operations include the broad subjects of intellection, hedonics, learning, motivation, and defense formation.
Our third and final etiological term is derived from the noun "circumstance," provided by Webster for us as "one of the conditions under which an event takes

place or with respect to which a fact is determined." Clearly, a condition or circumstance may be within the organism or in its environment, and it may occur intermittently, once, or continuously, with varying strength. It now becomes apparent that experience becomes specific for the organism in the circumstances provided during survival. The term genetic can now be observed to pertain to the duration of the pedigree far exceeding the lifetime of the organism. The adjective experiential, depending as it does upon some degree of organized sensation and perception, applies properly to the period from birth to death, perhaps including the last two trimesters of pregnancy. The adjective circumstantial properly refers to the period from conception to death, as it has been well demonstrated that a variety of intra-uterine events may determine form and function of the embryo.
It is interesting to note that the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders of the American Psychiatric Association approximates this triplicate formulation of "elements" or "factors" determining behavior (Complementary Diagnostic Evaluation, pp. 46-69). It is specified to consist of the elements (1) external precipitating stress (our circumstantial adjective), (2) premorbid personality and predisposition (our genetic and experiential adjectives taken together), (3) the degree of psychiatric impairment, with which we are not presently concerned. It is not enough, however, to provide oneself with descriptive adjectives. Some formulation of the way in which they relate to one another must be provided. For the individual organism the phenomena determined by genes, experience, and circumstance are "liable but not certain to occur." Description of the status of an organism, and indeed its related evaluation as adapted or maladapted with respect to probability of healthy or unhealthy survival, is contingent upon a giving or supplying of each of the attributes or characteristics in com-

11

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

mon with more or less of the other two. diagnosis in psychiatry, as in medicine,

One can then view Cameron's "event se- proceeds to physical and neurological

quences" and the evaluation of adaptation examinations if these studies have not been

or maladaptation at any time as contingent properly completed before. The psychiatrist

upon factors of genetic, experiential, and may be led by information developed

circumstantial classes. For the human or- during these operations to recommend ad-

ganism this is implicit in the operation ditional specific special tests or laboratory

of diagnosis.

examinations, including psychological test-

We have now completed a presentation ing, X-rays, and clinical laboratory tests of

of an etiology general enough to include routine or special nature. At each step in

medical disorder, yet specific and flexible this process the psychiatrist may and should

enough to merit application in the field of make observations about genetic factors,

psychiatry.

especially in the detailing of family his-

Provided with this concept of factors having genetic, experiential, and circumstantial characteristics, let us proceed to a brief survey of the operational characistics of present psychiatric practice, paying special attention to diagnosis.
It has long been a melancholy observation of teachers of medicine that, when the well-rounded, multi-disciplined, g r o u p clinic oriented medical student completes his internship and elects psychiatry as his field, he is promptly seized with amnesia for medical diagnostic process, views be-

tory. In psychiatric practice the greatest usefulness of genetics is in diagnosis and prevention, although I will comment on its use in communication during treatment and management. It is probable that genetics has greatest application in the early periods of mental disorder. Here symptoms may be minimal or even absent. Here maximum therapeutic effects may be obtained. Early control over experience and circumstance may be sufficient to minimize genetic factors otherwise disastrous to patient or family.

havior from the point of a Freudian splin- It should be understood that a diagnosis,

ter school, and relies upon history emerg- or a working differential diagnosis, is

ing from unstructured sessions over a pe- formed in the minds of one or more people,

riod of many months. Or at the other ex- and its meaning varies with the character-

treme he assists his patients to select the istics of the person. The first person to

tranquilizer they require during a period reach a diagnosis is usually the psychiatrist,

of more or less double-blind experimental although there are rare and startling in-

trial, with a multiple crossover design fea- stances where intelligent patients reach a

ture. Psychiatric diagnosis, however, is no correct diagnosis with the aid of several

more dependent upon a single segment of senses and facilities of the public library.

the individual or upon response to treat- To the psychiatrist a diagnosis indicates

ment than is diagnosis in any field of medi- (1) confirmatory tests or studies, (2) treat-

cine. It is still a process by which a more ment and management measures, (3) com-

or less systematic description is undertaken munication to persons intimately con-

in collaboration between the physician and cerned, (4) continued observation. Per-

the patient or informants in order to arrive sons concerned include the patient, the pa-

at an understanding of the sources of the tient's relatives, attending physicians, wel-

phenomena presented. Traditionally this fare agencies, and laboratories for special

systematic review has included the present studies.

illness, a system review, a personal history The significance of the formation and

including developmental, medical and edu- communication of diagnosis is that it is

cational data, and a family history.

selective, privileged and confidential, and

Upon completion of the medical history, diagnosis is often indefinite in early stages

12 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

of disorder. As is the case in medicine for any disease, it becomes a matter of clinical judgment to whom, how much, in what terms, and when diagnosis of psychiatric disorder and its significance is communicated. Several general principles apply. Sufficient information must be communicated to the patient, or responsible relatives, to guard the physician against charges of malpractice by negligence. The information required is usually that sufficient to aid the responsible family group to guide their actions, as is the case in medicine generally. There are few psychiatric disorders of such unmitigated hopelessness that the psychiatrist need hesitate to communicate the facts, provided his own hostility to a largely genetic disorder, having a minimal experiential or circumstantial component, is not displaced. Genetic education in psychiatric practice often must teach the patient to live with possibilities and uncertainties.
We may turn to specific psychiatric disorders and consider the operation of diagnosis further, together with some attention to treatment and prevention. Among the chronic brain syndromes Huntington's disease is unique. It is a degenerative disorder without parallel, in which the genetic factor is defined by a relatively simple dominant mode of transmission, one-half of all offspring carrying the gene, with affected persons certain to transmit the disorder to one-half of their children. Although abnormal movements may be its only symptom, its later picture of psychosis combined with hyperkinesia is scarcely to be confused with any disorder other than so-called "senile chorea." An adequate family history is definitive provided it can be obtained. Again, it is in the early stages of this disease that knowledge of the heavy genetic factor guides psychiatric treatment and management. Understanding the significance of the contingency concept provides excellent reassurance for treatment of the patient with the maximum experiential and circumstantial tools available.

The analytically-oriented psychiatrist knows that he misses much of the material and influence available to his profession if he does not explore attitudes toward information before he provides it in patients and relatives. He can often prepare a patient for genetic information which otherwise would occasion new and emergency circumstances. He can protect patients from including genetic influences among the expressions of hostility, or among guilty fears. These operations are those in which a psychiatrist has unique experience, and which he can contribute in training settings to geneticists, psychologists, social service workers, and others who might benefit.
Additionally, psychiatrists may anticipate a new and challenging field in the prevention of mental disorder with a large genetic component, which may be termed perhaps "psychotherapeutic sterilization." This need not deprive pre-marital or marital pairs from planning parenthood but should aid them to consider adoption or artificial insemination as acceptable ways of achieving it.
Pick's and Alzheimer's diseases are psychoses in the pre-senile period and have less well-defined genetic factors, but Jervis (9) reviewing these disorders concluded (p. 283) that "cases are known in which genetic factors play the dominant role in determining the pathologic process. The possibility of familial occurrences may be considered, indeed, a common characteristic of pre-senile dementias." Grünthal and Wenger (7) have given detailed consideration to the genetic factor in Alzheimer's disease, and Löken and Cyvin have described Alzheimer's changes in siblings (14).
Huntington's disease and the pre-senile psychoses are rare. There are two chronic brain syndromes, however, which contribute significantly to the thousands of patients admitted to state hospitals at age 60 and over. They are generally termed "psychosis with senility" and "psychosis with cerebral arteriosclerosis." Our knowledge of the relative weight of the determinants,

13

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

their definition, recognition, and control is still almost formless. Treatment and management are subject to the same considerations offered for Huntington's disease.
Prevention, however, and indirectly diagnosis, are in extremely interesting phases. Many studies are in progress, especially of experiential and circumstantial factors, not appropriate to detail here. Kallmann concluded from data reported in 1951 that the "occurrence of either (senile or involutional psychosis) not only presupposes the capacity for survival beyond the beginning of the involutional period and the ability to live through the preceding years of maturity without succumbing to any other kind of psychosis but also requires a combination of etiological components, which individually would not be sufficient to produce a psychotic reaction syndrome." Kallmann's recognition of status contingent upon contributing factors was explicit. In the 1956 paper he writes of "interacting causative elements."
Psychiatrists are still feeling their way, with the help of the biochemists and anthropologists as well as geneticists, among the interaction of factors in general and in cerebral arteriosclerosis which contribute so heavily to psychoses of the senium. The genetic factor cannot be overlooked. It has been shown, for example (6), that the Navajo Indian's freedom from atherosclerosis is independent of diet. A further singular and promising lead toward genetic factors in atherosclerosis, now under investigation in the research unit at Creedmoor, appears as the disease progeria, characterized by atherosclerosis and senility in the first decade, and recently described in two sisters (15). It is hard to quarrel with an assertion that genetic studies, especially in collaboration with other disciplines, offer much promise for the prevention of mental disorders of the senium.
Manic-depressive reaction provides another special instance of psychiatric diagnosis aided by genetics. Adequate family history will usually differentiate these pa-

tients from psychotic reactive depressions, involutional psychosis, or schizo-affective disorders, although the genetic mechanism is considered by Kallmann and others to be by irregular dominance. The psychiatrist who considers a young depressed male will tend to reach an especially guarded opinion, and tighten management and treatment, if his knowledge includes cyclic hyperactivity succeeded by suicidal attempts in the patient's father or occasionally in the grandparents or collateral lines.
Many schizophrenic reactions are now recognized to have genetic components. Drs. Kallmann (10) and Lauretta Bender (1) have done much to further this recognition. The need now is for better clinical definition and for detailed analysis of the three factors. The psychiatrist is not diagnosing or treating adult or juvenile schizophrenia intelligently unless he is aware of the interaction of genetic, experiential, and circumstantial factors in this disorder. Kallmann (12) recently formulated his concept of juvenile schizophrenia to include the factors of (1) gene-specific vulnerability to stress arising from ordinary environmental circumstances, (2) an apparently non-specific impairment in the organization of these normal protective functions which bestow on many persons a relatively1 high degree of resistance to an unfavorable environment.
In the Creedmoor unit a recent study, apparently one of the first of its nature (17), compared parents of normal children with parents of schizophrenic children by a battery of psychological tests and found differences in personality between these parental groups. It is probable these differences were of a nature not deriving simply from the circumstances and experiences of being parents to schizophrenic children, but that conclusion must wait upon other studies. I will make subsequent reference to gene-determined personality characteristics.
Prevention of the schizophrenic reaction

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

14 Eugenics Quarterly

is as challenging to the fields of genetics cultural circumstances than one set at a

and psychiatry as is prevention of Hun- high level.

tington's disease. It seems pertinent to raise Additionally, it seems quite probable

here the possibility, presently ignored in that in the human, psychological defense

the excitement andtherapeutic promise of mechanisms are selected for theindividual

the tranquillizers, that if the fertility dif- by the genes and either made available

ferential usually characterizing schizo- under biochemical or interpersonal emer-

phrenic reactions is reduced, these medica- gencies, or subjected to disorganization,

tions may ultimately increase theincidence contingent upon circumstances and experi-

of thedisorder. It is not too early to pay ence.

attention to this possibility and to benefit It is inevitable that the practicingpsy-

by whatever can be learned from experi- chiatrist, having begun to beat some peace

ences with diabetes, idiopathic epilepsy, with psychoanalytic concepts, and being re-

and other diseases with genetic determi- cently disturbed by biochemical concepts,

nants similarly controlled in part bymedi- must prepare himself for additional pres-

cation.

sures from genetics. That he is willing to

Finally, we may consider the psycho- bear this additional pressure is indicated

neurotic disorders. Here genetics still has by responses to a questionnaire recently

little to offer the practicing psychiatrist. sent to theprofessional staff at Creedmoor

Much is waiting, however, upon develop- State Hospital, asking whether they would

ments specifying early behavior patterns, consider useful a Genetics Laboratory pro-

and definitions of stability andindividual- posed for consultation and for counseling

ity of defense-mechanisms. The significance of relatives. One respondent abstained,

of strain-differences within species is begin- one was negative, and26 were affirmative.

ning to be related to behavior (19) and Such a nearly unanimous favorable re-

to response to drugs (8). It is patent that sponse in the field of psychiatry should be

an organism characterized bya low level of comforting to geneticists, whose lights,be-

spontaneous activity would have less prob- ginning with Mendel's, have often been

ability of conflict in restrictive parental or long hidden.

REFERENCES

1. BENDER, L. 1950. "The Problem o£ Anxiety in Disturbed Children," in Hoch, P., and Zubin, J., (Eds.). Anxiety, 119-139. Grune & Stratton, N. Y.

von Erblichkeit bei der Alzheimer'schen Krankheit nebst Bemerkungen über den Altersvorgang im Gehirn, Monatschr. f. Psychiat. u. Neurol. 1 0 1 : 8-25.

2. BLEULER, E. 1950. Dementia Praecox, or the Group of Schizophrenias, International Universities Press, New York.

8. IRWIN, S., SLABOK, M. and THOMAS, G. 1956.
Individual differences in response to drugs, Fed. Proc. 1 5 : (1).

3. CAMERON, D. E. 1953. "A theory o£ diagnosis," in Current Problems in Psychiatric Diagnosis, Hoch, P. and Zubin, J. (Eds.), Grune & Strat-

9. JERVIS, G. A. 1956. The pre-senile dementias, Chapter X, Mental Disorders in Later Life. O. J. Kaplan, Editor, second edition, Stanford Uni-

ton, N.Y. 33-45.

versity Press, Stanford, California.

4. COMMITTEE ON NOMENCLATURE AND STATISTICS 10. KALLMANN, F. J., FEINGOLD, L. and BONDY, E.

OF THE AMERICAN PSYCHIATRIC ASSOCIATION

1951. Comparative adaptational, social, and

1952. Mental disorders--diagnostic and sta- psychometric data on the life histories of

tistical manual. Americal Psychiatric Associa-

senescent twin pairs, Am. J. Human Genet.

tion Mental Health Service, Washington, D. C.

3 : 65-73.

5. DAVID, P. R. and SNYDER, L. H. 1954. Principles 11.

. 1953. "Involutional psychoses,"

of Human Genetics, in "Genetics and the

"Senile and pre-senile." Heredity in Mental

Inheritance of Integrated Neurological and

Health and Disorder. W. W. Norton & Co.

Psychiatric Patterns", PROC. ASS.Res. Nerv. and Ment. Dis. 3 3 : 3-22.
6. GILBERT, J. 1955. Absence of coronary thrombosis in Navajo Indians, Calif. M. 8 2 : 114.

Inc., N. Y. 181-182, 183-190.
12. . 1956. Psychiatric aspects of genetic counseling, Am. J. Human Genet. 8 : 97-101.
13. LEVINE, M. 1952. "Principles of psychiatric

7. GRUNTHAL, E. and WENGER, O. 1939. Nachweis

treatment," in Dynamic Psychiatry, Alexander,

15

A. and Ross, H. (Eds.) Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago, Ill. 307-366.
14. LÖKEN, A. C. and CYVIN, K. 1954. A case of
clinical juvenile amaurotic idiocy with the histological picture of Alzheimer's disease, J. Neur., Neurosurg. and Psychiat. 1 7 ; 211-215.
15. MOSTAFA, A. H. and GABR, M. 1954. Heredity
in progeria: with follow-up of two affected sisters, Arch. Pediat., 7 1 : 163-172.
16. PEARSON, JOHN S., PETERSON, MAGNUS C.,
LAZARTE, JORCE A., BLODGETT, HARRIET E., and
KLEY, IRENE B. 1955.An educational approach to the social problems of Huntington's chorea, Proc. Staff Meet. Mayo Clin. 3 0 : (16) 349-358.
17. PERR, HERBERT M. 1958. Criteria distinguishing parents of schizophrenic and normal children: An initial study with the Interpersonal Diagnostic System, A.M.A. Arch. Neur. if Psychiat. to be published.

18. ROMANO, J. 1949.Adaptation, Cornell University Press.
19. RUSSELL, E.S. 1955. Significance of physiological pattern of animal strains in biological research, Brit. M. J. 1 : 826-833.
20. Standard Nomenclature of Diseases and Operations. 1952. 4thEdition. NewYork, The Blakiston Company.
21. U. S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION,
AND WELFARE. 1955. Evaluation in Mental Health, report of National Advisory Mental Health Council, Washington, U. S. Govt. Printing Office, 11.
22. Webster's New International Dictionary ofthe English Language, 1953, Second Edition. G. & C. Merriam Company.
23. WHITTIER, J. R. 1958. Contingency theory of adaptation and maladaption, Dis. Nerv. Sys. To be published.

CHAIRMAN BUGHER: I think the degree of unanimity among the psychiatrists you mention would be an unsual phenomenon with respect to any subject.
One of the very significant things that Dr. Whittier has called to our attention is the everpresent booby trap of semantics which exists in any multidisciplinary approach, where a given symbol or word turns out to mean widely different things to different people, without their

always being conscious of the fact. It is very helpful to have this brought out so clearly.
We can move on into a field which is again morphological but one which is especially attractive to the geneticist who is working with facial structures, and all these aspects of development. To speak on "Genetics and Dentistry," we have Dr. Carl Witkop, who has for a considerable period of time devoted his attention to problems of this kind in the National Institute of Dental Research in Bethesda.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

GENETICS AND DENTISTRY
CARL J. WITKOP JR., D.D.S.
National Institute of Dental Research U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare
Bethesda, Maryland

T
JLHE DENTIST is CONCERNED with three major problems relating to genetics. The first problem concerns the safe use of diagnostic X-rays to minimize any germinal or somatic cell damage. The second problem deals with those inherited factors influencing the normal growth and development of oral structures. The third problem concerns the inherited diseases of the teeth

and surrounding structures. It is this last problem that is of interest to the heredity counselors.
In some dental diseases inherited factors can be decisive or only contributory to the production of a specific illness. For example, dentinogenesis imperfecta, an inherited defect in the formation of dentin, is produced only when a person is heterozy-

