Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
European heredity registers
Jan Mohr
To cite this article: Jan Mohr (1955) European heredity registers, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:4, 198-204, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987248 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987248
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

EUROPEAN HEREDITY REGISTERS
JAN MOHR
Laboratory of Human Genetics Oslo University Oslo, Norway

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

In primitive societies, where external factors such as famine or epidemics may sometimes wipe out considerable parts of the population, it is reasonable to concentrate on counteracting these factors, and to pay relatively little attention to the diseases and defects due to hereditary causes.
The situation is different on a higher level of civilization, as in the North American and European countries. Since in these societies various external causes of disease have been fought successfully, while the internal causes have remained essentially unchanged, the latter have become more prominent. In such societies the health problem presented by hereditary influence on disease and maladaptation is of major importance. Several per cent of individuals suffer from some serious hereditary condition at birth or from a relatively early age.
The ever new and often increasing demands of society on the abilities of the individual is another point of interest in this connection. Reading is, for instance, today a required ability in most occupations in several populations where illiteracy was widespread even recently. And while dyslexia may be a serious handicap today, it could not manifest itself as a defect in an illiterate society. Like the spread of literacy in the case of dyslexia, other purely social changes may cause an apparent rise in the prominence and frequency of other defects influenced by heredity.
Even more than by such developments the interest in genetic causations has probably been increased by the recognition, also in wider circles, that the hereditary structure of human populations may not be considered unchangeable. The development of civilization has brought various new pos-

sibilities for genetic change. One of them is an increase in mutation frequencies due to a higher background radiation. Another, which has been discussed from earlier times, is that certain medical or social advances may eliminate selection against some hereditary diseases or defects and thereby lead to a gradual increase in their frequencies. Considering such possibilities, the need for intensified research in human genetics is strongly felt also from the point of view of practical medicine.
One of the possible means for augmenting our knowledge seems to be a wider use of heredity registers. The desirability of setting up such registers in countries where the conditions are favorable has been stresed at numerous occasions, for instance at one of the meetings during the recent World Population Conference in Rome
(Book, 1954).
The purpose of the present article is to suggest some of the ways in which heredity registers have been or may be useful; some of the possible sources of information are considered, to indicate in which circumstances it may be possible to achieve an efficient registration.
A heredity register is here taken to mean a permanent register of individuals suffering from serious diseases or abnormalities of possibly hereditary nature, including data on family relations and other information of significance in genetic investigations. The register is by definition presumed to be associated with an institution which has research in medical genetics as a permanent main task. Otherwise it could scarcely, during the long periods of time concerned, engage in research or practice of medical genetics with efficiency.

198

199

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

The idea of heredity registers has from time to time been considered in several European countries, and various attempts have been made to put it into effect. But lasting progress has been made only in a few places. In Denmark a heredity register was started in 1938 at the University Institute of Human Genetics, Copenhagen (T. Kemp). This register is so far the most comprehensive and will therefore be the main source of examples here. In Switzerland there is a register of more recent origin at the Medico-Genetic Center, Hôpital Cantonal, Geneve (A. Franceschetti). Afirstbeginning has been made in a few other countries, for instance at Nederlands Instituut voor Praeventieve Geneeskunde, Leiden (P. J. Waardenburg). But in most of the European institutions for research in human genetics, the registration does not yet appear to go much beyond the simple keeping of data collected by the individual workers. In Norway an attempt is now being made to establish a heredity register at the Laboratory of Human Genetics, Oslo University, in cooperation with the Norwegian Health Services and with support from the Rockefeller Foundation.
In several countries more or less comprehensive special registers of various conditions which may be hereditary, such as blindness, deafness or psychosis, have been established at institutions with other chief interests than medical genetics. The institutions may be societies for the blind, hospital departments for eye diseases, mental hospitals, etc. Such registers will not be considered in the following discussion, which will be confined to heredity registers as defined above.
Possible Scope of Heredity Registers
The frequencies of some relevant diseases and defects will be discussed in order to suggest the numbers of cases to be registered. Only some larger groups will be mentioned, primarily mental deficiencies, psychoses, cases of blindness and deafness and malformations. Instead of aiming ex-

clusively at the clearly hereditary cases, it is necessary to register some wider groups known to include a significant proportion of hereditary cases. It would be impossible for the reporting institutions or persons to select hereditary cases within such clinicdiagnostic groups for registration in any satisfactory way. Any such selection would be likely to make the material valueless for some of its most important purposes.
In the case of mental deficiencies, as for several of the other groups, the frequencies given for different countries or different times cannot easily be compared. This is partly because the criteria are apt to differ, being in practice social rather than biological. According to Book (1953) the frequency of idiocy and imbecility taken together (I.Q. below 50) may conservatively be put at one-half per cent, and of the higher grades at two or three per cent.
The morbidity risk for psychosis is at least two per cent. According to Slater (1953) it may be estimated that 2.65 per cent of men and 2.93 per cent of women in England and Wales some time during their lives will be admitted to a mental hospital. On the Danish island Bornholm (about 40,000 inhabitants) the morbidity risk up to 55 years of age for all types of psychosis taken together is about 4.1 per cent according to Fremming and Strömgren (Kemp, 1951b), while the morbidity risk for schizophrenia and manic-depressive psychosis is about 0.9 per cent and 1.6 per cent, respectively. The frequency of psychotics in the general population at any chosen time is of course much lower.
The frequency of blindness varies considerably from country to country. In Norway there were in 1948, according to Hoist (1952), at least 3,181 cases of blindness, that is, slightly less than one per thousand in the general population. About half these cases were considered to be of hereditary nature. Only about one-sixth were due to accidents or intoxicants.

200 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Also the frequency o£ congenital or early deafness varies considerably from country to country. It may be 0.4-0.8 per thousand (Kemp, 1951b). Lindenov (1945) found that about half of 345 Danish cases examined in 1940 were of probable genetic origin. The rest were mainly due to various infections.
At least one per cent of the newborn have, according to Kemp (1951b), some serious malformation. But the frequency in the general population is lower because of the high mortality of these conditions. Among the most frequent malformations are harelip and cleft palate, spina bifida, congenital dislocation of the hip and various deformities of the extremities. A significant proportion of the malformations are hereditary or dependent upon a hereditary disposition. The same applies to several other groups of diseases or defects such as the following: various internal diseases (diabetes, bronchial asthma and scores of rarer conditions), diseases of the skin (for instance ichtyosis, xeroderma pigmentosum, albinism and epidermolysis bullosa), eye diseases (for instance cataract, aniridia and the retinitis pigmentosa group), nervous diseases (for instance epilepsy, neurofibromatosis and various abiotrophies) and certain other groups.
The special circumstances in the country or area concerned will be decisive for which conditions one should primarily include in the registration. The Danish register includes among other conditions mental deficiencies,psychoses, psychopathies, cases of blindness, deafness and language defects and various malformations. The total number of patients reported to this register, since it was started in 1938, now exceeds 200,000, and several thousands are added every year (Kemp, 1954) ; the number of inhabitants in Denmark is about 4.3 millions. The Swiss register aims at a similarly comprehensive registration, but the work is of a much more recent date and does not yet comprise a systematic registra-

tion of the groups covered by the Danish register. So far, about 700 reports a year are received, primarily on ophthalmological, neurological, dermatological, hematological and other special cases (Franceschetti, 1955). The Norwegian register, which has just been started, receives reports on mental deficiencies, cases of blindness, deafness and language defects and various other conditions.
Various Applications of Heredity Registers
A heredity register may primarily be of assistance in the following kinds of investigations or activities:
1. Estimation of the frequencies of the various hereditary conditions in the population and detection of possible changes in these frequencies with time.
2. Studies of the familial distributions or modes of inheritance of various diseases or defects and of their population genetics; selection, assortative mating, isolation, consanguinity. Studies of linkage relations may also be served by the register.
3. Estimation of mutation frequencies. An efficient and permanent registration of various conditions due to single genes would make it possible to observe any substantial increase in the mutation frequencies of these genes. This would be the most direct way to detect any genetic effect of an increased background radiation.
4. Genetic - hygienic counseling. The register may contain necessary information on the relatives of the patients, which may otherwise in many cases be difficult or impossible to obtain.
5. Studies of twins with diseases or defects influenced by heredity, to contribute to the evaluation of the relative importance of heredity and environment to the development of the conditions concerned.
6. Long-term planning of medical institutions and of the education of medical personnel for the diagnosis, treatment and rehabilitation of various conditions.
7. Early detection of cases which may

201

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

profit from early treatment, schooling or care.
Heredity registers have already been of great value in many of these ways. At the University Institute of Human Genetics, Copenhagen, frequency studies have for instance been carried out for chondrodystrophy, aniridia, hemophilia, surdomutitas (congenital or early deafness), epiloia, mongolism, osteogenesis imperfecta, harelip and cleft palate and club foot. Kemp (1950) has given a review of these and other frequency studies.
In the case of many of the conditions influenced by major genes, such as chondrodystrophy, phenylketonuria and hemophilia, the problem of definition is relatively simple. And in such cases it should not be unreasonably difficult for heredity registers gradually to achieve comparable estimates of the frequencies in different places and at different times.
The problem of definition is more difficult in the cases in which there is no sharp natural distinction between pathological and normal individuals. For some of these conditions, for instance psychosis, psychopathy and mental defect, the definitions used in practice are to a large extent social rather than biological, a significant factor being the inability of the individual to get along in society. The frequencies estimated on such grounds may of course be strongly influenced by trivial social or administrative factors, and the possibilities of demonstrating biological or genetic changes or differences may be correspondingly reduced or eliminated.
For some conditions, for instance mental defect, deafness and blindness, better definitions may be obtained by use of such tests or measurements which may permit a grading of individuals. Frequency studies may then be carried out for conditions defined as cases below a certain grade. If the cases included in a heredity register by partly social criteria are graded by such tests or measurements, the registration cannot be expected to be complete for the least severe

degrees, but only for more serious cases. And accurate frequency studies based on the data of the register are of course only possible for those degrees for which there is sufficient reason to believe that the registration is complete. To make the data of the register more useful for frequency studies in the case of such conditions, the inclusion of cases should as far as possible be based directly on examinations, tests or measurements.
If a change in the frequency of a certain condition has been demonstrated, one is faced with the problem of whether or not it is due to a genetic change. For the singlegene conditions just mentioned, and other cases where environmental factors are known to be of little or no consequence, there is admittedly no such difficulty. But in the case of conditions like mental defect and psychosis, where environmental factors are known to be of significance, the question may be difficult to answer.
But observations of changes in frequencies from place to place and from time to time may of course be of very great interest even if an immediate genetic interpretation should be impossible. In some cases such observations might lead to an identification of relevant environmental factors, which in turn might facilitate the genetic interpretation. And the demonstration of a change of possibly genetic nature would be a strong stimulus to further research.
Heredity registers have also been of great assistance in studies of familial distributions and modes of inheritance of various diseases and defects; for instance the Danish register in studies of chondrodystrophy, harelip and cleft palate, hemophilia, surdomutitas, aniridia, myotonic dystrophy, osteogenesis imperfecta, epiloia and mongoloid idiocy.1
These investigations have generally been carried out by a physician with special
1Most of these studies have been published in the series, "Opera ex Domo Biol. Hered. Hum. Univ. Hafn.," Vol. 1-36.

202 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

training in the field concerned, who, starting with the data of the register and of other institutions that may possess information on the condition to be investigated, has traveled about the country to examine the patients personally and collect more accurate and comprehensive information on relatives.
Studies of this kind, to supplement and correct the data of the register, will undoubtedly be necessary also in the future even in the case of a register far better developed than any existing today. One may expect, however, that it will become possible in certain respects to base investigations more directly on the data of the register, as the reporting institutions gradually become more efficient.
The family studies will to an increasing extent come to include investigations of genetic linkage; so many chromosome markers are already available that data for the study of linkage should be collected as a routine procedure in most family studies. This often will make it necessary to travel around in the country to secure blood samples and other material from the patients and their relatives. A heredity register, containing information on all the relevant persons in the various districts, would permit this work to be planned and carried out efficiently without unnecessary travel.
Some of the investigations in which heredity registers have been of assistance have included estimations of mutation frequencies. This, for instance, applies to the Danish studies of chondrodystrophy, aniridia and hemophilia. Besides being of great theoretical interest, such estimates may be of a special practical importance in the atomic age, partly by giving a better foundation for theoretical estimations of the genetic sensitivity of man to irradiation, partly by giving a standard of comparison for later determinations of mutation frequencies during a possible rise in the background radiation.
Heredity registers may also be of value as sources of information in genetic-

hygienic counseling. This work has achieved considerable scope in Denmark, partly because of the Danish legislation in this field, which permits abortion as well as sterilization on eugenical grounds. The University Institute of Human Genetics in Copenhagen has received more than 1,000 inquiries a year concerning genetic-hygienic counseling. In more than half of these cases the measure under consideration has been abortion. A considerable part of the inquiries have concerned cases of adoption. Cases concerning sterilization have been less numerous, and marriage and similar counseling problems have been relatively few. Most inquiries have come from the "mother-aid-institutions," the rest mainly from physicians in general practice and from hospitals or similar institutions. The pathological conditions concerned have been of great variety: malformations, cases of deafness, blindness or ear diseases, skin diseases, internal diseases, nervous diseases, mental deficiencies, psychoses and other conditions (Kemp, 1951a).
Sources of Information
The potential sources of information differ of course from country to country, and so do the practical possibilities of obtaining reports. The position of the public health services is of particular importance. Without their active support the establishment of an efficient heredity register would scarcely be possible. Most of the following possible sources should be available in all more civilized societies:
1. Physicians. School physicians, medical examination boards of the armed services, State district physicians, physicians in general or special practice.
2. Hospitals, various special hospital departments and similar institutions.
3. Midwives and maternity hospitals. 4. Special schools or classes. Schools for children with mental defect, blindness, deafness or defects of language. 5. Schoolpsychologists. 6. Local committees for the care of chil-

203

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

dren. 7. Public or private institutions orsocie-
ties concerned with economic or other support of certain groups of patients.
8. Special registers. Registers of psychoses, mental defect, blindness, etc.
Before attempting to make use of any of these sources to establish a system of registration, it is of course advisable to decide exactly which groups of diseases and defects the heredity register should cover and formulate accurate and practical definitions of these groups. When all the sources necessary to detect all or practically all cases of a condition are utilized, it may be expected that the same case often will be reported by different sources. The information on an individual will be duplicated in part but often will be supplementary.
One may expect that even by using all available sources of information, the registration of various conditions may be rather inefficient in the beginning. However, as the reporting institutions and persons become better acquainted with the purpose and gain more experience, it should be possible gradually to attain a higher efficiency. Such an improvement should be easier to obtain if the institution with which the hereditary register is associated is engaged in the teaching of medical genetics. The Danish register as well as the recently established Norwegian heredity register are associated with University institutes which give regular courses in human genetics to medical students and others.
To achieve an efficient registration, it is of course important to make the reporting system simple. One of several points to consider in this connection is the coordination of the heredity register with possible special registers at other institutions. For instance, it would appear preferable (with certain exceptions) to have the reports, even on conditions covered by a special register, sent directly to the heredity register, and not first to the special register. This may simplify matters for the report-

ing institutions or persons: several of these would possess information on conditions which might be covered by different special registers, and it would clearly be simpler for them to report all cases to a single, central heredity register than to two or more special registers. Information desired by special registers may be conveyed as a routine procedure.
It may also be easier for the more comprehensive heredity register to maintain an efficient contact with the reporting institutions during the long periods of time concerned than for several smaller registers by separate efforts. And a direct contact between the heredity register, which has research and practice in medical genetics as a permanent main interest, and the reporting institutions offers the best prospects for a registration conducted with persistent regard to these tasks.
In Denmark one of the most important sources of information has been a number of special institutions for the care of patients with mental defect, epilepsy, blindness, deafness, language defects and invalidism. Shortly after the registration was started, the Ministry of Social Affairs sent an address to these institutions, stressing the importance for the special care system of the registration, and asking the institutions to report all cases coming under special care to the heredity register. All these institutions have responded to the request and have later sent regular and careful reports to the heredity register. These reports have been the nucleus of the Danish registration. The material has been supplemented from various other sources, such as psychiatric hospitals and institutions for psychopaths. Reports have also been received from other hospitals and physicians in general or special practice, often in connection with genetic-hygienic inquiries. Further, reports are received from the schools in Copenhagen, partly on children examined by the school psychologists, partly on children in special classes. Also valuable information is received from "social

204 Eugenics Quarterly

committees," clergymen, teachers and oth-

, 1954. Prevalence of genetically based

ers. (Kemp, 1945)

physical and mental deficiencies and the frequency of related genes. World Population Con-

In the case of the recently established ference, Rome 1954. Meeting 23. Section I. Mim-

Norwegian heredity register, one of the first eographed.

steps has been to secure reports on the chil- FRANCESCHETTI, A., 1955. Personal communication.

dren who are referred for examination or schooling to the special schools for cases of blindness, deafness, deficiencies of speech, reading or writing or of mental defect.
As regards the Swiss register, physicians in the various specialities have been a ma-

HOLST, J. C, 1952. The occurrence of blindness in Norway. Am. J. Opht., 3 5 : 1153-1166.
KEMP., T., 1945. Saerforsorg og arvehygiejne. Op. Dom. Biol. Hered. Hum. Univ. Hafn., 9.
, 1950. The frequency of diseases affected by heredity in Denmark. Cold. Spr. Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol., 15: 129-140.

jor source of information. All the existing associations (neurologists, internists, dermatologists, oto-rhino-laryngologists, etc.) have been approached and agreements

, 1951a. Arvehygiejne (Genetic hygiene). English summary. Op. Dom. Biol. Hered. Hum. Univ. Hafn., 2 5 : 1-95.
, 1951b. Genetics and disease, 1-330, Munksgaard, Copenhagen.

worked out to obtain reports on hereditary conditions from the members of these associations (Franceschetti, 1955).

, 1954. Prevalence of genetically based
physical and mental deficiencies and the frequency of related genes. Eugen. Quart., 1: 215220.

REFERENCES
BÖÖK, J. A., 1953. Oligophrenia. In A. Sorsby: Clinical Genetics, 322-331. Butterworth and Co., London.

LINDENOV, H., 1945. The etiology of deaf mutism, 1-263. Munksgaard, Copenhagen.
SLATER, E., 1953. Psychiatry. In A. Sorsby: Clinical Genetics, 332-349. Butterworth and Co., London.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

