Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Meetings and recent publications
Helen G. Hammons
To cite this article: Helen G. Hammons (1962) Meetings and recent publications, Eugenics Quarterly, 9:2, 112-116, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1962.9987514 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1962.9987514
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

MEETINGS AND RECENT PUBLICATIONS

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

EPIDEMIOLOGY AND GENETICS OF MENTAL
DEFICIENCY IN A SOUTHERN SWEDISH
POPULATION: Hans Olof Akesson. Institute of Medical Genetics of the University of Uppsala, Sweden, 1961, 107 pp. (paper).

mentally retarded. The morbid risk for both parents and sibs here is among the highest reported, according to the author. This could in part be due to the fact that only resident siblings and parents were included, he suggests.

This is a census investigation of a geographical area of Sweden chosen at random to study epidemologically the occurrence of mental deficiency. A medical genetic study of the probands and their families was made. A special control study was undertaken after the main investigation to get an exact estimate in some selected groups, including all the inhabitants at three different age levels. Such control techniques have never been used before in this field, according to the author.
Ten Southern Swedish rural parishes were studied with a total population of 7,533. At the census date, 132 mental defectives were living in the parishes; the etiology for 123 of these was unknown. Frequency of parental first-cousin marriages was not significantly different from the general poulation. The low-grade mental defectives were almost childless, but the feeble-minded had produced a significantly larger number of children per individual compared with the control group. The frequency of twins was about the same in the general population. A significantly higher morbid risk was found for both parents and sibs compared with the general population. Fifty per cent of both the parents and sibs of the group "mental defectives of unknown etiology" were discovered to be

FORUM LECTURES--BIOLOGY SERIES: The
Voice of America, U.S. Information Service, Washington, D.C., 1961 (paper).
Twenty talks on biology originally broadcast by the Voice of America are now available in pamphlet form. These twenty pamphlets describe briefly and vividly the important aspects of our present biological knowledge and include such topics as Biochemistry of Human Heredity (H. Bentley Glass), Chromosomes and Tissue Culture (Theodor T. Puck), Nucleic Acids (Alexander Rich), and Enzymatic Control (DeWitt Stetten,
JO-
RESEARCH HIGHLIGHTS -- NEUROLOGICAL
AND SENSORY DISORDERS, 1960: U.S. De-
partment of Health, Education and Welfare, Public Health Service, National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Blindness, 57 pp. (paper).
This is a valuable compilation of materials, with special emphasis on research progress in 1960, on the activities of the National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Blindness. Special reports are presented on epilepsy, mental retardation, neuromuscular disorders, and other disorders. Specific research studies and programs are described.

112

Recent Publications

113

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

Significant research progress is reported in certain diseases responsible for mental retardation and in demonstrating new forms of inborn chemical defects. Chromosomal defects have been found in a number of forms of mental retardation in addition to mongolism. The chemical basis of the baffling muscle disease, familial periodic paralysis, has been established. About 25 per cent of the research appropriation of the National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Blindness is devoted to a project on neurological disorders of infancy and childhood.
The importance of the biochemical approach is underlined in the report: "It is probable that the conquest of themajor disease categories in neurology will depend upon our ability to recognize and modify derangements of chemistry in relation to the nervous system." Galactosemia and phenylketonuria are already being treated effectively, and basic chemical abnormalities must be seriously considered in diseases such as the muscular dystrophies and familial periodic paralysis, the epilepsies, and cataract formations, the report concludes.
MATER ET MAGISTRA--Christianity and
Social Progress: Encylical Letter of His Holiness Pope John XXIII (Translated by William J. Gibbons, S.J., as^ sisted by a Committee of Catholic Scholars). Paulist Press, New York, 1961, 96 pp., 25 jf (paper).
This Encylical ranks with its great predecessors RERUM NOVARUMAND QUADRAGESIMO ANNO as a landmark in Catholic thought about contemporary social problems according to the translator, W. J. Gibbons.
The section on Population Increase and Economic Development states that, in regard to the number of births and

available resources, grave difficulties do not arise at present or will in the immediate future. As the translator says, the Pope avoids decision about scientific and statistical data on population. Whatever the situation, however, these problems should be resolved in a way consonant with man's dignity, the Enclyclical declares. In regard to reproduction, it states that "no one is permitted to use methods and procedures which may indeed be permissible to check the life of plants and animals."
Annotations and a teaching-aid outline by the translator are useful for readers.
SLOAN-KETTERING INSTITUTE FOR CANCER
RESEARCH--Biennial Report, 19591961. Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York.
The common denominator in the remarkable advance in scientific knowledge during the past few years is the complex and fascinating substance known as nucleic acid, the chemical basis of the gene, according to this biennial report of the Sloan-Kettering Institute for Cancer Research. It describes nucleic acid asthe governor and guide of both cellular activity and cellular heredity and as clearly the active principle--the infective and hereditary material--of viruses. The code of the nucleic acid of the chromosomes spells out the orders that guide the processes of living things, thus bringing together many of the life sciences under one unifying concept.
This development has large implications for cancer research. Cancer would appear to correspond to a mutation, a permanent hereditary change at the cell level. The findings lead inevitably to the concept, the report states, that cancer, no matter what the inducing agent, is ultimately the result of an internal change

114 Recent Publications

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

in chromosomal nucleic acid of the affected cells. Thus, the various theories about cancer are merged in this unifying concept and there is available not only much new knowledge but a new framework within which to approach cancer, the report concludes.
Most of the useful anticancer agents, including radiation, are thought to act by affecting the cell's nucleic acid or by altering the cell's production of these vital chemical substances. Attempts are underway to produce chemicals that will interfere still more specifically with the cell's nucleic acid metabolism or, more recently, large molecules that may alter the composition or function of existing chromosomal nucleic acid. The studies of the Division of Nucleoprotein Chemistry in this area are described in the report.
MEETING THE CHILDBEARING NEEDS OF
FAMILIES IN A CHANGING WORLD: Ma-
ternity Center Association, New York, 1962, 115 pp. (paper).
This is a report of a work conference in 1961 sponsored by the Maternity Center Association of New York. The conference stressed the rapid changes in family life taking place under the impact of socio-economic influences. The science of heredity counseling is described as beginning to offer practical help and the work on chromosomes and genes as "a marker of history bearing more weightily on human destiny than the hydrogen bomb or our rockets into space."
The section on "The Growth of American Families" by Ronald Freedman points out that the vast majority of American families want two to four children and are using some form of contraception to attain this goal. But a significant minority cannot reach this goal be-

cause of some physical impairment to reproduction. Dr. Freedman concludes that many historic differences in the birth rate are narrowing or disappearing and that the moderate-sized families most Americans want will produce a very rapid rate of growth which may change our ideas about family size in a generation or so.
POPULATION: William Peterson. The MacMillan Company, New York, 1961, 652 pp., $7.95.
This is a readable textbook on population in three parts: population of the United States, population of societal types different from those in the United States, and the general determinants of population. The Soviet Union and its evolution of family policy have been used as a case study in the analysis of the population of totalitarian societies. Peterson concludes that the population trends of a totalitarian state are shaped by the Party's drive for total power. In the section on determinants of fertility, eugenics is not treated directly.
O6GENESIS--THE STORAGE OF DEVELOP-
MENTAL INFORMATION: Chr. P. Raven.
Pergamon Press, New York, 1961, 282 pp., 58.50.
This is volume ten in the zoology division of the Internation Series of Monographs on Pure and Applied Biology. Relevant for those interested in genetics and embryology, this book analyzes the formation of egg cells in the ovary in reference to problems of genetic information from one generation to another through germ cells. The nuclear, cytoplasmic, and cortical information of the egg are considered in order to arrive at a clearer understanding of the developmental code. The chapters on the Storage of Developmental Information are of particular interest to geneticists.

Recent Publications

115

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

BIOLOGY--AN INTRODUCTION TO THE SCI-

Study of the demographic situation in Cen-

ENCE OF LIFE: Clarence J. Goodnight, Marie L. Goodnight, and Richard R. Armacost. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1962, 460 pp., $6.95.

tral America, Mexico, and Panama in relation to the economic development of these regions.
Provisional Suggestions for National Programmes of Analysis of Population Census

This is a general biology textbook. DNA is presented as the chemical basis of heredity, and the laws of Mendel are

Data as an Aid to Planning and Policy Making: United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, New York, 1962. Suggestions based on results of dis-

discussed in detail. There are chapters cussions at seminars on population census

on chemistry and the cell, genetics, and evolution.

data held in Latin America, Asia, and the Far East in 1959 and 1960, and the findings of case studies of these problems in

OTHER PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED

five countries, carried out by the United Nations and the governments concerned.

Mental Health Research Institute--Fifth An- Workbook and Laboratory Manual in Gen-

nual Report (July 1, 1960 to June 30, 1961): The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 72 pp. (paper). Describes the re-

eral Biology: William C. Beaver (6th ed.) The C. V. Mosby Co., St. Louis, 1962, 299 pp., $3.75 (paper). Includes new material

search program of the Mental Health Research Institute at the University of Michigan and lists staff publications.

on molecular biology and genetic improvement of living organisms.
Modern Concepts of Psychoanalysis: Leon

Le Unioni Coniugali Libere Nell' America Latina-Le Madre Nubili in Brasili: Giorgio Mortara. Istituto di Demografia. Rome, 175 pp. L. 1.750 (paper). A demographic study in two parts of free marital unions in Latin America and of unmarried mothers in Brazil.

Salzman and Jules H. Masserman (eds.). Philosophical Library, New York, 1962, 210 pp., $4.75. An appraisal of the achievements of psychoanalysis and criticism of some of its widely held tenets, including evaluation of results, by analytically trained authorities in related fields.

Exploring the Brain of Man: National Com- Psychotherapy in the Soviet Union: (trans-

mittee for Research in Neurological Dis-

lated and edited by Ralph B. Winn). Philo-

orders. The Medical School, University of

sophical Library, New York, 1961, $6.00,

Minnesota, Minneapolis, 28 pp. (paper).

207 pp. A comprehensive presentation of

Describes the research on the widely vary-

theories and practices of psychotherapy in

ing disorders of man's brain and the

the Soviet Union.

groups which work through the National History of Psychology and Psychiatry: A. A.

Committee for Research in Neurological

Roback. Philosophical Library, New York,

Disorders.

1961, $7.50, 422 pp. Short biographies of

Characteristics of Overseas Migrants: G. Beijer, N. H. Frijda, B. P. Hofstede, and R. Wentholt. Government Printing and Pub-

the chief figures in the history of psychology and psychiatry including Darwin, Galton, C. Lloyd Morgan, and Robert Yerkes.

lishing Office, The Hague, 1961, 319 pp., guilders 20 (paper). English edition of MEETINGS

four investigations published in Dutch of

The XI International Congress of Genet-

Dutch emigrant units overseas in 19561957 and the results of the first follow-up in 1958-1961 of their economic and social

ics will be held in The Hague, Netherlands, from September 2 to 10. The program will consist of symposia of invited lectures, panel

integration.

discussions, short reports, demonstrations, etc.

Human Resources of Central America, Pan- The mornings will be mainly devoted to

ama, and Mexico, 1950-1980, in Relation symposia of invited papers, the afternoons to

to Some Aspects of Economic Develop- short reports of members. The language of

ment: Louis J. Ducoff. United Nations the Congress will be English. Full member-

Economic Commission for Latin America. ship is provisionally Hft. 125. The Presi-

155 pp., $2.00 (paper). A United Nations dent of the Organizing Committee is Dr.

116 Recent Publications

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

C. L. Riimke o£ Utrecht, and the Secretary is Dr. S. J. Geerts, Nijmegen. Further information can be obtained from The Secretariat of the XI International Congress of Genetics, 14, de Monchyplein, The Hague, Netherlands
"Eye on the Family" is the subject of the Annual Meeting of the National Council on Family Relations to be held at the University of Connecticut in Storrs, August 22 to 24, 1962. New Perspectives on American families and new directions for family life workers will be discussed.
The 1962 sessions of the American Institute of Biological Sciences will be held jointly this year with the Pacific Division of the American Association for the Advancement of Science at Oregon State University, Corvallis, August 26 to 31.
TEACHING
A short course in medical Genetics will be given at Bar Harbor, Maine, from August 6 to 18, 1962. For the third consecutive year, members of the staff of the Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, and of the Roscoe B. Jackson Memorial Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, will collaborate in a course on medical genetics at Oakes Center in Bar Harbor. As in the previous years, the course is supported by the National Foundation as part of its new program in birth defects.
The course is designed primarily for members of medical school faculties. Application should be made to Dr. Victor A. McKusick,

Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore 5, Maryland.
A new teaching film, Medical Genetics, Part II, is now available, according to the National Foundation. The film was prepared by Victor A. McKusick, M.D., and his associates in the Division of Medical Genetics, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. The film deals with biochemical genetics in man. It explains through the use of clinical examples such as sickle cell anemia, phenylketonuria, and other aminoacidurias how genetic variation is reflected through specific changes in protein structure and thereby in the physical properties and function of proteins.
The film may be obtained free of charge, except for return postage and insurance, from the Department of Professional Education, The National Foundation, 800 Second Avenue, New York 17. Three weeks' advance booking is requested.
FELLOWSHIPS
The Margaret Sanger Research Bureau offers postdoctoral fellowships for training in contraception, infertility, and endocrine gynecology to competent foreign gynecologists and obstetricians, for periods of six months to a year. Fellowship appointments begin on January 1 and July 1. Prospective applicants should write to Alan F. Guttmacher, M.D., Director, Margaret Sanger Research Bureau, 17 West 16th Street, New York 11.
HELEN G. HAMMONS

