Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Perspectives in population eugenics
Gordon Allen M.D.
To cite this article: Gordon Allen M.D. (1955) Perspectives in population eugenics, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:2, 90-97, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987230 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987230
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

PERSPECTIVES IN POPULATION EUGENICS

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

T
JLHE ADAPTATION OF A SPECIES to a new
environment is an extremely complex process. Under natural selection it is very slow, requiring hundreds or thousands of generations. The complete transformation of a species into its geological successor may take a period of time on the order of a million years, although the interval must vary over a wide range for different species. Among the factors which determine the rate of transformation, one of the most important is the intensity of selection. Artificial selection as practiced by man with his most useful animals and plants combines a relatively strong selection with hybridization, favorable population structure, and other contributing influences. As a result, some of these protected species have undergone changes in a few thousand years that Nature could have accomplished only in a million years; changes, in fact, which Nature might carefully have avoided. With modern genetic knowledge, comparable changes might be effected in twenty years of intensive breeding and selection.
Recognition of these facts led early eugenists to the conclusion that we could apply somewhat analogous methods to ourselves and, in a few generations or centuries, obtain great improvements in average intellectual endowments. It is not my intention altogether to dispel this hope; I am ready to believe that at some future time human evolution will be greatly accelerated, though not entirely controlled, by human efforts. In the present state of science and social organization, however, such an undertaking would be difficult to justify. Several lesser objectives, while not central to eugenics as usually envisaged, deserve more immediate attention and may provide the necessary foundation for a more ambitious eugenics program to follow.

GORDON ALLEN, M.D.
Department of Medical Genetics New York State Psychiatric Institute
Genetic Obstacles to Accelerated Human Evolution
Quite apart from sociological considerations, there are at least three genetic reasons for regarding assistance or acceleration of our own biological evolution as the most difficult and the least urgent objective that eugenics could at present set for itself.
The first reason is that the analogy between selection in man and in agricultural species is not a close one. Artificial selection as practiced on plants and farm animals owes much of its effectiveness to the fact that, within a single breeding population, all members may be descended from a single selected individual within one or two generations, and an improved form can easily replace other forms with little or no intermixture. Human populations are so enormous compared with the reproductive potential of the individual that immediate displacement of a breeding population by a selected type is out of the question. Changes would have to be achieved by slight differentials in reproduction with much intermixture, even if "improved forms" could be easily recognized.
Secondly, natural selection has some great advantages over artificial selection in adapting a species to a complex environment such as man will always face. Natural selection tests every gene countless times over in a very large number of genetic and environmental settings; it increases or decreases the frequency of every gene according to its average value to the species. Since very few individual genes will ever be identifiable in every person who carries them, our knowledge of single genes can be of little value in scientific selection as applied to most human traits. Like natural selection, any program of assisted evolution in man would have to rely upon

90

91

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

phenotype selection, that is, upon selection of individuals according to their attained qualities.
Finally, natural selection must have continued with little change up to the present time in uncivilized peoples, presumably favoring good intelligence, if we define this as the capacity to learn and to adapt to the environment. Yet it does not appear that the Japanese Ainu, for example, are more intelligent than related peoples who have been civilized for 2000 years. Twenty thousand years of natural selection certainly did not bring great intellectual improvement in the descendants of Cro-Magnon man. Although we have no definite information on the next point, it probably required at least 200,000 years of unhampered natural selection to transform a creature of definitely human status, as seen in Java man, into people of modern intelligence. In order to produce noticeable effects on average intelligence in one or two centuries, therefore, a scientific program of selection in man would have to be at least ten, and perhaps fifty times as efficient as natural selection.
The principal reasons for the relatively slow response of intelligence to selection of any kind appear to be the genetic complexity of intelligence and its very large dependence on environment. Because of complex interactions of genetic factors with each other and with the environment, some genes which are compatible with high creative intellect in one individual may prove deleterious in his descendants. This is illustrated, for example, by the distribution of mental disorders among gifted people and their relatives (1). The actual ability of a family or population to multiply or to survive may bear only a loose relation to their native intelligence; cultural heritage plays a more decisive role in this competition.
Pursuing the last thought a little further, however, we discover one inefficiency of natural selection that could surely be improved upon in a scientific system of selection. Throughout human evolution, the most in-

telligent and talented persons have probably failed to reproduce any better than, or as well as, their neighbors. Through their contributions to the cultural heritage of their community, however, the population producing many leaders or thinkers would be favored in competition with populations that produced fewer. This may have been Nature's best device for enhancing man's more abstract intellectual capacities.
There is, however, a bright side to this picture. If the genetic basis of human intelligence is as stable as the above reasoning suggests, and if natural selection acts so slowly in its maintenance and development, then any relaxation or reversal of natural selection would cause only a very gradual decline in genetic potentials.
In what directions, then, can eugenics hope to make significant contributions to human welfare within the next century, and to what extent should the present eugenic program be concerned with longerterm objectives? It appears that two kinds of program, already embarked upon in some countries wisely or unwisely, promise early rewards to nations that can effectuate them scientifically. These are negative eugenics and population control. In addition, some benefits might be derived within a few generations from a program of positive eugenics; whatever could be accomplished by this means would appear to be predominantly an improvement in cultural inheritance, with incidental and perhaps negligible genetic gains. These three shortterm objectives all require extensive research and planning. The long-term objective of conserving or improving the overall genetic legacy of future generations is not yet clearly in sight, but certainly deserves some attention in present research.
Negative Eugenics
Clinical eugenics, in the form of genetic counseling, is already establishing itself as a proper part of medicine. That this approach will achieve results sufficient to

92 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

change population statistics in the fore- The argument for negative eugenics must

seeable future may well be doubted. We be tempered, however, with two reserva-

should not scorn the protection of individ- tions that emerge from modern knowledge

ual families from genetic catastrophe, but of genetics:

our concern in this discussion is with popu- First, natural selection has only recently

lation eugenics.

been frustrated with respect to such severe

As geneticists have repeatedly argued, only dominant defects, and recessives which are sex-linked or very common, can be rapidly reduced in the population by limiting reproduction of affected persons. To limit reproduction of healthy carriers of known hereditary diseases would be difficult and genetically unsound, although justifiable exceptions may become increasingly common with advances in genetic knowledge.

disorders as diabetes or hemophilia. We can therefore not expect to reduce the frequency of these conditions much by restricting reproduction of affected persons. Mutation alone has probably prevented their eradication, and would continue to do so in the face of stringent eugenic controls. By the same token, however, if no substitute is found for natural selection, the diseases in question will increase in frequency.

There is ample precedent for taking public Second, any recessive or irregularly

health measures against the spread of dis- dominant condition which is common may

ease by affected persons, even to their own families. Recently, conservative measures which violate no traditional human rights have been urged by a British health officer (2) with respect to Huntington's Chorea. These are, mainly, the routine reporting of all diagnosed cases, followed by investiga-

be "paying its own way" by conferring some advantage upon heterozygous carriers or upon persons with favorable modifying factors. This is the principal reason why, as a general rule, only affected persons and not healthy carriers should be required or advised to limit their reproduction.

tion and counseling of their families. While Another argument is frequently advanced

dominant or common recessive defects may against negative eugenics. With respect to

account for only a small proportion of the persons having severe hereditary handicaps

handicapped, their absolute numbers are early in life, natural selection is relaxed

certainly large enough to deserve public under civilization only to the degree that

attention. It has been estimated that in social measures and medical science are able

England and Wales there may be 2000 to reduce the severity of the handicap.

cases of Huntington's Chorea and perhaps From this it has been concluded (3) that

twice as many healthy young persons des- we should let medical science and Nature

tined to develop the disease. In the United States, according to conservative estimates, there may be 10,000 persons with hereditary bleeding diseases resembling hemophilia. Schizophrenia, which may depend largely upon a simple hereditary factor, affects one per cent of the population, and the frequency of diabetes mellitus may be as high as two per cent. The identification of all serious hereditary diseases and the incorporation of conservative control measures into public health programs would achieve as much in a few generations as present expenditures on psittacosis, rabies, and other rare diseases.

take their course, and allow the frequency of the diseases to increase up to the limit imposed by the social and economic burden of maintaining these people. At that point, presumably, the number of untreated persons would become large enough to reestablish natural selection. This would be a valid genetic argument against eugenic measures only insofar as the genes involved might have secondary, useful effects. It is in sharp disagreement with public health principles, which require the prevention of diseases even though satisfactory treatment may be available. Furthermore, if, as suggested here, negative eugenic measures are

93

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

applied only to dominant or to common efforts at population limitation must be un-

recessive diseases, and mainly to individuals successful is that countries most successful

who are actually handicapped, this argu- in this respect would be overrun by coun-

ment loses most of its force.

tries that continued to multiply. But under

modern conditions of restrained migration

Population Control

one country could overrun another only in

Family planning, by one method or an- war. In war, the relative strength of op-

other, is now almost universally accepted in posing forces depends partly on techno-

civilized countries as a desirable means of logical development and partly on the abso-

protecting health and happiness. Popula- lute quantity of men and resources avail-

tion planning on a national scale is also ac- able for purposes of war. Both of these

cepted in many countries, and generally factors depend, not merely upon the size of

operates by means of family allowances, fer- the nation, but on the ratio of useful re-

tility clinics, etc., to encourage families sources to population. In general, there-

either to increase or to limit their size ac- fore, heavily over-populated nations would

cording to assumed national needs. Fur- be unlikely to overrun nations of similar

thermore, among the normal mechanisms size and resources that had maintained a

in human society that are capable of reduc- favorable balance between resources and

ing birth rates, there are some beside over- population.

population and its correlates, stressed by Malthus. Evidence of this is given by the population history of the U.S., where fertility began to fall from its peak in the 19th

According to Darwin, whether population limitation depended upon voluntary or upon compulsory measures, differential reproduction of creeds or sects would favor

century, long before the country could be the multiplication of those that responded

considered overpopulated. These mech- most poorly to the controls. Eventually a

anisms, chiefly age at marriage and complex major portion of the population would

psycho-social factors, may ultimately pro- habitually ignore the controls that had

vide a better approach to the regulation of once been effective. But here again we can

population size than direct economic or look to "natural selection" among nations

legal controls.

to maintain progress. Each system of popu-

Sir Charles Galton Darwin in The Next lation regulation might break down sooner

Million Years (4) has maintained that any present tendency for cessation of population growth is temporary, and that eventually all countries will outgrow their resources. It is his contention that until man has evolved into a completely new species, in perhaps a million years, he will continue to reproduce essentially like an animal, so that Malthusian principles will determine the rise and fall of successive civilizations. One may well question the estimate that a million years, or even half a million, will be required for evolution to produce a new

or later, but whenever a nation thus failed, it would probably fall behind in social or technological progress. World leadership would thus change hands from time to time, from such nations to others that had temporarily solved their population problems. The natural tendency of successful cultures to be widely imitated could thus maintain a rather steady cultural evolution toward a social or political organization of the world that maintained populations near the optimal size in relation to available resources.

species of Homo. And if the succeeding spe- Finally, Sir Charles Galton Darwin sug-

cies of man could perhaps break out of the gests that if population control should

animal patterns of reproduction, why could succeed for many thousands of years, a new

not the present species?

"procreative instinct" would arise, inde-

Darwin's first reason for believing that pendent of sexual behavior. It would

94 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

spread throughout the population and be gradually intensified by the relatively higher reproduction of those possessing it. Such an instinct would finally break the bonds of both law and culture, and overpopulation would again rule man's destiny.
One of the most obvious trends in human evolution has been the increasing importance of learned behavior. Man's mass conduct is determined by culture at least as much as by instinct, even if instinct is used in a very broad sense. The so-called sexual instinct, for example, is known to find different modes of expression in different cultures, and in some instances comes largely under cultural control. As evidence of this one could cite the wide differences between professional men and laborers with respect to sexual outlets reported by Kinsey. These differences cannot plausibly be explained as biological in origin, but attest to control of the "sexual instinct" by cultural influences.
In short, I have more faith in man's intellectual capacity to evolve and adhere to a profitable creed than in his biological capacity to evolve a new form of instinctive behavior.
That a low reproductive rate can be maintained under natural selection is shown by the reproductive patterns of primates as compared with many lower mammals. Evidence closer to the present discussion is seen in the historical growth of urban as compared with rural populations. Sir Charles Galton Darwin cites this as an effect of high differential reproduction in a segment of the population having a successful way of life. Actually, urbanization tends to sterilize city dwellers, and cities have multiplied in spite of their almost catastrophic biological effects on the people most immediately concerned. Cities bring such great advantages to their culture or nation as a whole, or are an outgrowth of such a successful overall culture, that the surplus rural population is usually sufficient to maintain their numbers. Natural selection has as yet failed to defeat this system and

seems rather to favor it. Natural selection is not simply the differential reproduction and survival of individuals; evolution in the genus Homo has probably depended as much on competition among populations and their cultures as upon competition among men or families. The essential contest has been primarily one of cultural stability and adaptability, and only secondarily one of numerical strength.
If population limitation should be required for the continued progress of civilization, as many suppose, this cultural pattern, like urbanization, would flourish despite its apparent defiance of the elementary principles of biological succession. If eugenists choose to work for the attainment of an optimal population size and structure in relation to resources, either by increasing or by decreasing birth rates, they will probably find Nature working on their side.
Positive Eugenics
The third promising short-term program of population eugenics would be an attempt to improve the population with respect to psychological and social traits by creation of a augenic environment. This would involve, first of all, the improvement of birth control methods and the universal dissemination of information and attitudes favorable to family planning. Second, the proposed system would require the gradual modification of our educational system and our social institutions to place marriage and parenthood high among the interests and goals of the most intelligent and responsive young people. Finally, a eugenic environment would require the reduction of social and economic obstacles to marriage and parenthood by careful reorganization of taxes, salaries and public services. For example, the interference of higher education with early marriage would be minimized, as would the economic conflict between size of family and availability of cultural and educational opportunities.
It is supposed by eugenists that, with

95

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

careful study, these changes could be effected in such a way that potentially good parents would be eager to establish families and would have more children, on the average, than other people. According to the "Eugenic Hypothesis," these potentially good parents would also have a higher average genetic potential for intelligence and social adaptability, and would insure a preferential reproduction of desirable genes.
Geneticists are in general agreement that cultural and medical advances do not, in themselves, constitute a permanent substitute for natural selection. Modern eugenists advocate something like the eugenic environment to fill the gap, either with the objective of preventing genetic deterioration of the species or in the hope of improving man's genetic qualities. Such a program might equal natural selection in its effects on intelligence, but we have already noted what slow progress this would be. Of much greater significance, if a workable program of this sort were to be carried through, might be a resulting improvement in the average cultural attainments of the population. For, with each new generation, a larger proportion of children would come from homes that provided a good early social and emotional environment. This would probably occur regardless of the direction or magnitude of concomitant genetic changes so that, for the present, the validity of the "Eugenic Hypothesis" is unimportant.
Further research is hardly necessary to affirm the desirability of some measure of control over population growth. More thorough study is probably needed concerning the advisability of a program of positive eugenics. Only a beginning has been made in exploring the ends desired, the possible means, and all likely consequences.
Endogenous Selection
The three objectives discussed in the preceding sections appear to be the only ones for which useful eugenic measures can be devised in the immediate future. But the

original and longer-term objective of eugenics will properly retain an important place in the imagination of many human geneticists. This is the continuation or acceleration of human biological evolution in much the same direction it has taken in the past. I believe that, if man's existence on earth is not brought to a sudden end, propulsion and partial guidance of our evolution by science is almost as certain to eventuate as the conversion of atomic energy to peaceful uses or the improvement of agricultural methods in backward areas. The following review of evolutionary processes seems to indicate that a trend in this direction began long before man invented artificial selection.
Natural selection is essentially the differential multiplication of animal and plant forms according to their degree of adaptation to their environment. This may result simply from differential reproduction, but is commonly dependent upon competition, as for food or for mates. Forms that are brought within man's agricultural economy enter a lively competition for human acceptance, and this is known as artificial selection. In almost every species of animal that has developed any social behavior, there is a similar competition for acceptance by other members of the same species. Sexual selection, in which one sex chooses its mate from several available, is a simple example of this. In bees, defective young and even defective adults are destroyed by normal adults. A positive as well as a negative selection is seen in some birds and mammals living in aggregates and granting privileges according to a social hierarchy. This hierarchy rarely seems to be based on genetic qualities, but the same is true of other instruments of natural selection. Infanticide, often influenced by genetic traits of the infants, appears to have been widely practiced by primitive man for purposes of family limitation (5).
These are examples of endogenous selection, if this term is taken to designate any process, other than competition for primary

96 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

necessities, by which individuals willfully affect the survival or reproduction of other members of their species. Insofar as endogenous selection causes a species to evolve independently of environmental pressures, this evolution may be regarded as self-propelling or autokinetic. It should be recognized, however, that mechanisms of endogenous selection are themselves subject to natural selection. These principles find their most interesting applications in eugenics.
Endogenous selection survives in Western culture principally as sexual selection, social discrimination, capital punishment, and forced institutionalization. The older expressions of this behavior pattern are gradually being replaced by more rational ones, of which the most recent are public health measures against carriers of some communicable diseases, and genetic counseling. The adoption of public health measures against specified hereditary diseases constitutes the present frontier in the advance of endogenous selection, and the next may be the establishment of a "eugenic environment." In view of the obvious evolutionary advantage of even some crude forms of endogenous selection, it appears likely that natural selection will promote its development up to the most complex form compatible with human society. Although originating as a product of man's ingenuity, systems of selection, like languages, will ultimately be shaped and improved by forces over which man has no conscious control. Progress will be achieved not only by scientific planning, but, more decisively, by competition among nations and the self-elimination of unworkable or inefficient systems; sometimes by gradual overgrowth, sometimes by political or social action, and sometimes, perhaps, by violence. Clearly, these agencies can most effectively insure the continued progress of civilization in a world where diverse political and cultural systems exist side-by-side with liberal exchange of scientific observations but without mutual interference.
When the final history of life on the earth

can be written, self-propelled evolution may occupy a position comparable to that of animal locomotion. Both innovations confer greatly increased power and responsibility; the latter an individual responsibility, the former a collective one. Both will have been first achieved by the most complex organisms of their era, but by opening new evolutionary channels will have led to infinitely greater complexity in the resulting biological world.
Conclusions
In the opinion of Sir Charles Galton Darwin, the same average state of human affairs which has existed in the past several millenia will prevail for about a million years to come. In arriving at this prediction Darwin has perhaps confused the behavior of biological systems with that of inorganic systems. In the physical world exceptional events and extreme fluctuations tend to cancel one another, but in biological or cultural evolution they constitute the stepping stones for new advances. In predicting evolution, therefore, one must consider future events which have small individual probabilities, but which would all lead to one result; the sum of their probabilities may be large enough to render their common result almost inevitable. In particular, it might be highly improbable that population growth or human evolution should come under scientific control at any one time in any one nation, but if it occurs just once, this will probably suffice to establish such control throughout civilization for the remainder of human history. Once instituted in a stable society, eugenic measures would lend themselves to limitless improvement, eventually achieving rapid genetic advances with minimal external controls. At present, however, the effects of positive eugenics upon man's genetic inheritance would be inconsequential by comparison with its possible benefits to his cultural heritage. In the coming century, the greatest benefit of all may be expected to derive from better management of popu-

97

lation problems and from the reduction in incidence of certain hereditary diseases. Ultimately, these four objectives may be pursued in a single, comprehensive eugenic

program, varying from one country to another according to different theories and different needs.

REFERENCES
1. JUDA, ADELE, 1953. Höchstbegabung. Munich and Berlin; Urban & Schwartzenberg. (Reviewed in Eugenics Quarterly 1 (1): p. 71.)
2. PLEYDELL, M. J., 1954. Huntington's Chorea in Northamptonshire. British Medical Journal 2 (1954), pp. 1121-1128. (Abstracted in Eugenics Quarterly 2 (1): p. 62.)
3. SNVDER, L. H., 1954. The effects of selection and

domestication on man. Journal of the National Cancer Institute 1 5 : 759-769 (Abstracted in this issue of Eugenics Quarterly) .
4. DARWIN, C. G., 1953. The Next Million Years. New York; Doubleday. (Reviewed in Eugenical News 38 (4): p. 152.)
5. APTEKAR, HERBERT, 1931. Angea; Infanticide, Abortion and Contraception in Savage Society. New York; W. Godwin, Inc.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

1955 SUMMER WORKSHOP
POPULATION REFERENCE BUREAU
Six graduate students from the fields of demography,sociology, conservation,economicsandgeography will be chosen for a six-weeks' Summer Workshop in Washington, D. C. in the summer of1955.
Objective--As the problems of population inevitably gain in momentum, it will devolve upon future generations to interpret population dynamics and to formulate rational policies. The Bureau, through its Summer Workshop, enables the interested student to broaden his field of inquiry and to become more cognizant of population dynamics. It stimulates his thinking in terms of policy. A diversified educational experience has been planned for Workshop participants. Briefly it will follow the pattern outlined below.
Research--Under the supervision of the Bureau's Director, each student will undertake a research project scheduled for early discussion in the Population Bulletin. He will search out the facts, prepare a discussion outline, and finally a first-draft manuscript.
Discussion--Representatives of various government and non-government agencies working in the fields of demography, conservation, and economics and representatives of press and radio will be invited to participate in three or four seminars.
Process Level Experience--Students will learn how the Population Bulletin is created by participating in all steps of preparation of an issue: work conferences; research; development of manuscript, tables, charts; preparation of manuscript for printer, handling of proof, preparation of dummy; and finally, distribution.
Summing Up--In termination, each member of the Workshop will prepare for the Bureau a brief statement summarizing:
1. Whether or not the experience wasof value to him; if so, in what way; if not, why.
2. Suggestions and comments which would be helpful in planning and conducting future Workshops.

