Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Research on intelligence and personality
Frank Lorimer Chairman
To cite this article: Frank Lorimer Chairman (1956) Research on intelligence and personality, Eugenics Quarterly, 3:2, 75-81, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1956.9987270 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1956.9987270
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

RESEARCH ON INTELLIGENCE AND PERSONALITY*

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

I. INTRODUCTION

II. RESUMES ON SELECTED ASPECTS

The need for a broader conceptual framework in research on the genetic aspects of intelligence and personality was discussed in an editorial by Gardner Murphy in Eugenics Quarterly 1:4, December, 1954. The editorial stimulated correspondence. Thereupon, the Board of Directors of the American Eugenics Society in May, 1955 authorized Dr. Frank Lorimer to arrange for an exchange of ideas among a few persons interested in this subject. The others invited to serve as members of this committee are: Gordon Allen, M.D., New York State Psychiatric Institute; Dr. John L. Fuller, Roscoe B. Jackson Memorial Laboratory; Dr. Gardner Murphy, Director of Research, Menninger Foundation; Dr. Harry L. Shapiro, Curator of Anthropology, American Museum of Natural History; and Professor William R. Thompson, Psychology Department, Queens University. The committee met at 230 Park Avenue, New York City, October 21, 1955. Mrs. Helen Hammons, Managing Editor of Eugenics Quarterly, attended as an observer.
Dr. Gardner Murphy opened the discussion with a statement about the complexity of the interacting genetic and environmental factors in both cognitive and temperamental attributes. The nature of the problems encountered here requires the pooling of knowledge and techniques by geneticists, social scientists, physiologists, and psychologists in devising appropriate research programs. The most important task of the American Eugenics Society is to further an increase of knowledge in this field, and the Society is in a position to give "an integrative leadership" in this undertaking.
*First Report of Committee of the American Eugenics Society on Research on Intelligence and Personality, April 1, 1956.

OF THE FIELD
Brief résumés of information and suggestions on some aspects of this elusive field are presented here. The first of these résumés, by Professor William R. Thompson, begins with a consideration of the value for genetic investigations of units determined through factor analysis of data on animal behavior, and proceeds to the statement of some more basic principles.
Factors in Animal Behavior and Their Relation to the Study of Inheritance
The problem under consideration concerns the usefulness of factor analysis as a technique for finding units of animal behavior amenable to genetic analysis. Since all behavioral domains approached are initially very complex, it seems essential to try to find out more unitary traits or abilities that are likely to show relatively simple modes of inheritance.
Factor analysis--the most obvious method available--has, in fact, been applied by a number of investigators to animal learning, drive and emotionality. However, as Royce has shown in a review of the literature, the results of these studies are rather disappointing. The factors that have emerged are undetermined and difficult to interpret. For these reasons Tolman has felt that animal abilities and traits are multitudinous and very specific. This may well be true of "naive" animals. But it is not necessarily true of sophisticated or highly experienced animals. It is quite possible that with continued experience in testing situations, a rat or other laboratory subject will show increasing ability to transfer skill gained in one situation to new situations. The "learning sets" developed by monkeys in Harlow's laboratory

75

76 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

seem to indicate clearly that this may happen. The more tests given to a monkey, the more it is able to solve ensuing tests quickly and easily. It has learned how to learn. Another way of putting this is to say that general abilities develop only with practice, so that they cannot be expected to appear in naive animals faced for the first time with a battery of tests.
If factors do develop with practice, the next question that arises is what these factors may mean genetically. To answer this, we need to consider the possible genetic meanings that a correlation between two variables may have.
There appear to be three such possible meanings and these have been labeled chromosomal communality, gene communality and selection communality. The first of these refers to linkage, that is, the case where genes carrying the two traits are on the same chromosome and assort together under certain mating conditions. The second meaning is identical with genetic or physiological pleiotropy and refers to the dependence of the two traits on common genes or on some common physiological or biochemical process itself governed by a number of genes. The third case is perhaps the most interesting. Here the communality between the two traits is developed through selective cross-homogamous mating in the population. When there is a tendency for individuals high on one trait to mate with individuals high on the other trait, a correlation will arise between the two traits in a few generations, even though the traits were orthogonal to begin with. Many factors of human ability and personality may be of this nature, and in such cases we could not expect to find any simple genetic solution.
On the basis of the above analysis, some recommendations can be made concerning fruitful lines of research in psychogenetics with animal subjects.
1. An investigation of how factors develop (if they do) with increasing experience and sophistication of the subjects.

2. Studies comparing behavior factor patterns obtained with naive and with sophisticated subjects.
3. Studies of the inheritance of factors obtained in the two cases compared in (2).
4. Tests for the genetic meanings (linkage, pleitropy, selection) of the obtained factors, including experiments aimed at the artificial production of factors by crosshomogamous mating in a population of laboratory animals.
5. Investigation of the inheritance of the speed and uniformity of development of behavioral factors.
By examining these empirical problems with animal subjects, it is hoped that fresh concepts and methods will result that may prove to be useful at the human level. By such a process of "cross-fertilization" we may eventually come to know considerably more than we do now about the inheritance of behavior.
Observations by Dr. J. L. Fuller on genetic factors influencing variability in physiology and behavior, as evidenced by research on animals, are directly relevant to points treated in Professor Thompson's résumé. Dr. Fuller's general comments on the "Relationship of Gene and Character" are followed by some specific "Suggestions about Research Areas."
Relationship of Gene and Character In addition to the capacity for self-dupli-
cation, genes appear to have primary functions of (1) controlling the rates of specific biochemical processes, and (2) producing specific antigens (Wright). Whenever genetic influences upon more complex structures or functions are considered, the gene-character relationship is inevitably remote and may be difficult to analyze. However, steps in this direction are possible with genes having large individual effects. In such situations one can work backward from the fully differentiated character, comparing trait-bearers with non-trait-bearers at earlier and earlier stages of development. Diverse characteristics may thus be found to stem from a

77

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

single primary deficiency. Some geneticists (e.g. Gruneberg) believe that all cases of pleiotropy are secondary; in other words each gene has only one primary effect upon development.
From studies of variation in inbred animal stocks has come the concept of the genotype as setting the reaction norm, and the related concept of environment as the sum of the agencies which are associated with variation about the mean which is characteristic of a particular genotype. Such a formulation implies that there is a "natural" habitat for each species. We know that environment and genotype interact, so that the same environment may induce more variability in some genotypes than in others. Heterozygosis, for example, seems to favor phenotypic stability (the genetic homeostasis of Dobzhansky and Lerner). Some pure lines of mammals seem to lie close to thresholds which control development, and ordinary amounts of environmental variability induce high polymorphism within these lines (Wright, Runner).
In spite of the fact that behavioral characteristics are notably responsive to environmental influences, experiments with animals under controlled conditions have shown that a great variety of measures of behavior are influenced by genotypes. Some of the reported variables include: activity (measured under several conditions), male sexual activity, nest-building and giving of maternal care, hoarding of food, tendency to defecate when disturbed, susceptibility to audiogenic seizures, amount of fighting, savageness, timidity, maze learning, discrimination learning, delayed response ability, and docility or general trainability. Perhaps it would be safe to say that any two distinct mammalian strains will be found to differ on some behavioral indices, and that a wide enough sampling of different strains will uncover evidence of hereditary effects upon any measure of behavior which can be devised. Many of the differences appear to be poly-

genically controlled, although simpler mechanisms have been postulated by a few workers.
Similarly, variations in morphology and physiology can be demonstrated to correspond to genotypic variation. This leads to a demand to "explain" hereditary differences in behavior through interpolated structural and functional differences. This is certainly desirable, but it should be clear that the demonstration of the effect of genotype upon behavior and the study of evolutionary consequences of such differences does not depend upon the detailed working out of casual relationships. Working out such relationships may help the physiological psychologist at a theoretical level; it is perhaps essential to the therapist trying to overcome the disadvantages of certain genotypes; but it is not necessary for an evaluation of the consequences of selection upon the genetic constitution of a population. In other words, we need not completely understand the physiology of a deleterious gene combination before considering it as a eugenic problem. However, the way we regard the eugenic problem may be greatly modified when physiological studies enable corrective measures to be taken which alleviate the disadvantages of the gene.
Suggestions about Research Areas In the area of personality and intelli-
gence, we know that selection of animals for differences in specific learning ability and in specific emotional responses is successful. We do not know what we are selecting in terms of body structure and body chemistry. Recent advances in the fields of endocrinology and neuro-psychology should make possible a direct attack upon the problem. Basic research in this area is apt to be slow, but results will be important. Specific kinds of experiments might include:
1. Comparison of local neurochemistry in strains which differ in behavioral characteristics (Krech, Rosenzweig and Bennett: choline-sterase differences in brains of rats).

78 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

2. Comparison of effects of brain ablations in strains differing in behavior (Fuller, Rosvold and Pribram: preliminary evidence in experiments on dogs).
3. Measurement of hormone sensitivity in strains which differ in the strength of activity known to be modifiable by hormones (Young, Riss, Valenstein, and Grunt: sex behavior and hormones in the guinea pig; Fuller, Chambers and Fuller: cortisone and activity in mice).
4. Effects of psychological stress in different strains upon both behavior and physiological functions. Such studies have relationship to the significance of personality differences in the psychosomatic diseases.
5. At a more psychological level, studying the factorial composition of the behavioral differences found to exist between strains. Some preliminary studies have been done at Bar Harbor (Anastasi, Fuller, Scott, and Schmitt), but much more is needed.
The experiments suggested above make use of fully differentiated psychological characteristics. An equally important area of animal research is the evaluation of the importance of different kinds of directive factors at specific stages of development. The time factor, so often stressed in clinical situations, has until recently been neglected in experimental work. Just when does the genotype-environment interaction system become frozen, so that subsequent modification of the organism's characteristics is difficult or impossible? Are there critical periods for channelizing certain functions? Perhaps some of the disputes regarding the constancy of the IQ could be illuminated by properly designed animal experiments in which both heredity and early experience were independently varied.
The possibility of "working backward" in animal research from certain clearly differentiated traits to other developmental processes, comparing trait-bearers with non-trait-bearers at various stages of devel-

opment, has already been mentioned. This approach has yielded significant clues to the genetic aspects of some deviations in human behavior. But, here too, various possibilities must be examined in making use of new information provided by these studies. The following brief statement summarizes a general discussion of this subject by Dr. Gordon Allen.
Leads from Pathology In any attempt to study gene action,
especially of highly complex traits like behavior, it seems that the only hope is to find a trail of effects produced by the gene. This is nicely illustrated in the case of Wilson's Disease, a progressive hereditary degeneration of the brain distinguished by peculiar motor disorders and by hardening of the liver, among other things. The motor disturbance was early related to pathological changes in the basal ganglia of the brain, while the liver changes were thought possibly to represent some specific biochemical deficiency. Subsequently it was found that persons with this disease have large deposits of copper in the brain, liver, and other organs, and that they excrete large quantities in the urine. Most recently it has been learned that these patients have a specific deficiency of ceruloplasmin, a copper-containing protein, in the blood. This is the sort of biochemical defect usually attributed to primary gene action, but in this disease there is still much debate about the primary defect. The deficiency of ceruloplasmin (and, hence, of copper) in the blood does not seem to be a sufficient cause of the excess copper in the brain and elsewhere, and especially of the high rate of excretion of copper. The ceruloplasmin deficiency may be secondary to some more general intracellular defect in copper metabolism, manifested independently and possibly even more directly in the brain, or the primary defect might be in the digestive tract, which absorbs too much copper.
We can conclude from this example that the discovery of biochemical abnormalities

79

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

associated with a hereditary disease does not always bring one closer to the primary site of gene action. However, it usually throws light on the pathological processes involved.
An application of these principles closer to the field of our discussion may be found in schizophrenia. Certain newly studied drugs, such as lysergic acid, produce schizophrenia-like behavior in normal individuals. This has led to the optimistic conclusion that schizophrenia itself may result from the presence of some comparable chemical in the body, and that this may be a primary genetic defect. However, there are at least three other possibilities to keep in mind: first, that the effects of lysergic acid may have only an incidental resemblance to schizophrenia; second, that lysergic acid may produce the same state of physiological unbalance found in schizophrenia but does this by altering an entirely different factor in a complex chemical or physiological equilibrium; and, third, that the disturbance of this equilibrium, though responsible for perpetuation of the abnormal state in the schizophrenic, may itself be only a secondary effect of early pathological reaction patterns, whose etiology is as difficult to explain as any other behavior pattern. Even the last possibility, however, would not exclude a simple genetic etiology.
Another clinical condition that may help us understand the genetic basis of intelligence and brain function is hereditary microcephaly. Evidence has recently been advanced suggesting that the most common type of microcephaly is a simple recessive trait which often shows up in heterozygous carriers in the form of depressed intelligence. This condition seems to deserve much study from two points of view. First, if the heterozygous state impairs intelligence, the anatomical, physiological, and mental effects of the gene should be investigated; much of our present knowledge about brain function has come from this type of study, and in this case a specific

gene appears to be responsible. Second, the homozygous state of the gene reduces brain size drastically by what seems to be a sort of compression of the essential component; the resulting brain is a condensed miniature of the normal brain. These brains function remarkably well, with little or no motor disturbance and even some capacity for symbolic mental processes (e.g. speech). There has been much speculation about the possible resemblance of these brains to a pre-human ancestor, but little systematic neuro-physiological research on the condition.
In the normal range of intelligence, too, probably much is to be learned about the relation of function to anatomical variations. These variations (especially in microscopic architecture) have received little systematic study, and techniques for counting cells, for example, have only recently been devised. It should be remembered, however, that these variations may be only incidental or even irrelevant to the primary variations in mental capacity, and may not in themselves affect mental function. Monkeys have not just undergone an evolutionary upheaval in their behavior, as has man, and cannot be expected to show a comparable degree of individual variation in intelligence, yet they are said to show similar individual variations in brain micro-anatomy.
In the borderline and moron range of intelligence, some statistical considerations are instructive. The lowest 5 per cent of the population falls below IQ about 75, but the distribution continues to follow the normal frequency curve down as far as about IQ 45. At that point, with about 0.5 per cent of the population remaining, the curve fails to drop off as rapidly as expected. The excess is due to pathological conditions, both genetic and environmental, that are superimposed on the normal distribution. Down to this point, then, most variations appear to be caused by the same factors which produce differences in the normal range of intelligence. Insofar

80 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

as this variability may be genetic in origin, the observation indicates that almost everyone carries genes that impair his intelligence, or that would do so in certain combinations. We can probably take this as evidence supporting Muller's contention that deleterious mutations are widespread, and that a large proportion of these are probably concerned with intelligence.
There are three possible explanations for the presence of such deleterious mutations: (1) They may have some compensating selective advantage, either in nonmental traits or in combination with certain other genetic factors for intelligence. (2) They may represent a stage of human evolution we have not altogether left behind us, if civilization has, so to speak, stopped the moving picture while brain evolution is in full progress. (3) They may represent myriad recurring mutations which natural selection, even at top efficiency, could not keep at a much lower level. This again, is a correlate of recent rapid evolution of the human brain, which process would not yet have had time to integrate the changes genetically and develop "stabilizing" genetic mechanisms. The absence of such rapid brain evolution in the recent history of experimental animals probably argues against the comparability of man and animals with respect to individual variations in intelligence. The three influences listed above are not mutually exclusive.
III. GENERAL DISCUSSION OF POSSIBLE
RESEARCH LEADS
1. Need for new longitudinal studies with attention to factors in intelligence and personality. Primary behavioral characteristics, as determined by factor analysis, are merely functional entities. They may differ radically in origin. Some may have a genetic basis, whereas others may not.
The most obvious approach to research on the possible genetic significance of such functional entities is the study of their

relative constancy among kin of varying degrees in different circumstances. An interesting variant of this approach involves the analytical treatment of the complete, original data for identical twins and for sibs.
Longitudinal studies seem to be particularly important here, in order to investigate the emergence of various factors in intelligence and personality among related and unrelated persons, at successive ages, and under different cultural conditions.
2. Investigation of apparent pleiotropic changes associated with cognitive and affective behavior. The possibility of dealing with more specific physiological and clinical components of similar behavior patterns is opening new approaches to the diagnosis and treatment of gross deviations in human behavior.
3. It was recognized that questions about assortative mating with respect to various mental and personality traits have a direct bearing on the type of eugenic theory that finds favor in the American Eugenics Society today. If intelligence and personality are highly multifactorial in their biological as well as in their social conditions, it is important to study the extent to which there may, or may not, be any association among the various genetic factors. In other words, do some individuals have "clusters" of genetic traits that provide better adaption to the broad requirements of our society than the corresponding "clusters" of some other people and is there any tendency for such clusters of traits to hang together, or to be reassembled, in successive generations?
Assortative mating is the primary mechanism by which such clusters of associated traits, diverse in nature and origin but similar or congenial in effect, can be built up and maintained within a large, continuing, and heterogeneous population. This is a subject on which there has been relatively little research in comparison with its theoretical importance.

81

IV. RECOMMENDATIONS
The Committee believes that the relatively neglected and very complex field we have traversed in our discussion should be explored more systematically.
The Committee therefore recommends that the American Eugenics Society initiate arrangements for a seminar, or series of seminars, to be concerned with reviewing the conceptual framework of research in this field.
Again, a continuing committee in this

field would be able to give more detailed consideration to specific research needs and possibilities. It might eventually formulate concrete plans for research that would merit serious consideration. It recommends that the Society consider possible ways of promoting the continuous and systematic consideration of new possibilities of significant research in this area.
FRANK LORIMER
Chairman

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

