Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Genetics and dentistry
Carl J. Witkop Jr. D.D.S.
To cite this article: Carl J. Witkop Jr. D.D.S. (1958) Genetics and dentistry, Eugenics Quarterly, 5:1, 15-22, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1958.9987342 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1958.9987342
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 8 View related articles Citing articles: 22 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:24

15

A. and Ross, H. (Eds.) Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago, 111. 307-366.
14. LÖKEN, A. C. and CYVIN, K. 1954. A case of
clinical juvenile amaurotic idiocy with the histological picture of Alzheimer's disease, / . Neur., Neurosurg. and Psychiat. 1 7 ; 211-215.
15. MOSTAFA, A. H. and GABR, M. 1954. Heredity
in progeria: with follow-up of two affected sisters, Arch. Pediat., 7 1 : 163-172.
16. PEARSON, JOHN S., PETERSON, MAGNUS C ,
LAZARTE, JORCE A., BLODCETT, HARRIET E., and
KLEY, IRENE B. 1955.An educational approach to the social problems of Huntington's chorea, Proc. Staff Meet. Mayo Clin. 3 0 : (16) 349-358.
17. PERR, HERBERT M. 1958. Criteria distinguishing parents of schizophrenic and normal children: An initial study with the Interpersonal Diagnostic System, A.M.A. Arch. Neur. if Psychiat. to be published.

18. ROMANO, J. 1949.Adaptation, Cornell University Press.
19. RUSSELL, E.S. 1955. Significance of physiological pattern of animal strains in biological research, Brit. M. J. 1: 826-833.
20. Standard Nomenclature of Diseases and Operations. 1952. 4thEdition. NewYork, The Blakiston Company.
21. U. S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION,
AND WELFARE. 1955. Evaluation in Mental Health, report of National Advisory Mental Health Council, Washington, U. S. Govt. Printing Office, 11.
22. Webster's New International Dictionary ofthe English Language, 1953, Second Edition. G. & C. Merriam Company.
23. WHITTIER, J. R. 1958. Contingency theory of adaptation and maladaption, Dis. Nerv. Sys. To be published.

CHAIRMAN BUGHER: I think the degree of unanimity among the psychiatrists you mention would be an unsual phenomenon with respect to any subject.
One of the very significant things that Dr. Whittier has called to our attention is the everpresent booby trap of semantics which exists in any multidisciplinary approach, where a given symbol or word turns out to mean widely different things to different people, without their

always being conscious of the fact. It is very helpful to have this brought out so clearly.
We can move on into a field which is again morphological but one which is especially attractive to the geneticist who is working with facial structures, and all these aspects of development. To speak on "Genetics and Dentistry," we have Dr. Carl Witkop, who has for a considerable period of time devoted his attention to problems of this kind in the National Institute of Dental Research in Bethesda.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

GENETICS AND DENTISTRY
CARL J. WITKOP JR., D.D.S.
National Institute of Dental Research U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare
Bethesda, Maryland

T
JLHE DENTIST is CONCERNED with three major problems relating to genetics. The first problem concerns the safe use of diagnostic X-rays to minimize any germinal or somatic cell damage. The second problem deals with those inherited factors influencing the normal growth and development of oral structures. The third problem concerns the inherited diseases of the teeth

and surrounding structures. It is this last problem that is of interest to the heredity counselors.
In some dental diseases inherited factors can be decisive or only contributory to the production of a specific illness. For example, dentinogenesis imperfecta, an inherited defect in the formation of dentin, is produced only when a person is heterozy-

16 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

gous for the defective gene. However, variations in the clinical appearance in these teeth are partially ascribable to environmental factors to which these defective teeth are subjected after eruption into the oral cavity. On the other hand, the work of Hunt (2) on dental caries in rats indicates that hereditary factors such as anatomical variations in tooth form (5) affect the caries susceptibility but that environmental factors are most likely the major etiological agents in this disease (3). It is only in the former instance, where the disease is primarily genetically determined, that the heredity counselor can make relatively accurate predictions at this time.
INHERITED DENTAL DISEASES
The intrinsic diseases of dental significance can affect oral structures only, or they can be present as oral manifestations of generalized hereditary disease. Table 1 illustrates these defects. Only those conditions that have been fairly well established as genetic in origin have been included. It is to be remembered that some of these diseases may be mimicked by non-genetic phenocopies. A few of these defects will be discussed in detail.
Heritable Defects in Dentition Without Generalized Defects
In order to determine the prevalence, inheritance and classification of hereditary enamel and dentin defects, a survey of 96,471 children was conducted in the State of Michigan (15). There are at least five distinct inherited defects in enamel. All teeth in both dentitions are affected except in local hypoplasia. Extensive clinical studies at the National Institutes of Health failed to reveal any other consistent physical or metabolic abnormality in patients affected with these conditions. All inherited enamel defects taken together occurred once in 14,000 to 16,000 children. 1. Hypoplaisa of Enamel
The enamel is about one-fourth the thickness of normal enamel, has a granular surface, and is very hard. The teeth are light brown in color and are usually

separated at the contact points. Schulze (11) reported that this condition is inherited as a sex-linked dominant in five extensive pedigrees.
2. Hypocalcification of Enamel This condition is the one commonly re-
ferred to as amelogenesis imperfecta (13). The enamel is dull brown in color and very soft with a rough surface. It can be scraped from the underlying normal dentin by a sharp instrument. The enamel persists only a short time after the teeth erupt. This condition is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait.
3. Hypomaturation of Enamel In this condition the teeth are an opaque
white when they first erupt, but they turn light brown later. Calcium salts are deposited in the matrix but do not mature to the hard apatite crystal. The tip of an explorer can be forced into the surface of the teeth with firm pressure. A collar of normal-appearing enamel may be present at the cervical portion of the crown. This condition is transmitted as a sex-linked recessive trait.
4. Pigmented Hypomaturation of Enamel The enamel is of normal thickness but
is not so hard as normal enamel. The surface is shiny, agar brown in color, with a brown pigment extending throughout the thickness of the enamel. Histochemical stains indicate that this is not blood pigment. This condition is probably inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.
5. Local Hypoplasia of Enamel Only the primary teeth may be affected
in this condition. Brown pitted or lined hypoplastic areas occur mostly on the incisors and premolar teeth. All teeth may show hypoplasia. There is wide variation in the number of teeth affected in individuals from the same kindred. In two instances the trait was transmitted by persons with normal-appearing teeth, once by a male and once by a female. This is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait.
In addition to these five conditions there are probably at least two more enamel de-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

TABLE 1.
HEREDITARY ORAL DISEASES

Oral Disease

MODE OF
INHERITANCE
D z=Dominant R = Recessive S = Sex-linked IS = Intermediate
sex-linked

HERITABLE DEFECTS IN DENTITION WITHOUT GENERALIZED DEFECTS
Hypoplasia of Enamel Hypocalcification of Enamel Hypomaturatîon of Enamel Pigmented Hypomaturation of Enamel Local Hypoplasia of Enamel

Dentin Dysplasia Dentinogenesis Imperfecta Missing or Peg Laterals Missing Maxillary Incisors & Cuspids Missing Premolars
Missing Third Molars Gigantism of Maxillary Central Incisors Fused Primary Mandibular Incisors
Familial Dentigerous Cysts

_

SD D SR
R D (with incomp.
penetrance) D D D DoiR D D D

HERITABLE DEFECTS IN DENTITION WITH GENERALIZED DEFECTS
Dentinogenesis Imperfecta with Osteogenesis Imperfecta _ Enamel Hypoplasia in Vitamin D Resistant Rickets Enamel Hypoplasia with Epidermolysis Bullosa Dystrophia Local Hypoplasia of Enamel with Fanconi Syndrome Missing Teeth with Ectodermal Dysplasia Missing Premolars with Premature Whitening of Hair _.. Missing Lateral Incisors with Ptosis of Eyelid Retarded Eruption with Cleido-Cranial Dysostosis

D D (irregularly) R RÏ IS or D D D D

HERITABLE DEFECTS OF ORAL STRUCTURES WITHOUT GENERALIZED
DEFECTS
Ankyloglossia Elephantiasis Gingivae Harelip and Harelip with Cleft Palate

D D R?

HERITABLE DEFECTS OF ORAL STRUCTURES WITH GENERALIZED

DISEASES

Gangrenous Stomatitis with Aeatalasemia

Periodontis with Agammaglobulinemia Periodontitis and Osteoporosis of Jaw Bones with Thalas

semia Major

Alveolar Bone Changes in Sickle Cell Disease

Gingival and Postoperative Hemorrhage in Hemophilia

and Christmas Disease

Mucosal Telangiectasia in Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia (Olser)
Facial Angiomatosis with Sturge-Weber's Disease

Oral Hematomas with Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome

Facial Deformity in Gargoylism

Facial Deformity with Mandibulo-Facial Dysostosis (Fran-

ceschetti)

Facial Deformity with Cranio-Facial Dysostosis (Crouzon) Micrognathia with Pierre Robin Syndrome Hypoplasia of Maxilla with Achondroplasia

Multilocular Cystic Fibrous Dysplasia of the Jaws and Face

(Jones)

~

Osteosclerosis in Albers-Schönberg Disease Hyperostosis of Jaws in Generalized Hyperostotic Bone
Disease (Witkop)

Hypercementosis and Bone Changes in Osteitis Deformans

(Paget)

Neurofibroma and Pigmentation in Neurofibromatosis (von Recklinghausen)
Circum-Oral Pigmentation with Gastrointestinal Polyposis

(Peutz-Jegher)

____

Facial Pigmentation and Carcinomas of Lip in Xeroderma

Pigmentosum

Gingival and Lingual Amyloid Deposits in Familial Amy

loidosis

.

White Spongy Nevus of Mucous Membranes

R SR
R R
SR
D D (irregular) D R (RS)
D (irregular) D (irregular) R (incomp. dom.) D
D
D (irregular)
R
D (incomp.)
D
D
ISR or R D D

ACCURACY OF GENETIC PROGNOSIS
**· = accurate ·* = approximate
* = questionable
#*

18 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

fects that are hereditary in nature. We have investigated reports that dentists in a community see what is at first called fluorosis after 1 ppm of sodium fluoride is added to the water supply. On examining these children, we find as high as 15 per cent of them have some variation in the color of the teeth--usually a yellow. This is not fluorosis. One explanation may be that there are several forms of genetically controlled normal variants of enamel similar to the variants of hemoglobin. This would offer a possible explanation for the inconsistent results obtained in many attempts to determine the chemical and structural composition of enamel, and in turn account for the differences in D M F1 rates seen in members of the same family subjected to similar environmental influences.
Two hereditary defects of dentin were found in the survey: dentin dysplasia and dentogenesis imperfecta.
Dentin dysplasia is also known as rootless teeth. It is frequently misdiagnosed as dentinogenesis imperfecta (9). The crowns are well formed and normal in color. The roots may be absent, blunted or may be only short spicules. A characteristic chevron or half-moon-shaped remnant of pulp chamber is seen in the X-ray of these teeth. Root canals are usually absent. Many teeth show large radiolucent areas around the apices of the root. The condition is transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait.
Dentinogenesis imperfectahas been called opalescent dentin, Capdepont's teeth, odontogenesis imperfecta, hereditary brown teeth, and shell teeth. Many of these names originated because one or two of the many variations this condition shows were emphasized by the author as points of differential diagnosis. We have seen some 350 cases of this condition in extensive kindreds. We also have examined as many as 140 affected individuals in the same kindred and have seen all the variations ascribed to separate entities.
1Decayed, Missing and Filled--a standard of dental caries experience.

Dentinogenesis imperfecta occurs in the general population of Michigan about once in 8,000 individuals. In certain isolated populations the frequency is much higher (14). The teeth vary from an opalescent blue to an amber brown in color. The enamel may fracture from the defective dentin soon after eruption or may remain intact on the crowns of the teeth throughout life. The enamel may be normal or hypoplastic. The crowns are usually bulbous in shape and the roots short. The pulp chambers are usually absent, but may be normal in size or even very large, resulting in a shell tooth (8, 14). This condition is transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait with nearly complete penetrance.
The homozygous state for this condition was not seen, but in one marriage where both parents were affected the mother had seven pregnancies with only two viable offspring. Both children appeared to be hetterozygous for this condition. The other five pregnancies terminated in abortions between the second and fifth month of gestation. The homozygous state of these genes may be lethal. Linkage studies were carried out between dentinogenesis imperfecta and phenylthiocarbamide taste testing and secretor factor in saliva. In general, the same sibships were used for both the saliva and the taste testing. The results of the paired-sib analysis are presented in Table 2. It appears that there is probably linkage between dentinogenesis imperfecta and phenylthiocarbamide taste trait,

TABLE 2.
LINKAGE DATA

PAIRED SIB METHOD

Dentinogenesis Imperfecta--PTC

LL LU 28 13
x2 = 11.24

UL 10
d/ = l

uu Total
24 75 P<.001

Dentinogenesis Imperfecta--Secretor Factor

LL LU UL UU Total 19 19 11 11 60

19

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

Congenitally hereditary missing teeth dentinogenesis imperfecta, both with and

may show some variation in the number without bone disease, so that both severe

of teeth missing depending on whether the and mild forms of tooth defect may occur

person is heterozygous or homozygous for in the same kindred. In our cases the teeth

the gene involved (4). Some of these genes erupt early in the more severely affected in-

are relatively common in the population. dividuals. However, Pindborg (7) reports

Grahnen (1) reported prevalence of 5 to delayed eruption of the teeth. We have

6 per cent of missing teeth, excluding third seen the eruption of permanent teeth as

molars, in Swedish populations.

early as three years of age. There is another similarity to the congenita and tar-

Heritable Defects in Dentition With Generalized Defects
Dentinogenesis imperfecta sometimes occurs as part of the osteogenesisimperfecta syndrome (12). Dentinogenesis imperfecta may also occur as an independent hereditary trait as does blue sclerae and otosclerosis--the other manifestations of the fragile bone disease. Dentinogenesis imperfecta is found in familial cases of osteogenesisimperfecta and also in those apparently sporadic cases in which no affected predecessor can be detected. In several kindreds the tooth defect has proved to be a more reli-

da types of bone defect in that the teeth which erupt first are the most severely affected. The primary teeth, permanent first molars and incisors are usually very defective. The permanent cuspids and second molars, which erupt at 11 and 12 years of age, are less severely affected. There is apparently a tendency toward normal dentin formation in the teeth that develop later. The cuspid and second molar begin their development at about 2 to 3 years of age; therefore, the lessened severity of the defect in these teeth cannot be ascribed to hormonal changes in puberty.

able indication of affected individuals than In sections of bone from cases of osteo-

blue sclerae. In one such kindred the blue genesis imperfecta there is found a baso-

sclerae were absent, but the dominant in- philic, PAS positive substance not present

heritance of the trait could be traced in normal bone (6). A similar substance

through the members with defective teeth is found in teeth affected with dentinogen-

for three generations. The combination of esis imperfecta with or without osteogen-

fragile bones, dentinogenesis imperfecta and esis imperfecta.

blue sclerae then appeared in our proposi- Ectodermal dysplasia is a condition in

tus and three first cousins.

which the ectoderma portions of the tooth

It is not known whether dentinogenesis germs fail to develop properly, resulting in

imperfecta, occurring as a separate entity, absence of all or some of the teeth. Males

and dentinogenesis imperfecta with osteo- are more severely affected than females. genesis imperfecta are exactly the same This condition is classified as an interme-

condition (9). Schulze (11) claims that diate sex-linked trait, because females who

there are microscopic differences. How- carry this gene usually show absence of at

ever, there are a great number of similari- least one or two teeth or other stigmata of

ties between these two conditions. There this disease (10).

are also similarities between the tooth de-

fect and the bone defect.

Heritable Defects of Oral Structures

McKusick (6) states that there is a bell- Without Generalized Defects

shaped curve of severity of osteogenesis im- Ankyloglossia or tongue-tie appears to

perfecta and that the separation of the be dominantly inherited. We have been

congenita and tarda forms is somewhat ar- studying this condition and its effects on

tificial as both forms may occur in the speech in a population residing in South-

same family. A like situation exists for ern Maryland. We found during our den-

20 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

tal and medical studies that 50 people of the 731 examined had a prominent lingual frenUm that prevented them from raising the tip of the tongue beyond a point midway between the upper and lower incisor teeth when the mouth was opened to its fullest extent. The mode of inheritance of this condition is difficult to determine in most families, because in many new-born infants the frenum is cut, if it appears to interfere with tongue function.
Heritable Defects of Oral Structures With Generalized Defects
The Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is of particular interest to dentists because of the frequency with which these patients have post-operative complications of m a s s i v e edema and swelling. This condition has been neglected in the dental literature, and very few descriptions and reports of this disease appear anywhere (6). Yet, it is perhaps one of the most common connective tissue diseases encountered in Southern Maryland among a group selected as a control for our inbred population studies. Biochemical studies on these patients have failed to reveal any defect in hydroxyproline metabolism.
White spongy nevus of mucous membranes is of dental interest because it is sometimes misdiagnosed as precancerous leukoplakia. It has frequently been described as an oral lesion only but usually involves vaginal mucosa also (16).
A RESEARCH PROGRAM IN HEREDITARY
DISEASES
In 1955, we examined three individuals with dentinogenesis imperfecta who claimed vague relationship with one another. In trying to determine the exact relationship by kindred chartings, it soon became apparent that we were dealing with a most unusual family. In tracing all sides of all affected sibships, we found that only eight surnames appeared which were repeated with monotonous frequency. Other defects of a hereditary nature were found in

these families which included an ear defect, albinism, polycystic kidneys, deaf-mutism and Brailsford-Marquio's disease. Further investigation disclosed that we were dealing with a population isolate. This isolate comprises about 5,000 individuals of mixed racial ancestry who did not consider themselves Negro and were not admitted into the white marriage patterns of the community. We are now conducting extensive research on the social, medical, and dental aspects of this group. Because the inmarriage pattern has persisted in this population since before 1760, many recessive characteristics appear in the homozygous state. For example, 55 albinos have appeared in this population; 48 are living today. Seven hundred and thirty-one unselected individuals were examined this summer. Of this number 104 had positive sickling tests, including both SA and SS hemoglobin patterns. A rare peculiar form of recessive generalized hyperostotic bone disease was found in five members of one sibship. This disease has probably not been described before. All bones are affected. The first symptoms appear at about 4 to 5 years of age with a swelling, always on the right side of the jaw, accompanied by a seventh nerve paralysis which persists after the swelling subsides. Gradually both sides of the face are involved. Loss of hearing begins at about 6 to 9 years of age, and becomes progressively worse. A progressive retinal atrophy and exophthalmos develops. The base of the skull is involved in the hyperostotic process early, and eventually the jaws and facial bones show the hyperostotic changes of leontiasis ossea. The long bones show tremendous cortical thickening. They are considerably larger than normal but retain their normal configuration. The usual laboratory tests are within normal limits. There are no hematological changes. There is no history of fractures in these cases.
This population offers the opportunity to find matings rare in human material. In

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

21

diseases where the genetic factors are only fluoride in thewater supply. In the com-

contributory, it may be possible to further munities with fluoride in thewater supply

define the role heredity plays in their these rates are about 60per cent lower than

etiology. Forexample, after examining the communities without fluoride. In Prince

dental condition of 780patients, it was de- Georges and Charles Counties, Maryland,

termined that the D M F rates and the where this isolate resides, thefluoridecon-

lactobacillus counts2 were similar to those tent varied from .02ppm to .08 ppm--far

in communities with 1 ppm of sodium below that required to produce a decrease

2 A bacterial test of dental caries activity.

in caries activity.

REFERENCES

1. GRAHNEN, H. 1956. Hypodontia in the permanent dentition. Odont. Revy (Lund) 7 : 1-100.
2. HUNT, H. R. and HOPPERT, C. A. 1944. In-
heritance of susceptibility and resistance to caries in albino rats (Mus Norvegicus). J. Am. Coll. Dent. 1 1 : 33.
3. and BRAUNSCHNEIDER, G. E. 1947.
Hereditary and environmental factors influencing tooth decay in the albino rat (Rattus Norvegicus). R. Gen. Soc. Am. 1 6 : 37.
4. KEELER, C. E. 1935. Heredity in dentistry. Dent. Cosmos. 7 7 : 1147.
5. KIFER, P. E., et al. 1956. A comparison between the fissures of the lower molars of cariesresistant and caries-susceptible albino rats (Rattus Norvegicus). J. Dent. Res. 3 5 : 620629.
6. MCKUSICK, V. A. 1956. Heritable Disorders of Connective Tissue. Mosby Co., St. Louis.
7. PINDBORC, J. J. 1947. Dental aspects of osteogenesis imperfecta. Acta Path, et Microbiol. Scand. 2 4 : 47-58.
8. . 1948. Dentinogenesis imperfecta. Saertryk of Tandlaegebladet. 5 2 : 279-296.
9. RUSHTON, M. A. 1954. Anomalies of human dentine. Ann. Roy. Col. Surg. Eng 1 6 : 94-117.

10. SACKETT, L. M., MARANS, A. E. and HURSEY,
R. J. 1956. Congenital ectodermal dysplasia of the anhidrotic type. Oral Surg., Oral Med., and Oral Path., 9 : 659-665.
11. SCHULZE, C. 1957. Erbliche Strukturanomalien menschlicher Zahne. Proc. First Int. Cong. Human Genet., Acta Genet., 7 : 231-235.
12. SEEDORFF, K. S. 1949. Osteogenesis imperfecta. Opera Ex Domo Biol. Her. Human, Universitatis Hafneinsis, Kopenhaven, 2 0 : 229.
13. WEINMAN, J. P., SVABODA, J. F., and WOODS, R.
W. 1945. Hereditary disturbances of enamel formation and calcification, J. Am. Dent. As. 3 2 : 397-418.
14. WITKOP, C. J., DYSON, H. R. and SACKETT, L.
M. 1956. Hereditary defects occurring in a racial isolate residing in southern Maryland. Clin. Proc. Child. Hosp. Washington, D. C. 1 2 : 29-33. 15. . 1957. Hereditary defects in enamel and dentin. Proc. of the First Int. Cong. Human Genet., Acta Genet., 7 : 236-239.
16. ZEGARELLI, E. V. and KUTSCHER, A. H. 1957.
Familial white folded hypertraphy of the mucous membranes. Oral Surg., Oral Med., and
Oral Path. 10: 262-270.

DISCUSSION

CHAIRMAN BUGHER: I think we all appre-
cite the wealth of material which is available in the dental clinic. The accumulation of such data is an important function of the human geneticist.
I was curious myself about one thing, because you brought up the question of the lethality of the homozygous condition. I think that's the first mention of this problem. Are there others of these dental disturbances that have a similar feature?
DR. WITKOP: We don't know because these traits are so uncommon in the population that a mating which would give you a homozygous

offspring would be extremely rare. It was only in an isolated population, where people were forced by social and religious factors to marry within their ownkind, that a situation like this did turn up with any frequency.
Two such marriages have occurred where both parents have dentinogenesis imperfecta. One was in past generations where we cannot obtain good data on the mothers' pregnancies, but in this particular instance, where we do have information, the woman had been examined repeatedly after each miscarriage. These examinations did not reveal a specific cause of the miscarriages. Unfortunately none of the fetuses were examined microscopically.

22 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

QUESTION: Has the new syndrome been trait, have been shown to be genetically de-

given a name?

termined.

DR. WITKOP: We are calling it recessive generalized hyperostotic bone disease.
QUESTION: Would Dr. Witkop care to comment on the counseling aspects of this?
DR. WITKOP: I think Mrs. Dyson in the following paper will probably answer some of those questions. Certainly the health authorities in the County are concerned about the children needing glasses because of albinism, nystagmus and eye trouble.
The Howard Dental School has been repairing all the cases of dentogenesis imperfecta. They either extract the teeth and put in a denture, or else they crown the teeth which is a very expensive procedure.
DR. MAX LEVITAN: Are these conditions generally well known enough so that students in dental schools learn about them?
DR. WITKOP: In general, no. They usually learn about dentogenesis imperfecta, but this condition is confused in the dental literature with dentin dysplasia. As you can see, the two conditions that we differentiated here have certain similarities. Both lack root canals and pulp chambers. In fact the last two cases reported in the Journal of the American Dental Association were called dentogenesis imperfecta but were actually dentin dysplasia. These two conditions are entirely separate entities.
DR. BENTLEY GLASS: Most of these defects you have discussed are of the grosser type. I would like to ask if you also find an equal wealth of hereditary conditions that relate to the spacing of the teeth and the shapes of particular teeth, the things that the anthropologists are interested in.
DR. WITKOP: Yes. My objection to most studies on physical anthropology is they show that a trait is prevalent in a population and then say it must be heredity. I'm old-fashioned on these things. I'd like to have the families studied also.
However, there are differences in tooth form. Shovel-shaped incisors and large maxillary incisors, which seem to be inherited as a dominant

DR. ALLEN: Dr. Warkany has very impressively demonstrated the value of accurate diagnosis in family counseling. I believe that many of these conditions are so difficult to diagnose and so rare that the ordinary practicing dentist cannot be relied upon to give a differential diagnosis. In these situations I suspect that the counselor can neither resort to the aids that have been provided us nor to the risk figures but must study the family.
DR. WITKOP: That would be the best advice to give: to look and see how it is inherited in a family, and then make your prediction on that basis.
Two or three of these conditions are fairly well known and can be accurately diagnosed by an oral pathologist, but to differentiate among some of them is very difficult. As a general rule of thumb, if both dentitions are affected, it's usually genetically determined. I have seen conditions where this was not so, but the only thing I can say is that most dentists do not know what these conditions are. They usually attribute these defects to a fever in childhood or to some other sort of infectious disease occurring in the early period of life. Fevers and severe vitamin deficiencies early in life do cause defects that look similar to local hypoplasia, but there is nothing I have ever seen that causes dentin dysplasia, hypocalcification, or dentogenesis imperfecta, or hypoplasia of enamel where the enamel is very thin, that was other than a genetic defect.
CHAIRMAN BÛCHER: HOW broad our field of concern is, when you consider the variety of the scientific disciplines which are represented here today! Certainly, the public health nurse has been one on whom the public at large --parents, in particular--have relied and do rely with increasing frequency for sound advice and guidance in many fields, not the least of which is to assist with the genetic problem the family may be confronting. To discuss "Genetics in Public Health Nursing," we have Mrs. Hazel Dyson, who is not only a registered nurse but has a special interest in the field of dental research at the National Institute.

