Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Genetics in relation to cardiovascular diseases
Victor A. McKusick M.D.
To cite this article: Victor A. McKusick M.D. (1958) Genetics in relation to cardiovascular diseases, Eugenics Quarterly, 5:1, 30-36, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1958.9987344 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1958.9987344
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:24

GENETICS IN RELATION TO CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASES

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

VICTOR A. MCKUSICK, M.D.
Associate Professor of Medicine Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine

I N 1745 Lancisi remarked on the occur-
rence of aneurism of the heart, his term for cardiomegaly, in male members of three generations. Over a century earlier Peter Forestus had described a familial incidence of cerebral hemorrhage. In his magnum opus, Morgaeni described the cerebral hemorrhage of one Zani whose father had likewise died of "apoplexy." In moments of gloom, I think we are very little removed from the position of these %vriters of two and three centuries ago: Heart diseases tend to "run in families." My charge in this symposium, as I interpret it, is to survey in birds-eye manner how much further ahead, if at all, we are.
Probably all would agree that some genetic influence is involved in the pathogenesis of all four of the major varieties of cardiovascular disease: congenital malformations of the cardiovascular system, rheumatic fever, hypertension, and atherosclerosis, including coronary artery disease. Clearer operation of genetic factors is seen in the rare varieties of heart involvement occurring as part of tuberous sclerosis, the syndromes of Marfan and of Hurler, glycogen disease of the heart, progressive muscular dystrophy, myotonic dystrophy and Friedreich's ataxia. But we will confine our remarks to the Big Four.
For many reasons, the genetic factor is extraordinarily difficult to study in these disorders. Probably in no other major category of disease is multifactorial causation so complex. The multiple factors are both environmental and genetic. Obviously to state that genetic factors of some significance are involved in rheumatic fever does not deny the role of the streptococcus. To say that heredity is significant in atherosclerosis does not deny the significance of

diet. To point out a genetic factor in congenital heart disease does not exclude the important role of the intra-uterine environment, e.g., with reference to maternal infection.
The two biggest of the Big Four, hypertension and atherosclerosis, are not independent operators. Each potentiates the other and study of one must take the other into consideration.
In the case of rheumatic fever, heredity presumably determines why only certain of those individuals exposed to the appropriate streptococcus develop the disease. Were there a method for identifying the genetically susceptible individual, it might be possible to provide more economic and effective prophylaxis, especially to individuals in high-risk environmental situations such as barrack life. It would be of great interest, both theoretical and practical, to know what distinguishes the "rheumatophilic" individual from the general population and to know the mechanism of the genetic enhancement of susceptibility to rheumatic fever.
Although there are data which appear to leave no doubt of a genetic factor in this disease, rheumatic fever illustrates how easy it is to misinterpret certain observations as indicating a genetic basis. The idea emanated from Boston a few decades ago that persons with red hair, fair skin, freckles and blue eyes are more susceptible to rheumatic fever, presumably because of genetic constitution. This conclusion was probably based on the character of the Boston population at that time. Beginning in the middle of the last century, large numbers of Irish families immigrated. They lived under crowded and undernourished circumstances ideal for the development of rheu-

30

31

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

matic fever. Later as Irish immigration waned and the Irish already in Boston became more prosperous, immigration from southern Italy and Sicily increased. Families of Italian origin took over the cold-water flats, crowded living facilities and pick-andshovel work. Part passu the complexion of rheumatic fever in Boston changed, quite literally.
In recent years several excellent studies on the genetics of congenital malformations of the heart and great vessels have established the following generalizations:
1. An aggregation of cases in sibships occurs such that the incidence of cases among the sibs of probands is on the average increased 10 to 15 times over that in the general population and in the case of some types of malformation, 40 times.
2. The consanguinity rate is increased in the parents.
3. Congenital malformations of the heart occur rarely in two successive generations.
4. There is some increased concordance in monozygotic twins as compared with dizygotic.
5. There is an increased incidence among the first cousins of the probands.
6. About one-fifth of the cases, regardless of the specific type of the cardiovascular malformation, show other congenital malformations.
There is not complete agreement as to how much intrafamilial similarity there is in the variety of malformation.
Two general observations may be made. It is essential to consider the precise type of malformation separately. The genetic factor appears to be less important in some malformations, such as simple ventricular septal defect, than in others, such as pure pulmonary stenosis or patent ductus arteriosus. Intrafamilial similarities are more striking for some. Some malformations, specifically coarctation and patent ductus arteriosus, are at times transmitted through successive generations. As a result of the large concentrations of congenital heart cases in

places such as Paris (1), London (2) and Baltimore (3), excellent empiric risk figures are becoming available.

TABLE I

CROSS-BEAK IN CHICKENS

Breed

Sporadic After 40 mgm/egg Incidence ethyl carbamate

White Leghorn Black Minorca

0.20% 1.63%

6.8% 25.4%

Strain
1 2

HARELIP AND CLEFT PALATE IN MICE

Sporadic After Cortisone

Incidence

to Mother

5.0% 100% 0.2% 18.7%

(After Landauer)

A second point: one is reminded of the work of Landauer and others (Table I), who can produce congenital malformations with teratogenic agents with varying facility depending on the genetic strain of the experimental animal. Ethyl carbamate produces cross-beak in 6.8 per cent of white leghorns and 25.4 per cent of black Minorca. Comparing two strains of mice, one with a 5 per cent sporadic incidence of cleft palate and harelip and another with a 0.2 per cent incidence, it is found (4) that cortisone produces a 100 per cent incidence in the 5 per cent sporadic group and only 18.7 per cent in the other. Genetic and intrauterine environmental factors may well collaborate in the production of congenital malformations of the cardiovascular system, as in other congenital malformations (11) --one is reminded immediately of Mongolism.
The chart in Figure I is intended to indicate some of the factors responsible for atherosclerosis. I do not apologize one whit for its complexity, since this is the nature of the problem and this chart is doubtless already a gross over-simplification. Both the environmental and genetic factors are multiple. The proportions of each varies from case to case. Stress may contribute to hypertension and possibly even to hypercholesterolemia, both of which ac-

32 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

HEREDITY -- .

\ \ \
\

-ENVIRONMENT-
FIGURE 1.
celerate atherosclerosis. Diet, by reason of excess fats or the wrong kind of fat, perhaps by reason of deficiencies of pyridoxine, and possibly by other mechanisms not now known, may contribute to atherosclerosis. The genetic predisposition to atherosclerosis may operate through many avenues. Diabetes with its associated defect of lipid metabolism is one mechanism or perhaps a cluster of genetic mechanisms. Parenthetically, diabetes, per se exceedingly difficult of genetic analysis, illustrates how much more complex is the problem of atherosclerosis, to which it is but one contributing factor.
Probably variations in the pattern of distribution of arteries, such as the coronary and the cerebral, are to some extent genetically determined. These variations may be critical in determining the clinical effects of thrombosis and possibly some varieties may predipose to atherosclerosis through hemodynamic peculiarities. Accumulation of data on intrafamilial similarities of coronary or cerebral arterial patterns is difficult, requiring, as it does at present, necropsy determination. Wilkinson (13) postulates that atherosclerosis is "a process in which an inherited defect of arterial structure permits the development of placques under the influence of secondary factors.

such as hypertension, renal disease, and certain hormone imbalances." He pictures this arterial abnormality as "an inherent defect at the junction of the intima: and media." This suggestion should stimulate productive work. It is known that the coronary arteries of the male have a greater intimai thickness than those of the female from the early stages of development. Some families have a genetic defect of lipid metabolism, leading to hypercholesterolemia, in such pronounced form that it is possible to analyze this factor which overshadows the others. Reference is made to the work of Adlersberg (5), Wilkinson (6), and others (7). A genetic defect in the plasmaclearing mechanism is only speculative. There are other factors which influence blood lipids but are not covered in Figure 1, e.g., exercise and hormones.
The family history is of utmost importance in diagnosing coronary artery disease, let us say in a young man with chest pain, and in the planning of a dietary or other program for an individual or a family. In a recent joint report (8) the statement was made: "The evidence at present does not convey any specific implications for drastic dietary changes, specifically in the quantity or type of fat in the diet of the general population, on the premise that such changes will definitely lessen the incidence of coronary or cerebral disease." However, the report does state: "These conclusions obviously apply to the general population, and not to patients or to individuals with a strong family history of early deaths from cardiovascular disease." One is reminded of the well-known story of the man accused of stealing a jug: "Why, I have never as much as seen that jug; furthermore, it was cracked anyway."
The young coronary artery patient has been the object of study by several groups, including Yater (12) who used an army population, and by Gertler, White and others (9) who used a hospital and private practice population. Such studies demonstrate peculiarities which may have a gene-

33

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

tic basis. For example, Gertler and colleagues (9) found a deficiency of ectomorphic individuals in the young coronary population.
For prognosis and prevention, we should have information on what the young coronary victim looks like as a child and teenager. For this reason, we have undertaken to focus on the children of young coronary patients as much as on the proband.
In essential hypertension we again encounter the problem of multifactorial causation which is probably in part environmental, in part genetic. There is some reason to think that blood pressure is a continuous variable, which is age and sex dependent. The state we choose to designate hypertension is the arbitrary truncation of a distribution curve.
As in the case of atherosclerosis, in which the genetic factor is easiest to demonstrate in young coronary artery patients and in patients with a striking lipid defect overshadowing all other factors, so in hypertension the neatest category for study would appear to be malignant hypertension, that is, accelerated phase of essential hypertension. Some workers find a striking family history of hypertension in the majority of cases of malignant hypertension; when such a history is absent, primary renal disease or similar specific cause of the hypertension is suspected. (The results of some other workers are not in agreement, however.)
Pharmacology has two major divisions. One concerns itself with the question of whether a given drug is effective, the other with the mechanism of drug action. In clinical genetics we have a comparable dichotomy: Is there a genetic factor in a given disorder? What is the mechanism by which a genetic factor operates in the production of a given pathophenotype?
In our department Humphreys has recently demonstrated, by an ingenious method, the heritability of a tendency to hypertensive toxemia of pregnancy. He studied 100 toxemic women who were themselves born in the Johns Hopkins Hospital, and

whose mothers, by reason of the latter fact, were observed at that hospital during at least one pregnancy. When he compared this group with a similar group of 100 nontoxemic women, likewise born in the Johns Hopkins Hospital, Humphreys found an incidence of hypertensive toxemic over 2 Y2 times greater in the mothers of toxemic daughters than in the mothers of normotensive daughters (Table 2).

TABLE 2

Number in Experienced Born of Toxemic Group Toxemia Pregnancies

Probands 100

100

28

Controls 100

0

11

Thus, a familial and very likely a genetic factor has been demonstrated, but what is its mechanism, how do the toxemic lines differ from the non-toxemic lines?
Another colleague of mine, Caroline Bedell Thomas (10) has proposed certain guideposts in the prevention of heart disease of the hypertensive and atherosclerotic types. These guideposts are derived from the experience of others and from her own in the study of Johns Hopkins medical students. Dr. Thomas grades the probability of developing cardiovascular disease in four classes, depending on the parental history for hypertension and coronary artery disease and on certain traits displayed by the individuals. These traits probably also have, in considerable degree, a genetic basis. Inexact and empiric as it is, this type of approach is one of the best we have for guiding preventive measures at the clinical level, that is, at the level of the individual. In effect, it is an attempt to place on a more concrete basis that vague quantity known as "clinical judgment." A genetic assessment enables the susceptible individual to be pin-pointed and prophylactic measures to be arrived more effectively.
There is a prevalent conception that demonstration of a genetic factor means that treatment is hopeless. It is not necessary to point out to this group that such

34 Eugenics Quarterly*-

pessimism is unwarranted, that the ability to identify genetic susceptibles is the most promising attack on many of the major illnesses with which mankind is presently

afflicted, and that solutions to these problems through preventive medicine will be closer when characterization of the genetic factor is complete.

REFERENCES

1. LAMY, M., DF.GROUCHY, J. and SCHWEISCUTH, O.
1957. Genetic and non-genetic factors in the etiology of congenital heart disease: a study of 1188 cases. Am. J. Human Genet. 9 : 17.

8. STARE, F. J., CORCORAN, A. C, POLLACK, H.,
PAGE, I. H. and WILKINSON, C. F., JR. 1957.
Atherosclerosis and the fat content of the diet. Circulation 1 6 : 163.

2. POLANI, P. E. and CAMPBELL, M. 1954-1955. An
aetiological study of congenital heart disease. Ann. Human Genet. 1 9 : 209.

9. GERTLER, M. M., WHITE, P. D., et al. 1954.
Coronary Heart Disease: A Multidisciplinary Study. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

3. NEILL, C. Baltimore: Personal communication. 10. THOMAS, C. B. 1957. Characteristics of the indi-

4. LANDAUER, W. 1957. Phenotypes and genotypes,

vidual as guideposts to theprevention of heart

with special reference to sporadically-occurring

disease. Am. Int. Med. 4 7 : 389.

developmental variants. Am. Naturalist 1 9 1 : 11. FRASER, F. C. 1955. Thoughts on the etiology

79. of clefts of the palate and lip. Acta genet, et

5. ADLERSBERC, D. 1951. Hypercholesteremia with

stat. med. 5 : 358.

predisposition to atherosclerosis: an inborn er- 12. YATER, W. M., et al. 1948. Coronary artery dis-

ror of lipid metabolism. Am. J. Med. 1 1 : 600. ease in men 18to 39years of age; report of866

6. WILKINSON, D. F., HAND, E. A., and FLIEGELMAN,

cases, 450 with necropsy examinations. Am.

M. T. 1948. Essential familial hypercholesterol-

Heart J. 3 6 : 334-372, 481-526, 683-722.

emia. Am. Int. Med. 2 9 :671.

13. WILKINSON, C. F., JR. 1957. Drugs other than

7. WHEELER, E. O. 1957. The genetic aspects of

anticoagulants in thetreatment of atherosclero-

atherosclerosis. Am. J. Med.2 3 : 653.

sis. J.A.M.A. 163: 927.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

DISCUSSION

CHAIRMAN BUGHER: We have a very few cortisone than in the strain that does notshow

minutes here for additional discussion and these anomalies without treatment. This to my

questions.

knowledge has not general significance. We

have Dr. Fraser and Dr. Kalter here, who can

DR. MCKUSICK: I am prompted to ask Dr. discuss that much better, and I wonder if they

Warkany whether he investigated the family could say something about that point. history of cleft palate due to aminopterin, or

whether the family history in any of these DR. H. KALTER: First, it should be remem-

aminopterin-induced abortions has been looked bered that the spontaneous anomaly occurring

into. in theA strain of mice is cleft lip with or with-

out cleft palate, whereas the cortisone-induced

DR. WARKANY: I did not ask about cleft malformation is cleft palate without cleft lip,

palate in this family as yet. At the time this and that the embryogenesis of these conditions

child wasborn the conditions were not favor- is different from each other. Second, although

able for obtaining a good family history. How- the A strain is more susceptible to cortisone-

ever, I would like to say one word about the induced cleft palate than are the DBA and

concept that teratogenic factors just increase C57BL/6 strains, which do not have spontane-

the incidence of malformations that occur in ous cleft lip, A mice are not always moresus-

certain stocks spontaneously and sporadically. ceptible than the latter strains to the cleft

You showed Dr. Fraser's figures where this palate-inducing properties of teratogens, as has

seems to be borne out, since in the strain of been shown by our recent experiments using

inbred mice where cleft palate occurs spon- riboflavin deficiency.

taneously a higher incidence wasproduced by A clear though not always recognized mor-

35

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

phological and embryological distinction exists between cleft lip versus cleft palate, which may not always exist between other spontaneous and induced anomalies that closely resemble each other. But until the detailed pathogenesis and morphology of the similar conditions is worked out, it is not legitimate to assume that the teratogen has merely increased th eincidence of the spontaneous malformation.
CHAIRMAN BÛCHER: I don't think that anyone could very successfully dispute the value of as many accurate observations as possible in the family history with respect to any of these matters.
DR. ALLEN: I don't think this matter should be left very definitely one way or the other. There is a wealth of information from experimental genetics about production of defects as phenocopies in just those strains that are genetically disposed to the same defects spontaneously. There are therefore grounds for assuming a predisposition, as well as for questioning it, in any particular instance of defect.
COMMENT: In Dr. Warkany and Dr. Kalter and Dr. McKusick, I see a tendency toward an all-or-none type thinking, which is not good for consultant purposes. Very often, it seems to me, heredity is assigned causation by default.
If the investigator or the counselor has failed to recognize that they have a case where they can't identify anything genetic, that is, a family history, do you have any assurance at all, if you can identify neither family history nor etiologic environmental agents, in saying that it isn't going to happen again? In other words, you are as much in the dark with the environmental agents as you are with the so-called genetic factors.
As to the aminopterin-induced abnormality: if you can identify something environmental that is unusual, are we any more certain that we may ascribe with justification anything that may happen to the environmental than to the genetic?
DR. GLASS: I dislike to refer to my own work, but since the challenge has been thrown out I would like to point out that there are cases in genetics which have been studied for

many years and which show very clearly indeed that the ability for the production of various kinds of abnormal growth is dependent upon the presence of a particular genetic basis. Let me refer the commentator to a paper published just two weeks ago in Science.
DR. C. NASH HERNDON: I would like to ask if these two concepts are in any way mutually incompatible.
DR. GLASS: Not at all.
DR. HERNDON: It seems to me that, if one considers the question of penetrance of genes, it is not unlikely that environmental stress of a wide variety of types could bring a gene normally not penetrant into a penetrable state, and, similarly, that one might induce a clinically indistinguishable effect by a teratogenic agent.
DR. POTTER: I'd like to change the subject just a little bit and comment on one of the tables Dr. McKusick showed in relation to the babies who were born of toxemic pregnancies. I would like to know whether they have separated the two types of toxemia. I think it's generally accepted that you have one form, preeclamptic toxemia, which differs from hypertensive toxemia, and if you lump the two together you probably get into a state where you have relatively little information.
Is this hypertensive toxemia? And if it is, is it primarily a manifestation of the importance of a hypertensive background rather than toxemia proper? Is it preeclamptic toxemia, or is it a combination of both?
DR. MCKUSICK: I would like very much to go over all these data with you, but in general the hypertensive toxemia for the purposes of this study was defined in terms of blood pressure only, and diastolic blood pressure in excess of 90 was the criterion. Systolic blood pressure was not used because of apparent variability on exogenous bases. No one was included in the study who, by any evidence, was a chronic hypertensive on any other basis, such as pyelonephritis.
Another aspect of the study was a follow-up on the mothers of these women, done exclusive-

36 Eugenics Quarterly

ly, with the obvious difficulties, through the unit records of the patients which, of course, meant that every visit to the hospital was incorporated in the same record. So 60 or 65 per cent in each group had ten-year follow-ups, and something approximating half that figure had 20-year follow-ups. There is a statistically significant greater incidence of hypertension in the mothers of toxemic daughters. There also is, however, this same situation in the toxemic mothers of normal daughters, and I think this fits together. We interpreted this finding as indicating that hypertensive toxemia of pregnancy is one expression of a familial tendency to hypertension of the more conventional, or perhaps the regular, variety.

CHAIRMAN BÛCHER: I think that this brings us to the end of our allotted time for the morning session. I'm sure that I speak for everyone here in thanking our speakers for their generosity and helpfulness and labor in laying before us all of this extremely interesting and valuable material and comment.
Now, I hope that perhaps Mr. Osborn may have a suggestion as to the next order of events here.
MR. OSBORN: The next order of business is lunch. We want everybody to know that there's a buffet luncheon downstairs, to which everyone is invited and to which we all may help ourselves.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

