Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Comment: Medical arts congress at Turin: With international symposium of medical genetics
Franz J. Kallmann M.D.
To cite this article: Franz J. Kallmann M.D. (1957) Comment: Medical arts congress at Turin: With international symposium of medical genetics, Eugenics Quarterly, 4:3, 162-163, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1957.9987324 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1957.9987324
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:24

162 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

COMMENT
Medical Arts Congress at Turin: With International Symposium of Medical Genetics
The Third International Congress of Medical Arts, sponsor of a number of specialized international symposia including one on Medical Genetics, was held June 1-9, 1957 at the Valentino Exposition Hall in Turin, Italy. The congress was conducted with laudable proficiency and on a grand scale, and took place in a most dignified and beautiful setting. The various sessions were exceedingly well attended by professional men from all over the world, including sizeable contingents of medical specialists.
In addition to Medical Genetics and Statistics, Mental Hygiene, and Social Psychology, the following subjects were covered by well-organized symposia: History of Medicine; Vestibular Function; Physiology; Cardiovascular, Plastic and Orthopedic Surgery; Photobiology; Pharmacology and Chemotherapy; Parasitology; Dermatology; and Nuclear Medicine. Particular emphasis was placed on those fields where important recent advances had occurred. Generally speaking, it was an extremely timely congress, with discussion of all subjects on an uncommonly high level of competence.
From the standpoint of human genetics, the congress meant a remarkable step forward, for it was one of the first times that genetics was officially recognized as one of the important medical specialties. Speakers went out of their way to accord this new discipline the deserved position of equality, thus bearing witness to the fact that medical genetics has finally attained a real place in medicine.
Two developments seemed to have mainly been responsible for this salute to human genetics. First was the discovery that the specificity of blood groups depended

on gene action. Second was worldwide recognition of the serious threat posed by radiation and the danger of mutations. Suddenly, people appeared to be aware everywhere that radiation and radioactive fallout may cause mutations leading to pathology.
A highlight of the program was the conferring of honorary medical degrees by the School of Medicine of the University of Turin. At a ceremony conducted with characteristic Old World charm and tradition, the progress of medicine in a number of diverse areas was celebrated and applauded. It was an event long to be remembered by those present.
The illustrious company of six scientists so honored, among whom the writer was privileged to be numbered, were George de Hevesy of Stockholm, Nobel Prize laureate and pioneer in nuclear medicine; Charles B. Huggins of Chicago, hormonal treatment of cancer; Franz J. Kallmann of New York, psychiatric genetics; Jonas E. Salk of Pittsburgh, polio vaccine; Paul Santy of Lyons, cardiovascular (mediastinal) surgery; and Arthur Stoll of Monaco, alkaloid chemistry.
Against this impressive medical backdrop the two-day symposium on medical genetics was held, under the chairmanship of Luigi Gedda of the University of Rome. The meeting was devoted primarily to a discussion of the genetic aspects of tuberculosis and cancer, the morning session of the first day being given over to tuberculosis, with individual papers presented both afternoons.
Participating in the symposium on genetically determined variations in resistance to tuberculosis were F. J. Kallmann, L. Gedda, G. L'Eltore of Rome (on familial accumulation),, and F. Keiter of Hamburg (polygenic mode of inheritance).
This reporter emphasized that despite remarkable advances in controlling tuberculosis, neither the question of causation nor the problems of prevention and treatment can be regarded as solved. The recent

163

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

decline in the prevalence of the disease has lagged behind that in mortality, and little is known about the nature o£ gene-specific variations in antimicrobial defense mechanisms. The theory of a polygenic basis for variable resistance to tuberculosis was shown to be supported by all available serial twin data (1 Argentine, 1 NorthAmerican and 3 European samples with a total of 698 index pairs) and to be fully compatible with giving recognition to all medical services directed toward attacking the tubercle bacillus. In fact, "reluctance to recognize the operation of any genetic elements in this disease may have such disadvantageous consequences as (1) delay in the search for definitive biochemical correlates of gene-specific deficiencies determining low resistance to tuberculosis; (2) hazardous increase in the number of low-resistance carriers with a chance of reproduction, expected as the result of assortative mating trends and improved medical techniques; and (3) further increases in the mutation rate of populations, due to excessive use of ionizing radiation."
The topic for the second day was the genetic aspect of cancer, with the following research workers participating in the discussion: G. Gianferrari (moderator), G. Arrigoni, P. E. Beolchini, A. Bonino, A. Cresseri, A. Lovati, G. Morganti, A. Musini, M. G. Ronzoni, A. Serra, and G. TorrioliRiggio. In the afternoon session, A. Bedina, B. DeMaria and R. Peruzzotti joined the panel speakers in presenting blood group data in relation to cancer and other conditions.
Although a uniform set of statistical procedures was used by the investigators, the statistical data concerning a demonstrable genetic component in the etiology of various forms of cancer were inconsistent. Statistically significant evidence for a tendency to familial incidence was obtained in regard to leukemia as well as to cancer of the breast, uterus, prostate and stomach, but not for cancer of the bladder. The meaning of the statistics presented was discussed

at length and by an impressive array of prominent experts. One of the unresolved questions was whether the quality of the raw data was sufficiently homogeneous for the application of complex statistical methods.
The somewhat inconclusive tenor of this session drove home once again how much more we need to know in order to be able to understand statistical genetic data. It was revealing to observe the humility and scientifically detached attitude of dedicated research workers who had spent a lifetime at their work in the difficult field of human genetics.
Of the various papers read in the afternoons, those of particular interest here included reports by R. Turpin (genetic risks of radiation); L. Gedda and F. Gentili (prenatal diagnosis of anencephaly in one twin); M. Lamy et al. (relationship between the Bonnevie-Ulrich and Turner syndromes); and F. van den Bosch (a newly observed syndrome distinguished by an association of intellectual, ocular and dermatologie defects with a still undefined metabolic dysfunction).
Technical arrangements for translation and transmission o£ speeches were about as fine and well-organized as any this observer has found anywhere. An excellent loudspeaker system carried the voices of the translators, seated in individual cubicles, to all parts of the large hall. As it happened, there were relatively few English-speaking participants.
Italian warmth and hospitality, as manifested throughout the congress, left nothing whatever to be desired. Similar genetic symposia should be held regularly in other parts of the world. All the papers presented at this symposium will be published in a forthcoming issue of the Acta Geneticae Medicae et Gemellologiae.
FRANZ J. KALLMANN, M.D.
New York State Psychiatric Institute
Columbia University

