Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Report on the development of the family planning program in Taiwan
S. C. Hsu
To cite this article: S. C. Hsu (1963) Report on the development of the family planning program in Taiwan, Eugenics Quarterly, 10:3, 135-138, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1963.9987557 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1963.9987557
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

REPORT ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE FAMILY PLANNING PROGRAM IN TAIWAN

S. C. Hsu Rural Health Division
Joint Commission on Rural Reconstruction, Taiwan

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Birth control or child spacing wastaboo in Taiwan, as in many other countries, ten or twelve years ago.Two potent forces have helped to change the situation: first, increasing population pressure, and second, the persistence of an active nucleus of persons in taking appropriate action to win public support. The experience of Taiwan may be useful to countries where rapid growth is creating similar problems which would beameliorated by the general practice of family planning.
That population has become a problem in Taiwan may be seen from the facts listed below:
1. Taiwan ranks among the countries with the highest rates of population increase in the world. With an annual rate of natural increase of 31.6per thousand, it will take only 23.5 years to double the 1961 population of 11million, if the rate of increase remains constant.
2. The density of population is high. In 1961 there were 310persons per square kilometer of the total area of Taiwan, which is second only to the Netherlands (349.7 in 1959). The density per square kilometer of cultivated land in the same year was 1,279 persons, which is second only to Japan (1,527 in 1959).
3. Because of increasing consumption of staple foods, it was necessary to import rice in 1960, and in 1961 rice imports exceeded exports. Imports of wheat have also been increasing, as shown in Table 1.

4. Local governments are finding it difficult to maintain essential services for the growing needs of increasing numbers. Education maybe taken as an example.
Beginning at agesix,education is compulsory for all children in Taiwan. The Constitution provides that the county or municipal government shall spend no less than 35% of its annual budget for primary school education. Because of the growing numbers of children of school age, most counties and cities in Taiwan have had to appropriate ever greater amounts in excess of this minimum, at the expense of their over-all reconstruction programs. In the 11 years beginning in 1950,the number of schools increased 31%but the student population doubled. Classrooms are overcrowded, even with a half-day system of instruction for pupils in grades one to four. County and township governments have found it increasingly difficult to bear their share of the building cost to match the provincial contribution for the construction of additional classrooms, and they are unable to appropri-

TABLE 1

IMPORT AND EXPORT OF STAPLE FOODS*

Calendar Rice Year Exports

Rice Imports

Wheat Imports

1955 1956
1957 1958 1959 1960 1961

190 86 144.5 195.7 160.1 35.0 70.0

0 0
0 0 0 31.6 100.0

159.9 185.3
238.2 233.0 215.9 252.1 273.9

·In metric tons.

135

136 Brief Reports

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

ate the funds necessary for improvement of existing facilities, such as installation of electric lighting and white plastering and painting to improve illumination.
Thus the hard facts of population increase are becoming clear to the Taiwanese. Recognition of the population problem and willingness to cope with it have been growing. A gradual change has taken place in private and official attitudes concerning the spacing of children and control of family size. Some highlights of this development are outlined below.
In 1950 the JCRR prepared and distributed a portfolio and pamphlet on family welfare and the spacing of children, based on the rhythm method. The material was generally well received, but there was some bitter and vocal opposition, based on fear of a Communist plot to weaken the fighting power of Free China. The Premier and Governor were sympathetic to the JCRR and recognized the need for fertility control, but could not endorse any measures because of Dr. Sun Yat-sen's contrary teaching on the subject. No action was taken, and a quiescent period followed.
The JCRR took up action again in 1952, when it sponsored a three-year pilot population study aided by the Rockefeller Foundation. The study was designed and directed initially by Dr. George W. Barclay of the Office of Population Research of Princeton University, whose "Report on Taiwan Population" was published in 1954. The report revealed a large increase in mortality and adoption rates of children in proportion to size of family. Government and Party officers and university professors were made aware of these findings in the monthly classes for political orientation which were conducted by the National Government. By this means prejudice on the population problem and the

topic of family planning was somewhat neutralized.
The next important step was taken in August, 1954, when the China Family Planning Association, the first such organization in Chinese history, was officially registered with the Ministry of Interior. It was organized by leaders of both sexes, including legislators, professors, Kuomintang Party members, and government officials. From the second year of its establishment the Association has been subsidized by an annual appropriation of the Provincial Government.
The Association began its program, which included treatment for sterility as well as child spacing, on a small scale in villages inhabited by military dependents, in order to determine if family planning was needed and accepted by the people. These activities were warmly welcomed, and the program was extended to the whole island, with similar reception by both local and mainland Chinese. Because of the limited funds available, the Association now confines its activities to the families of personnel of government enterprises, such as the Taiwan Power Company, Taiwan Sugar Corporation, Chinese Petroleum Corpoporation, and members of the Keelung Fishermen's Association.
In 1959, Prepregnancy Health was adopted by the Provincial Government as an integral part of the Maternal and Child Health program. Government hospitals and health organizations were required to open prepregnancy clinics, with the function of preparing expectant mothers for their next pregnancy by proper spacing. Since then the Provincial Health Administration has established such clinics at 117 health stations and in about half a dozen provincial hospitals.
Controversy flared up again; as before,

Family Planning on Taiwan

137

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

opposition concentrated on the fear of weakening the military strength of Taiwan. The Government's position was strengthened by considerations of the economic investment and time required before today's infants could become soldiers while, at the same time, the population would double and the resources needed to support a war would be consumed by increased numbers. National strength, it was argued, depended more immediately on the welfare of children already born, and on the health of mothers, both of which called for spacing of births and control of family size.
In spite of opposition, family planning continued to win supporters. At the biennial meeting of the Chinese Medical Association in 1960, child spacing was accepted unanimously as an integral part of medical and health care. This action by a professionally expert nonpolitical body was regarded as important support for the government in the controversy regarding child spacing. Further endorsement was provided by the adoption of family planning as one of the activities of the Provincial Farmers' Association at its annual meeting in 1960.
As mentioned earlier, Sun Yat-sen's teaching regarding fertility control had been interpreted in 1950 as prohibiting government support of JCRR's action at that time. In the changed climate of 1961, the Kuomintang Party was able to re-examine the problem. The Kuomintang population policy, as formulated in 1945 at its Sixth Plenary Session, had contemplated a reasonable increase of the population through reduction of the death rate and the promotion of health, and improvement of the racial stock by encouraging individuals of superior quality to multiply. In January 1961, the Kuominatang Central Headquarters sought the advice of a group of officers, professors, and specialists,

regardless of political background, who were kown to be interested in the population problem. Because family planning is aimed at better health and a strong race, it was found to be consistent with Kuomintang policy. The conferees recommended that family planning be promoted and that the Kuomintang use its influence to gain more positive support for the work.
Stimulated by public discussion, general interest in the population problem in Taipan is growing. During the past few years several newspapers in Taipei have conducted informal meetings of religious, political, economic, social, medical and health leaders, representing contradictory points of view. Participants were invited to express their own views without disputing with others. All these individual opinions were later published in the newspapers.
By 1961 it was possible to plan and set up a long-range population study project, for which the JCRR sought outside help. The Population Council of New York has undertaken initia] support for the project, and provided technical assistance. Through arrangements made by the Council, the University of Michigan agreed to cooperate with the Taiwan Provincial Health Administration for joint sponsorship of a Population Studies Center, associated with the Maternal and Child Health Institute in Taichung. The project combines an action program for promoting prepregnancy health and family planning in the entire city of Taichung, with scientific evaluation of the results.
No really effective large-scale family planning program can be carried out without governmental blessing and support. Opposition was voiced in the Legislative Yuan by a legislator who requested prohibition of all family plan-

138 Brief Reports

ning activities, including the Population Studies Center and the prepregnancy health activities of the Maternal and Child Health Institute. In a memo to the Legislative Yuan dated March 26, 1962, Premier Chen Chen replied to that request. Excerpts from the Premier's memo may be quoted as an authoritative statement of the government's position:
"The population studies and experiments conducted by the Maternal and Child Health Institute of the Taiwan Provincial Health Administration are for the purpose of analyzing the factors of population growth in Taiwan so as to form a basis for finding out the best ways of promoting maternal health and taking care of babies and children. Population is an essential element of the nation. Any conduct which is detrimental to it, such as abortion, infant exposure, etc., is prohibited by law. Although the popu-

lation of Taiwan has been growing rapidly in recent years, the Government has made great efforts for economic development, improvement of public health and expansion of educational facilities to meet the increasing needs. However, child-bearing is purely a personal affair which the peoeple may decide for themselves and the Government is not in a position to interfere with it. Therefore, the family planning activities among the people cannot very well be prohibited."
The present situation presents a challenge to those concerned with the family planning program, particularly the medical and health personnel in Taiwan, to cope effectively with population pressure, one of the major threats to economic development. The pilot program in Taichung is demonstrating what can be done. Future success may be used as a lever for later actions of wider scope.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

