Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Changes in American marriage patterns
Nelson N. Foote
To cite this article: Nelson N. Foote (1954) Changes in American marriage patterns, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:4, 254-260, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987206 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987206
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 16 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

Family Life Division

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

CHANGES INAMERICAN MARRIAGE PATTERNS

And theRole of Women*

NELSON N. FOOTE
Director, Family Study Center University of Chicago

IN THEUNITED STATES, generations, areas,
classes, and ethnic and religious groups differ widely as to their previous patterns and their rates of change in women's roles within marriage. Nonetheless it seems valid and useful to assert that in general the direction of change is the same among all strata. There areno effective counter-movements, only varying degrees of opposition, hesitancy and venturesomeness, toward development of a wifehood and motherhood characterizable as yet only in the tentative terms or dimensions of a rudimentary prototype.
That such a consistent prototype appears to beemerging in America is a consequence of a battery of powerful common influences, some of which are so comprehensive in their bearing upon social life that they shall only be listed:
1. The equalization of real family income, concurrently with itsrapid rise, especially during thepast half-generation.
2. The thorough diffusion of favored cultural patterns, through restless internal migration and travel, almost universally enjoyed media of mass communication, and high levels of education.
3. An operative ideal of equality of opportunity, to which every minority or disadvantaged person can make public appeal.
Influences which bear more specifically upon the wifely role will be noted as its
·Presented at the World Population Conference, Rome, September 1954.

salient aspects--and needed qualifications of their generality--are described.
Women of the educated and mostly salaried upper middle class are leaders, models and mentors in moving the public toward the prototype hypothesized. This not unwitting bias accounts for their prominence in the analysis below. No comprehensive survey exists, but citations are available for all statements of fact.1
Decline inEconomic Dependence
Legal disabilities of women were felled after World War I, but only World War II and full employment since have given them substantial movement into all jobs and toward equal payfor equal work. Recent reports by theWomen's Bureau of the U. S. Department of Labor show, among other marked shifts, 27percent of allwives in the labor force (1953). A wife's sense of economic dependence upon her husband is in severe decline, even if not working, when she feels she can work if shewishes, and at the cost of no severe decline in status or standard of living.
Married women were discriminated against during the depression; their sense of economic independence may thus depend upon continued full employment, but it may be more permanently structured. To illustrate, successive reductions of the normal work-day and work-week, concurrently abetted by lowerings of time taken up by conducting a household, let many women enter the labor force who
1 Among sources contributing to the general estimate attempted here, thereferences cited at the end of this article were especially helpful.

254

255

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

could not when job and home each were full-time. Further shortening of the workday and work-week has general appeal and becomes more feasible as productivity rises. Institutionalization of maternity leave in contracts is also probably durable.
Increased divorce rates in recent decades may partly demonstrate that wives can now leave their husbands with less fear of hardship. From the husband's viewpoint, this may make a marriage more precarious, but to the wife it gives greater power to insist that the marriage be satisfactory. The decline of alimony awards may signify legal recognition of the availability of self-support.
Segregation of the sexes among types of employment and physically at work is diminishing, i.e., men and women are increasingly working together at the same jobs as well as similar pay. The equalization of social status implied constitutes an example to the community at large. Another function of co-employment is exposure of women to a wider range of potential marriage (and re-marriage) partners, thus further reducing male advantage and strengthening the wife's position. Some husbands complain frankly to interviewers that working wives are hard to control, yet women ever married in the labor force have doubled since 1940.
More Financial Responsibility
Due mainly to the mounting kinds and degrees of wives' contributions to family income, but aided by increasing male confidence in their judgment, the earlier pattern of predominant male voice in expenditure is giving way to varied arrangements. Wifely participation in determining expenditures is less often through adoption of a rigid division of income and more through discussion and repeated readjustments. A substantial minority handle all family accounts.
Among urban white-collar groups, wives contribute especially heavily to family in-

come during the earliest years of marriage. Some married students are totally supported by wives while completing their educations, without embarrassment. Whether cause or effect of earlier marriage, parents of both are freer in aiding young couples. The traditional sentiment that the new husband must support his wife as her father did has attenuated in nearly all strata, in favor of a desire by wives to share in their husbands' upward financial struggles. The evidence is chaotic but suggests that wifely income, while no longer conceived as pin money for purchasing extras and luxuries, has not, except in poor families, become yet quite as essential as the husband's. Being lower than his as a rule, it still tends to be conceived as supplementing and stabilizing his. Nevertheless, as already experienced by some couples, when her earning power comes close to his, its loss due to pregnancy can be quite destabilizing in the absence of a prudent schedule of saving and expenditure. Taking this into account makes the heaviest incidence of the baby boom among whitecollar couples even more hard to explain but strengthens the expectation that these women may want to resume work, unless their husbands' incomes continue to rise rapidly.
Public recognition of the variability of these arrangements is found in the law which permits husband and wife to decide each year to file separate or joint income tax returns, and to claim appropriate allowances for dependents. As a time for self-conscious review and planning, this filing period invites scrutiny for understanding decision-making on income, expenditure and fertility.
More Sharing of Authority
Participation by wives in family decisionmaking extends beyond financial matters and is being enhanced by a variety of influences other than economic. Along with easing of legal barriers to divorce, the sanction of public opinion against it as shame-

256 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ful has crumbled. Three-fourths of the divorced soon remarry. As an ultimate defense against unilateral assertion by husbands, wider availability of divorce conditions all marriages. Whether it does so by causing mates to try less hard to master crises, or whether relationships are improved by the limitation of male authority, is unfortunately a much-debated issue as yet unsettled by research. Several studies summarized by Goode agree on a substantial inverse correlation between economic status and frequency of divorce, with professional groups--the most equalitarian-- divorcing least.
Male pretensions to superior authority are widely ridiculed in contemporary comedy, cartoons, children's literature and other forms of popular art. Patriarchal enclaves are steadily dissolving through acculturation. The common encouragement of adolescents to achieve independence tends to focus on fathers and tempers young adult male performance in turn. Masculine domination through greater physical strength, corporal punishment and open violence have diminished in even the most patriarchal strata, perhaps indirectly due to decline of occupations demanding arduous manual labor and the rise of those rewarding education and social skill. Several surveys turn up men wanting their wives to be less dominated than their mothers were, none wanting the opposite.
The role of the wife in sharing authority is concurrently being strengthened positively by her higher education, wider contact outside the home, the exercise of responsibility in civic associations, and explicit encouragement by "experts." The increased emotional intensity and psychological interdependence on which observers agree, resulting from the small family's isolation from kin and parents, make the giving and withdrawing of affection a potent sanction of sharing. It is significant here that upper occupational groups are the most migratory save farm labor.

Less Division of Labor
A more or less pronounced differentiation between male and female tasks in the home has traditionally been regarded as a fundamental feature of family organization. But in those marriages among the urban, educated classes which have been taken as prototypical of change in all strata, there remain only two or three tasks securely monopolized by one sex, childbearing and sewing by the wife, and the most arduous physical maintenance chores by the husband. Painting, repairing, fueling, car-washing, though still mainly performed by husbands, are increasingly undertaken by wives, often with their husbands, often alone. Wives in rural and lower classes have often performed men's work, but more fortunate women have both avoided and been denied it. Such women are losing their inhibitions against it, concurrently with abandonment of restraints upon participation freely with men in physical play and sports. Sport clothing, in fact, is commonly the garb of suburban wives in such tasks, and their attitude corresponds.
On the side of the husband, the same crossing of ancient boundaries is fast becoming commonplace among the more culturally-alert and servantless segments. Diaper-changing, dish-washing, cooking, cleaning, laundering, shopping--tend to become duties shared with the wife, especially when she works outside. Such sharing fluctuates, rotates and changes unevenly, frequently provoking conflict. If sewing were not in severe decline generally in American homes, husbands might have invaded even this province; the main restraint against it has been implicit loss of masculine standing if they do so before public opinion legitimizes it. Thus American wives, between mechanization of the smaller home, factory-provided services, and husbandly assistance in their chores, are progressively relinquishing a traditional raison d'être, but are gaining greater

257

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

companionship with their husbands and more freedom for leisure pursuits than they are fully prepared to utilize. Some resent this trend as somewhat a usurpation of their prerogatives, especially child-rearing, some feel bereaved of function, but most welcome it.
More Companionship with Husband
Companionship is further advanced in play than in work, either inside or outside the home, save in declining family enterprises like farming and retailing. They attract favorable comment, but very few couples have been able to coordinate their careers and circumvent anti-nepotism rules to work together at the same vocation. But the decline of segregated amusements and voluntary association is pronounced, whereas formerly men monopolized political bodies, women, cultural societies, and adult fraternities and sororities thrived. Coeducation has been a major influence in this trend, great state universities supplying a model.
It appears probable that the urban husband spends more hours per week in the company of his wife than in any decade since industrialism removed production from the home. It is becoming impolite to invite husbands only or wives only to most functions; and agreement upon friends and outside interests now appears as important in marital adjustments as approval by each other's previous families.
In 60 years the median age of males at first marriage dropped from 26.1 to 22.6; of females, from 22.0 to 20.4. Earlier marriage, before the man has achieved financial independence, suggests growing companionship, but the decreasing gap in ages is still more indicative of the comradely relationship arising; this gap will probably decrease further, as will discrepancy in their educations.
For this trend toward the companionship marriage heralded by Ernest W. Burgess, another kind of evidence occurs in the

new Kinsey volume on the sexual behavior of American women. It reveals that the frequency of female orgasm in marriage has steadily increased over the past five decades, while the frequency of intercourse has slightly declined, which Kinsey interprets as due to its regulation more by mutuality of desire and less by unilateral male demand.
In terms of sex role and personality rather than sexuality, the extreme polarization of masculinity and femininity found in the past is diminishing somewhat as signified particularly in feminine sports dress and masculine beardlessness.
Recurrent Self-doubt
The rapid change of women's roles occurs unevenly amid conflicting conservative and progressive attitudes and is far from a smooth and confident passage. While the more backward undergo continued suppression, the same trends intermittently precipitate the more forward into mingled emotions of anxiety, guilt, futility, boredom, unimportance, resentment and regret over wasted capacities, punctuated by spasms of housework and "doing things for the family." Such a mixture of intangibles can hardly be captured systematically but has to be reported as a widespread characteristic of contemporary marriage, especially in the prototype groups. Perhaps this is the subjective side of all social change.
A major index is the efflorescence of many facilities for marriage counseling, psychiatry and advice-seeking-and-giving. A perhaps more healthy response to uncertainty about how to encompass the roles of wife and mother, companion and producer, are the flourishing child study groups, family living courses, and popularized scientific publications presenting information and guidance to replace traditional prescriptions. On the most intellectual plane is the wide reading of a dozen postwar books, mostly by women, which delve rationally and exhaustively into their current

258 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

dilemmas. A skeptic might ask if these manifestations ameliorate or aggravate the condition they express. Numerous husbands, even the most sympathetic, confess puzzlement over the subtle stresses through which their wives pass as they assimilate alterations in their structural situation.
Husbands, of course, have usually had their vocations from which to derive an unremitting sense of worth (save when embroiled in contests for prestige). But wives in large numbers have become disaffected from marital and familial roles which formerly engrossed them, without having fully arrived at a new self-conception which reconciles their competing aspirations. Until their destination becomes more clearly defined, it will remain difficult for their husbands or peers or the public to furnish the ratification that will quell their vertigo.

suppose, if they cannot grant to leisure pursuits the same validity as paid work.
Much discussion has been focused recently upon the emotional plight of the middle-aged mother whose last child leaves. Lengthened life, earlier marriage, earlier child-bearing, fewer offspring have multiplied and lengthened the emptyest phenomenon. It warns against the limitation of wifely interests to children.
Equally recognized as a grim sanction against the traditional narrowness of female interests is the fairly common spectacle of husbands who "out-grow" wives, who continue to develop intellectually and socially while their wives are arrested in routine, the widening distance and tension between them culminating in divorce when the husband encounters another woman more stimulating than his wife.

An Emerging Developmental Perspective
Conflict in women's roles is not helpfully conceived simply in terms of static dilemmas of career vs. marriage or siren vs. hausfrau. The so-called feminist might better have been called a masculinist when she rejected the conventional feminine role,

These negative sanctions are fortifying the positive values found in maintaining the companionship characteristic of the courtship period throughout the marital career and are commencing to evoke some rational foresight into the conditions for doing so. This may be a new variant of old-fashioned prudence.

taking men as her model, instead of seeking to modify and elaborate femininity in new directions. The current trend in both popular and professional thinking is toward the recurrent reconciliation of plural interests in ways peculiar to each phase of the life-history. The concept of career is thus loosening to comprehend more than just the vocational sphere. The careerproblem thus tends to be construed as fashioning a wifely role which combines a real sense of vocation on which adequate feelings of worth can be based. A few succeed by developing virtuosity in a household art or knowledge of child development, a few by community leadership. For many more, however, gainful employment seems psychologically indispensable even when not financially necessary. In this career-seeking wives may be more traditional than they

Professionalization
This is the best single term for summarizing the interrelated variables and trends which appear most influential in redefining women's roles in marriage: shifts of employment toward tertiary industries and salaried occupations, rise and stabilization of real income, freer access to higher education and skilled employment, more responsibility in family planning, reliance upon scientific expertness instead of tradition, broadening application of the career concept, and self-conscious emphasis upon continuous personal development. It may be relevant that the American Council on Education appointed a Commission on the Education of Women in 1953, to conduct basic research, action studies and educational experimentation relative to the kinds

259

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

of women to be developed, andthemeans ly the coming and leaving of children

bf doing so, at alllevels of schooling.

throw husband and wife into varied new

Qualifications needed to relate the pro- constellations, togeneralize about which in

totype sketched above to thediverse strata the space remaining would be futile. The

of American society can be roughly sum- marked social-psychological contrast be-

marized under the heading of hetero- tween the continued strength of the pa-

geneity. While the varying kinds and de- rental relationship and the tentativity of

grees of resistance tofollowing the example the marital relationship in many of the

of the professional classes, so far as they same families deserves note, as it may

are cultural inheritances, canbe witnessed further clarify the developmental perspec-

dissolving, it would be notan over-simpli- tive mentioned above. The normal parent

fication but a distortion to assert that is fully committed to hischild in advance

heterogeneity is in absolute decline. The and expects to participate in his develop-

ever-more-refined division of labor and the ment, taking some responsibility for the

differentiation of avocational interests con- personality which will emerge. A develop-

stitute counter-influences. Pursuit of indi- mental perspective on marriage likewise

viduality and versatility appears stimulated emphasizes training rather than selection,

by leisure. This effect is especially intensi- potentiality of mutual development rather

fied as parents commence self-consciously to than compatibility of presenting traits.

cultivate the distinctive talents and per- Spread of this attitude may offer some hope

sonalities of their children, as many make of reversing the long-term trend toward

it thegoal of their marriage to do.

marital instability. The recession of di-

Intensive migration andmobility, more- vorce rates each year since their 1946 peak

over, tending to throw marriageable per- may or may not signify that American hus-

sons into cosmopolitan contacts, have mul- jbands and wives are learning to master

tiplied intermarriage and heterogamy. heterogeneity.

Despite mass communication and engulfment of socio-economic extremes in the middle, no downtrend in thenewer modes of cultural diversification is foreseeable. The stability of marriage comes thus to depend less upon homogamous mate selection and more upon adaptability and competence in resolving the divergencies of response andorientation which unavoidably appear in heterogamy. Despite their mistakes and mishaps, Americans view the outcomes of marriage notpessimistically as fate but optimistically in terms of success and failure. It further indexes the matterof-fact professional approach that they are

National policy is tending toward the improvement of human resources while public sentiment is increasingly attracted by the values of personality development. That the family is the matrix of identityformation hasnever needed less emphasis. As younger people pour into the expanding occupations and acquire the professional competence requisite to full self-realization in work, love andplay, their unusualcurrent procreativity isprobably a valid index of their confidence that they can surmount the unceasingly problematic situations of the dynamic future world they confront.

turning to the schools to provide youth with competence to master family life situations.

REFERENCES
ALLEN, FREDERICK LEWIS, "The Big Change in Sub-
urbia," Pts. I & II, Harpers Magazine, 208-9, 1249-50, June and July, 1954, pp. 21-28, 47-53.

Competence, Confidence and Procreativity

BURGESS, E. W., and LOCKE, H. J., "The Family:
From Institution to Companionship." 2d ed. New York: American Book Company, 1953.

Up to here marriage has been contem- GUCK, PAUL C.,"The Family Cycle," American So-

plated apart from parenthood, yet obvious-

ciological Revient, 12, 2 (April, 1947), pp. 16474.

260 Eugenics Quarterly

GOODE, WILLIAM J., "Economic Factors and Marital

Stability," American Sociological Review, 1 6 , 6

(December, 1951), pp. 802-812.

HAJNAL, JOHN, "Differential Changes in Marriage

Patterns," American Sociological Review, 1 9 , 2

(April, 1954), pp. 148-154.

_____,

"Analysis of Changes in the Marriage

Pattern by Economic Groups," American Socio-

logical Review, 1 9 , 3 (June, 1954), pp. 295-302.

JACO, E. G., and BELKNAP, IVAN, "IS a New Fam-

ily Form Emerging in the Urban Fringe?"

American Sociological Review, 1 8 , 5 (October,

1953), pp. 551-557.

JOHANNIS, T. B., JR., "Father Participation in Selected Family Activity," paper presented at annual meeting of National Council on Family Relations, 1954.
KINSEY, ALFRED C., et al., "Sexual Behavior in the Human Female." Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1953. p. 380.
WHYTE, WILLIAM H., JR., "The Transients I-IV," Fortune 4 7 , 6; 4 8 , 1-3 (May-August, 1953).
Women's Bureau, United States Department of Labor, Bulletin 249, The Status of Women in the United States, 1953. Washington: 1953, pp. v, 26.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Annual Meeting 1954
American Eugenics Society
A luncheon talk by Frederick Osborn, Secretary of the American Eugenics Society, on "Involving the Whole Community in Education for Personal and Family Living" will highlight the Annual Meeting of the American Eugenics Society, to be held in conjunction with the Conference on Education for Personal and Family Living of the American Social Hygiene Association on December 17, 1954 at the Hotel NewYorker, Eighth Avenue and 34th Street, New York City.
Tickets for the luncheon at 12:30 P.M. can be obtained for $3.50 at the New Yorker Hotel on the day of the meeting without previous reservation. The business meeting of the Society will follow the luncheon at 3:00P.M.when financial and program reports will be presented. Notices of the meeting are being mailed to all members of the Society.

