Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Factors operative in mate selection in a Philippine village
Ethel Nurge
To cite this article: Ethel Nurge (1958) Factors operative in mate selection in a Philippine village, Eugenics Quarterly, 5:3, 162-168, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1958.9987367 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1958.9987367
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

FACTORS OPERATIVE IN MATE SELECTION IN A PHILIPPINE VILLAGE*
ETHEL NURGE
Goucher College

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

A,·NUMBER OF STUDIES have been made in
various sectors of A m e r i c a n society about the relationship between cultural factors and mate selection. Many of these have been made to test the relationship between propinquity and mate selection.1 The present study deals not so much with propinquity in finely measured degrees, nor yet with race, ethnic origin, or religion, but rather with proximity in terms of comparatively gross physical space and with a number of cultural factors which are not necessarily brought to the fore in studies of American society. This paper has relevance to eugenics and demography in that it demonstrates, for one area at least, the difficulties involved in the break-up of "isolates" or inbred communities.
It is not necessary to consider the ramifications of race, racial identity, and racial identification because the social unit on which we are to focus is composed of one

group, Filipinos, who consider themselves one race. We will not be called upon to deal with ethnic origin for, although there are many ethnic groups in the Philippines, the village we are concerned with has a high degree of ethnic homogeneity. They are all Christian Filipinos. Language will not be one of our considerations because the dialect spoken by all is Wary Wary. It will not be part of our study to isolate the variable, religion, because almost all of the people are nominally Catholics and have been so for hundreds of years. These factors, then -- religion, ethnic origin, language, and race--are for all practical purposes, held constant. What is not? Some of the cultural variables operative in the selection of any given spouse in this village are socio-economic status and opportunity^ for contact between the marriageable youths. The prescriptions about courtship as well as those about the regulation of

* Paper in a shortened form was read at the annual meeting of the American Anthropological Association in Chicago, December, 1957. The field work was made possible by the support of the Fulbright Foundation whose financial and moral support is gratefully acknowledged.
1 Davie, M. R. and Reeves, R. J., "Propinquity of Residence Before Marriage," American Journal of Sociology, XLIV, (January, 1939); Bossard, J. H. S., "Residential Propinquity as a Factor in Marriage Selection," American Journal of Sociology, XXXVIII, (September, 1932) and Abrams, R. H., "Residential Propinquity as a Factor in Marriage Selection: Fifty Year Trends in Philadelphia," American Sociological Review, VIII, (June, 1943);

Clarke, A. C., "An Examination of the Operation of Residential Propinquity as a Factor in Mate Selection," American SociologicalReview, XVII, (February, 1952). Other relevant studies are: Hollingshead, A. B., "Cultural Factors in the Selection of Marriage Mates," American SociologicalReview, XVI, (October, 1950); Burgess, E. W. and Wallin, P., "Homogamy in Social Characteristics," American Journal of Sociology, XLIX, (1943); Smith M., "Similarities in Marriage Partners in Intelligence," American Sociological Review, VI (October, 1941) and Smith, M., "A Research Note on Homogamy of Marriage Partners in Selected Physical Characteristics," American Sociological Review, XI, (April,
1946).

162

163

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

sanctioned union are fairly standardized for all members of the village although the norms are in a slow process of change as we shall see.
The Village
Guinhangdan is a small agriculturalfishing village located on the national road in northeastern Leyte, Republic of the Philippines. The climate is tropical, and there are no seasons other than wet and dry. Ocean and river fish are supplementary to rice as the staples in an undiversified diet. Houses are of bamboo and thatch and are raised off the black, sandy soil to stand perched in rather irregular rows. The buses which travel along the national road are now as familiar a feature of transportation to the natives as are their well-known outrigger canoes. Twelve hundred people in more than 200 households live a quiet, peaceful life in Guinhangdan. The rhythm of their lives is quickened by market days, visitors, and the celebration or observation of life crisis rites and religious ceremonials -- processions and fiestas being important in the latter instance.
The Courtship Customs
Courtship customs are an appropriate area in which to begin. Courtship is a semi-secret affair. Defined occasions for meeting a love object include fiesta, feasts, or dances. After a good deal of hesitation, which is offset by encouragement of peers, a boy will dance with a girl and try to win her favor. The girls act very shy, quiet, and circumspect at this stage, and they do not flirt. After the initial meeting, some time is allowed to lapse and then the male may take up the next stage of courtship and send messages, notes, or letters to the girl. She, again, is coy and initially unresponsive, not answering the missiles until several have been sent. This part of courtship is handled with titillative secrecy. Special messengers are employed and cir-

cuitous routes are used to keep the communication secret from the parents. If the girl encourages the boy, the next step in courtship is undertaken. This consists of several serenades. The boy asks a few of his male friends to accompany him, and the group, usually a trio, make their way to the home of the girl rather late of an evening. One of the boys carries a guitar, the only instrument pressed into service at this time. Standing outside of the domicile at a respectful distance from the house, they sing both popular songs from the numerous movies now filmed in the Philippines in which Tagalog is the lingua franca and folk songs which are primarily in Wary Wary. It is not incumbent upon the girl to make any acknowledgement; in fact it would be forward if she came to the window or door. She is permitted to peek through the cracks in the thatched wall, however. If her parents are well disposed to the lad, which means in this society that they are friendly with his parents, they may bid him and his companions enter the house and conversation, but no feeding, will ensue. If the parents do not like the boy, they will ignore the music; there will be no invitation to enter the domicile; the family members will mutter among themselves but there will be no overt act of rejection or aggression.
We have mentioned the approved and customary occasions for meeting a love object and outlined the courtship procedures. A few words, now, about what constitutes an ideal love object, both male and female, are in order. Desirable females, both from the viewpoint of elders and the suitor, have families with money and/or possessions, or they have educated members or steady jobs, usually in the government service. Desirable females are soft-spoken and peaceful but not necessarily either virgin or chaste. Beauty is desirable and is defined primarily in terms of lightness of color and height and secondarily in terms of facial features, special attention

164 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

being given to complexion. Breasts, legs, and buttocks are not erotically important. Desirable males are members of monied families, of families having much land or political or social eminence. Furthermore, desirable males are even-tempered and amenable to suggestion. Handsomeness is defined in terms of height and skin color and secondarily in terms of facial features. Biceps, chest development, hip contours and legs are not of erotic importance. It is the expectation of all that both boy and girl will be respectful and obedient to all who are older than they are and that they will be mutually respectful and obedient to each other.
Marriage Arrangements
How, by whom, and under what circumstances are permanent, sanctioned, marital unions arranged? For several decades marriage in Guinhangdan has been undergoing slow gradual change. Formerly parents chose the mate of a boy or girl although the young people frequently had a degree of choice, or some veto power. A series of two meetings with attendant feasting and oratory were part of the marriage arrangements. The male underwent a period of probationary labor, and the girl was under scrutiny for her performance of the female role. For analytic purposes, the important element was that control of mate selection lay primarily with the parents. Today this is not true. Instead all formal marriage rites follow some weeks or months after an elopement by a young couple. In other words, the youngsters have taken away from their elders one of the kinds of control in mate selection. The passing of this control into the hands of the young ones is only partial, of course. For instance, if the parents are firmly set against a permanent union, marriage will not follow the elopement even if the girl gets pregnant. It is felt by young and old that the parent's permission is necessary. In most instances, parents give permission, if not approval,

after a period of sulking and "cooling off." In no instance, when the parents actively disapproved the union, did the couple maintain the alliance.2
Marriages tend to be within social classes, and there are practical reasons for this. Affinal relatives have almost as much right to one's largess as do one's consanguineous kin. There are finely graded differences for the various dyadic relationships, but, on the whole, affinal kin are kin to whom one has broad obligations. So that, even in these days of greater personal choice through the mechanism of elopement, mates tend to choose each other with consideration of the family group as a whole and individuals keep in mind any advantage to be lost through a poor marriage. Furthermore, after the elopement there is an arranged meeting or two between both sets of parents and, at this meeting, the boy's side (as in the old pattern) bring food, workers, and influential orators to the meeting. There is a feeling that these must be of a caliber pleasing and fitting to the girl's family. Accordingly a poor boy cannot aspire very much above the economic level which his parents have. The bride-price exists, and in marriage arrangements the family of the male must bargain with the family of the female and the two families must come to an agreement on property exchange. In this respect the old practices continue, although some of the items which form part of the bride-price have changed form. Thus while betel nut was important formerly, the more common stimulant is now tobacco. Tuba, a coconut palm wine, was and continues to be, an important item of the marriage arrangements.
2 It is interesting to note that when informants are questioned about marriage arrangements they invariably answer with a long account of the oldstyle contract. They do not see that elopement is the current marriage arrangement. When arrangements for marriages made in the last ten years were reviewed, it was found that only one was contracted under the old marriage arrangement system.

165

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

The Marrying Population and
Geographical Factors
We will now consider the degree to which endogamy (marriage within a given social unit; in this instance, the social unit is the village) is present in the village. We will do this by a consideration of the birthplace of spouses and their residence at time of courtship. Of the 231 households, 196 had a nucleus of a married couple. The remaining household heads were four unmarried females, two unmarried males, twenty-two widows, six widowers, and one male separated from his wife. From the counts that follow we have eliminated the unmarried males, the unmarried females, the widows and widowers and the family broken by separation. We will consider only the 196 couples, dyads in which both persons are still living and are still living together. For these 392 people, place of birth and residence at time of courtship were ascertained. The numbers are as follows:

TABLE 1

BIRTHPLACE OF 3 9 2 SPOUSES

Guinhangdan
Palo and municipality Tanauan and municipality Tacloban and municipality Samar Elsewhere

Males 141
21 6 4 4 20

196

Females 118 30 8 4 13 23
196

TABLE 2

RESIDENCE AT TIME OF COURTSHIP

Guinhangdan Palo and municipality
Tacloban and municipality Tanauan and municipality Samar Elsewhere

Males 151 12 8
3
5 17

Females 141
23 7 2 5
18

196 196

If the places mentioned in the tables are traced on a map, the geographical distribution of the mates is found to be remarkably circumscribed. The homes in the village

proper are clustered in an area of roughly one kilometer north and south and about half a kilometer east and west. The town of Palo is but two kilometers to the north although the municipality proper, the political demarcation, is, of course, a larger unit covering a few square kilometers. Tanauan is a market town to the south about three kilometers, and Tacloban is the island capital and is 17 kilometers to the north. Samar is the island to the east of Leyte and is reached only by an overnight trip in an outrigger canoe. Since World War II it is possible to visit Samar by traveling on public transportation facilities. The trip includes the use of buses on both islands and a ferry jaunt between the islands, the ferry being an old U.S. Army LST landing craft.
If we compare birth patterns with residence patterns, the correlates are these:

TABLE 3

CORRELATES OF BIRTH AND RESIDENCE OF 3 9 2 SPOUSES

Males

Born and residing in Guinhangdan

when courting

122

Born in Guinhangdan but residing

elsewhere when courting

19

Born elsewhere but residing in

Guinhangdan when courting 29

Neither born in nor residing in

Guinhangdan when courting 26

Females 114
27 50

196 196

Residence Patterns
The question arises as to why the twentysix husbands and fifty wives moved into Guinhangdon when neither he nor she was born there nor residing there at time of courtship. This was determined by questioning them, and in many of the cases, of course, one of the spouses lived or was born in the village and the other came in at marriage. However, there were some cases where the newlyweds came to the village to join a relative other than the parents of either. Residence at the time of marriage is not simply matrilocal or patrilocal, and it is definitely not neolocal. Normally the young couple join an estab-

166 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

lished household for the first few years of married life, but the factors which decide whose household that shall be are not the degree of closeness of the relative nor yet whether the connection is in the male or female line. What seems to be operative here are two factors: the need of one of the sets of parents (and/or other degree relative) for the labor and/or financial aid of the young couple and, secondly, a strong personal need on the part of a parent or set of parents (or other degree relative) for the presence of his or her child. In the latter instance, the possessive parent must have the manipulative power to persuade or coerce the couple to take up residence with him or her. Eventually, the length of time depending in part on individual need for autonomy, the young couple will beg, borrow, or raise the materials and the money to build their own house. Normally by this time they have a child or two.
There were eight cases where neither the husband nor the wife were born in or resident in Guinhangdan at the time of courtship. Their subsequent settling in the village was due to these reasons: in three cases a parent of either lived in Guinhangdan even though this particular child had not been born there nor was resident there at time of courtship; in one case the couple joined the wife's paternal uncle; in two cases the young-marrieds came to the village because the husband hoped to better himself economically through fishing; one couple came because the school is conveniently located; and one couple came because the man had been ill and had made a vow to the village patron saint that he would come to live in the village should he regain his health.
Discussion
It is a matter of fairly general assumption that the more widely traveled a youth is and the more contacts and acquaintances he or she will make, the wider is the circle

of prospective mates.3 Perhaps this is true in America, but even here the validity of the assumption remains to be proved. There are so many social factors affecting selection that a mere increase in numbers of potential spouses is of relatively minor importance. Today the youth of Guinhangdan have many more opportunities than formerly to meet marriageable youths other than their village relatives and friends. For instance, the village is built on the national road and buses have become a familiar part of the pattern of life. The Bureau of Motor Vehicles in Tacloban lists seventeen entrepreneurs who run buses which pass through Guinhangdan. The number of buses owned by each individual or company ranges from one to nine. In a single day as many as 120 buses might pass through the village. Not only do the buses pass through the village, but also they are heavily traveled. Normally they are crowded to an unbelievable degree, with livestock and produce being an accepted part of the load, and the villagers are eternally traveling somewhere. Visiting is a most popular pastime, and, yet, the marrying population remains surprisingly restricted.
Another fact which attests to the amount of traveling the villagers do, and consequently the increase in the number of people they meet, is the fact that a fair number of children these days go out to school. The village school is a six-grade school which corresponds to our elementary school; high school begins in the seventh year. The proportion of the children of the total number who do go to high school is small; yet all of them who attend, do so by going out to Tacloban, the provincial capital. They may go up every day and come back in the evening, or they may
3 Carpenter, Niles, "Courtship Practices and Contemporary Social Change in America," in The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Sciences, 1932.

167

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

board or live with relatives in the city. The numbers who go on to college are even smaller, but they may go even farther afield. The best colleges are not on Leyte; one is in Manila and one is on Cebu. To be sure, the college in Tacloban gets the greater number of village youth whose families are affluent enough to send them to college, but in any event the pursuit of higher education is leading many children and youths outside of the village.
Questioning about why people traveled elicited the following information. Taxes are paid in Palo because Guinhangdan is a village under Palo's jurisdiction. This does not mean many trips because so few people pay taxes and they are paid so seldom. People generally travel to Palo to market and this is a daily occurrence for some, a rare trip for the very poor, and an event of every few days occurrence for most. There are two other general shopping areas: Tanauan and Tacloban. Not many people go to Tanauan, but Tacloban is popular particularly when shopping for something out of the ordinary. Tacloban has a great diversity of foodstuffs and materials and the shops and bazaars are open every day. Tanauan's market day is Sunday, and Palo has a big market day on Wednesday and a considerably smaller collection of food offerings every day. Cockfighting is an attraction that draws many males, and cock fights are held on Sunday in Tanauan and on Saturday in Tacloban. Perhaps 25 kilometers to the south of the village is another municipal capital, Dulag, but almost nobody from the village goes there and only the most urgent of business or family reasons would result in their venturing so far.
Guinhangdan is a coastal village. What amount of travel is there from this village to interior villages, hamlets, and individual farms? Within the municipality of Palo there is a good deal of travel because many villagers or their relatives own land in the area. However, nobody owns land any farther south than Kabarasan Daku or

farther west than Castilla or St. Augustine. The western boundary points do not even reach to the mountains which form a backbone ridge to the island. Travel to interior villages, hamlets, or farms also occurs at times of fiestas, weddings, baptisms, funerals, or memorial rites. There is, then, much evidence that the amount of travel is considerable. However, travel does not necessarily mean that the travelers can, will, and do communicate in any meaningful intimate way with the outsiders that they meet. The ignorant tourist who sees much and understands little is a case in point. Redfield has observed in Guatemala that the Indians are frequently travelers but that, nonetheless, they remain fairly isolated in their separate villages, each village having customs peculiar to itself and the members of each village being so physically inbred that they resemble each other markedly.4 In Guinhangdan the people are aware of their like-mindedness within the village and of the (what looks to us like) slightly different customs in other villages. As such they philosophize: "It is better to marry within one's own village; here we know what to expect." In addition to their like-mindedness, they have an active suspicion and distrust of nonvillage people and even of places outside the village. It is always the next village which has the most witches. The farther the village from home base, the more malevolent the supernaturals may become. Thus while there were no barongs (a type of sorcerer who caused deformation of the facial features, particularly the nose) in Guinhangdan, there were many of them on Samar. When after having lived in Guinhangdan for two months and having established some identification of self with group, the investigator went on a journey to Samar, real concern was expressed for her safety among such powerful and malevolent beings as inhabited that island.
The complexity of cultural factors in
4 Redfield, R., "The Folk Society," American Journal of Sociology, Jan., 1947, pp. 293-308.

168 Eugenics Quarterly

mate selection has been explored with special reference to courtship procedures, socio-economic status, residence customs, and the patterns of traveling. Despite an increase in the number of opportunities and reason for travel and in the number of individuals traveling, themarrying population remains remarkably circumscribed. Some of the culturally functional reasons for this situation have been presented.
REFERENCES ABRAMS, R. H.,Residential propinquity as a factor
in marriage selection: Fifty year trends in Philadelphia, Am. Sociol. Review, 8 : 3, June, 1943. BOSSARD, J. H. S., "Residential propinquity as a factor in marriage selection," Am. J. Sociol. 38: 2, Sept., 1932.
BURGESS, E. W. AND WALLIN, P., Homogamy in

social characteristics, Am. J. Sociol., 4 9 : 2, Sept., 1943.
CARPENTER, NILES, Courtship practices and contemporary social change in America, in The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Sciences, 1932.
CLARKE, A. C.,An examination of the operation of residential propinquity as a factor in mate selection, Am. Sociol. Review, 1 7 : 1, Feb., 1952.
DAVIE, M. R. AND REEVES, R. J., Propinquity of
residence before marriage, Am. J. Sociol., 44: 4, Jan.,1939. HOLLINGSHEAD, A. B.,Cultural factors in the selection of marriage mates, Am. Sociol. Review, 15: 5, Oct., 1950. REDFIELD, R., "TheFolk Society," Am. J. Sociol., 52: 4,Jan., 1947. SMITH, M.,A research note on homogamy of marriage partners in selected physical characteristics, Am. Sociol. Review, 1 1 :2, April, 1946.
, Similarities in marriage partners in intelligence, Am.Sociol. Review, 6 : 5, Oct., 1941.
WALLER, W., AND HILL, R., The Family, New York: Dryden Press, 1951.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

