Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Fertility in midcentury America
Robert M. Dinkel
To cite this article: Robert M. Dinkel (1956) Fertility in midcentury America, Eugenics Quarterly, 3:1, 22-31, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1956.9987261 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1956.9987261
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

FERTILITY IN MID-CENTURY AMERICA
ROBERT M. DINKEL
Guilford College

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

T has been done on each of these two projects

JL HE BIG NEWS IN HUMAN FERTILITY i n and then indicate some of the features of

mid-century America has been the 1940- the work which deserve further consider-

1955 baby boom, which in dramatic signifi- ation by theresearch teams.

cance has rivaled the hydrogen bomb ex- The article by Mishler and Westoff on

plosions set off by the United States and "A Proposal For Research on Social and

Russia and the international atoms-for- Psychological Factors Affecting Fertility:!

peace movement that climaxed recently in Concepts and Hypotheses"1 is a progress

a Geneva conference of theworld's leading report by the technical staff of the Milbank

physicists. This increase in the U. S. birth Memorial Fund's Steering Committee on

rate upset not only predictions of demog- the development of plans for a newstudy

raphers but also research interests and of fertility. The objective of this study is

methods used for more than a generation. basic research at the level of motivation in

Before errors of prediction had become family planning and family size. Attention

apparent, however, demographers had been of the committee so far has been focused

aware of shortcomings and had been busy on problems of conceptualization and pos-

trying to elaborate theory and refine tools sible organizing principles. Research willbe

of measurement. Experience and insights directed to knowledge of factors affecting

gained from the Indianapolis Study, for successive orders of pregnancy or birth in

example, contributed heavily toward better. the belief that such information is essential

understanding of the factors underlying to an understanding of the size of com-

human fertility and toward new research pleted families. According to present plans,

orientations that would be more effective the study will be limited to women who

than old ones in defining and measuring have had two children. Repeat interviews

these factors.

of these women 18 months after the first

There is nowkeen interest among some visit may be included in the research de-

students of human fertility in the ways in sign in order to test the performance of

which current or proposed research has couples over a specified period of time.

been shaped by the results of that study. We tend to expect of its successors a combination of the best theory andmethods in projects of sufficient scope to shed further light on the basic factors that influence the having or not having of children. What actually is happening along this line can perhaps best be judged at this time by a

The conceptual framework for fertility research as outlined by the authors defines the pattern of contraceptive use as the major variable for study. Pregnancy desires and capacity to carry out these desires are more specific aspects of thepattern that are proposed for study. Factors related to

critical review of the research proposal of the Milbank Memorial Fund for a new study of fertility and of the Puerto Rico research of Hill, Back, and Stycos. Our discussion first will summarize briefly what

1 Milbank Memorial Fund, Current Research in Human Fertility, "A Proposal For Research on Social Psychological Factors Affecting Fertility: Concepts and Hypotheses" by Elliot G. Mishler and Charles F. Westoff, pp. 121-150, New York, 1955. See
also EUCENIC QUARTERTLY, Dec. 1955, pp. 229-233.

22

23

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

contraceptive use, or the independent variables, are assumed to be the major elements of the concrete situation within which the fertility event takes place. These elements are considered on theoretically distinct levels of the person, the family group, and the social setting.
With the person as the unit of analysis, attention is directed to general personal attributes, such as excessive dependency needs, and to extra-familial orientations and roles that are incompatible with children. With the family group as the unit of analysis, styles of life and systems of organization are distinguished. Important styles of life are defined as familistic and work-mobility. Systems of organization are considered from the point of view of interaction patterns and psychological aspects. Power, communication, and division of labor are features of interaction patterns deemed useful for study while cohesiveness, marital adjustment, and norms constitute psychological aspects of importance. The social setting is viewed as characteristics of other social groups that are more or less compatible with various patterns of fertility performance. Continuity of membership and status in social groups and the benevolence of the psychological, social, and economic environment provided by these groups are selected as areas of the social setting that should be investigated.
The operation of this theoretical model is taken to be dependent upon the extent to which having a child or a certain number of children is compatible with other life values and interests. "Although at the level of a truism this serves to bring into prominence the notion that a fertility choice (whether implicit or explicit) involves a 'cost' for the individual and for the family, that is, certain desires and interests are either yielded or compromised in preference to others. . . . If it is given its widest and most general interpretation then all specific hypotheses and findings are simply manifestations or instances of this

'law' of compatibility. . . ."2 The authors have derived from this
theoretical statement some 21 hypotheses that are grouped under the most suitable unit of analysis. Some of these hypotheses are broken down into sub-hypotheses with the fullest development made of those that pertain to socio-economic variables. The treatment is not complete, however, for the writers warn us that important issues and problems have been sidestepped or ignored and that hypotheses have been stated without necessary qualification and specification and have not been rated as to relative importance.
In a critical review of the work of the Committee, Hauser observes that we now have some theory and some specific hypotheses, but that there is yet to come a second stage of sampling, statistical and operational design and a third stage of design for testing the hypotheses.3 His critique of the hypotheses is given under the headings of inclusiveness, operational form, and interaction of the variables. Under inclusiveness, he notes omission of "face-sheet" items, failure to take into account the timing aspect of the variables, lack of specific reference to the general social-economic climate, and shortcomings of fertility research that deals with less than the whole procfeative period of the couples. Under operational form, he suggests the desirability of breaking down the dependent variable of psychological availability of contraception into its components, he points out that the "person as a unit" involves two spouses and that it is necessary to take into account their interaction, he raises the question of how many of the attributes or variables included in the hypotheses can be actually identified and measured effectively for purposes of testing the hypotheses, and he wonders whether the separation in time between acquisition of data and fertility performance is potentially great enough
2 Ibid., p. 132. 3Ibid., "Some Observations on Method and Study Design" by Philip M. Hauser, pp. 151-162.

24 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

to make prediction useful. Under interaction of the variables, he points out that the proposal includes practically nothing on this subject but that the final study design must make some attempt to deal with the problem.
Our criticism of the research proposal must be conditioned not only by the tentative and skeletal character of the theoretical model in its present stage of development, but also by the fact that this area of research has not been sufficiently well staked off by prior studies to permit at this time a fully integrated and theoretically adequate investigation. Without pointing out obviously loose ends of the conceptual framework or marking the absence of qualification and specification noted by the technical staff itself, we believe that it might be helpful to indicate some of the danger areas that should be skirted as the research proposal is further refined and focused.
The proposal as now defined emphasizes the influence of a "work-mobility" ethic upon fertility and in so doing shows some cultural bias. The model, in fact, tends to be oriented principally toward middle class, urban, Protestant, and industrial society. This focus is very likely the result of leaning heavily upon the findings of the Indianapolis Study. There can be no quarrel with slanting a new study in the same direction. We advocate only explicit recognition of the kind of value net that is being spread to catch relevant motivational data.
A second possible bias is that of rational behavior in the "cost" theory of fertility decisions. Emphasis upon this theme is reminiscent of classical economics. This element, no doubt, is important for many couples in planning the size of their family and in carrying out their plans in the specific social and economic circumstances of early married life. There are many other couples, however, for whom this approach is not likely to yield much insight into the nature of fertility behavior. It is well known that planning is often only rational-

ization of deep-seated, unconscious social and psychological backgrounds. In families, furthermore, in which a strictly utilitarian approach is taken toward having children, we might well ask to what extent the positive and negative values of cost analysis are known. It is recognized in this connection that the couple's definition of the situation might be the important research goal.
With a cultural bias and a rational approach to fertility behavior, the authors have not neglected completely areas of interest that are pertinent to the field of psychoanalysis. The concepts of excessive dependency needs and of basic'ego identification with parent of the same sex appear somewhat baldly placed in the total structure of hypotheses. The meaning of these variables is difficult to determine without ascertaining the matrix of other personal characteristics and the social setting that tends to direct, fulfill, or frustrate the need. Thus,, the expression and meaning of specific personality traits depend upon the total operational constellation. How desirable is it, therefore, to open such areas of interest when their exploration in an effective way might consume the entire resources of the project? The staff has probably given consideration to this point and might have some good plan for its practical solution. Judging only from their statement, however, we see the possibility of superficial fishing in deep waters.
The whole field of motivation requires treatment that presents a dilemma to any research group with limited resources. The proposal of the technical staff already has exceeded the budget of the Committee and restrictions have been placed on the outline as presented in 1954 to the Milbank Conference. As conceptualization leads to further specification, additional tailoring may become necessary. In a relatively undeveloped field of research, the more adequate the theoretical formulation of a new study the greater the inability of the staff

2J

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

to carry out the study of the problems that are deemed crucial in the whole structure of posited interrelationships. This is forever the dilemma of good research in the social sciences.
Another inheritor of the Indianapolis Study legacy is the Puerto Rico project, which has been underway since 1951 and from which results have begun to flow.4 The primary purpose of this research was to discover why the actual family size as late as 1950 was about twice as large as the ideal size family of about three children. The authors began their study with the hypothesis that general motivations to take action with regard to family size, knowledge of means of control, and efficient family organization determine the relation between ideal and actual number of children. In the Milbank Conference paper, they described source, size, and composition of samples; outlined an analytical model of selected variables in fertility planning; stated hypotheses relating family action potentials to fertility control; and presented the results of an application of these hypotheses to a sample of 888 Island families. These couples met the criteria of husband and wife living together, married five to 20 years, of demonstrated fertility, and of less than sixth-grade education.
Hypotheses were classified under the following headings: (1) effectiveness in intra-family communication, (2) female modesty barriers to communication and action on fertility control, (3) empathy between spouses and action on fertility control, (4) marital satisfaction and action on fertility control, and (5) family organization. Under the last heading, three familistic types were distinguished on the basis of freedom of the wife to work gainfully, freedom from husband dominance, and freedom from prohibitions on her life space. Among the findings were: (1) degree of communication differentiates suc-
4Ibid., "Family Action Potentials and Fertility Planning in Puerto Rico" by Reuben Hill, Kurt Back, and J. Mayone Stycos, pp. 42-62.

cessfully among families on birth control use, but not on success with which used, (2) wives who correctly perceive husband's attitudes on having more children practice birth control more than those wives who less correctly understand their husband's attitudes, (3) marital happiness correlates well with general communication, but is indifferently related to fertility control, (4) marital agreement appears significantly related to success in fertility control, (5) wives with least satisfaction in the sex relationship are the most likely to have practiced birth control over a long period if they have practiced it at all, and (6) familism appears closely related to fertility, fertility control, and success in fertility control.
In this article, the authors unfortunately were unable to present much of the data they have obtained from their extensive research in Puerto Rico. Questions about representativeness of the sample, definition and measurement of variables, interviewing procedures, responses of persons interviewed, reliability of their answers, processing of schedules, and techniques of summarizing and relating the data cannot be answered from the limited information given in this paper. Although the brief description of what has been done indicates high-level research, it is not sufficient for a critical review of the work. Evaluation of the scientific character of the project, therefore, must await publication of their book in which they probably will give full details of methods used.
The data of the article, nevertheless, are adequate to raise some questions about the method used to test or prove the hypotheses relating efficiency of family organization to fertility. In Table 2, we are shown which of 36 zero-order correlations met the 5 per cent test of statistical significance. Twentyone came up to this level and the hypotheses were accepted as supported. In the other 15 cases, the test was not met and the hypotheses were either rejected or reversed.

Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

From such evidence, there is difficulty in knowing exactly what has been demonstrated. First of all, the approach is atomistic; whereas, the analytical model that is the source of the hypotheses is patterned. Unless all the items of the integrated theoretical structure are supported, we need to know whether the pattern as a whole falls, whether a major job of reweaving is required, or whether a patch-work of re-interpretation will mend sufficiently the structure for it to continue as an explanation of fertility. Secondly, tests of statistical significance tell us practically nothing per se about how much of the variation in fertility has been accounted for by the hypotheses. Thirdly, the general character of the independent variables, such as marital adjustment and familistic type of organization, might conceal other factors related to these variables that are responsible for their correlations with use of birth control and success in its use. Finally, even if correlations of high order were found and theoretical inconsistencies between supported and unsupported hypotheses were ironed out, the authors still would have the task of explaining the processes by which operation of the model yielded the correlations. Correlations need to be buttressed by qualitative materials and logical connections that indicate the processes through which the independent variables are associated with fertility.
Physical scientists are more accustomed than social scientists to so finishing the job of research and not letting it stop with the obtaining of statistical association between the variables. In the physical sciences, of course, possession of more closely-reasoned theoretical models that are supported by much past research of an additive character makes more possible the crucial experiment from which results can be taken directly and fed back into the analytical structure; in other words, the explanation of quantitative associations found in the test are at hand before the test is made. In the social sciences, on the other hand, it is

necessary to backtrack from the correlations to other research and to the conceptual framework in order to juggle the pieces together in a new whole. Only as other parts of the model used in the Puerto Rican research are specified, hypotheses stated, and findings given will we know what amount of juggling would be necessary to fit these materials on efficiency of family organization into an adequate conceptualization of the whole process of fertility behavior. Only then will we know how much emphasis to place upon this factor of family organization as an explanation of the difference between ideal and actual family size.
So much for some of the newer research in social demography that has been rooted in soil prepared by the Indianapolis Study. Let us turn now to a consideration of current or proposed research that stems more directly from interests, traditions, and data of formal demography. We particularly have in mind studies making use of vital statistics, census reports, or related materials. The objectives of these studies are usually much more limited than those discussed above. Refined statistical analysis rather than elaborate conceptualization is the keynote or identifying characteristic of this second group of investigations. P. K. Whelpton's monograph on cohort fertility can be considered appropriately under this heading.5
The objective of his study may be considered as the accurate prediction of population trends, using past and present marriage and birth rates to estimate number of children to be born during the reproductive history of the female cohorts under 45 years of age included in a population at a particular time. One of the technical problems confronted by the analyst after breaking down the universe of women into subgroups homogeneous for age, parity, and marital status is that of removing cyclical influences from their past birth perform-
5P. K. Whelpton, Cohort Fertility, Princenton University Press, 1954.

27

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ance. Surpluses and deficits of births resulting from a smoothing of the record are allocated to the proper time period in the reproductive history of each cohort. Thus, the timing of births with its postponements and accelerations under the influence of social and economic conditions is taken into account. Such refinement of the record of births, however, still leaves the problem of making projections. Accuracy of these projections depends upon correct estimates of the marriage rate, of the course of social and economic history as it might influence timing of births, of fashions in child bearing, and of secular trends in the cultural definition of the ideal-sized family. One way to improve these estimates might be to make them for cohort subgroups that are specific for residence, class, race, religion, and ethnic background as well as for age, parity, and marital status. How possible or practicable such a breakdown would be remains to be seen. A second method of acquiring information and insight needed for improvement of our ability to predict trends in birth rates is that of periodically surveying national samples of women for data on their past birth performance, plans for the future, and general attitudes toward child bearing and rearing.
Such a survey by Whelpton, Freedman, and others that is now in progress is a cooperative undertaking by the Survey Research Center of the University of Michigan and the Scripps Foundation of Miami University.6 Their sample was to consist of about 2,700 married white women between the ages of 18 and 39 with husband present or in the armed forces and about 300 single white women between the ages of 18 and 24. These women were to be interviewed for approximately 60 minutes each by trained women interviewers on the staff of the Survey Research Center. Single women were to be asked about plans to
6Milbank Memorial Fund, Current Research in Human Fertility, "A Study of the 'Expected' Completed Fertility of a National Sample of White Women," by P. K. Whelpton, pp. 106-112.

marry, engagements, and ideal family size. Married women were to be asked about pregnancy histories, birth-control methods, and ideal family size. General background information was to be obtained from both groups. Results will be compared with actual births during the 1955-1959 period as registered with the National Office of Vital Statistics and as shown by the 1960 Census data on children ever born. It is hoped that similar surveys can be undertaken in 1960, 1965, and later years. Besides such comparisons of expected with actual births, valuable information will be obtained on sterility, family planning, birth-control methods, and differentials in fertility. The crucial problem faced by the study is how close a relationship there is between what people say they are going to do and what they actually do. No doubt, major discrepancies will be found. Success in using such material will likely occur as further surveys indicate circumstances that deflect or change opinions, desires, and plans of people with regard to having or not having children.
A third approach that might lead to improved predictions of cohort fertility is the more thorough analysis of the past response of marriage and birth rates to historical factors. N. B. Ryder's study of Swedish female birth cohorts from 1751 to 1901 is an example of what can be done along this line when excellent data are available.^ The author states that his material may be; summarized as (I) the challenge to a population posed by a rapid increase in survivorship; (2) the initial response to the problem by a stringent limitation of marriage; (3) the frustration of this particular means of family limitation; and (4) ways in which the above demographic developments were manifested in family life. According to Ryder, the most striking result of the investigation is that it suggests the probability that Swedish fertility began declining per-
7Ibid., "The Influence of Declining Mortality on Swedish Reproductivity" by N. B. Ryder, pp. 65-81.

28 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ceptibly not in the latter part of the nine- dred-year period. The average age of

teenth century, but rather some 70 years marriage also was stable, being approxi-

earlier. He concludes: ". . . The following mately 27 years. All of these facts suggest

propositions may be asserted with a fair no adjustment to the 30 per cent increase

degree of confidence: (1) There was a during the same period in total person-

marked decline in nuptiality of the Swedish female population, beginning early in the nineteenth century; (2) although this change induced some decline in fertility, the effects were practically nullified by contemporaneous changes in mortality; (3) the major decline in fertility awaited the abandonment of what Malthus called 'moral restraint' in favor of the NeoMalthusian remedy for excess fertility."8

years, ages 15-50, for the female cohorts of 100,000. What did change was the proportion of females who married. In the cohort of 1851, for example, there were approximately 14,000 more females who arrived at a marriageable age due to improvement in mortality during the preceding 100 years. If the nuptiality rate had remained the same as for the 1751 cohort, about 11,250 instead of 7,600 of these 14,000 would have married. Thus, for every cohort of 100,000

These conclusions arise out of a pre- near the middle of the nineteenth century

liminary report with 14 charts showing there were about 3,500 females who re-

mainly changes from 1751 to 1901 in total mained single who would have married if

person years, person-years married, nuptial- the nuptiality rate of a hundred years

ity rates, mean marital duration, female earlier had been maintained. The question

live births, gross fertility rates, and marital is what is the proper interpretation of these

fertility rates. On the whole, the data have changes that were concurrent with the de-

been handled carefully in their graphic cline in mortality. From our point of view,

presentation and clearly indicate the course they do not support fully the conclusions

of several measures of fertility over 150 that Ryder draws and which have been

years as mortality declined. The author summarized above.

shows awareness of technical problems that confront the student in measuring fertility changes. His interpretation of the data tends to be forceful and dramatic.

This investigation of the Swedish data illustrates how the study of cohort fertility can be used for analytical as well as for predictive purposes. When the object of

His main weakness as revealed by this research is population forecasts, birth rates

preliminary report appears to be over are used in order to work with the most

emphasis on the teleological adjustment of current information on fertility trends and

Swedish cohorts to declining mortality. In to reduce to a minimum the gap between

order to bring out this character of his the time of the occurrence of events which

interpretation, we present below some of serve as a basis for prediction and the time

the facts that, for the most part, are only of events which are forecast. Use of these implicit in the data of his graphs.9 From data introduces, of course, the trouble-

1751 to 1851, the number married in the some problem of timing of births that we

cohorts of 100,000 increased from about already have discussed. When the goal, on

47,400 to 55,000. The number of children the other hand, is investigation of the as-

per 1,000 married person-years remained sociation of selected factors with fertility

fairly constant at around 230 for the hun- rates, number of children ever born can be

used successfully and for cohorts of com-

8Ibid., p. 78. 9Some of these data have been deduced from the graphs. Not having access to the research materials, the writer is unable to verify these deductions or to make them more precise.

pleted fertility there is no problem of timing to be taken into consideration. The two types of research are complementary, for results obtained in analytical studies

29

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

should help forecasters of population trends ferences, and social and economic factors

to judge better the necessity or desirability related to fertility. Among the latter will

of a further breakdown of cohorts beyond be income, education, and duration of mar-

the age, parity, and marital status subdi- riage. A feature of these analyses will be

vision usually used, to discount properly use of parity-specific rates for cohorts,

the influence of unusual social and eco- carrying forward some of the earlier work

nomic conditions upon birth rates, and to done by Whelpton. We have been cau-

estimate correctly some of the long-term tioned, however, by Grabill that the mono-

trends in family formation and child rear- graph will be a straightforward descriptive

ing. Since correct analysis of factors asso- study rather than one that explores ad-

ciated with number of children ever born vanced hypotheses of the kind developed in

to women of completed fertility depends the Indianapolis Study.

upon extensive subdivision of the data, This monograph is a long overdue analy-

the number of cases in the sample must be sis of the wealth of data from the 1910 and

very large. The only source of such data 1940 censuses as well as a timely study of

is usually the decennial census. When the more recent information reported by

comparable data from several censuses are the Census Bureau. Very likely, analyses

published, trends can be ascertained and made of the changing size of American

often the significance of results can be families will be more specific and definitive

evaluated properly only with reference to than the study of social and economic dif-

the rate of change in the associations stud- ferentials in American fertility. Simultan-

ied. During the past decade, the Census eous cross classification by age of marriage,

Bureau has published several fertility re- occupation of husband, education, etc. that

ports that give in detailed form sample would allow further clarification of the data from 1910, 1940, and 1950 censuses.10 interrelation of these variables is not given

What, then, are the analyses that have been in the Census reports. We expect, however,

made or that are currently being made of that the monograph will be useful as a

this large body of raw materials?

reference for background information

A Census monograph on American fertility is being prepared by Riser, Whelpton, and Grabill using data from these reports.11 Among tentative chapter titles are: historical setting, ecological aspects, social and economic variations, and other factors in differential fertility. Analyses will be made of the changing size of the American family, rural-urban reproduction, Negro-white dif-

needed in carrying out more theoretical analyses of these factors. We also await with interest to see what else the ingenuity of these scholars may produce for us.
Several studies of differential fertility using data from the several censuses have been made during the past decade and presented in the form of magazine articles, chapters in books, doctoral theses, etc.12 Through these investigations, we have

10U.S. Bureau of the Census: (1) Sixteenth Census of the United States:1940, Population, Differential Fertility 1940 and 1910, (a) Fertility for States and Large Cities, 1943; (b) Standardized Fertility Rates and Reproduction Rates, 1944; (c) Women by Number of Children Ever Born, 1945; (d) Women by Number of Children Under 5 Years Old, 1945; (e) Fertility by Duration of Marriage, 1947; and (2) United States Census of Population: 1950, Special Reports: (a) Fertility, 1955; (b) Duration of Current Marital Status, 1955. All published by the U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington.
11Milbank Memorial Fund, Current Research in Human Fertility, "Progress Report on Fertility Monograph" by Wilson H. Grabill, pp. 82-92.

learned the approximate size of differences in fertility associated with regional and rural-urban residence, with color, and with socio-economic status as indexed by occupation of husband, education of wife, or income. We have seen also how these differences tended to narrow from 1910 to
12See for example, Charles F. Westoff, "Differential Fertility in the United States: 1900 to 1952," American Sociological Review, Vol. 19, No, 5, October 1954, pp. 549-561.

30 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

1950 first through the higher rate of fertility ever born. How practicable this breakdown

decline from 1910 to 1940 of the most might be is best known to the Census Bur-

fertile subgroups and secondly through the eau experts. If necessary some compromise

greater increase from 1940 to 1950 in the might be effected whereby only cells with

birth rate of the least fertile sections of the a minimum number of cases would be

population. These studies have been dis- published in detail with remaining cases

appointing in several respects: (1) con- grouped together in a few residual cate-

sidering the wealth of data, they have been gories. If the budget of the Census Bureau

relatively few in number and of limited has been too small to give us the additional

scope; (2) they have not been successful breakdown of the data as described above,

in isolating the influence of crucial vari- we would prefer to obtain these data and

ables by sufficient breakdown of the data or to dispense with some of the tables that

by other techniques; (3) little or no atten- have been published.

tion has been paid to patterning of the variables and to the collective influence of important factors in constellation form; (4) there has been a general neglect of the influence of age of marriage and of duration of current marital status upon number of children; (5) interrelationships of occupation of husband, education of husband, and education of wife in their influence upon number of children ever born have not been investigated although the distinctions that might be found probably would be useful in further understanding the ways in which socio-economic status and social roles affect fertility; and (6) they

Such criticism of the 1910 and 1940 census data is from the point of view of using them to determine the influence of selected factors under specified social and economic conditions upon fertility. It is assumed that the results of such analysis would have theoretical relevance and would be helpful in making population forecasts. This approach, however, is not the only one which can be taken toward the data and which would serve worthwhile purposes as the forthcoming monograph of Kiser, Whelpton, and Grabill will probably demonstrate.

have provided only thin interpretations Although our criticism applies with equal

of the existence of fertility differentials and force to the 1950 census fertility data, we

of the changes in them from 1910 to 1950. should be thankful in this case to have

To some extent, of course, the failures as any sizable body of published materials

listed above may be attributed simply to since government funds were inadequate

the fact that very little effort has been made and publication had to be financed by

to exploit the data.

private groups. Selection of the limited

This last observation might raise the question of whether the census data are sufficiently rich to merit exhaustive analysis. Let us consider first the fertility reports embodying the 1910 and 1940 samples. From an ideal standpoint, we find that the data are inadequate in not giving a simultaneous breakdown of native white women by age, age at marriage, rural-urban residence, marital status, occupation of husband, and education of wife. Without such subdivision of the data, we are unable to

data, therefore, was probably guided primarily by the research objectives of these groups. These data, nevertheless, will be useful for studies of differential fertility of the kind that has been made during the past generation. Such new studies when made will likely add perspective to our old picture of subgroup differences, but will be unable to unscramble the combined effects upon fertility of the socio-economic variables such as income, occupation of husband, and education of wife.

isolate the influence of each of these im- What research can be undertaken with

portant factors upon number of children the 1950 material has been hampered by

31

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

lack of strict comparability with data from the earlier censuses. The change in definition of urban residence and lack of funds to present data in all tables for both old and new definitions is an understandable complication. There were other changes in the 1950 tables, however, which have not been explained and for which reasons are not apparent. Consider, for example, some of the difficulties found in an analysis of number of children ever born by education of wife, using Table 9 in the 1940 report on fertility by duration of marriage with Table 21 in the 1950 report on fertility or Table 47 in the 1940 report on women by number of children ever born with Table 20 in the 1950 report. In the first place, the 1950 data are for all whites, whereas, the 1940 data are for native whites. Secondly, educational classes in the 1950 report are dissimilar from those in the 1940 publications with the result that instead of six to eight groups found in one or the other census there are only four or five left after necessary combinations for comparability. And, finally, when analysis by parity of woman is made, the 1950 age breakdown 55 to 59 years is found to have.no counterpart in the 1940 report, which gives data for women 55 to 64 years old and 65 to 74 years old. Some of these problems can be solved partially by the researcher, but others cannot be and errors introduced by non-comparability must be estimated.

With refinement of analyses of differential fertility and cohort fertility will probably come further studies of the relation of predicted numbers to resources, to the level of economic activity, to personality development, to family adjustment, and to other matters of concern to society. Interpretation of the meaning of population changes in terms of resources to support increased numbers has been long an interest of demographers and other scientists. One of the recent publications in which the problem is discussed and means for its solution advanced is that by Paul S. Henshaw with the title Adaptive Human Fertility.13 This book is principally of a nontechnical character and has little original evidence to distinguish it. The description of modern methods of fertility control is the best section of the work, as one might well expect since the author's background is mainly that of a biologist. Some students might find informative and interesting his weaving together of factual materials on population and resources with normative considerations in the belief that such presentation makes for a well-rounded understanding of the problem and is best suited for obtaining desirable action.
13 Paul S. Henshaw, Adaptive Human Fertility, McGraw-Hill Book Co., N. Y., 1955.

