Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
General session: II. The makeup of the healthy family
Frederick Osborn
To cite this article: Frederick Osborn (1955) General session: II. The makeup of the healthy family, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:2, 78-82, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987228 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987228
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

II. THE MAKE-UP OF THE HEALTHY FAMILY
FREDERICK OSBORN

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

IN RECENT YEARS THE WORD HEALTH h a s
been given a broader meaning. It now includes almost all aspects of human wellbeing. We speak of the mental health of the individual as naturally as we speak of his physical health. We speak of a healthy relationship between individuals. We know that there are healthy attitudes, and other attitudes which are not so healthy. When we speak of the nation's health, we generally mean not only the health of the nation's individuals but also their economic well-being. Recently too we have learned that all these aspects of health are interrelated. Doctors are using the term psychosomatic, and I believe it can be applied to the family and the nation as well as to the individual. Health, like liberty, is indivisible.
So today we are using the term "The Healthy Family" in this broad and all inclusive sense.
The healthy family is the product of its social and biological inheritance. No one takes exception to this statement when it is couched in such broad terms. But when we try to define how much differences in family health have been affected by the respective contributions of the environment and of genetic inheritance, we find ourselves in a field in which argument and even bitter controversy has raged these many years. In some quarters the argument still rages. But thoughtful people have come to realize that while it will be nice to have this point settled, it is not of much practical importance to the effort to improve family health. Our thesis is that practically all sound proposals for improving the social inheritance would tend to improve rather than injure the

genetic inheritance. There are great variations in health as
between different families. Some families contribute far more than their share to the clientele of hospitals, sanatariums, police courts, and state institutions; others less than their share; and a few stay entirely clear of them for generations. Luck may play a part, but in general these variations are related to both the social and genetic inheritance of the parents, to training, education, friends, neighbors, the community, and all the intangible influences of the particular environment with which they react. There have been a number of objective statistical studies of the relation of family health to most of these variables, and we are beginning to know something about them.
Of all the influences which affect the health of the family, the parents themselves are the most important. In the United States, parents who are physically andmentally healthy above the point of subnormality can always, barring unusual circumstances, provide their children the necessities for a healthy physical growth. In proportion as the parents are happy in their relation to each other, as they show their children constant affection, give them consistent training when they are little, provide a friendly and cheerful atmosphere in the home, they are training them in mental health and in healthy interpersonal relationships. In proportion as the parents watch and understand the mental growth of their children in its various stages and provide them with appropriate intellectual stimulus at the appropriate time, they are providing the atmosphere for that intellec-

78

79

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

tual growth which is the highest attribute of health. Finally, from or through their parents, children receive the genetic base with which all elements of the environment interact to produce the mature individual.

children from unhealthy homes are a retarding factor, and children from healthy homes represent a gain, and that both the gains and the losses are certain to show up in the next generation.

To get healthy families, we must start There is a self-evident cure for this

with the right parents. Obviously the place anomalous condition; namely, to provide

to find healthy parents is among people such conditions in our American society

who have been brought up in healthy fam- that fewer children will be born in un-

ilies. But this seems to be a circular argu- healthy families, and that more than the

ment. For our present purpose we had bet- average number of children will be born in

ter first consider how parents can be trained healthy families. This may seem a novel

for a healthy family life. A great deal is idea, but it is worth giving thought to. We

being done along these lines. The Chil- have already listed some of the things that

dren's Bureau of our Federal government are being done to improve family health

distributes well-written and authoritative through the education of parents. We were

booklets covering the needs of children at about to list a number of proposals now

different ages. The newspapers carry col- currently discussed, for environmental

umns of advice to parents, most of it good, changes which would also help to improve

some of it exceedingly well done. The family health. It may be worth while to

great national weeklies carry well-presented analyze both lists from the point of view

articles about family life. Psychiatry has of their effect on family size in different

made important contributions to knowl- types of families.

edge of how to bring up normal children, The most important factor affecting size

and gradually we are learning to apply of family is the culture pattern of family

them with practical good sense. Marriage limitation which during the past sixty years

counseling services are developing rapidly has spread throughout the western Euro-

and render valuable service; there are child pean countries. At the start it spread un-

and parent clinics, and a variety of state evenly, beginning with the higher income

and county and city mental health services. groups and as a result the first effect of fam-

All these guides to a more healthy fam- ily planning in this country and in most of

ily have developed in the past forty years; Europe was to increase the so-called social-

some very recently indeed. We can be con- class differentials in births. Some geneticists

fident that they are having an effect, and believe that such differentials result in a

that since each generation of children deterioration of our genetic inheritance.

should as a result be better prepared for Other geneticists discount this danger. But

parenthood, the effect should be cumula- quite apart from our genetic inheritance,

tive. But it is possible that we have in our we can be sure that our social inheritance is

society an offsetting factor which from gen- not going to be improved so rapidly if in

eration to generation tends to offset these each generation the more responsible or

gains. If the parents least qualified to more educated parents have fewer children

make a healthy family have on the average than the poorly educated, or the less re-

more children than those most qualified, sponsible.

each generation will in turn start out with Today in the United States the birth

a larger proportion of children ill adopted differentials between socio-economic groups

or ill prepared for parenthood. We do not seem to be diminishing as family planning

know whether or not this is the case. It spreads more evenly through the country.

would be a hard thing to find out. But we The proportion of families with five, six

do know very definitely that on the whole or more children among the lowest eco-

80 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

nomic groups has continued to fall right preciation of the values and happiness to

through the period of the baby boom, be found in a larger family, the effect on

while the white-collar and higher economic family size should be even greater. It might

groups, who had severely limited the size be argued that too much emphasis on the

of their families during the depression, have problems of child rearing tends to make

been the major factor in increasing the parents over-anxious, and hence afraid to

birth rate since the war.

have more children. It doest not seem to us

There is another recent trend highly favorable to a better distribution of births. A number of studies have been made on groups of people all of whom practice fam-

likely that this would happen to really healthy parents. But such anxieties might well reduce the number of children in less healthy families.

ily limitation fairly effectively. All these Much stress is laid on slum housing as an

studies provide evidence for believing that environmental cause of juvenile delinquen-

when people take some pains to limit the cy. Bad housing conditions also encourage

number of their chlidren, the people with the irresponsible breeding of children who

the lowest incomes have the fewest chil- are not going to get proper home care, for

dren, and the number of children increases bad housing conditions encourage careless-

in direct proportion to increase in income. ness and loss of self-respect. But if the only

Better still, there is evidence that the larger effect of improved housing was to restrict

families are born to the more responsible family size, it would also be a one-sided in-

parents in such groups, parents who give fluence on the better distribution of births.

their children a better home environment Good housing should make possible larger

and are more respected in the community. families among responsible parents. In

This evidence needs to be reinforced by developing housing projects, thought

larger studies, but the trend is clearly en- should be given to providing space ade-

couraging. It looks as though the planning quate for a certain proportion of large fam-

of family size, which is so rapidly becoming ilies, at a cost which would not unduly

universal in this country, automatically penalize the parents for having more than

brings about some improvement in the dis- three or four children. Government hous-

tribution of births even under present so- ing projects in Sweden and other Scandi-

cial conditions. Evidently a great deal more navian countries have included such pro-

could be done if we studied our social in- visions, and this kind of planning should

stitutions and modified them to further not be impossible in this country.

these trends. In particular, everything we are trying to do to improve family health should be thought .about from this point of view.

Education tends to raise the age of marriage. If marriage is put off too long, a smaller family results. This should be watched. But in other respects, the better

All of the activities listed under the our system of public education, from kin-

head, "Education of Parents," seem to us dergarten through college, the more likely

influences favorable to a better distribution that intelligent and responsible parents will

of births. Parents most receptive to these educational influences would with better understanding of the problems have an easier and happier time rearing their children and would seem more likely to have another child. Parents less able to accept such guidance are less likely to be affected one way or the other. If marriage counseling and advice to parents includes an ap-

have that extra child, while the irresponsible and careless are hardly likely to be stimulated by education a generation away. At privately endowed colleges the system of undergraduate scholarships usually provides help for the able children of lowincome families, and should thus encourage thoughtful parents to have more children. But the system of post-graduate

:i

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

scholarships has just the reverse effect. The small size of the scholarships combines with the atmosphere of the post-graduate schools to postpone marriage to an age at which these men and women are not likely to have large families. Yet it is probable that many post-graduate students are far above the average in the affection, care and wisdom with which they would raise their children. Combined with high intelligence, these traits should make for the finest sort of home environment. It should be made possible for graduate students to get married at an earlier age.
We do not have family allowances in this country, but they need to be discussed because they are in use in England, Canada, Sweden, France, and in fact in every country inhabited by people of western European descent except the United States. There is much discussion of them in this country especially in Catholic circles, and a very real possibility that they might emerge rather suddenly if we should have a severe depression.
Family allowances were developed in Europe either to raise a birth rate which was considered too low or to ameliorate the poverty of low income families with a large number of children whom they could not otherwise properly feed and support. Neither of these reasons applies to this country. We do not consider our birth rate too low. Wages, even at the minimum rate, are in general sufficient to provide food and necessities for quite large families. The children orchronically unemployed and dependent families are taken care of by many sorts of community, state and federal programs. If these are not sufficient, they should be enlarged. But there seems no reason to go in for a system which in other countries, so far as the records show, has made no improvement in the distribution of births, and on the contrary has at least in some instances tended to increase births among the least competent parents.
We should analyze for their effect on births among families of different types,

such social activities as school lunches, public health nursing services, recreation, county clinics and all the apparatus of public health and social welfare. In most cases the effect of these activities is probably to make for more births among the more responsible families. They should be studied for modifications which would make their influence as discriminating as possible. Many of the changes would probably be along the lines of training personnel in the psychological influences which affect size of family. Until all the fine body of professional people engaged in the task of improving family health realize that it is no kindness, but only an injury to parents and to children to encourage further parenthood among parents who have already demonstrated their incapacity to care properly for children, our institutions won't have the effect we want them to have.
The strongest pressures on parents trying to decide whether to have another child, are the pressures of community opinion. If friends and relatives, ministers and doctors, the whole atmosphere of the community express a clear attitude as to whether they should have another child, the influence is likely to be decisive. This requires a discriminating opinion, applied to each particular couple. This opinion may best be based on how well the couple are bringing up the child or children they already have. If their home is one which gives expression to a constant and affectionate care, if another child is wanted and would not seriously endanger the family living standards, the atmosphere about the parents should be one of enthusiastic approval even if they already have four or five children. If their home does not meet these conditions, they should not be encouraged to have a larger family. Such discriminating attitudes will require considerable education. We are all too apt to think in simple terms, such as "small families are better" or "people ought to have large families." These subconscious and often, in particular cases, erroneous ideas influence our attitudes and

82 Eugenics Quarterly

have their effect on the people we see. We owe it to the next generation to be more discriminating.
Many other physical and psychological conditions of the environment bring pressures to bear on decisions as to whether there should be another child in the family. All these conditions should be studied for their effect, or how they might be maintained, altered, or increased. In the aggregate they constitute the intimate and personal reasons why a couple decide to have or not to have another child. Few couples are influenced in such a decision by the interests of society at large. A distribution of births favorable to society and to future generations can only be brought about by creating conditions in the environment which will tend to stimulate parents to the right decision.
There is little or no extra cost or public expenditure attached to what we are proposing. Nothing in the proposal runs

counter to the things we are already doing to improve family health. All that is needed is first, the acceptance of a new idea; second, the development of a more discriminating public opinion; third, continuing studies of the effects of different environments; and fourth, such modifications of our institutions as are indicated by these studies.
The results would accelerate our present efforts to improve the environment and social inheritance of the next generation. The effect would be cumulative from one generation to another, each generation of children getting a better start than the one which preceded it. We would no longer need to be anxious about the genetic deterioration of the higher qualities of the race, for such a distribution of births could hardly lower our genetic potential. It might indeed carry the hope of a real improvement.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

