Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Editorial comment
To cite this article: (1956) Editorial comment, Eugenics Quarterly, 3:1, 2-4, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1956.9987257 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1956.9987257
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

DR. HARRY L. SHAPIRO Newly Elected President of the American
Eugenics Society

Fabian Bachrach

vol.3,NO.1,March,1956 Eugenics
EDITORIAL COMMENT

Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

New Officers of A.E.S. Elected

Dr. Harry L. Shapiro, Chairman of the Department of Anthropology at the American Museum of Natural History, has been elected President of the American Eugenics Society to serve from 1956 through 1958. A director of the Eugenics Society for many years, he has just completed a three-year term as its Vice-President.
Dr. Shapiro is also Professor of Anthropology at Columbia University and Research Associate in Anthropology at the Bishop Museum, Honolulu. A past president of the American Anthropological Association and the American Ethnological Association, he is a member of the National Academy of Sciences. He was chairman of the Division of Anthropology and Psychology of the National Research Council from 1932 to 1933. His chief fields of research are physical anthropology, human biology, race mixture, and population. Field work was carried on in Polynesia, Puerto Rica, the Orient, the eastern Pacific, Alaska, and the southwestern United States.
In addition to contributions to many scientific journals, Dr. Shapiro has published two books: "The Heritage of the Bounty" (1936) and "Migration and Environment (1939).
Alan F. Guttmacher, M.D. head of the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology at The Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City, is the newly elected Vice-President of

the Eugenics Society. He is also clinical professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology at Columbia Medical School. He was formerly chief of Obstetrics at The Sinai Hospital of Baltimore.
A diplomate of the Board in Obstetrics and Gynecology, he is a fellow of the Academy of Obstetrics and Gynecology and the American Society for the Study of Sterility. He is an associate editor of Fertility and Sterility and Vice-President of the Planned Parenthood Federation of America from whom he received the Lasker Award in 1947.
Dr. Guttmacher has published extensively on infertility, contraception, induction of labor, and the history of medicine. He is the author of the pocketbook, "Having a Baby."
Chauncey Belknap, lawyer, was re-elected Treasurer. Mr. Belknap is a member of the firm of Patterson, Belknap, and Webb in New York City and has been a Director of the Eugenics Society for many years.
Frederick Osborn, demographer of New York City, was re-elected Secretary.
Directors of the Society will be elected at the Annual Meeting. Suggestions for candidates should be sent to the Chairman of the Nominating Committee, American Eugenics Society, 230 Park Avenue, New York 17, N. Y.

Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Editor's Note:

for children and, further, linkage of this

Comment by Robert C. Cook and Frederick with all valuable genetic qualities. Quite

Osborn on The Eugenic Hypothesis has been published in EUGENICS QUARTERLY, September 1955,pp 129-132 and December, 1955, pp. 194-

the contrary! The Eugenic Hypothesis depends upon the possibility of determining

197. the desire for children through socio-cultu-

The following letters continue this discussion. Copies of the original presentation of The Eugenic Hypothesis by Frederick Osborn are available upon request to the Editor. Readers are inxnted to contribute their comments.

ral influences. As I see it, there are only two other major assumptions implicit in the Eugenic Hypothesis. One is that responsiveness to our socio-cultural environment is partly determined by genetic variations

within the species. The other is that this

responsiveness itself is the trait of primary

To the Editor:

interest for positive eugenics. None of these

I have read with interest the exchange of assumptions appears to be seriously dis-

comment concerning the validity of the puted.

Eugenic Hypothesis (Cook, 1955 a, b; Osborn, 1955). Although the main objections of Robert C. Cook are now admitted to have been based on a misunderstanding, the same misunderstanding and similar ob-

According to the Eugenic Hypothesis, desire for children and responsiveness to the environment will be linked not genetically, but by the deliberate creation of a Eugenic Environment. This environment

jections may still linger in the mind of would be designed to stimulate the desire

some skeptics. In any event, the genetic for children in persons most responsive to

basis of the Eugenic Hypothesis seems to their total environment, without influenc-

deserve closer scrutiny than it has received ing those whose interests were narrower or

up to now, and I think this scrutiny will whose physical and mental handicaps made

reveal no points of conflict with present child-rearing too burdensome. Of course,

genetic theory.

the Eugenic Environment can achieve its

The Eugenic Hypothesis is expressed by purpose only if, at the same time, adequate its author as follows (Osborn, p. 240): "If contraception makes fertility dependent the environment from childhood includes upon desire for children (vide infra).

those influences which make for full devel- A second objection was phrased by Cook

opment of the desire for children, then as follows: "There is a further hard-to-de-

those individuals most susceptible to the fine Lamarckian flavor to the Eugenic

stimulus of the environment will tend to Hypothesis that seems to run counter to

have more children than will their less re- biological realities." Before we argue about

sponsive fellows. . . . The response would this "hard-to-define" flavor, let us make

be voluntary, a selection drawn out by the some effort to define itl Lamarckianism is

environment itself, so that in so far as chil- the doctrine that acquired characters are

dren tend to resemble their parents for biologically heritable. There are two

either hereditary or environmental reasons, points at which such a doctrine is suggested

there would be in each generation a proportionate increase in the number of people best fitted to the environment."
Cook objected, first, to "the assumption that 'group inheritance'--a transmission en bloc--of a whole constellation of desirable characteristics is a biological possibility." As Cook understood it, the Eugenic Hypothesis required inheritance of the desire

by the Eugenic Hypothesis. First, Osborn says that even in so far as children resemble their parents for environmental reasons,a eugenic environment would multiply the people best fitted to it. It is not truly Lamarckian to believe in social inheritance of acquired behavior patterns. Competition and selection among cultures can operate independently of and even in opposition to

