Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Family allowances in great Britain, Canada, Australia and New Zealand
Rosalind Chambers
To cite this article: Rosalind Chambers (1954) Family allowances in great Britain, Canada, Australia and New Zealand, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:1, 21-27, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987160 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987160
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 6
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:36

FAMILY ALLOWANCES IN GREAT BRITAIN, CANADA, AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND
ROSALIND CHAMBERS
London School of Economics and Political Science University of London

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

JLOR THE MOST PART the benefits paid undei the various Social Security schemes which have developed so rapidly in the past 25 years are intended to meet hardship arising from an emergency situation or a physical handicap or both; sickness allowances, old age pensions, unemployment benefits or compensation for industrial injury all fit into this framework. A partial exception may be found where maternity allowances form part of social security; childbirth and its attendant expenses are a normal contingency for most married people. But in many plans of this kind a needs test is imposed before maternity grants or allowances are given, thus bringing them again within the scope of hardship.
Family allowances, however, in Great Britain, Canada, Australia and New Zealand are in a different category; they are given in these countries to all families with dependent children (though as will be seen the first child is sometimes excluded) without a needs test and without restriction as to class, status, occupation or, generally speaking, race. Normally a residence qualification only is required as a condition for receiving family allowances.
In some European countries, these allowances form part of a national population policy, as an encouragement to parents to have children. This was of course notably the case in France which was the pioneer in the field of family allowances and which initiated and extended them as a means of combating a disquietingly low and continually falling birth rate; Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy followed the same policy, inspired partly by military considerations. It

is debatable how far the aim of raising the birth rate, at any rate eugenically, has been achieved by these measures, and in later schemes, such as those in Great Britain and the Dominions, population policy has played a negligible role in the formation and carrying out of schemes for family allowances. It has been claimed indeed by some writers that as economic standards rise families become smaller, and therefore allowances will be a factor tending to lower rather than to raise the birth rate. But it does not appear that in the countries under consideration there has been any marked effect one way or the other.
In industrial countries, a strong argument that family allowances should be given as a matter of social policy, quite apart from any considerations of population, was and is the change in the position of children. Since the last quarter of the 19th century, they have ceased to be an economic asset, as they formerly were, as legislation has progressively restricted or prohibited their employment in remunerative work. Now up to at least the age of 14 or 15 and often later, they make little or no contribution to the family exchequer, and this, coupled with a general rise in standards of living and an increase in social responsibility, means that a young family is a considerable economic liability to its parents.
In these countries universal family allowances are now an integral part of the social security plans, but compared with other benefits, for example old age pensions, they are of comparatively recent date. Family burdens were, however, recognised in other

21

22 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

social legislation; income tax reductions the same income. The remedy for this, said

were allowed in all cases for family respon- Eleanor Rathbone, was not to raise the

sibilities; some gave mothers and children's general wage level which would be eco-

allowances in certain circumstances of need, nomically impossible and would give the

though these were partial measures and in childless an "unearned increment" but to

no case covered the whole country, nor the pay allowances in respect of some or all

whole population; others gave maternity dependent children. For many years after

grants in childbirth. In Great Britain such the book was published these views gained

allowances formed part of the Poor Law little public support; Malthusian views on

until the inception of the National Insur- population still commanded a good deal of

ance system, when they were gradually in- respect, and it was feared that to "subsi-

corporated within it -- though never com- dise" children would result in a rise in the

pletely. In Canada, Australia and New birth rate among the poorest groups. The

Zealand, where the Poor Law tradition was fact that France had recently adopted an

much less strong, allowances for needy de- extensive system of family allowances as a

pendents were included in the assistance or part of a policy to counteract the falling

pension schemes. That the mere existence birth rate, strengthened this point of view.

of a family might constitute an economic Organised labour was also for long opposed

burden which could not be carried without to family allowances, fearing their effect on

hardship by many wage earners, and which wages, even if they were financed from

should be lightened by the community in public funds, and not as in France, by a

its own interests, as well as from humani- levy on employers.

tarian motives, was very slowly appreciated. Such provision as existed up to the second World War was mainly through services in kind: cheap or free meals for school children, cheap milk and nourishment for pregnant or nursing mothers, and sometimes free medical and nursing services for women in childbirth.

The economic depression of the interwar years showed in many ways the part played by family burdens in producing poverty. Rowntree in his "Human Needs of Labour" and in the much fuller survey "Poverty and Progress" based on 1936 material, stressed the importance of large families or even three or four children as a

cause of poverty. Sir John Boyd Orr (as he

Great Britain

then was) in his "Food, Health and In-

In Great Britain the campaign for family come" published in 1936 observed that 40

allowances is indissolubly linked with the per cent of the children in Great Britain

name of Eleanor Rathbone. Her book were during some part of their childhood,

"The Disinherited Family" was first pub- living in families where the total income

lished in 1926 and remained until 1944, was too low to provide a satisfactory and

when her aim was achieved, the Bible of adequate diet for all members of the fam-

the family allowances protagonists. In it ily. Various other surveys, both of areas

she stressed the fact that the British wage such as those of Bristol and Merseyside,

system, whatever its foundation in eco- and also of groups, such as the Pilgrim

nomic theory, was based on the individual Trust report "Men Without Work" made

and took no real account of family needs. the same point -- the economic burden of

Thus the man with a family of three or more than one or two children, often where

four children, drawing the recognised wage the father was fully employed, still more

for his job and grade, might be living in where the family were on unemployment

conditions of poverty, while his fellow benefit or assistance.

worker who happened to be childless or a An increasingly favourable attitude tobachelor would be quite comfortable on wards family allowances developed during

23

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

the last war, partly though not altogether because, with a nation under arms, more and more families were in fact receiving allowances as service men's dependents; the finishing touch was given when Lord Beveridge in his famous report on "Social Insurance and the Allied Services" made the establishment of a system of family allowances one of the basic assumptions of his plan. The Government subsequently announced its intention of setting up such a system, and in 1944 the Family Allowances Act was passed.
This has been amended in details as the cost of living rose, and the present scheme provides for a flat-rate weekly allowance (at present 8/-) for every child except the first until the age of 16; thus in a "sample" family of four children all under 16, three will draw allowances till the eldest becomes 16; then the second child having become the first under 16 ceases to draw, and so on. The allowances are paid to the mother and are subject to Income Tax, but not to any form, of needs test. The scheme is administered by the Ministry of National Insurance.
In addition to these allowances Great Britain has a system of maternity grants and allowances paid to insured women or the wives of insured men, that is, to nearly every mother in the country. From October 1953, these will consist of a maternity grant of £9 payable shortly before or after confinement which may be supplemented by a further £3 if the woman is confined at home, and of a maternity allowance of 32/6 weekly for eighteen weeks payable to women who are employed and cease work owing to pregnancy. Unlike family allowances these benefits are conditional on a minimum number of contributions being paid under the insurance scheme.
Canada
In Canada as in Great Britain family allowances were a late development. One of the main difficulties in this as in other social security measures was a constitu-

tional one concerning the powers of the Federal and Provincial legislatures. Already, before the Unemployment Insurance Act was passed, it had been necessary to amend the British North America Act so as to enable the Federal Parliament to carry through legislation of this kind, covering the whole Dominion and centrally financed, and when family allowances were first proposed, opposition was encountered, not to the principle -- the necessity for easing family burdens was pretty generally recognised-- but to the apparent encroachment on the rights of the Provinces.
The determinant factor in putting family allowances on the map was the publication of the Marsh Report. This as is well known was prepared for the Prime Minister's Advisory Committee on Reconstruction by Dr. L. C. Marsh, and was entitled "Report on Social Security for Canada; the Requirements for Post-War Planning." The report dealt with all aspects of social security, reviewed existing measures and suggested plans for coordination and extension, envisaging a plan to cover the whole field. One of the main recommendations was the introduction of family allowances, and in support of this Dr. Marsh attempted to define minimum standards of need and to show how many families and incomes fell short of them. By 1943 standards of family needs had been accepted by the Dependents Allowances Board of Canada for service men's families, and it was suggested that it was time that the principle should be extended to cover all families. The Marsh Report defines two standards; one taken from a study made by the Welfare Council of Toronto prepared in 1939, based on local needs and prices and adjusted to the 1941 level, was described as a "desirable living minimum" and allowed for a higher standard than, for example, Rowntree's human needs standard in Great Britain. This required monthly incomes of 17.85 dollars for a child, 69.9 dollars for a man and wife, and 122.88 dollars for a family of five. Dr. Marsh also defined a lower

24 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

standard, which he called an "assistance minimum" which would only be sufficient to maintain health over a short period and which allowed for no amenities. To reach this, the necessary income levels were 14.63 dollars for a child, 44.46 dollars for a man and wife, and 94.54 dollars for a family of five. On these requirements it was found (using the earnings data of the Dominion Bureau of Statistics) that for a family of five (three children) 33.4 per cent of the male heads of households in urban areas and 50 per cent in rural areas earned less than the assistance minimum, while the percentages falling below the desirable living minimum rose to two-thirds in urban areas and three-quarters in rural areas. Large families were only one factor in producing poverty, but, just as in Great Britain, they were an important one. The Report recommended the institution of a Federal scheme of children's allowances as part of a general social security plan, and after reviewing possible methods of administration and finance, advocated universal cash allowances, financed from general taxation.
Following on the Marsh Report, a special committee was appointed by the Canadian House of Commons to examine and report on a national plan of social insurance and this was followed by a Family Allowances Bill which became law in 1944. As already suggested, opposition to this was mainly on the Federal Provincial issue, but some individuals and groups were opposed to it on another point, namely, that by a federal scheme some provinces would benefit much more than others, although all would have to pay if the plan were financed by centrally imposed taxation. This is indeed the case, as is shown by the numbers of children who received allowances, which vary from 1,350,588 in 1950 in Quebec, to 33,588 in 1950 annually in Prince Edwards Island. Clearly such difficulties are inevitable in countries such as Canada where the area is vast and the population very un-

equally distributed between the provinces. Eventually the provincial opposition was
overcome, and a federal scheme of family allowances came into force in 1945, being administered by the newly established Department of Health and Welfare. As subsequently amended and liberalised, the Canadian scheme like the British gives allowances without any test of income, and goes further, in that family allowances do not form part of taxable income. All children-- not excepting the first -- under 16 and maintained by their parents or parent are eligible, and payments are based on a sliding scale according to the age of the child, ranging from five to eight dollars a month. In the original ' scheme the allowance was reduced where there were more than five children in a family, and there was a residential qualification of three years. In 1949 the former provision was withdrawn, and the latter amended to one year. The allowance is paid to Indian and Eskimo families, but for them the payment is made chiefly in kind. In 1951 nearly two million families with over four and one-quarter million children were covered by the scheme. A specific condition of the allowance is that the children attend school; payments may be withheld if this is not complied with, and if the authorities consider that the allowance is not being spent on behalf of the child it may be paid to some other person than the parents, or not given at all.
Mothers' allowances on a provincial basis are also awarded by all the provinces. These vary in amount, but all are based on need, and carry a residence and usually a nationality condition; to be eligible, claimants must usually be widows or have family incapable of maintaining the family--such incapacity includes desertion and sometimes divorce. In a few provinces, needy families who do not strictly fulfil these conditions may nonetheless be given allowances.

25

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Australia
Australia presents some features that are similar to Canada, in that it has a federal constitution, and of course Commonwealth and State legislatures. It also has a wage structure which is controlled by Courts of Arbitration; wage-fixing Tribunals were established in Victoria in 1896 and in 1907 the first Commonwealth basic wage for unskilled workers was laid down, and described as being sufficient to maintain "an average man as a human being." Subsequent statutory basic wages have derived from this, and it was for long assumed that the standard laid down covered family needs. The existence of this statutory wage structure with its apparent family basis has been one of the obstacles to a Commonwealth scheme of family allowances. In 1926 a Royal Commission was appointed to enquire into the subject; the majority were not in favour of any action, nor was the Government of the day, affirming that the expense would be too great and that allowances would raise costs of production and of living so that no real benefit would result. However, various state schemes were in fact introduced during the succeeding years, based on a test of need.
By 1940 the tide of opinion had turned in favour of family allowances in Australia as in other countries of the British Commonwealth, helped by the war and the necessity for paying allowances to the dependents of Service men. A scheme of child endowment was promised in 1941 and was shortly afterwards introduced. During the course of the debates in the Commonwealth Parliament, the part which might be played by such a plan in population policy was discussed, and the need of Australia for more young people was stressed; counter arguments maintained that the Australian birth rate was already high and that any marked rise would be a disadvantage. But the Government declared that there was no reason to think that the scheme would have any great effect on the birth rate either

way and the real reason for introducing it was the necessity for strengthening family life and lightening its economic burdens, which the basic wage no longer did. In former years, as one of the chief Opposition speakers pointed out, the problem had been to raise the status of labour; this was now achieved and the problem had changed to the disparity between the level of family life as laid down by Australian standards and the level attainable for many families on the statutory basic wage. It was also pointed out that the age of marriage was generally later in Australia than in Great Britain, thus increasing the economic burden of the larger families.
The scheme as originally introduced was to pay allowances to all dependent children except the first up to the age of 16, without a needs test, but with a residence qualification. At the present time the first child is also included, however, but receives a lower benefit -- 5/- instead of 10/- a week, the latter being paid for subsequent children. The existing income tax deductions in respect of children were modified under the plan, so that the larger incomes contributed to the allowances of the worse off. Allowances in Australia are paid for children living in charitably financed institutions, and for those boarded out by the states, but not for those maintained in state-supported institutions.
The scheme is administered by the Ministry of Social Services and is financed by a payroll tax on amounts above £20 a week and by income tax.
Maternity allowances have been paid since 1911 to residents; these, which carry no test of need, take the form of a lump sum, varying according to the number of children in the family, and also a sum of ¿10, representing an allowance of 25/- a week for four weeks before and after childbirth.
New Zealand
Although its methods are the last to be discussed here, New Zealand took the lead

26 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

in giving family allowances, as it has been does so mainly from general revenue,

the pioneer in much social legislation after- though the social insurance fund makes a

wards adopted by other countries; for ex- contribution. Moreover, in Great Britain

ample, the first Old Age Pensions Act was allowances are regarded as part of taxable

passed in 1898.

income, while in the other countries they

Family allowances became established in are not. In no case are the allowances

New Zealand in 1927, when weekly pay- large enough to meet the economic cost of

ments of 2 / - a week for each child were bearing and rearing a child, and they have

given for families with more than two chil- come increasingly short of this as the cost

dren; they carried an income limit, at that of living has risen, and allowances, while

time £5 a week, for the full allowance. raised, have not kept pace with prices.

Between 1927 and 1936 adverse economic While probably few people would urge

conditions made it necessary to reduce the that the community should in fact meet

income limit, first to ¿3.12, and then to the whole cost of children, many critics

£3.5; but in 1936 it was again raised to £4. have said that the allowances are too low.

The Social Security Act of 1938 created a Canadian commentators on the Marsh Re-

new Department of Social Security, which port and the subsequent legislation pointed

took over, among other duties, the admin- out that benefits did not reach even the

istration of family allowances; the income lower of the two minimum standards laid

limit was raised to £5 a week and the allow- down in that document, and were too low

ance to 4/- for each eligible child. In 1940 substantially to ease the economic burden

all children except the first were included, of children. Certain Australian representa-

and in 1941 all children under 16. Further tives pointed out in the course of the vari-

amendments in succeeding years increased ous debates that allowances were sufficient

allowances and raised the income limit, to make a considerable contribution to the

until in 1946, the Social Security Amend- lower paid workers' budget but not enough

ment Act (passed in the preceding year) to make much difference to the higher wage

abolished the income limit altogether, and earner, and they urged that allowances

included all adopted children as benefici- should bear some relation to wages or sal-

aries. The benefit remains at 10/- a week, aries. It will be noted that none of the

and the scheme is financed by a special in- national schemes here considered recog-

come and payroll tax.

nised differential needs of this kind; all pay

New Zealand has no general scheme of maternity allowances; hospital treatment and midwifery services are provided free of cost, but no cash.

flat rates, except the Canadian plan, which varies according to the number of children, not according to variety in income. It is difficult to see how -- even if it were desirable on general grounds -- such differences

Conclusions

could be recognised without levying a specific and differential tax.

The various schemes of family allow-

ances here discussed have one thing in In Great Britain the Royal Commission

common; they all give benefit without a on Population, reporting in 1949, while ad-

needs test and without specific contribu- mitting that Family Allowances had not

tions as in social insurance. Otherwise they been established as an instrument of popu-

show considerable differences; Great Brit- lation policy, pointed out that at the 5/--

ain is alone in excepting the first child level which then operated they were a most

from its scope of benefit, although Aus- inadequate alleviation of family burdens,

tralia gives a reduced allowance. Canada, and suggested that they should be raised to

Australia and New Zealand finance their 12/-- weekly, a suggestion which has not so

schemes by special taxation, Great Britain far been fully carried out, the amended

27

allowances being 8/-. Criticisms have also been made though much less strongly of the wisdom or equity of paying allowances without income limit to all families; however, to impose a needs test would not only be administratively expensive and complicated but might discriminate against the thrifty and saving parents.
To conclude, it is reasonably certain that the demand for higher benefits will continue to "grow by what it feeds on" as costs and prices rise and higher standards in the welfare state are demanded, without any very clear idea as to how they are to be paid for or as to their relation to production. However, it is unlikely, in the opinion of the writer, that demands will be as insistent for family allowances as for, say,

old age pensions. It is in the early days of welfare legislation that humanity and abstract justice are the moving springs; by now in the countries discussed, pressure groups of varying strength constitute the main motive force, though not of course the only one. Old age pensioners are a clearly defined, increasing and fairly wellorganised body, who are beginning to form an important pressure group. But family burdens are much less easy to isolate, the heads of families are not an organised group and demand for higher family benefits is vague and ill-defined. It is more often vicariously voiced by social workers than by the people directly concerned, and in the legislative field altruism is only too often less effective than self-interest.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

BIBLIOGRAPHY

General
International Survey of Social Security, International Labour Office
Minimum and Advanced Standards of Social Security, International Labour Office
The International Labor Review, International Labour Office
The Social Security Bulletin, Social Security Association
The Parliamentary Debates of Great Britain, Canada, Australia and New Zealand
Measures for Family Welfare, United Nations
Great Britain
"The Disinherited Family," E. Rathbone "Poverty and Progress," Seebohm Rowntree "Human Needs of Labour," Seebohm Rowntree "Health, Food and Income," Boyd Orr The Beveridge Report on Social Insurance and the
Allied Services Report of the Royal Commission on Population,
1949
Annual Reports of the Ministry of National Insurance
Canada
The Rowell Sirois Commission (Report of Royal

Commission on Dominion Provincial Relations) The Marsh Report on Social Security for Canada Reports of the Canadian Congressof Labour "Canadian Welfare" (various issues) "Social Security and Reconstruction in Canada,"
H. M. Cassidy
Australia
Australian Commonwealth Legislative Series, International Labour Office
Australian Medical Journal Reports of the Department of Social Services State Parliamentary Reports
New Zealand
Social Security in New Zealand, International Labour Office
New Zealand Medical Journal Report of the Pensions Department Annual Reports of the Social Security Department New Zealand Legislative Series, International La-
bour Office Also various periodicals produced by organised
labour, voluntary societies and religious bodies contain relevant material, though only in short articles and notes.

News of Population and Birth Control This four-page monthly news sheet gives and Spanish. Gifts and U. S. subscriptions round-the-world coverage on population ($2.00) make possible free distribution and birth control. It reaches 100 countries abroad. (Mrs. Dorothy Brush, Editor, 501 and is translated into German, Japanese Madison Ave. New York 22, N. Y.).

