Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Meetings and recent publications
Helen G. Hammons
To cite this article: Helen G. Hammons (1962) Meetings and recent publications, Eugenics Quarterly, 9:3, 172-174, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1962.9987523 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1962.9987523
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

MEETINGS AND RECENT PUBLICATIONS

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

GENETIC AND CONSTITUTIONAL ASPECTS
OF DIABETES MELLITUS: Sven E. Nilsson. Almquist and Wiksell, Stockholm, 1962, 96 pp. (paper).
An investigation of three groups of young males in Sweden: diabetics, nondiabetics with diabetic relatives, and nondiabetics without known heredity for diabetics.
Diabetes occurred with increased frequency among relatives of juvenile diabetics, and the distribution of the disease was compatible with assumption of a uniform diabetic gene. Autosomal recessive mode of inheritance seemed most likely, but dominant inheritance could not be ruled out.
The investigation added evidence for the inheritability of diabetes mellitus, the author concludes. The disease appears to be caused by a uniform mutant gene with a frequency of 0.17 to 0.20 in the population studied, and develops mainly in homozygotes. There seems to be no reason to assume any difference in the mode of inheritance between juvenile and adult diabetes on constitutional grounds. A table of risks for relatives of diabetics is given.
REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT OF CARNEGIE
INSTITUTION OF WASHINGTON, 1960-
1961: Caryl P. Haskins. 54 pp. (paper).
A remarkably fine statement about the need for a "living science" by the President of the Carnegie Institution of Washington, Caryl P. Haskins, whose reports are always distinguished by their luminosity in presenting science as vision as well as in terms of technical specifics.

Here he affirms that the establishment of an indigenous living science in the new nations--however modest it may be --is the most critical and the most spiritually significant of all the aspects of scientific and technical experience.
In his review of the year's work of the Carnegie Institution, the President points out that the primary objective "is the support of the uncommitted individual scientists; it is not organized for the direction or even the coordination of research workers." The science of the individual uncommitted investigator is highly methodical. According to this report, it actually may be more methodical from a long-range point of view than organized group science. The work of the Institution's six departments has exemplified this vividly in the past year, Haskins states. The description of the Department of Genetics, established 57 years ago, is of special interest.
GENETICS: E. Grace White. Vantage Press, New York, 1962, 258 pp.; $6.00. A revised edition of a textbook on ge-
netics to which a section on chemical genetics has been added. More space is given to the gene than is usual in elementary texts, and students are urged to keep up with current journals.
The last chapter on eugenics presents the aims of positive eugenics, concluding that if they were in practice the more competent persons at any economic level would have more children than the incompetent. The references on eugenics omit some of the important British material such as the Eugenics Review and some of C. P. Blacker's writings.

172

Recent Publications

173

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

SOCIOLOGY (6th edition): Jesse Bernard and Deborah M. Jensen. The C. V. Mosby Co., St. Louis, 1962, 356 pp.; $6.00.
A new edition of a book on sociology for nursing students. It has a wide range and touches on eugenics in dealing with the family and with the individual and his environments. The roles of heredity and environment are discussed, and most mental and emotional illness is described as the result of disturbances in social relationships or in metabolism, each of which may be either cause or effect of the other.
EVOLUTION AND GENETICS--The Modern Theory of Evolution: David J. Merrell. Holt, Rinehart, &Winston, New York, 1962, 420 pp.; $6.00 (illustrated).
Written for those who want to know more about the theory of evolution and the operation of evolutionary forces. There is a good deal of material on the genetics of population and a short section on eugenics. It can be used either as a textbook or for general purposes.
GENERAL BIOLOGY--The Science of Biology (6th edition): William C. Beaver. The C. V. Mosby Co., St. Louis, 765 pp.; $8.00 (illustrated).
A new edition of a textbook covering both classical biology and some new research developments in the field. A little material on human inheritance is included. The volume shows familiarity with the field of positive eugenics as developed by the American Eugenics Society.
MARRIAGE: Robert O. Blood, Jr. The Free Press of Glencoe, Macmillan, New York, 1962, 515 pp; $6.00.
A revised edition of Anticipating Your Marriage, but the text is almost com-

pletely rewritten, according to the author. It covers the material comprehensively and is a readable text. The chapter on family planning deals with contraception, religious practices, child spacing and family size, but there is no specific material on eugenics.
VAESTONUTKIMUKSEN VUOSIKIRJA (VII)
1961-1962: Väestöpoliittinen Tutkimuslaitos, 1962, 182 pp. (paper).
Yearbook of population research in Finland from 1961-1962. English summaries are provided only for the first part. Articles include the cost of pregnancy and childbirth in Finland. Finnish social legislation provides maternity welfare centers which reach 95% of the mothers on the average. A maternity allowance is given to every mother, and trained communal houseworkers help during the mother's absence. Other articles deal with population in India, aspects of urbanization, cancer in Finland, and family companionship and cohesion.
MENTAL RETARDATION--Activities of the
U. S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare: Departmental Committee on Mental Retardation. Washington, D. C, 1962, 77 pp.; 50(4 (paper).
Describes advances in treating the more than five million mentally retarded children in the United States by the U. S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. President Kennedy's special panel is now formulating a plan to combat mental retardation. Some of this retardation is explained here as coming from very complex mechanisms of heredity which reflect genetic variability in intelligence. Control programs for phenylketonuria are described, as well as some of the chromosomal abnormalities linked to retardation.

174 Recent Publications

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

OTHER PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED
Surgical Sterilization of Men and Women--A Selected Bibliography: Edited by Christopher Tietze, assisted by Lussia Neumann. Publication No. 11, National Committee on Maternal Health, Inc., New York, 1962, 38 pp. (paper). A bibliography on surgical sterilization which covers the medical and sociological literature chiefly from 19461961.
The Basic Facts of Heredity: Amram Scheinfeld. Washington Square Press, Inc., New York, 1961, 273 pp., 60¿ (paper). A revised and expanded edition of The Human Heredity Handbook which includes a list of heredity clinics. Illustrated by the author.
Mental Health Book Review Index: Compiled by the Editorial Committee and Contributing Libraries. Vol. 7, 1962, 66 pp. (paper). Lists the titles of books published in the behavioral sciences and their reviews in the journals. Sponsored by the World Federation for Mental Health, International Council of Psychologists, American Foundation for Mental Hygiene, and Research Center for Mental Health. Now published annually.
The Nature of Ego--A Study: Benjamin Meynard. Philosophical Library, New York, 1962, 211 pp., $4.50. A discussion of the ego based on James, Jung, Ouspensky, and others.
MEETINGS
The Fifth Annual Meeting of the Society for the Scientific Study of Sex will be held at 9:30 a.m. on Saturday, October 20th, 1962, in the Barbizon Plaza Hotel, 106 Central Park South, New York City, New York. The topic for the

morning session is "New Concepts in Sex Education."
Chairman: Milton I. Levine Participants: Rev. Lee Belford, Lena Levine, Lilli Peller, Walter R. Stokes. The topic for the afternoon session is "Prostitution."
Chairman: Robert V. Sherwin Participants: Harold Greenwald, Wardell B. Pomeroy, Theodore Rosenthal, Judge Sylvia Singer.
An Asian Population Conference is to be held in 1963 under the auspices of the United Nations Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE).
A small group of demographic experts and representatives of the relevant U. N. specialized agencies met in Bombay in February 1962 to advise on the plans for the Conference for the guidance of the ECAFE Secretariat. Among those attending this Preparatory Committee of the Asian Population Conference was Mr. John D. Durand, who is in charge of the Population Branch of the United Nations Headquarters.
FELLOWSHIPS
The Population Council announces fellowships open in demography for 1963-1964. It is offering twenty-five fellowships at the predoctoral and postdoctoral levels, available for study in the United States and other countries. Applications are accepted from all countries. Preference is given to applicants who have completed at least one year of graduate study. For information and application forms write to: Fellowship Secretary, The Population Council, 230 Park Avenue, New York 17, New York, U. S. A.
HELEN G. HAMMONS

