Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The prospects for genetic improvement
L. C. Dunn
To cite this article: L. C. Dunn (1956) The prospects for genetic improvement, Eugenics Quarterly, 3:1, 32-37, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1956.9987262 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1956.9987262
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

THE PROSPECTS FOR GENETIC IMPROVEMENT

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

L. C. DUNN
Institute for the Study of Human Variation Columbia University

L,'OOKINC AHEAD is ONE of those risky oc- known as mutations, so that a new gene-

cupations which can only be faced by doing form responds in a different way to the

just the opposite, namely by looking back- same environment, or to changes in the en-

ward. What we shall know of the future vironment, so that the response of the same

will certainly be determined by what we set of genes is different. A newly arisen

have learned in the past; and the real prob- hereditary character like albinism, or

lem set for a scientist when you ask him spotted skin, or woolly hair, which ex-

about the future is to extend beyond the presses itself similarly in the usual environ-

present day the lines of progress by which ments, is an example of mutation; darken-

the science of yesterday became the science ing or freckling of skin on exposure to sun-

of today. It requires him to take stock of light is an example of a so-called environ-

the significant advances of knowledge in mental variation, although both kinds of

the recent past, and to guess which of these variations, of course, are expressions of a

show some prospect of profitable extrapola- particular system of genes (known collec-

tion in the future.

tively as the genotype) reacting with a

Of me it is required to take some stock specified environment or range of environ-

of recent work in the field of genetics, the ments. The expression, that is, the appear-

scientific study of heredity and variation. ance or behavior of the individual, is

Heredity, of course, is the biological con- known as the phenotype. One of the main

nection between the generations of plants, animals and men, the bridge over which passes the living substance which we inherit from father and mother and remoter ancestors. This is the substance contained in the egg and sperm from which each of us arose; and it consists of an organized assemblage of thousands of living elements known as genes. The particular system of genes received by each individual--and each individual receives a different set-- determines the kinds of responses we make to our environments. The peculiarities of each animal or plant or man are determined by this interplay or interaction be-

purposes of genetics is to understand the relations between genotype and phenotype.
Now we discuss the meaning of another term in the title: improvement. What we shall mean by improvement is something more advantageous for man than what he has now. However much we may speak of knowledge for its own sake or science for the sake of science, the ends of both are certainly and inevitably, although sometimes indirectly, for our human purposes, the betterment of the human condition and the increase of human happiness. The job of the scientist is to search out the rules of

tween his genes and his surroundings, be- order by which nature operates. His do-

tween his heredity and his environment. main is the real world of atoms and sub-

Variations are novelties which arise in atomic particles, their motions and actions

one component of this interacting system; whether in molecules, in genes, in living

they are either due to changes in the genes, cells of animals or plants or men, in the

crust of the earth or in the atmosphere or

*Presented in the lecture series "2000 A.D." at Cooper Union, New York City, November 14, 1955.

interstellar space. In this search his im-

32

33

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

mediate purpose must always be to seek for reason and for order, even though the eventual end of human betterment has to be superseded or even sacrificed in the process. But he must from time to time do what we are asked to do tonight, come out of the laboratory or the study and make some assessment of where we are and where we are going.
Where then are we going genetically? What are the prospects of improvement of the genotypes of the animals and plants upon which we depend both for food and, for instruction? (I put instruction almost on a par with food, for we must learn largely from the other living things which we can control experimentally, something we are prevented from doing with our own fellows by moral and practical restrictions.) What finally are the prospects of improvement in human genotypes? Concerning our own conservative, slow-breeding species, I should remind you that man, as man, has a long history of some 600,000 to 700,000 years and during this time no major changes in his structure have occurred, major in the sense that there is no evidence of a tendency for Homo sapiens to split into different species. What has occurred, is occurring today and will probably continue, is evolution on a comparatively minor scale zoologically, the formation of races and other more or less distinct groups of genotypes as a result of geographic and cultural isolation, accompanied by separation of populations, inbreeding, and adaptation to different local environments. We should, therefore, not expect any spectacular changes in the human animal in the two generations intervening between now and 2,000 A.D., an interval comprising only about 1/100,000 of man's history. However, changes in the proportions of a few of the many thousands of genes which comprise the total genotype are occurring within and between some human populations today and this is evidence, as I shall show, that such evolution is certainly continuing in our own species.

One way of discussing these questions is to draw up a kind of balance sheet of genetic improvements and disimprovements which we know from experience or by good inference to have occurred or to be occurring now in man or the animals and plants on which he depends. I hope to show you that to discuss either side of this balance sheet apart from the other has not much meaning, for all living things, man certainly not excepted, are parts of nature, which is a continuum of interacting elements in some kind of equilibrium. The balance of nature is no figure of speech. When the frequency of spinsters (in Darwin's old fanciful example) is connected with the quantity of the crop of red clover* seeds through steps which lead through cats (kept by spinsters), field mice (hunted by cats), bumble bees (whose nests are destroyed by field mice), red clover blossoms (fertilized by bumble bees), the whole is figurative, but each step (except possibly the first) is a well-established fact. There is, as every ecologist knows, a balance in which predators and prey, parasites and hosts, insects, bacteria, viruses, and foodsupply are interacting elements. Disturb one and you disturb the whole chain. So it is with the genotypes of animals, plants and men who all live in populations and societies of which the structure expresses an internal adjustment of the members to each other and of the group to its surroundings.
I shall put down first on the credit side a change in the genotype of human populations in certain parts of the world which is probably occurring today, although the exact measure of it will have to be taken by another generation of geneticists. There is a usually fatal hereditary anemia known as sickle-cell anemia which arises in young children when the child has received from each of his parents a particular form of one gene, known as the sickling gene, since it causes the red blood cells, when under reduced oxygen pressure as in the venous circulation, to assume bizarre crescent-

Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

shaped forms. Such parents have only one such abnormal gene, the other member of the pair being normal, so they do not suffer from anemia, although they can be identified by their blood picture as being carriers of the sickling gene, or having (as medical men say) the sickle-cell trait. This abnormal gene is common in parts of Africa (sometimes 40 per cent of a tribal group will have it) and in Sicily, and in their descendants in the United States, and around Lake Kopais in Greece, and large numbers of children regularly die from this terrible anemia. This gene is most frequent in areas where malicious malaria (Jalciparum) has been hyperendemic; that is, where nearly everyone has been exposed to the malarial parasite. One direct experiment by a British physician in Africa has shown that persons with one of the abnormal genes, (the trait-carriers), are actually more resistant to malaria than related persons with two normal genes. It appears that such carriers are at an advantage in malarial areas, so the frequency of the bad gene increases, and with it the number of children fated to suffer and probably to die from sickle-cell anemia. Malaria, as we know, has been eradicated in America and Europe (including Sicily) by using DDT to kill the mosquitoes which transmit the malarial parasites from person to person. Persons having one sickling gene no longer have an advantage over normal people in Sicily, or in the United States, and we expect the frequency of the gene to fall, and with it the death-rate of children from sickle-cell anemia. This should also happen in Africa when malaria is eradicated there. If it does, we shall have a most dramatic example of an undoubted improvement in a human genotype, obtained as a byproduct of an improvement of the environment by good public health methods. A similar story may be enacted with another hereditary anemia, that is, thalassemia, or Mediterranean anemia, from which thousands of children die each year in the formerly malarial areas of Italy,

Sicily, Sardinia and Greece, and in the United States where intermarrying descendants of immigrants from these areas have preserved the bad gene and will for several generations to come. But eventually these hereditary diseases will be rare all over the world.
Let us ask now what flies may get into this apparently good ointment. What if the mosquitoes should become resistant to DDT, as some other insects have done, by survival of those with mutations conferring immunity? There is no sign of this yet, but all of this knowledge is only of recent date, and this is a possible, if not probable, sequel.
There is, however, an additional weight on the improvement side of the scale in these cases, because persons who will transmit either of these genes can be accurately diagnosed by a blood-test. If each such person would refrain from having children, all present anemia genes would disappear from the populations, and we should have to fear only those which arise anew by mutation, probably a rare occurrence.
This suggests, of course, that if we could recognize, in advance, those persons who will transmit to their children hemophilia and other diseases known to be caused by an identified gene, such as certain forms of idiocy and imbecility and some other physical abnormalities, the means would be at hand for reducing such genes also to the status of rare genes of which the only examples would be those newly arisen by mutation. There are signs that this may occur for some genes well before 2000 A.D. The improvement will occur only if the carriers of such genes have first the knowledge, second the means, and third the will, to refrain from having children. Alas, this knowledge has been available for certain dominent abnormal genes (expressed when received from only one parent) for a generation, but these genes are still with us. Either the means or the will or both are still lacking. With the spread of the knowledge and practice of contraception,

35

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

which is certain to increase, some of this knowledge may be implemented.
These eugenic proposals cannot be efficiently applied by merely preventing the reproduction of persons suffering from hereditary diseases or abnormalities, usually rare, which express themselves only when two like genes (known as recessives) are received, one from each parent. Nature now prevents most such persons from reproduction, but the recessive genes persist in the parents where they cannot be detected until too late, after the afflicted child has been born. However, if persons known to carry such genes would voluntarily refrain from having as many children as persons who do not carry these genes, some progress in reducing their frequency might be made.
We shall cite briefly only one other case of improvement in a genotype to show that some probable improvements may be of a temporary character and perhaps balanced] by disadvantageous outcomes. The past century has seen a great growth of cities and the consequent break-up of the village communities in which many western peoples lived and married. Certain abnormal genes have been found to occur in a few such small marriage circles or isolates, and when two people, probably related, from the same village marry, there is a greater risk that they should each transmit the same abnormal gene, received from a common ancestor. When such persons marry in the city, there is a better chance that they will marry someone without the same abnormal gene. This reduces the likelihood of the birth of a child with two genes of the same abnormal form; hence the frequency of such an hereditary abnormality should fall. But now the bad genes are more widely distributed and less likely to be reduced by the death of diseased children, each of which carries two of the bad genes out of this world. They thus tend to escape from the control of natural selection which kept them in check, although at a cost of suffering and death, in the villages. But if genes with highly favorable

effects under all environments should become more widely dispersed, the urban concentrations of the future, provided they are real melting pots, might confer biological blessings beyond the mechanical, social and esthetic ones by which we profess to justify our choice (generally involuntary) of a metropolis with dirty subways, littered streets and a generally hectic and precarious life.
I have only a little time for two topics which I am certainly expected to discuss, but these I believe involve applications of principles which I have tried to illustrate in the above examples. One, of course, is. the effect of the use, both military and industrial, of atomic energy, which is bound, to increase the hazards of radiation-injury to the genotype, from which we now suffer to a limited extent due to the so-called normal or background radiation from a mildly radioactive planet and universe, and at the hands of some incautious or X-ray-happy physicians. There seems little doubt that these hazards will increase, especially if some super-bombs go off anywhere above our continent or in our waters. There is no doubt either that increases in the radiation to which living organisms are exposed are followed by increases in the rate of gene mutation, and that most newly arisen mutations have deleterious effects. I do not belong to the prophets of doom, but I cannot view as biologically bright a future in which these hazards will increase. It is true that populations adapt their biological structures in the long run to new hazards and new mutations--but how long is a "long run" for our species? And how much immediate suffering can we tolerate? If we have a choice, none of us would choose to invite the risk implicit in such horrible engines as the H-bomb from which we (and we means all human beings) may expect only disimprovement for our species. Meantime we must develop pre-treatments which will counteract the mutagenic effect of radiation on our tissues and germ cells, and ways to do this have already been ex-

36 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

plored. Before we descend into the deep shelter, we shall have to take our pills or a nitrogen tank down with us, and it may be that there is no hiding place down there.
For the captive species on which we ourselves are parasites, especially our crop plants, there is some hope, predicated on solid achievements especially of the Swedish plant breeders, of further improvements in yield and quality through the use of carefully controlled radiation. Already grainvarieties have been produced by selection and recombination among radiation-induced mutations which extend the range of profitable crop production several degrees northward, and there is no reason why this method should not yield further improvements. But I suspect that the mutation process involves chemical steps which will provide more effective and less risky entrees to the great problem of the future in this field--the deliberate control and direction of mutation in specific genes or groups of genes. We shall certainly be nearer to that goal by 1975. Perhaps it will be achieved by 2000.
The second point of these two is: what are the prospects for changes in the genotypes of the world of microscopic life on which we depend and which holds over us continual threat and hope--the world of protozoa, bacteria and viruses? Here the fact of balance is clearly established. No sooner had we gained control over some pathogenic micro-organisms through the use of antibiotics than we found the parasites able quickly to adjust themselves to the new hazard. Micro-organisms have survived so many such hazards in the past, that they have evolved as a result of their history a plasticity due to random mutation by which, if resistance to streptomycin is advantageous, lo, the mutations are already present, and such mutant types survive as streptomycin-resistant strains. More than that, some of them now require streptomycin and cannot survive in competition without it. We keep one jump ahead only by discovering new antibiotics, by inducing

mutations in the molds that produce the antibiotics (such as penicillin) so that they produce a greater quantity of antibiotic, and by learning the metabolic systems of the micro-organisms with which we must continually contend. I believe we are smarter than they and shall win. But we may kill some good friends in the process, for many of the constructive activities of plants, animals and men cannot go forward without some of these symbiotic beneficent allies. Meantime we have, by applying the same principles, conquered some of the most formidable bacterial and virus diseases of crop plants by breeding genotypically resistant varieties, one of the great triumphs of plant-breeding. The field of the genetics of micro-organisms is one of the currently brightest spots of the whole science, chiefly because new ideas about the gene itself are coming from it, and this glow falls especially on the future, for where new ideas are now, new facts will follow, and after that a new order which brings us nearer to our goal.
This brings me to my last point, and for this I should like to abandon the checks and balances of the ledger and speculate with more freedom, though I hope not with less responsibility. What does the biologist whose tools are genes speculate about when he leaves the laboratory and stands before an audience like this? What are his reasoned hopes for the next 50 years? I have already made some optimistic statements about prospects for controlling the genotypes of the most rapidly reproducing organisms, bacteria and viruses, and as a consequence, reducing the toll of disease on human and especially crop-plant populations. Two useful organisms with annual generations--Indian corn and chickens--have been greatly improved in the past 25 years, both by selective breeding and by controlled heterosis, the bonus of vigor and yield obtained in first generation crosses between different genotypes. This can certainly be extended to other crossbreeding plants and animals. New sources

37

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

of food will probably be made available by favorable mutations in unicellular green algae yielding cheaper carbohydrate, and in yeasts, yielding more and better proteins. Now that we know that the chief organic catalysts, the enzymes, are controlled by genes, we can surely harness these for human purposes.
The greatest recent increase in our knowledge of human genotypes has come from the combined efforts of serologists and geneticists working on human blood group genes, of which a dozen major systems are known, some of which consist of many elements, so that by combination of these literally millions of different genotypes become possible. The day is not distant when the uniqueness of each human individual will be proved from his blood group genes alone. As a byproduct of this knowledge one cause of infant mortality, hemolytic disease of the newborn, is now controllable. Relations between some of the other blood group genes and specific diseases (for example between blood group O and duodenal ulcer) have recently been proved. Others are certain to follow quickly. Genetics has entered medicine, and diagnosis of human genotypes must soon become an essential part of the practical knowledge of the physician. Human genetics will shortly have an efflorescence which will put it in the forefront of the sciences contributing to

human welfare, with profound social effects.
I shall not try to summarize this review and preview except to point out that wherever improvements, past or prospective, appear, they are associated with (or I suppose judged by) increased control and increased efficiency or effectiveness of scientific method, and this constitutes empirical knowledge, if not understanding. On the other hand, the other side of the ledger shows, .on balance, the greater precariousness which is to be, for better or for worse, the condition which will dominate the existence of our descendants in 2000 A.D. That is a condition which ignorance, unreason, prejudice, even lack of rapid scientific advance, could quickly make entirely untenable for civilized man. Once we have got the jump on nature, we shall have to keep on jumping faster and farther. This is to say that we shall become increasingly more dependent on our wits, those specifically human attributes such as tool-using, and the use of language with its corollary, thought--in short on cultural development. Surely that is no novel conclusion. Twenty-five hundred years ago an anonymous preacher told his people: "Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get wisdom; and with all the getting, get understanding." Today we should remember that more of that task lies ahead of us than behind us.

