Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Genetic counseling: At the Minnesota State Board of Health
Lee E. Schacht
To cite this article: Lee E. Schacht (1961) Genetic counseling: At the Minnesota State Board of Health, Eugenics Quarterly, 8:4, 226-228, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1961.9987489 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1961.9987489
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

Genetic Counseling

Genetic Counseling: At the Minnesota State Board of Health

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

With the recent advances in biochemistry, cytogenics and other fields of human biology, our understanding of human heredity and disease has increased many fold in the last 15 years. Some of the inherited diseases have been found to be due to certain metabolic defects. A great many of these have been studied carefully, and the site and type of defect has been determined. In several cases such as phenylketonuria and galactosemia a dietary treatment has been found which may prevent the clinical symptoms and permit development of a normal individual. The discovery of a cytological technique by which the chromosomes of man may not only be counted but may be differentiated has given us insight into the causes of many diseases such as mongolism, Klinefelter's, Turner's syndrome and certain undifferentiated abnormalities. Our understanding of the human blood group systems, the haptoglobins, the transferrins, and the hemoglobins have also done much in pinpointing exactly where genetic defects occur. The inheritance of many of the congenital malformations has been closely studied and much has been learned about the degree of inheritance involved in these as well as related anomalies. In various psychiatric diseases we are beginning to understand the interacting roles that heredity and environment play in the production of these diseases. Thus with these new tools and the information which they have provided for us, we are now in a position to give more precise information to families who seek counseling with respect to the inheritance, or

non-inheritance, of various diseases and defects which occur in their families.
Because of this increased knowledge of the role of heredity and the increased demand for genetic counseling, the Dight Institute of Human Genetics and the Minnesota Human Genetics League proposed for enactment by the 1959 Minnesota State Legislature a bill providing for the establishment of a human genetics unit within the Minnesota State Board of Health. The purpose of the bill was to provide counseling and educational services on a statewide basis. This bill provides for developing and carrying out a program in human genetics which includes "the collection and interpretation of data relating to human hereditary diseases and pathological conditions; the assembly, preparation, and dissemination of informational material on the subject for professional counselors and the lay public; the conduct of such research studies as may stimulate reduction in the frequency of manifestation of various deleterious genes, and the provision of counseling services to the public on problems of human genetics. It shall consult and cooperate with the University of Minnesota, the Public Health Service, and the Children's Bureau of the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, and with nationally recognized scientific and professional organizations engaged in studying the problems of human genetics."
The same bill also provides for an advisory committee of nine members for appointments of 6-year terms to assist and advise the State Board of Health in

226

Genetic Counseling

227

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

formulating policy and programs for the study of problems of human genetics. This advisory committee consists of members from the Dight Institute for Human Genetics, the University's Department of Pediatrics, Dental School, and Department of Anthropology, local physicians from the Twin City area and the Mayo Clinic, and from several of the foundations in this area.
It was decided that the two main functions of the unit in its early years of development would be to provide genetic counseling and informative and educational material to various professional groups who would be directly involved in human genetic problems. These would include physicians, social workers, nurses, and educational institutions.
Because of the problems involved in providing genetic consultation, it was decided that this service would be provided only directly to or by referral from the following individuals:
1. All licensed physicians and dentists 2. Private hospitals, institutions, and
agencies 3. Official state and local institutions
(welfare departments, adoption agencies and agencies that deal with the physically and/or mentally handicapped) 4. Individuals--by referral from their local physician or dentist, with only general information being provided without professional referral. Because of the need for an accurate medical diagnosis before genetic counseling can be given, it was decided that lay requests for counseling would have to be refused. The procedure for consultation is as follows. Inquiries about genetic information and consultation may be made by telephone or letter. Because of the

need for not only an accurate medical history but an accurate family history in evaluation of hereditary aspects of a trait, it is preferable that some member of the family be interviewed by the Human Genetics Unit. However, if this is not convenient or feasible the request for genetic evaluation will be given upon receipt of as much information on medical and family history as the physician or agency finds available. The referral from physician, dentist, or agency should include the patient's name, address, local identification, reason for the referral, as complete a history and diagnosis as possible, and such information as might be pertinent to the patient's understanding of the problem. Whatever follow-up procedure is deemed advisable is carried cut. This would include checking records from other state departments, the hospitals, private or public, within the state, and from other sources which the physician may indicate. A full account of the interview and the findings are then sent directly to the referring source. This information is discussed with the family at the time of the interview only upon permission of the referring physician.
When a family has been seen or consultation has been given, records are kept of all pertinent information received. When possible, a pedigree is taken and checked with whatever available records there may be, and a written report is included in this record of all comments and conversation during the interview. Also, all copies of information sent or received on a particular proband are kept on file. All such information is considered confidential and is not released without written consent. This information, however, is available for research purposes under a confidential law protecting such studies, if deemed advisable by the state board of health.

228 Genetic Counseling

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

The Minnesota Human Genetics Unit in its first year of existence has seen cases not only of medical interest but also has ·done a great deal of counseling with adoptive agencies concerning placement ·of children with mixed racial ancestry.
The educational part of the program has included lectures to various lay associations who have a vested interest in hereditary problems such as local chapters of the Association for Retarded Children, Crippled Children's groups, Association for the Blind, and similar organizations. There have also been medical staff lectures and discussions in several Minneapolis-St. Paul hospitals and the response has been extremely gratifying. Also, several schools of nursing in the Twin City area have requested lectures for their student nurses and these have been provided.
A series of five lectures which will cover the areas of metabolic diseases, -chromosome work, human serum proteins, and radiation effects has been prepared on problems in human genetics which is aimed at physicians and other related professional people. These lectures will be given once monthly and will be presented by various lecturers from throughout the United States. It is hoped that this will become an annual series and that in future years specific topics will be taken up in greater detail.
A supplement to the Minnesota birth ·certificate has now been worked out. It will provide for an automatic reporting of blood group reactions in newborns and the presence of congenital malformations and other possible hereditary or birth problems. This will be similar to the fetal death record supplement which has been in use in Minnesota for the past

four years. It is hoped by this method that a routine reporting of any of the congenital malformations and other possible hereditary diseases will give this unit a source of information not only for counseling purposes but also for research purposes in the future.
A registry of familial and hereditary diseases is now in being and includes all or almost all phenylketonuria patients within the state and all Huntington chorea patients. This registry is to be limited in scope in order that the file and records may be kept up to date and thus provide a current and accurate registry of these diseases throughout the state of Minnesota rather than a dead accumulation of dated material.
A study of human transferrins has recently been conducted in cooperation with the Rockefeller Institute on the Chippewa Indians at the Redlake Indian Reservation. It is hoped that the results of this study will be available in the near future. The state law establishing the Human Genetics Unit provides for such research projects, and it is hoped that similar projects will be initiated and carried out in the future.
While this is a new and unique service within the United States, that is, the provision for genetic counseling and education through a state agency, it is felt that the first year of operation has indicated that such a service is not only desired, but is needed and useful within the state. Several states have indicated an interest in establishing similar programs, and we feel that this can be done with profit to these states.
LEE E. SCHACHT
Minnesota State Health Dpartment

