Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The responsibilities of parenthood a marriage counselor's view
Robert A. Harper
To cite this article: Robert A. Harper (1959) The responsibilities of parenthood a marriage counselor's view, Eugenics Quarterly, 6:1, 8-13, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1959.9987384 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1959.9987384
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF PARENTHOOD A Marriage Counselor's View

ROBERT A. HARPER*
Washington, D. C.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

w,E NEED NOT LOOK HARD OR LONG
to find significant problems about which many contemporaries are apathetic, insular, irrational, and ignorant. As readers of this journal well know, a more than equitable portion of the unsealed fortresses of public misinformation and superstition center about such topics as genetics, eugenics, and population (3, 4, 12).
In the professional specialty of premarital, marital, and familial counseling, which is related to the foregoing topics most directly and obviously through heredity counseling, there is little current activity designed to guide clients on matters directed toward population limitation and improvement. So far as can be judged from professional meetings and correspondence, as well as from the official literature, hereditary matters are not a major concern of most marriage counselors. Not many counselors routinely inquire into such matters as the following with their premarital and marital clients: the practical risks of parenthood under conditions of consanguinity (10), mixed Rh blood factors (13), or family histories of schizo-
*Dr. Harper is in private practice as a psychotherapist and marriage counselor. He is a former secretary of the American Association of Marriage Counselors and has taught at Ohio State, University of Michigan, Michigan State, and George Washington University.

phrenia (1, 9), allergies, diabetes, mental retardation, nervous system malformations, harelip and cleft palate, clubfoot, etc. (11) . Although it may be argued with considerable validity that it is asking too much of a marriage counselor to expect him to be well informed on these subjects in addition to an already broad and heavy load of presumed expertness, it is to be hoped that more counselors will learn about and use heredity counseling services which are increasingly available (5, 6, 11).
Even if we take a kind and lenient attitude toward the sociologically and psychologically trained marriage counselor who lacks genetic and eugenic sagacity, we must call him to more severe accounting on environmental means of population improvement. The writer is particularly concerned about many of his colleagues who take a generally benevolent, encouraging, and even strongly urging approach to the bountiful reproductive activities of couples who are patently unqualified socially and psychologically for excelling in parenthood. Accumulating quantitative population problems are surely by now a sociological truism, and the need for qualitative population improvement is reflected in every area of scientific life. Many marriage counselors nevertheless insufficiently question the traditional assumption that parenthood is desirable

8

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

not only for "nice, average couples" but even for the moderately dull, deficient, and disturbed.
Euthenics, then, not alone eugenics, strongly suggests a most cautious and highly selective policy for marriage counselors regarding the clients they lead toward parenthood. How have many counselors remained immune to such suggestion? The unhappy answer seems to be that most sociologists, psychologists, and psychiatrists are perhaps still too deeply immersed in the myths of their own culture about the social desirabilities, individual benefits, and moral blessings of parenthood that they are not as adept at applying rational thought and scientific understanding to the matter as we should like.
The writer has analyzed some of the social and psychological difficulties of the marriage counseling profession in two other papers (7, 8). We shall here center our attention on various propositions about parenthood which diverge from the points of view, stated or implied, of many marriage counselors. These are tentatively held beliefs (subject to correction by much-needed research) , but they are made in the form of rather unqualified assertions for the sake of clarity, readability, and (hopefully) challenge to prevailing prejudices about parenthood. Although the statements are specifically directed toward parenthood in contemporary American society, they are probably more generally true.
1. The only time reproduction is truly desirable for the children, for the married couple, and for the general society is when (a) the husband and wife are considerably above average as phenotypes and (insofar as it can be deter-

mined) genotypes in such traits as mental and physical health, intelligence, emotional and social maturity, and creative and adaptive skills; (b) the marriage is a very happy one; and (c) both the husband and wife not only want children in a sentimental sense but are eager to make parenthood their main enterprise for the next quarter of a century and realize that this task means a lot of hard study, hard work, and the sacrifice of many other satisfactions.
2. Very few people meet all three of the foregoing criteria. There are a fair number of healthy, intelligent, mature, creative, adaptive people who are quite successful in business or professional activities who think that marriage and parenthood can be successfully pursued as an avocation to which they give little time and attention and for which they have little or no preparation. The facts are that in order to be even moderately successful in marriage and parenthood, under contemporary social circumstances, a great deal of time and energy and skill are required. Often indifference at worst or unskilled good will at best is all basically competent people offer family life: they have already given most of their available time, energy, and talent to out-of-home careers.
3. The relatively few couples who do fulfill all of the standards mentioned in our first point are likely to have their happy marriages made happier by children. In fact, for this minority, the joyful labors of parenthood probably bring as deep a sense of creative achievement as is available in life.
4. Under present-day social conditions, ancient conceptions about duties or rights of having children are quite inappropriate. "Be fruitful and multiply" is exceedingly poor advice in the

10 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

face of world over-population and accompanying social problems. Concerning the matter of duty, married couples who choose not to have children are being much more dutiful citizens in the light of contemporary social realities than those who do have children. The former are at least not adding to the overall weight of population or of the social and psychological problems which tend to arise from duty-inspired offspring. As for any rights that genetically, sociologically, and psychologically unqualified people may have to enter parenthood, these are privileges which have been socially granted and which may be socially removed. All individual rights are subject to the limitations set by the welfare of the society to which the individual belongs. Although the truth is recognized by only a pitifully few of those who influence public opinion in most countries, there is a real and imminent danger to the whole world society by the continued indiscriminate exercise of individual rights to parenthood.
5. Just from their own narrower points of view, happy couples who do not prepare themselves seriously and well for the hard work and real sacrifices of parenthood are often in grave danger of having their previously sound marriages undermined by the arrival of children and the accompanying increase in life's stresses.
6. Even more definitely, couples who were relatively unhappy prior to children are likely to find that the additional burdens of parenthood bankrupt their marriage and bring real and lasting misery. Unhappy marriages are not rendered happy by having children.
7. Many of the people who urge married couples to have children and try to

make them feel guilty if they do not are resentful of the freedom and enjoyment of life shown by some childless couples. "I'm tied down with a life I dislike with children (doing my duty); why shouldn't you be likewise?" is what probably goes on covertly in some of the people who are overtly saying: "Nothing like kids to make life worthwhile." Such propagandists for reproduction are malefactors, not benefactors, of the couples, the children thus reproduced, and mankind in general.
Such observations as the seven just made are apt to be judged as evil by some persons, but any less severe approach to the responsibilities of parenthood seems to me to be stupidly antisocial. My perceptions of the current situation add up to the generalization that whenever parenthood is an involuntary function and/or one for which the individual is grossly unsuited, ill effects are very likely to ensue for all parties concerned. Both the matter of desire and competency for parenthood are, however, relative. No parent is wholeheartedly happy about his role as a parent, and certainly no parent is perfectly equipped for the responsibilities of parenthood. But surely people who are functioning as parents predominantly contrary to their wishes and skills do injustice to themselves, their children, and their society.
Let us take a closer look at some of the attitudes and competencies needed for parenthood. The first attitudinal prerequisite is a happy marriage. This does not mean that every happy couple is automatically qualified to be parents, but without such happiness none is fully qualified. Research studies undertaken from widely variant psychological, psychiatric, sociological, and psychoanalyti-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

cal angles point with unanimity to the great significance of the home environment and of the parental influence in the development of the personality of the child.
One of the two parents, almost invariably the mother, has a greater quantitative and qualitative influence on the children. The home atmosphere and the maternal attitudes are to a very considerable degree a reflection of the marital relationship. That is, one of the main interests of the mother is her marriage, out of which these children have emerged. Her attitudes are predominantly optimistic and happy or pessimistic and depressed as a result of the happy or unhappy nature of her relationship with her husband. In addition to the direct bearing of the mother's attitudes of happiness or unhappiness on the children, there is the home atmosphere, the feeling tone of the family, which is chiefly set by the nature of the husband-wife interactions. The children are directly and indirectly affected by these interactions.
It is common practice to make married couples feel that they are abnormal, selfish, and in other ways unworthy for not having children. After a short period of marriage, childless couples are often subjected to jokes, questions, cajolings, accusations, etc. Such propaganda is not only in poor taste from any point of view (for the childlessness may be involuntary) but is most specifically inappropriate when the lack of children is a reflection of the lack of desire for them on the part of either person in the marriage. Certainly high motivation for parenthood is another essential attitudinal requirement for its successful fulfillement. Just as we would not urge a career as a jet pilot on a lad who

11
shows disinclination to fly, no more should we propagandize the joys and virtues of parenthood for couples who show reluctance about having children.
Competency to deal with difficult situations under long-term stress is another characteristic needed by persons who would be better-than-average parents. Let us make no mistake in underestimating the additional stresses that parenthood places on a couple in contemporary society and in overestimating the number of persons who are capable of successfully handling these stresses in a way that will assure health and happiness for themselves and their children.
There is a condition which accompanies some brain injuries and diseases psychiatrically referred to as anosognosia, the denial of illness. A patient with anosognosia may be paralyzed in his right arm, for example, and yet stoutly deny the existence of the paralysis. He apparently so reorganizes his perception that he is able to "remove" the paralyzed limb from his field of perceived reality. He is afraid to face the reality of paralysis; he feels comfortable in denying reality.
The denial of the difficulties, the burdens, the displeasures of parenthood, I propose, involves much the same psychological process as the denial of illness in the brain-injured. Many of us are afraid to face the unhappy realities of parenthood; we feel more comfortable in denying these realities, in believing the myth that having children is a sure route to happiness.
Despite the travail brought to the life of the average couple by the arrival and continuing presence of children, it is nevertheless true that at least the mother (and sometimes even the father) finds sufficient compensation for efforts made

12 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

during the children's infancies. Babies for a short time are dependent, cuddly creatures. Even for a mother who is not very mature, loving, or dedicated to the disciplines of parenthood, there are many narcissistic satisfactions she can derive from this small, pliable, helplessextension of her ego. For the first year or so of the child's life, the mother (and to some extent the father) can enjoy the satisfactions of a life created (and the alleged virtues of so creating) and of a love unquestioningly accepted: a life and a love totally dominated and possessed.
Infants do stop being infants, however. They develop actions and ideas different from those of the parents. Even by the beginning of the second year, they undertake behavior that demonstrates a will of their own. The narcissistic satisfactions of absolute power, of total domination and possession, are more and more lost by the parent. The child needs to grow toward independent functioning as a separate human being; the parent needs to desire and assist this growth toward independence for the child. To fulfill this responsibility, to help a child to become gradually an adult, to provide the wise and happy and steady guidance this child needs to become a mature and loving and productive human being: this, beyond doubt, is one of the most important and most difficult of human tasks. It takes an exceptionally capable and loving and integrated and mature person adequately to fulfill this job. It is not a task that the average person can successfully muddle through.
Such, then, briefly are some of the responsibilities of parenthood and some of the rare attitudes and competencies

required to meet them. It is surely most important and desirable for a considerable number of happy, well-adjusted, healthy, and intelligent world citizens to dedicate themselves to continuing reproduction of the human race, just as it is important and desirable for a sufficient number of persons with the requisite qualities to dedicate themselves to other activities closely related to human welfare such as science, medicine, engineering, law, education, and so. If we stop propagandizing the false virtues of indiscriminate reproduction and start educating people regarding the true values of qualitative population improvements, there is no reason to believe that many of the persons who are genetically, psychologically, and sociologically qualified will not willingly enter parenthood.
Meantime, education and counseling should bring out the realities of parenthood: its failures, its displeasures, its burdens. The qualified should not mistakenly believe that they have entered an easy, avocational avenue to joy. And persons who fail to measure up to what should be the increasingly severe requirements of child-bearing and -rearing had best be strongly discouraged about this route to self-fulfillment and encouraged to exercise their varying abilities in other areas of living.
Will such discouragement of massive and indiscriminate parenthood be dangerous for the future of the human race? Quite the contrary. Among the scientifically available reasons to fear for man's future (and there is no shortage of them), one will look in vain for insufficient reproduction. It is, indeed, only by preventing the domination of the human race by the genetically, socially, and psychologically unfit that

13

man's future can become the evolutionary fulfillment of his biological and cultural past. Man can no longer safely deny the reality that parenthood, as the most important and exacting of human responsibilities, should be open only to the trained, thequalified, the dedicated, and the skilled.
REFERENCES
1. ALTSHULER, K. Z. 1957. Genetic elements in schizophrenia, Eugen. Quart., 4 : 92-98.
2. CLAUSEN, J. A. and GINSBURG, B. E. 1958.
Genetic and cultural characteristics, Eugen. Quart., 5 : 95-104. 3. COOK, R. C. 1952. The physician's concern in the problem of over-population, Transactions if Studies of the College of Physicians of Philadelphia, 2 0 : 41-49. 4. . 1952. Why people refuse to

face population problems. Pop. Bull., 8 : 29-35. 5. HAMMONS, H. G. 1958. Heredity Counseling: Its Services and Centers, New York, American Eugenics Society. 6. Heredity Counseling Symposium. 1958. Eugen. Quart., 5:1-63. 7. HARPER, R. A. 1958. Neurotic interactions among counselors, Jour. Counsel. Psychol., 5 : 33-38. 8. . 1959. Marriage counseling and the mores: a critique. Marriage and Family Living, 2 1 : in press. 9. KALLMANN, F. J. 1953. Heredity in Health and Mental Disorder. NewYork, Norton. 10. MULLER, H. J. 1950. Our load of mutations, Amer. Jour. Human Genet., 2 : 111-176. 11. REED, S. C. 1955. Counseling in Medical Genetics. Philadelphia, Saunders. 12. SCHEINFELD, A. 1958. Changing attitudes toward human genetics and eugenics, Eugen. Quart., 5 : 145-153.
13. SCHWARTZ, H. A. and LEVINE, P. 1943.
Studies on the Rh factor, Amer. Jour. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 4 6 : 827-835.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

THE JOURNAL DF HEREDITY
Bi-Monthly Publication of the American GeneticAssociation
The Journal of Heredity features illustrated articles on the latest discoveries in genetics, anddiscussion of recent developments in the field of heredity as applied to plants and animals, including human genetics and eugenics. The situation in Soviet biological science and the effects of radiation on human populations have been the subject of several recent articles.
Subject to approval by the Council, membership in the American Genetic Association is open to persons who areprofessedly interested in anyaspect ofthe science of heredity. Dues, which include subscription to the Journal, are $5.00 per annum for residents in the U. S. and $6.00 in all other countries. Subscription to the Journal of Heredity is |7.00 per year; foreign postage, fl.00 additional. Inquiries concerning membership andsubscription orders should be addressed to the Secretary at the address below.

AMERICAN GENETIC ASSOCIATION

1507 MSTREET, N.W.

WASHINGTON 5, D.C.

