Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Colloquium on the role and behavior of sex chromosomes in mammalian development and reproduction: Basel, May 6­8, 1965
Marco Fraccaro
To cite this article: Marco Fraccaro (1966) Colloquium on the role and behavior of sex chromosomes in mammalian development and reproduction: Basel, May 6­8, 1965, Eugenics Quarterly, 13:2, 152-154, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1966.9987660 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1966.9987660
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
View related articles
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:28

COLLOQUIUM ON THE ROLE AND BEHAVIOR OF SEX CHROMOSOMES IN MAMMALIAN DEVELOPMENT AND REPRODUCTION: BASEL, MAY 6-8, 1965
MARCO FRACCARO
Gruppo EURATOM per le Radiazioni e la Citogenetica Umana Dell'Universita' di Pavia Pavia, Italy

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

This Colloquium, the third of its kind,
was held, as were the previous ones, at
the Department of Anatomy of the Uni-
versity of Basel, Switzerland, with the
kind hospitality of Prof. G. Wolf-Heideg-
ger. It was organized by Drs. H. P.
Klinger and M. Fraccaro, who alternated
as chairmen. The number of partici-
pants was restricted to 40, all of whom
were from Europe with the exception of
Drs. J. L. German, H. P. Klinger, S.
Ohno, and O. J. Miller from the United
States. In the tradition of the Collo-
quium, no formal papers were presented;
each topic was introduced by a speaker
who reviewed facts, listed controversial
points, and indicated topics for discus-
sion. The discussion followed unre-
stricted but for considerations of rele-
vance and time. The main subjects
discussed and the participants who intro-
duced them were as follows:
1. "The Role and Behavior of Sex Chromosomes in Mitosis and Meiosis in Mammals with Special Sex Determining Mechanisms"--S. Ohno
2. "The Role and Behavior of the Sex Chromosomes During the Somatic and Meiotic Cell Cycle in Mammals" --J. L. Hamerton
3. "Chromosomal Factors Affecting Fertility Differentials in Man and Other Mammals"--C. E. Ford
4. "Reproduction in Individuals with Numerical and Structural Chromosome Aberrations"--P. Polani
5. "Chromosome Abnormalities in Spontaneous and Induced Abortions" --H. P. Klinger

6. "The Sex Ratio at Conception and Factors Which May Differentially Affect This Ratio Such As Paternal Age, Radiation, Drugs, Contraceptive Procedures, etc."--R. A. Beatty
7. "Feasibility of Large Scale Cytogenetic Population Studies: Assessment of Simplified Cell Culture Method, Electronic Identification, Characterization and Evaluation of Chromosomes" --H. P. Klinger
Before the scientific program started, Prof. E. Witschi of the Ford Foundation extended welcoming words; he stressed that with its third meeting the Basel Colloquium is coming of age, and he expressed the hope that Basel, at the heart of Continental Europe, will see the tradition continue. Dr. H. P. Klinger, speaking for the organizers of the Conference, expressed gratitude to the Population Council for their grant, which defrayed some of the expenses of the meeting; to Prof. G. Wolf-Heidegger for providing the excellent facilities of his Department; and to the City of Basel, which, as on the previous occasions, gave the participants a reception at the magnificent Wildt'schen Haus.
Introducing the first subject, Dr. Ohno reviewed the morphology and behavior of the sex chromosomes in gonadal and somatic tissues of various mammalian species and stressed that the study of "unusual" situations and mechanisms is bound to be relevant to the understanding of the basic facts of sex determination and development, both normal and

152

Vol. 13, No. 2

Brief Reports

153

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

abnormal. He also stressed the important evolutionary implications of such studies and, referring to his personal studies, pointed out that although there is within mammals a wide variety of sizes and shapes of the sex chromosomes, the average content of essential material is the same. Special cases were subsequently illustrated by Dr. W. Schmidt, who reviewed his experiences with Microtus agrestis; by K. Fredga, who presented a new sex-determining mechanism in the Indian mongoose (Herpestes auropunctatus); and by Dr. A. Lima-de-Faria, who discussed the situation in Melanopus. The main emphasis in the discussion that followed was on the bearing of various findings on the problem of the duplication patterns of sex chromosomes and their heteropyknotic masses in the interphase nucleus. Dr. Schmidt emphasized the point that in Microtus agrestis the appearance of large, characteristic chromocenters varies in different tissues during development and drew the conclusion that there is a reversibility of "heterochromatization" during various phases of development and differentiation. Thus, two characteristic large heterochromatic masses are found consistently in brain cells, but not consistently in kidney cells and are altogether absent in other tissues of appropriately investigated embryos. Moreover, in cells cultured in vitro by direct trypsinization, the masses were present in epitheliumlike cells but absent in fibroblast-like cells. Also, the late-duplicating X was consistently present in the fibroblast cells that lacked masses in interphase nuclei; this was taken to indicate that the "late replication" of the X chromosome is, at least in this material, independent from the state of condensation of the chromosome in the preceding interphase. From this a lively discussion developed on the general problem of the inactivation-cyde

of the sex chromosomes. The problem of timing during development received particular attention. Dr. Klinger presented the preliminary results of a study on the morphology of nuclei during the first stages of embryonic development in the rat, starting from the two-cell stage. The results were not conclusive, but the potentialities of this delicate and exacting technique are many.
The second section merged easily with the first one. The new autoradiographic and histochemical techniques as applied to the study of sex chromosomes in mammals received particular attention. ¡Evidence from the mouse was the high light of this section. Dr. Monesi presented his autoradiographic and histochemical studies on the mouse testis, particularly emphasizing the behavior of histones during gametogenesis. Dr. Fraccaro presented evidence that the Y chromosome is asynchronous in duplication during spermatogonial mitosis; at four hours after injection of 3H-thymidine into the living animal, 40% of the spermatogonial metaphases display a single intensely labeled chromosome. Drs. B. Cattanach, Mary Lyon, and C. E. Ford discussed the results of a cytological and autoradiographic investigation of the "Cattanach Translocation," involving the insertion of an autosome section into an X chromosome. In this case it seems that either the normal or the translocated chromosome is alternatively the "hot" one. This is in contrast to another translocation, TI 6, in which inactivation seems to be nonrandom and it is always the translocated chromosome which is the "hot" one. Discussion of these findings centered around their genetic implications in terms of the behavior of genes involved in these X autosome translocations.
Introducing the third section, Dr. Ford surveyed the effects of fertility differen-

154

Brief Reports

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

tials produced by chromosome rearrangements in the mouse. This type of study focuses on three different aspects; viz., the meiotic behavior of the structurally altered chromosomes, the fate of meiotic products, and the differential viability of the products as gametes. Drs. Mary Lyon and Searle presented and discussed at length data on the behavior of X-ray induced translocations in the mouse. In this animal, sterility and semisterility are produced by practically all translocations involving the autosomes. In the mouse the presence of an extra chromosome associated with sterility does not necessarily mean that the extra chromosome is a sex chromosome, as is usually the case in man. In man, a large number of single instances of translocation are known, but their genetical implications and their effects on fertility differentials are difficult to study.
Dr. Polani expanded on these difficulties when he introduced the fourth section. The methodological approaches possible in man are necessarily limited. Two such approaches were illustrated by Dr. Hamerton, who reviewed the available data on the differential gametic output of carriers of the "mongol translocation," and by Dr. Book who discussed the results of a cytogenetic survey of 100 consecutive male partners from "sterility couples." At least 10 of these males were carriers of a chromosome abnormality, mainly involving the sex chromosomes. Dr. Lindsten illustrated cases of human reciprocal translocation in which it was possible to study the meiotic chromosomes. Dr. Miller, Dr. German, and Patricia Jacobs presented different types of human material all having a bearing on the topic discussed. Dr. Giannelli presented a detailed autoradiographic study of D/D translocations; this painstaking kind of study is necessary in man where

often the main problem is to discriminate the chromosomes involved in the translocation.
Dr. Klinger, introducing the fifth section, stressed the need for standardization in the selection of material and technical procedures for meaningful studies of chromosome abnormalities in human abortions. He exemplified this need by presenting the results of various abortion studies, including his own data. Dr. Miller reviewed some unpublished material and also contributed his own original data. From this emerged the striking fact that about 30% of spontaneous abortions in man are due to chromosome abnormalities. Two rather unexpected findings are the high frequency of triploid embryos and the high rate of elimination of XO zygotes.
In the next section, Drs. Beatty and R. G. Edwards discussed the experimental evidence, mainly from the mouse, bearing on the problem of differentials in the sex ratio induced by external or internal agents from conception to birth. A lot of attention was devoted here to the analysis of studies attempting to evaluate sperm activity and sperm phenotypes.
The last section was opened by Patricia Jacobs, who gave the results of the cytogenetic survey being made by the Edinburgh group on samples of the general population. The methodological difficulties of such surveys were discussed at length with particular emphasis on possible ways to reduce the vast amount of time and effort that they require.
It should be mentioned here that any formal report on the Colloquium cannot completely convey the spirit of this type of meeting, the free discussion, and exchange of ideas. The overall impression of the participants was that the meeting had been a success.

