Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Fertility management and concern with overpopulation in Mainland China
Amrit Lal
To cite this article: Amrit Lal (1964) Fertility management and concern with overpopulation in Mainland China, Eugenics Quarterly, 11:3, 170-174, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1964.9987589 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1964.9987589
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 25
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

FERTILITY MANAGEMENT AND CONCERN WITH OVERPOPULATION IN MAINLAND CHINA

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

In the classical period of Chinese thought, Confucius, Mo Ti, and Mencius wrote on the dynamics of population, but they were worried primarily about underpopulation. As a result, the main fabric of conventional opinion in China, viewing the vast, underdeveloped parts of the economy, has dwelt on the deficiency of population rather than on overpopulation. "More population means more taxpayers and more soldiers; more land could be plowed; more armies could be manned"; the growth of population was interpreted by the monarchs of ancient Cathay "as a working index of increasing nation's power, wealth, and prosperity." Growth in population represented increments in the social capital of the nation, and the belief has remained until the present Communist management of the Chinese community.
The attitude reflected in ancient Chinese thought in the realm of population is symbolized in the following ancient proverbs:
To die without offspring is one of the three gravest unfilial acts.-- Confucius
Man is envied for the number of descendents in the male line who will walk in his funeral train. Grandchildren and, still more, great-grandchildren are counted as special blessings of heaven.--Mencius
Grain is stored against famine, and sons are brought against old age.-- Anonymous
These teachings have stuck permanently in China, and the very suggestion of fertility management is abhorrent to the Chinese mind schooled in the Confucian ideals. The view is reinforced by

a group of western sinologists in their correspondence with Himes (1936), who had contacted them for information on contraception in the Chinese culture for his dissertation on the subject. These correspondents had rigidly maintained that "there is no information on, or discussion of, contraceptive methods in China."
But occasionally there had been audible an unorthodox voice in China, uneasy about the population outstripping the means of sustenance. Cressey (1955), for example, quoted a writing of 300 B. C. in which Han Fei-tzu described the problem of his day:
People at present think that five sons are not much, and each has five sons. Therefore, people are more and wealth is less; they work hard and receive little. The wealth of a nation depends upon people having enough food, not upon number of people.
The same dismal picture is projected in another old proverb from Shansi Province:
To feed a family of five, a farmer must work like an animal. But to feed a family of six, even a flogged animal will not work.
Hung Liang-chi (1746-1809)--who bears the arresting title of "Chinese Malthus," for he lived about the time of Malthus and in his tone warned of the inexorable danger of overpopulation--also belongs to the "protestant" tribe of Chinese thinkers on population. As compiled by DeBary (1960), Hung's formulations of the principle of geometric increase outstripping more slowly developing food production, his idea about the survival of the fittest, and finally his

170

Vol. 11, No. 3

Communications

171

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

reliance on natural checks are purely Darwinian in essence and Malthusian in conception. The following is a brief excerpt from Hung's essays:
Population in 30 years increases five times and ten times in 60 years. Within a matter of 100 years it will have increased twentyfold. . . . Even so, . . . the increase in land and houses will be just double, three times, or at the most five times the original, whereas the population has increased 10 or 20 times. . . . Flood and drought, plague and pestilence are what nature offers as remedies.
In spite of the Chinese reverence for human life, abortion was practiced in the Chinese culture. Maxwell (1928) mentioned different Chinese methods and chemical prescriptions to secure abortion. Towards the close of the nineteenth century the practices became prohibited by law. In the New Chinese Criminal Code (1928), Articles 332 to 338 dealt with penal servitude for abortions and helpers. But the law was not enforced with any seriousness, and the practice of abortion remained prevalent, for Cormack (1926) hinted at large numbers of requests made to doctors for securing abortions.
For the recent past, Cormack (1926) indicated that contraception in the present scientific form had appeared in China by the middle thirties:
Young China which is so articulate, has already got to discussing this (Birth Control) and cognate matters in some public meetings, and has ventured to print in some magazines, articles discussing these subjects.
About the same time Lamson (1930), a sociologist from Shanghai, also confirmed the rising interest in contraception:
For some time articles on birth con-

trol have appeared in some of the magazines of China.
Very little is known about the evolu-
tion of fertility management concepts for
the period between 1936, when war with
Japan disrupted the economy of the
country, and 1956, when the Commu-
nists launched a massive drive for fer-
tility management. This great Commu-
nist campaign was endorsed by men who
had some influence in the affairs of
the state, and many of them made favor-
able statements well before the campaign
started and during the early phase of the
campaign:
An over-large population presented many problems.--Shao Li-tzu's speech before National People's Congress, September 18,1954
In an underdeveloped country, rapid increase in population may cause difficulties in living.--Pai Chien-hua, November 1954
A wide dissemination of contraceptive knowledge would permit student marriages, ensure continued study and progressively greater contribution of an individual to Communist society. . . . It would also prevent criminal resort to nontherapeutic abortions.--Shao Li-tzu's article, "Prelude to the Dissemination of Knowledge about Contraception," Kuang-ming Jih-pao, Peking, December 19,1954
Health agencies and medical personnel in all areas will consider the requests and difficulties of those who apply, when deliberating approval for induced abortions.--Fu Lien, Vice-Minister for Health, cf. Population Index (July, 1950)
Propaganda on contraception be strengthened and limitation of techniques be loosened.--Liu Shao-chi's motion at the 2nd Session of the First National People's Congress, June 1955
I am personally in favor of family planning.--Chou En-lai's interview

172

Communications

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

with the Indian Delegation to China on Agricultural Planning, JulyAugust 1956
Under the present historical circumstances and in the interest of the nation, family, and new generation, our Party seconds appropriately planned births.--Wu, Ching-chao, March 3,1951, in New Construction
After the middle of 1956 the concern with fertility management, which had been rumbling underground since 1954 because of dogmatic compulsions, erupted in a burst of vitriolic controversy that astonished a largely skeptical world. On August 14, 1956, a Radio Peking broadcast fired the opening guns in the Chinese epic campaign against overpopulation. The broadcast carried instructions from the Ministry of Health to all health officers to push a campaign to spread information on fertility management and to educate people through various media. A month later Chou Enlai again put his seal of respectability on the decision to adopt birth control as a way of life for the Chinese.
Many articles discussing various aspects of fertility management appeared in various periodicals about this time. For example, an editorial in China Youth of September 6, 1956, deprecated early marriage; an article in the Tientsin Ta King Pao of August 6, 1956, stated that the supply of contraceptives was inadequate; while another article in New China's Women, Nos. 4 and 5, 1955, described contraception as essential to better living. China Youth Daily in December 1956 reported that the "Ministry of Public Health has declared that the operation (for abortion) will be performed on request without restrictions." At the peak of the campaign, adults were encouraged to swallow live tadpoles to achieve sterility without losing virility --a prescription concocted by herbalist

Yeh Hsi-ch'un, Deputy Head of the Government's Department of Public Health in Chekiang Province. Curiously enough, this method was endorsed by the Ministry of Public Health in Peking and was published in the Journal of Health, the Ministry's official organ.
The campaign had its heyday between December 1957 and March 1958, when cadres in Shanghai and Wuhan were making public pledges not to have another child during the second Five Year Plan or to keep a five-year spacing between pregnancies.
The most instructive statement in favor of fertility management came in March 1957, when Li Te-ch'uan in a speech to the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference championed the cause of the move with the most specific and undiluted remarks echoing Malthus:
If this year the number of babies should be 23,310,000, then each year thereafter the population would be larger, and the total number of children born would be still larger. It would be just as astonishing as the rate of accumulation of high compound interest on loans. The proverb "two in the first generation means a thousand in ten generations" (1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024) is therefore not without foundation.
In the same conference Li Te-ch'uan made it known that the Ministry of Health, in its "directive on contraception" issued in August 1956, had clearly demanded that medical and public health organizations at various levels should all assume the responsibility for technical guidance about contraception and that provincial and municipal departments of public health should train cadres for giving such guidance.
The period between midsummer 1957 and the first quarter of 1959 was not on

Vol. 11,No.3

Communications

173

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

the whole conducive to the growth of fertility management policies because of dogmatic compulsions to the contrary and functional difficulties in implementing the scheme on a large scale. There was, however, a speedy resurgence in March 1959when draft regulations of one of the People's communes contained provisions for birth control instructions. In April 1960 the revised agricultural plan retained a statement from the 1957 version, endorsing birth control in the interest of maternal and child welfare. The year 1961 saw a particular reorientation of the campaign with mounting anxiety over theproblem of how to feed the teeming millions.
Then came the pronouncements in the middle of 1962 which marked the climax of the campaign directed against early marriages. The authorities exhorted young persons to refrain from early marriages so that their study and work should not suffer. It was repeatedly stated that marriage should be considered only "after the various parts of the human body have developed," that excessive sexual activity "affects one's physical health," "a girl's health isimpaired due to early marriage and childbearing."
It was also reliably reported that from March 8 to April 10,1962, an exhibition on Planned Parenthood was held in Canton, and during the first twoweeks over 10,000 visitors saw the display of charts, models, andspecimens in so frank detail as to leave nothing to the imagination. This exhibition was preceded by the decision of the State Council to allow the import of contraceptives into China duty-free.
Of greater significance, People's Daily has been accepting since November, 1962, advertisements of various contraceptives. Advice on various methods of

contraception has been made available in retail stores. Along with postponement of marriage and the use of such methods as condoms, jelly, and diaphragms, there is an added emphasis on sterilization and vasectomy.
By the turn of 1964, the climate of opinion had taken a definite swing in favor of fertility management as a State policy. Premier Chou in an interview with theMiddle East News Agency in the first week of January 1964,said in no uncertain tone that China looks upon fertility management as "helpful in raising its people's living standards."
There arereasons to believe that Communist authorities in China are now sincerely committed to fertility management--a sharp negation of their doctrinaire thesis that man produces more than he consumes. But the current approach to theproblem of population--to borrow a favorite Chinese phrase--has "made a 180-degree turn." So far as the masses areconcerned, "already," said Peffer (1930), "the Chinese are conscious of the advantage of smaller families and are resorting to means of limiting their size, as may beseen bylooking in thewindows of modern drug stores, where devices are openly displayed with that matterof-factness about such things that are so natural to an Oriental and so shocking to the Occidental." Though theChinese have always proliferated the family,successful industrialization implies urbanization and education. The combination "always has one result--birth control." Peffer said this some 30 years ago. The Communists grasped the significance of the statement rather late--through an ordeal of "trial anderror."
REFERENCES
CRESSEY, G. B., 1955. Land of the 500 Million:
A Geography of China. McGraw-Hill Book Company, NewYork, p. 11.

174

Communications

Eugen. Quart.

CORMACK, J. G., 1926. Contraception or Birth Control. Chinese Medical Journal, XL (10): 973-985.
DEBARY, WILLIAM T., JR., 1960. Sources of
Chinese Tradition. Columbia University Press, New York, pp. 623-626. HIMES, NORMAN E., 1936 (rev. ed. 1963). Medical History of Contraception. Gamut Press, New York, pp. 105-113. LAMSON, H. D., 1930. Educated Women and
Birth Control in China. Chinese Medical
Journal, XLIV, (11): 1100-1109.

MAXWELL, J. PRESTON, 1928. On Criminal Abortion in China. Chinese Medical Journal, XLII (1): 12-19.
PEFFER, NATHANIEL, 1930. China: The Collapse of Civilization. John Day,NewYork, p. 285.
AMRITLAL
Fertility and Mortality Reference Bureau Delhi, India

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

NOTICE TO MEMBERSAND SUBSCRIBERS
All inquiries regarding subscriptions, payments of dues, or back orders of Eugenics Quarterly should be sent to our business office at the following address.
AMERICAN EUGENICS SOCIETY Business Office 1323 Greenwood Road Baltimore, Maryland 21208
Correspondence regarding manuscripts and inquiries regarding the Society, its goals, and activities may be addressed to the office at 230 Park Avenue, New York 17, New York.

