Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Race, mental illness, and intelligence: A social psychological view
Thomas F. Pettigrew
To cite this article: Thomas F. Pettigrew (1964) Race, mental illness, and intelligence: A social psychological view, Eugenics Quarterly, 11:4, 189-215, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1964.9987593 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1964.9987593
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 6
View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

RACE, MENTAL ILLNESS, AND INTELLIGENCE: A SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGICAL VIEW*

THOMAS F. PETTIGREW
Harvard University

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

The 1840 Census of the United States proved to be a great revelation to the nation (Litwack, 1961; Stanton, 1960). Right in the midst of the brewing storm over slavery, this census presented truly amazing data on mental illness and intelligence among Negro Americans. Though there were no appreciable regional differences for whites, the reported ratio for "insane" and "idiotic" Negroes was only one in every 1,558 in the South but one in every 144.5 in the North.1 Even more startling was the near-perfect correlation of rate with geography. In Maine every fourteenth Negro was recorded either "insane" or "idiotic"; in Massachusetts, one in every 43; in New Jersey, one of every 297; while Virginia had only one in 1,229; and Louisiana had only one in 4,310. Here were the juicy figures into which a proslavery fire-eater could sink his teeth. Obviously, slavery was a benign institution, protecting the Negro from the rigors of competitive society that so quickly drove him either mad or idiotic. Abolition of slavery, argued John Calhoun immediately, would thus prove to be "a curse instead of a blessing."
Soon a young physician and statisti-
cian, Dr. Edward Jarvis of Massachusetts,
challenged the accuracy of the census.
* This paper is drawn from a fuller statement of these and related topics which appeared in: T. F. PETTIGREW, 1964. A Profile of the Negro American. Van Nostrand, Princeton, N. J.
1Postell's (1953) analysis of the records of preCivil War Southern estates as recorded in probate courts of the time indicates that the ratio of slaves suffering from mental illness and retardation was roughly one per 86, a figure over 18 times that cited by the 1840 census.

Finding such glaring errors as Northern communities with more reported "insane" and "idiotic" Negroes than their total Negro populations, Jarvis completely refuted the incredible data. "It was the census that was insane," pithily commented a Northern clergyman, "and not the colored people."
MENTAL ILLNESS
Ever since the census of 1840, the mental illness rates of Negroes have been a subject of considerable interest and debate. But formidable methodological problems must be overcome before any reasonably accurate estimate can be made of the "true" amount of psychosis and neurosis existing in the general population. For many years investigators merely counted the number of people detained at any one time in mental institutions. This procedure is obviously inadequate. Such a rate not only reflects the number of the mentally ill, but also the duration of confinement, the availability and quality of the treatment facilities, and a host of other factors unrelated to the immediate problem. Consequently, later investigators have employed rates of mental illness over a specified time period. Two distinctly different types of these rates exist--"incidence" and "prevalence." Incidence refers to the number of new cases of a disease occurring in a population during a particular time interval, while prevalence refers to the total number of active cases of a disease present in a particular population during a particular

189

190

Pettigrew

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

time interval. Thus, prevalence includes new cases together with old cases who have either continuously remained ill or who have relapsed. This distinction is a vital one, for the two types of rates may lead to diverse conclusions.
Though the use of specified time periods and of both incidence and prevalence rates mark definite improvements in technique, serious problems remain. Generally, only the data from public institutions are secured, causing an underestimation of mental illness among those who can afford private treatment. And even studies which carefully include both public and private patients leave uncounted the many mentally ill people who never receive treatment. Equally serious problems are raised by the absence of a rigorous conception of mental illness and the dependence upon psychiatric diagnoses. Various researches have employed different definitions of mental illness, introducing error that is often compounded by unreliable medical judgments.
Further complications involve the special position and treatment of Negroes in American society. Since Negroes as a group are less educated and less attuned to the mass media than whites, they are less informed about mental disorder. A survey conducted in four Texas communities revealed that the Negro respondents were more likely to believe that the mentally ill "just don't want to face their problems," lack "will power," and look different from other people (Crawford, et al., 1960). Such beliefs together with inadequate financial resources to care for the disturbed family members at home often lead to the more rapid institutional commitment of Negroes. In addition, some Southern juries commit Negroes to mental institutions more readily than whites (Friedsam, et

al., 1954). Once committed, Negro lowerclass patients, like lower-class patients in general, are less likely to receive advanced therapy; indeed, they may well receive only custodial care and thus be consigned to lengthy institutionalization (Crawford, et al., 1960; Malzberg, 1944; Stewart, 1955). This is especially true in the South, where virtually all private facilities are closed to Negroes, and the few public facilities open to them are symbolic instruments of white-supremacy state governments-segregated, inferior, and grossly overcrowded. These factors operate to elevate spuriously both the incidence and prevalence mental illness rates of Negroes, since they amplify the number of Negroes institutionalized without necessarily representing an actual increase in the amount of mental illness.
Mindful of these sharply limiting qualifications, a few broad generalizations can be tentatively ventured on the basis of available evidence. Consider first the psychoses, the most severe mental aberrations. Repeated studies of first admissions to state hospitals in a variety of areas generally show Negro incidence rates for psychosis to be about twice as large as white rates 2 (Clark, 1949; Frumkin, 1954; Ivins, 1950; Malzberg, 1944, 1953, 1956, 1959; Pasamanick, 1963; Williams and Carmichael, 1949; Wilson and Lantz, 1957). Particular psychoses contribute disproportionately to the greater Negro rates. Schizophrenia, the bizarre condition of social withdrawal and personality disorganization, is especially frequent among Negro first admissions. Two organic diagnoses, paresis and alcoholic psychosis, are also overrepresented among Negroes entering state hospitals.
2 For methodological criticisms of these studies, see Schermerhorn (1956).

Vol. 11, No. 4

Race: A Social Psychological View

191

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

But such state hospital research obviously underestimates the amount of white psychosis. Allowances must be made for the fact that whites are better able to afford private treatment and thus escape enumeration in these studies of public facilities. Investigations which attempt to overcome this difficulty by including private facilities have turned up conflicting results. In Pasamanick's (1963) study of prevalence rates in Baltimore, the Negro psychosis rate was roughly twice that of whites for state hospitals alone, but when the predominantly white private and veterans' hospitals were included, the Negro-towhite ratio was lowered to one-and-a-half to one. Jaco's (1960) Texas study of incidence, however, found that the Negro rates were actually below that of "Anglo-Americans" once both private as well as public first admissions were calculated.
Finally, there is the problem of ascertaining how many mentally ill persons remain unhospitalized and untreated. As can be readily imagined, research on this problem is extremely difficult. One preliminary effort, a Baltimore health survey, found that the noninstitutionalized prevalence rate for psychosis was roughly ten times higher for whites than Negroes; but serious methodological weaknesses cast doubt upon this remarkable finding3 (Pasamanick, 1963).
3The weaknesses were threefold: (1) the noninstitutional prevalence rates were projected from just 17 actual cases of psychosis. (2) The problem of reliable and valid diagnoses was particularly acute, for internists, not psychiatrists, examined the subjects and often diagnosed mental disorders without psychiatric consultation or psychometric testing. Subsequently, one psychiatrist, who had not himself seen the subjects, reviewed the records and assigned the ratings. (3) These difficulties led to a serious sampling bias. Since for lack of information the psychiatrist-rater had to discard "about one third of the cases which had been diagnosed by examining physicians," the final rates for the noninstitu-

Obviously, the definitive epidemiological research on this question is yet to be performed. Meanwhile, personality tests confirm a greater tendency among Negroes to report psychotic symptoms. Two investigations independently conducted on diverse populations noted that Negro males scored significantly higher than comparable white males on the Minnesota Multiphasic Inventory (MMPI) scales measuring psychotic trends (Caldwell, 1959; Hokanson and Calden, 1960). Illustrative items from these scales include: "I have had periods in which I carried on activities without knowing later what I had been doing," and "At times I have had fits of laughing and crying that I cannot control." On balance, we can tentatively conclude that Negro psychosis rates, especially for schizophrenia and some organic psychoses, are higher than white rates.
If group data on psychosis are difficult to decipher, group data on neurosis are even more confusing. Most of these less serious mental abnormalities do not require institutionalization; particularly among lower-status Negroes, neurotic symptoms may often be ignored. Not surprisingly then, comparative group data on neurosis are somewhat contradictory. Neurosis incidence rates for first admissions to state hospitals are generally much higher for whites than Negroes (Williams and Carmichael, 1949), though this may merely reflect that only incapacitated Negroes are accepted. In addition, many neurotics receive treatment from private sources, and for economic reasons these individuals are predominantly white.
Service studies from World War II provide inconclusive evidence. Two Navy investigators reported less neu-
tionalized were based on an unrepresentative sample of Baltimore's population (Commission of Chronic Illness, 1957, p. 96).

192

Pettigrew

Eugen. Quart,

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

roticism among Negroes than whites (Gardner and Aaron, 1946; Hunt, 1947a), whereas an Army investigation reported more frequent "minor psychiatric illness" among Negroes (Ripley and Wolf, 1947). This discrepancy may be due in large measure to different health standards applied by the two services at induction centers, for there is reason to suspect that the Army's wartime requirements for Negro inductees were especially low.
Personality test results on neurotic measures generally do not reveal racial differentials comparable to those obtained on measures of psychotic trends. In fact, two MMPI studies found samples of white males scored significantly higher than comparable Negro males on a character-disorder scale of psychopathic personality trends (Caldwell, 1959; Hokanson and Calden, 1960). Two examples of this scale include: "I have not lived the right kind of life," and "My way of doing things is apt to be misunderstood by others." All told, we can tentatively conclude that the ratio of Negro to white neuroticism is not so great as for the psychoses; and for certain other conditions, like character disorders, the Negro rate may actually be less than the white. The findings on suicide are more straightforward. Negroes commit suicide far less frequently than whites; the national nonwhite death rate from suicide, 1949 through 1951, was only 42% of the white rate (National Office of Vital Statistics, 1959).
What lies behind these racial differences in mental illness? Authorities agree that innate racial factors do not provide an adequate explanation. To be sure, genetic potential probably interacts with environmental circumstance to produce such severe conditions as schizophrenia (Book, 1953; Kallman, 1951).

But there is no evidence to suggest that this genetic potential is differentially distributed among the races. Instead, it is generally reasoned that the genetic potential for mental illness is roughly the same among the world's larger populations (Linton, 1956) but that dissimilar situations trigger the potential to diverse degrees. This thinking holds with special force in comparisons between Negro and white Americans, since they possess a considerable proportion of common genes in their two gene pools (Glass, 1955). Thus, any distinct differences in mental illness between the two groups should be traceable to contrasting patterns of environmental triggering. And these contrasting environmental patterns are not hard to identify, for distinctions of social class and poverty, on the one hand, and racial restrictions, on the other, play critical roles in mental illness.
Witness first the importance of class. Hollingshead and Redlich (1958), in their research on Social Class and Mental Illness, found the patterns of treated mental illness among white lower-class patients in New Haven closely resemble those just described for Negro patients.4 Treated psychosis, particularly schizophrenia, has a higher incidence and prevalence among the poor than the prosperous. By contrast, neurosis incidence rates do not vary by class, though neurosis prevalence rates are actually higher among the economically well-todo. The type of neurotic diagnosis also varies by class. Lower-status patients more often "act out" their problems-- in antisocial and hysterical reactions-- while upper-status patients more often "act in"--in depressive and obsessive-
4 Only 6% of the lowest two classes analyzed in the New Haven study was Negro.

Vol. 11, No. 4

Race: A Social Psychological View

193

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

compulsive reactions and character disorders.
Faris and Dunham's (1939) Chicago data indicated that social classes within the city's Negro population had markedly diverse mental disorder rates.5 The reported incidence of different types of schizophrenia, in particular, varied; the Negro area nearest the downtown business district had a rate over 60 °/0 greater than that of a more middle-class Negro area. Not all studies have obtained such clear results with Negroes (Jaco, 1960; Kleiner, et al., 1960), but a recent incidence survey of Philadelphia Negroes disclosed that schizophrenia and mental illness in general were much less frequent among upper-status Negroes (Parker, et al., 1962). These findings were further confirmed in a study of first admissions to the state mental hospitals of Ohio. With each race analyzed separately, Frumkin (1954) noted that higher rates existed for both the white and Negro lower classes. He concluded that the higher admission rates of Negroes were a "function of the low status of the Negro rather than some biological or genetic difference due to 'race.' "
But social class is only part of the explanation. As early as 1913, Arrah Evarts (1913) pointed out how the behavior of three Negro schizophrenics was directly related to their racially restricted experiences. These observations have often been repeated during the past half century. For example, a higher incidence of mental illness noted among
5Compared with whites, Negro Americans have significantly larger rates of schizophrenia than manic-depression. This coincides with the fact that both the New Haven and Chicago investigations found less correlation between class and manic-depression than between class and schizophrenia. In addition, Kallman's (1951) twin studies reveal a smaller genetic component for schizophrenia than for manic-depression. In short, environmental factors appear more important for the mental disorder which reveals the greater racial differential.

Negro enlisted men on an isolated Pacific island was attributed by Ripley and Wolf (1947) to, among other factors, the dissatisfaction of the Negroes with their white officers and their strong sense of being the victims of racial discrimination. The majority of the psychotic breakdowns among the Negroes in this situation were diagnosed as "paranoid schizophrenia," a fact that recalls the admonition of Kardiner and Ovesey (1951, p. 343) against hasty application of the term "paranoid" to Negro patients. For Negroes "to see hostility in the environment is a normal perception. Hence, we must guard against calling the Negro paranoid when he actually lives in an environment that persecutes him."
One of the less direct mechanisms whereby persecution might lead to greater mental illness is the necessity for persons with few job skills to migrate long distances to seek employment. There has been considerable controversy over this point; it now seems that previous waves of particularly poor Negro migrants did have unusually high rates of mental illness (e.g., during the 1930's), but that better-educated recent arrivals to the North no longer evince this phenomenon. (Kleiner and Parker, 1959; Malzberg and Lee, 1956). Another possible mechanism is the perception of relative deprivation, the discrepancy between high aspirations and actual attainments. There is a growing body of research evidence which suggests this is a critical psychological determinant of mental disorder (Kleiner and Parker, 1963). And certainly racial discrimination acts to bar the very achievements which the society encourages individuals to attempt.
The deterioration of mental health through a combination of poverty and persecution is not limited to Negro

194

Pettigrew

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Americans. The Peruvian mestizo, barely managing to survive on the outskirts of Lima, presents a case in point (Rotondo, et al., 1960). Mental illness, alcoholism, and family disorganization are widespread, as well as the familiar personality syndrome of inferiority feelings, insecurity, and hostility. The human species reacts to crushing oppression in much the same way the world over.
Also instructive is the comparison of data on Negro Americans with those on Jewish Americans. Rather than the neartotal rejection long faced by Negroes, Jews have generally faced a more subtle, ambiguous kind of rejection. This more uncertain, shadowy form of discrimination, together with the Jews' higher social status and closer group and family bonds, have contributed to a mental illness pattern strikingly different from that of the Negro. Whereas the Negro suffers from psychosis relatively more than neurosis, Jews in the United States have fairly low psychosis rates but especially high neurosis rates (Myers and Roberts, 1958).
These Jewish patterns suggest a laboratory analogy. In his famous conditioning research on dogs, Ivan Pavlov established what appeared to be a type of "experimental neurosis" (Pavlov, 1928). First, he trained a dog to distinguish between a circle and an ellipse by presenting food each time the circle appeared and withholding food each time the ellipse appeared. Then Pavlov began gradually altering the shape of the ellipse till it more and more resembled the circle. Suddenly, at a point when the hungry animal could no longer differentiate one object from another, the dog's behavior changed drastically. To speak anthropomorphically, the dog rejected the whole situation, became ag-

gressive toward the experimenter, and in other ways tried to defend himself from intolerable anxiety. Other investigators, using an assortment of animals ranging from goats to chimpanzees, have replicated Pavlov's results (Liddell, 1946). The "experimental neurosis" created by these researchers often has the long-term effects and stubborn resistance to therapy characteristic of the more serious human neuroses.
The subtleties of anti-Semitic discrimination often blur cues for the victim. Determining whether a cool reception represents bad manners or prejudice can be as difficult as distinguishing the circle from the modified ellipse. With legal desegregation, this kind of anxious uncertainty increases for the Negro. The clear-cut rejection of the past contributed to such conditions as the excessive withdrawal of schizophrenia; the ambiguous, discreet rejection of the future may well lead to an increase of neuroticism among Negroes, as it has among Jews. This possibility, along with the Negro's rising economic levels and strengthening group and family bonds, suggest an hypothesis for future trends in mental illness: among Negro Americans, psychosis rates will begin to recede as neurosis rates climb steadily.6
INTELLIGENCE
Even more popular attention has centered upon the other focus of the celebrated 1840 census--intelligence. But this realm is also complex.
Consider the often-cited Tanser (1939) study of intelligence among the Negro and white children of Kent County,
6 Support for this hypothesis can be inferred from the findings of Myers and Roberts (1959), who compared the development of neurotics with that of schizophrenics in two social classes. Neurotics had been more rebellious and more often had come from stable homes and had loving and affectionate parents.

Vol. 11, No. 4

Race: A Social Psychological View

195

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Ontario, Canada. Tanser found that his white sample contained a higher average I.Q. than his Negro sample; but such results must be subjected to careful scrutiny. As in investigations in the United States, the social and economic conditions of Tanser's two groups were not equal. One psychologist, Mollie Smart (1963, p. 621), was born and raised in Kent County at approximately the time Tanser conducted the study there. She candidly describes the condition of the Negroes in this period:
Nearly all of the Negroes' houses were small wood buildings, often lacking paint and tending towards dilapidation. The theaters had a policy of seating Negroes in certain areas. The all-Negro school had been abandoned by my day. My elementary school classes always included Negro children, but I remember none during the last 3 years of high school. My Negro classmates were usually poorly clothed and badly groomed. Negroes held the low-status jobs. There were the servants, garbage collectors, and odd-job men. People called them "Nigger" more often than "Negro." I did not know until I grew up that a Negro could be a doctor, lawyer, teacher, member of Parliament, or even a clerk in a store.... I cannot conceive of any social advantages which Negroes enjoyed in Kent County at the time of the Tanser study.
Tanser himself admitted that his sample of Negro children had not attended school so regularly as the white children. Moreover, it cannot be said that southern Ontario is free of racial prejudice and discrimination. Ever since the close of the American Civil War, the position of the Canadian Negro has steadily declined, with violent outbursts against Negroes occurring in Kent County itself (Franklin, 1961; McGurk, 1953). The racial differences in I.Q. observed by Tanser, then, cannot be

interpreted apart from the area's racial situation.
These difficulties point up the severely limiting methodological problems which confront this research realm. Any test of native intelligence must of necessity assume equivalent backgrounds of the individuals and groups under study. But until conditions entirely free from segregation and discrimination are achieved and the floor of Negro poverty is raised to the level of whites, the definitive research on racial differences in intelligence cannot be performed. Meanwhile, psychologists must conduct their work in a culture where training and opportunity for the two groups are never completely equal.
Other fundamental problems complicate the issue. The very concept of "race" injects special issues. Since Negro Americans do not even approach the status of a genetically pure "race," they are a singularly inappropriate group upon whom to test theories of inherent intellectual differences between races. In addition, confusion is introduced by the ambiguity of the phrase "race differences." To find that many descriptive investigations using intelligence tests elicit differences between the "races" does not necessarily mean that these differences result from race.
Empirical efforts are also hampered .by the operation of selective factors in sampling. That is, Negroes and whites in the same situation--such as those inducted into the armed forces--may have been selected differently on intelligence, thus biasing the comparison of test scores between the two groups. For instance, Hunt (1947b) found that the Navy during World War II did not employ the same screening and selection standards for the two groups, permitting a far higher proportion of mental defec-

196

Pettigrew

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

tives among Negro than among white acceptances. Such a finding renders any comparisons in test scores between Negro and white sailors of dubious value. Much has been made of the intelligence test performances of the two "races" in both World Wars I and II, but such selective factors make these data difficult to interpret.
Despite these limitations, however, modern psychology has managed to achieve significant theoretical andempirical advances in this realm. These advances strongly favor a nongentic interpretation of the typically lower intelligence test score averages of Negro groups. This work can be conveniently summarized under four general rubrics: (1) new theoretical conceptions; (2)the mediators of intellectual underdevelopment; (3) varying opportunities and group results; and (4) the individual versus the group.
New Theoretical Conceptions
Since World WarII, psychologistsand other scientists have seriously reviewed earlier notions about such basic concepts as "the environment," "heredity," and "intelligence." Instead of the older nature versus nurture conception, the emphasis is placed on nature and nurture.7 Rather than asking which setof factors--environmental or hereditary-- contributes more to a particular trait or ability like intelligence, investigators ask how theenvironment and heredity combine to form the observed characteristic. Genes not only set broad limits on the range of development, but also enter into highly complex interactions with the environment, interactions which have not been emphasized enough inthe past.
7 Much of the following discussion is based on Gottesman's (1963) study.

An ingenious animal experiment by Cooper and Zubek (1958) illustrates this genetic-environmental interaction. These investigators employed two genetically distinct strains of rats, carefully bred for 13 generations as either "bright" or "dull." Separate groups of the two strains grew up after weaning in three constrasting environments: a restricted environment, consisting of only a food box, water pan, and otherwise barren cage; a natural environment, consisting of the usual habitat of the laboratory rat; and an enriched environment, consisting of such objects as ramps, swings, slides, polished balls, tunnels, and teeter-totters plus a decorated wall beside their cages. Fig. 1 shows the maze learning performances of the six groups of rats (the fewer the errors, the more "intelligent" the behavior). Note that the two genetically diverse groups did almost equally well in the enriched and restricted environments, sharply differing only inthe natural situation.8 In fact, the environment masks genetic potential to the
8 It should be noted, however, that these rats had been bred as "bright" or "dull" originally in the natural environment.

Y/h DULL STRAIN | |aW)6HT STRAIN

169.7 I M J

ENRICHED

NATURAL ENVIRONMENTS

RESTRICTED

Figure 1. Maze error scores for genetically bright and dull rats reared in three contrasting environments.

Vol. 11, No. 4

Race: A Social Psychological View

197

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

point where it is impossible to distinguish the enriched dulls from the natural brights or the natural dulls from the restricted brights.
The data of Fig. 1 bear important implications. "Genotypes," the true genetic potential, often do not coincide with "phenotypes," the actual, expressed trait. Similar genotypes may have different phenotypes (e.g., the bright rats in the restricted and enriched environments), and similar phenotypes may have different genotypes (e.g., the restricted bright and dull rats). Any phenotype is the composite product of the genotype and the environment in which the genetic potential must be realized. Relevant nature-nurture questions thus become: "How environmentally modifiable is the phenotypic intelligence of each genotype?" and "What is the contribution of heredity to the intelligence score differences among a group of individuals on a specific test in a specified environment?"
This newer view of the nature-nurture controversy and a mounting accumulation of new developmental evidence has resulted in a revised conception of the nature of intelligence. J. M. Hunt (1961) presents this modern thinking in his volume, Intelligence and Experience. Taking his cue from the strategies for information processing that are currently programmed for electronic computers, Hunt defines intelligence as central neural processes which develop in the brain to mediate between the information coming into the individual via the senses and the return signals for motor reaction. Moreover, he maintains that the initial establishment and subsequent capacity of these processes are probably rooted in the child's earliest encounters with the world around him. Intelligence, then, is not merely an inherited capacity,

genetically fixed and destined to unfold in a biologically predetermined manner. It is a dynamic, on-going set of processes that within wide hereditary limits is subject to innumerable experiential factors.
Hunt's view upsets two long-unquestioned dogmas about intelligence, dogmas critical in the area of race differences. He terms them the assumptions of "fixed intelligence" and "predetermined development." The first of these has its roots in Darwin's theory of natural selection. Indeed, the assumption of fixed intelligence became so established before World War II that many psychologists regarded all evidence of substantial shifts in I.Q. as merely the product of poor testing procedures. But, objected Stoddard (1943, p. 281), "to regard all changes in mental status as an artifact is to shut one's eyes to the most significant and dramatic phenomenon in human growth."
The second assumption of "predetermined development" refers to the idea that, barring extreme interference from the environment, intelligence will unfold "naturally" with gene-determined anatomical maturation. Classic work on salamanders and Hopi Indian children was cited to demonstrate this maturational effect and that prior experience was unnecessary for normal development (Coghill, 1929; Dennis, 1940). In this era, mothers were told to avoid overstimulating their children, to allow their children simply to grow "on their own." Hunt considers such advice "highly unfortunate," for it now appears that a proper matching of a child's development with challenging encounters with his environment is a critical requisite for increasing ability.
Notice that this new outlook in no way denies an hereditary influence on intel-

198

Pettigrew

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

ligence, an influence well established by twin studies (Gottesman, 1963). Rather, it views intelligence in much the same way that longevity is now regarded. A strong hereditary component is recognized in longevity; consistently long or short life spans typify many families. Yet, despite this component, the life expectancies at birth of Americans have almost doubled in the past century (Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, 1963). Better medical care, better diets, and a host of other environmental factors converge to enable Americans to make fuller use of their longevity potential. Likewise, the modern view of intelligence holds that we have not begun to expand our phenotypic intelligences even close to our genotypic potentials. From this vantage point, it appears that our society has placed too much emphasis on personnel selection at the expense of effective training programs.
Some of the most imaginative experimentation behind this new thinking is that of the eminent Swiss psychologist, Jean Piaget (1947). His ingenious and detailed studies with children of all ages provide abundant evidence that intelligence is the very antithesis of a fixed, predetermined capacity. And a wide range of other types of investigations amply bear out this conclusion. Even animal intelligence seems to be importantly affected by environmental opportunities. The previously-cited rat work of Cooper and Zubek shows how diverse cage environments affect later learning. In addition, pet-reared rats and dogs, with backgrounds of richly variegated experience, later evidence considerably more intelligent behavior than their cage-reared counterparts (Thompson and Melzack, 1956). And Harlow (1949) has demonstrated that monkeys can "learn to learn"; that is, they can

develop learning sets which enable them to solve general classes of problems almost at a glance.
Similar effects of early environmental enrichment on the intelligence of young children have been noted. Kirk (1958) has shown that early educational procedures can often produce sharp increments in intellectual functioning among mentally retarded children, sometimes even among those diagnosed as organically impaired. Other studies on normal children, both white and Negro, suggest that preschool training in nursery and kindergarten classes may act to raise I.Q.'s (Anastasi, 1958, pp. 200-205; Deutsch and Brown, 1964; Hunt, 1961, pp. 27-34; Lee, 1951). Among criticisms of this research is the contention that a selection factor could be operating. The natively brighter children may be those who tend to have preschool education. But among deprived children in an orphanage, the beneficial results of early schooling have been noted in a situation where selection factors did not operate (Wellman and Pegram, 1944). Also relevant is the tendency for orphans to gain in I.Q. after adoption into superior foster homes, the gain being greatest for those adopted youngest (Freeman, et al., 1928).
After reviewing research on cognitive learning in these early years, Fowler (1962) concludes that this is the period of human "apprenticeship." The infant is acquiring the most elementary and basic discriminations needed for later learning; like Harlow's monkeys, the infant is "learning to learn." Fowler speculates that conceptual learning sets, interest areas, and habit patterns may be more favorably established at these early stages than at later stages of the developmental cycle. Indeed, emphasis on "practical," concrete, gross motor learning in

Vol. 11. No. 4

Race: A Social Psychological View

199

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

these early years may even inhibit later abstract learning.
In any event, research has documented the intellectually damaging consequences of deprived environments. An English study found that the children of such isolated groups as canal-boat and gypsy families achieved exceptionally low intelligence test scores, scores considerably below those typically found among Negro American children (Gordon, 1923). Interesting, too, is the fact that as these children grow older their I.Q.'s generally decline, though this is not the case for children of more privileged groups. In a similar fashion, children in orphanages and other institutions tend to have lower I.Q.'s and more retarded motor and linguistic development than children in stimulating home environments. Once again selection factors may operate, with the brighter, more developed children being more often chosen for adoption. However, studies which overcome much of this difficulty still note this institutional retardation (Brodbeck and Irwin, 1946; Dennis, 1960; Gilliland, 1949).
A related finding concerns the trend toward lower I.Q.'s of children raised in large familities (Anastasi, 1956). One common explanation of this phenomenon is simply that parents who have large families are natively less intelligent. Yet, as Hunt (1961) points out, other findings strongly suggest that it is partly because parents of large families have less time to spend with each child. Thus, twins and doubles born close together in otherwise small families reveal a similar tendency toward lower I.Q.'s. And the negative relationship between family size and intelligence does not appear among wealthy families who can afford servants to provide stimulating attention for each child.

Finally, the extreme effects that can ensue from an impoverished environment are dramatically illustrated in a series of sensory deprivation experiments (Bexton, et al., 1954). These investigations reveal that normal people respond with marked psychological disturbances when severely restricted in activity and stimulation. They typically experience temporal and spatial distortions and pronounced hallucinations; and they evidence sharply impaired thinking and reasoning both during and after their isolation.
The Mediators of Intellectual Underdeve lopmen t
Within this new perspective on intelligence as a relatively plastic quality, a series of environmental mediators of the individual Negro child's intellectual underdevelopment has been determined. In fact, these mediators exert their effects even upon the Negro fetus. One study found that dietary supplementation by vitamins supplied during the last half of pregnancy had directly beneficial effects on I.Q. scores of the children later (Harrell, et al., 1956). In a sample of mothers from the lowest socioeconomic level, 80% of whom were Negro, the group fortified with iron and vitamin B complex had children whose mean I.Q. at three years of age averaged five full points above the children of the unfortified control group, 103.4 to 98.4. One year later, the mean difference had enlarged to eight points, 101.7 to 93.6. The same researchers failed to find a similar effect among white mothers and their children from a mountain area. Presumably, the largely Negro sample was even poorer and more malnourished than the white sample from the mountains. Dire poverty, with its concomitant inadequate

200

Pettigrew

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

diet, can thus impair intelligence before the lower-class Negro child is born.
Economic problems also hamper intelligence through the mediation of premature births (Knobloch and Pasamanick, 1962). Premature children of all races reveal not only a heightened incidence of neurologic abnormalities and greater susceptibility to disease, but also a considerably larger percentage of mental defectives (Harper, et al., 1959; Knobloch, et al., 1959). A further organic factor in intelligence is brain injury in the newborn. And both of these conditions have higher incidences among Negroes because of their greater frequency in the most economically depressed sectors of the population.
Later complications are introduced by the impoverished environments in which most Negro children grow up. At the youngest preschool ages, race differences in I.Q. means are minimal. Repeated research shows that in the first two years of life there are no significant racial differences in either psychomotor development or intelligence (Gilliland, 1951; Knobloch and Pasamanick, 1953; Pasamanick, 1946). And three recent investigations provide convincing evidence that such properly administered infant tests predict later scores (Drillien, 1959; Hurst, 1963; Knobloch and Pasamanick, 1960). Furthermore, later Northern investigations show little or no Negro lag in intellectual development through kindergarten and five years of age when thorough socioeconomic controls are applied (Anastasi and D'Angelo, 1952; Brown, 1944).
It is only after a few years of inferior schooling have passed that many Negro children drop noticeably in measured I.Q. (Osborn, 1960; Tomlinson, 1944). Part of this drop is due to the heavier reliance placed by intelligence tests at

these ages upon verbal skills, skills that are particularly influenced by a constricted environment. One Southern study of "Verbal Destitution" discovered that those Negro college students most retarded in a reading clinic came from small, segregated high schools and exhibited language patterns typical of the only adult models they had encountered --poorly educated parents, teachers, and ministers (Newton, 1960).
Another factor in the declining test averages over the school years is simply the nature of the schools themselves. Deutsch (1960, p. 3) gives the example of an assignment to write a page on "The Trip I Took," given to lower-class youngsters in a ghetto school who had never been more than twenty-five city blocks from home. Psychologist Deutsch maintains: "The school represents a foreign outpost in an encapsulated community which is surrounded by what, for the child, is unknown and foreign."
This tendency of the measured I.Q.'s of Negro children to diminish with increasing age is also noted among environmentally-deprived Caucasian groups-- mountain and other rural children in America and the canal-boat and gypsy children in England (Anastasi, 1958). Furthermore, the positive relationship between socioeconomic status and tested I.Q. among Negroes increases with age, again suggesting that environmental factors become ever more vital as the child matures (Tomlinson, 1944).
The nature of the disrupted family life of many lower-status Negro youths decreases further the slum's environmental stimulation. Most of these youngsters are reared in large families, with reduced parental contact. And many of them are in fatherless homes. Deutsch (1960,1963) and Stetler (1959) have both demonstrated that Negro children raised in

Vol. 11, No. 4

Race: A Social Psychological View

201

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

such broken homes score significantly below comparable Negro children from intact homes on intelligence measures.
Other research pinpoints the tasks tested by intelligence tests which are most impaired by this restriction of stimulation. Woods and Toal (1957) matched two groups of Negro and white adolescents on I.Q. and noted subtest differences. While superior to the whites on some tests, the Negroes were noticeably deficient on tasks such as detection of errors and drawing pictorial completions which required spatial visualization. A series of similar studies reach the same conclusion (Davidson, et al., 1950; Hammer, 1954; Higgins and Sivers, 1958; Newland and Lawrence, 1953). Machover (1943) demonstrated that this difficulty with perceptual and spatial relations was considerably more marked in a Southern-reared Negro sample than in an I.Q.-matched Northern-reared Negro sample. This breakdown of spatial performance among otherwise intelligent Negro children, especially in the more restrictive South, offers a suggestive parallel with the comparable spatial breakdown noted in the sensory-deprivation research. In any event, two additional studies provide evidence that this disability is correctable (Boger, 1952; Eagleson, 1937). Both studies gave groups of Negro and white children special training in spatial perception and found that the Negro subjects benefited more from the practice. I.Q. test scores were markedly higher for the Negro subjects five months after the training (Boger, 1952). Test authority Anne Anastasi (1958) believes this work supports the idea that the Negroes tested suffered from an unusually barren perceptual experience in early life.
Organic complications and environmental impoverishment are not the only

mediators depressing Negro American intelligence. Both the "functioning intelligence" and the measured I.Q. of an individual are inseparably intertwined with his personality (Kagan et al., 1958; Sontag, et al., 1955; Stringer, 1959). Edith Weisskopf (1951) has given case evidence of the great variety of ways personality problems can deter normal intellectual development. A child may do poorly in learning situations in a conscious or unconscious desire to punish his parents, to inflict self-punishment, or to avoid selfevaluation. And Roen (1960) has demonstrated that such personality problems are more highly related to intelligence test scores among Negroes than among whites. He equated two racial groups of soldiers on a wide range of social variables and found that a series of personality measures were more closely correlated with intelligence for the Negroes than for the whites. In particular, he noted that Negro soldiers who had low intelligence scores rated especially low on a self-confidence questionnaire.
Insecurity is especially provoked by any direct comparison with white performance. One investigation administered a task to Southern Negro college students with two different sets of instructions (Katz, et al., unpublished). One set told how other students at their college did on the task, while the second told how whites throughout the nation did. Those subjects who anticipated white comparison performed significantly more poorly on the task and indicated stronger concern and anxiety about their performance.
The role of "Negro" is a critical factor. Put simply, the Negro is not expected to be bright. To reveal high intelligence is to risk seeming "uppity." And once more the self-fulfilling prophecy begins to operate, for the Negro who assumes a

202

Pettigrew

Engen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

facade of stupidity as a defense mechanism against oppression is very likely to grow into the role. He will not be eager to learn, and he will not strive to do well in the testing situation. After all, an intelligence test is a middle-class white man's instrument; it is a device whites use to prove their capacities and get ahead in the white world. Achieving a high test score does not have the same meaning for a lower-status Negro child, and it may even carry a definite connotation of personal threat. In this sense, scoring low on intelligence measures may for some talented Negro children be a rational response to perceived danger.
In addition to stupidity, the role of "Negro" prescribes both passivity and lack of ambition as central traits. And these traits are crucial personality correlates of I.Q. changes in white children. The Fels Research Institute found that aggressiveness and intense need for achievement differentiate those children whose scores rise between six and ten years of age from those whose scores recede (Kagan, et al., 1958).
Another protective device is slowness. This trait assumes major importance in the speed instruments typically employed to estimate intelligence. In the Negro lower class there is no premium on speed, for work is generally paid by the hour and there are realistically few goals that fast, hard endeavor can attain. One experiment noted that differences in speed of response are primarily responsible for racial differences in I.Q. estimated by timed performance tests (Davidson, et al., 1950).
Playing "Negro" is made especially critical when the examiner is white. Even two-year-old Negroes seem verbally inhibited when tested by a white (Pasamanick and Knobloch, 1955). In fact,

this verbal inhibition may be the principal factor underlying the common observation that Negro children generally evidence verbal comprehension superior to their verbal communication (Carson and Rabin, 1960). Canady (1936) had students of both races tested alternately by Negro and white examiners. For both groups, the mean I.Q. was approximately six points higher when the test was administered by an examiner of their own race.
Adult Negroes evidence a similar reaction. A public opinion poll in North Carolina asked Negro respondents for the names of the men who had just run for governor in a primary election (Price and Searles, 1961). Three out of five Negroes questioned by Negro interviewers knew at least two correct names and gave no incorrect names, compared with only two out of five of a similar sample questioned by whites. A Boston survey replicated these results with two measures tapping intelligence (Pettigrew, unpublished). The first consisted of six informational items; each respondent was asked to identify six famous men: two Africans (Kwame Nkrumah and Haile Selassie) and the rest Negro Americans (Louis Armstrong, Martin Luther King, Adam Clayton Powell, and Elijah Mohammad). The other test required synonyms for ten words, ranging in difficulty from "space" to "emanate." Negro interviewers questioned half of the respondents, and white interviewers the other half. The two samples were equivalent in income, age, education, and region of birth. Fig. 2 presents the results. Note that on both tests the Boston Negro adults rendered more correct answers when interviewed by a Negro.
Apart from the role of "Negro," the middle-class bias of intelligence testing

Vol. 11, No.4

Race: A Social Psychological View

203

dren when there was extra motivation for doing well (e.g., a prize of movie tickets) and when the questions were read aloud as well as written. Sophisticated testing in ghetto schools should follow such guidelines formore adequate estimates of the abilities of disadvantaged children.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

»-ITEM INFORMATION TEST

10-ITtM SYNONYM TEST

TYPE OF TE5T

Figure 2. Race of interviewer and Negro test performance.

situations operates tohinder a disproportionate share of Negro examinees. Children perform best in situations familiar to them, but the conditions best suited for lower-status children are seldom attained. Most I.Q. tests arestrictly urban middle-class instruments, with numerous references to objects and situations unfamiliar to rural and lower-class people. Haggard (1954) showed that a less middle-class-oriented test led to significant increases in the performances of lower-class children.
Tests are only one aspect of class bias, however. Middle-class students have generally internalized their need to excel at such tasks; a high test score is itself a reward. Moreover, they perform most competently in silent testing atmospheres that place heavy reliance upon reading skills. By contrast, lower-class students frequently require tangible, external rewards for motivation. And their typically restricted home environments are overwhelmingly dominated by the spoken, rather than the written, word. It is not surprising, then, that Haggard (1954) discovered notable increments in intelligence test scores of lower-class chil-

Varying Opportunities and Group Results
If all of these mechanisms are operating to mediate the influence of a lean, hostile, and constricted environment upon the individual Negro's tested intelligence, certain group trends under conditions of varying opportunities can be predicted. These testable hypotheses are: (1)in environments which approach being equally restrictive for children of both races, theintelligence test meansof both will be low and will approach equality; (2) in environments which approach being equally stimulating for children of both races, the intelligence test means of both will be high and will approach equality; and (3) when any racial group moves from a restrictive to a comparatively stimulating environment, its measured I.Q.mean will rise.
The first of these hypotheses was tested on an isolated Caribbean island, offering little stimulation to its youth. It had "no regular steamship service, no railroad, motion picture theater, or newspaper. There were very few automobiles and very few telephones. The roads were generally poor. There were no government schools above the elementary level and no private schools above the secondary level. . . . People of all colors, then, were restricted to a rather narrow range of occupational opportunity" (Curd, 1960, p. 14).
Even here, however, complete equality of status between whites and Negroeswas

204

Pettigrew

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

not achieved. White skin was "highly respected," whites typically held the better jobs; and while almost half of the white students attended private schools, nine-tenths of the Negroes attended government schools. Nevertheless, there were no significant color differences on nine of the fourteen intelligence measures. The Negroes did best on tests which were less class-linked, less threatening, and less dependent on uncommon words. Thus, socioeconomic status was a more important factor than race on four of the five instruments which did yield racial discrepancies, and "lack of confidence," as rated independently by teachers, was highly related to three of them. In general, the island youngsters scored rather low on the tests, with race a relatively insignificant consideration. And the selective migration possibility that the brighter whites were leaving the island is not an explanation for these findings, since there was apparently little emigration or immigration. These data, gathered in a locality which approached being equally restrictive for both races, do "not lend support to the conclusion that colored inferiority in intelligence tests has a racial basis" (Curti, 1960, p. 26).
The second hypothesis has also received support from a number of studies. Three investigations, testing young children in Minneapolis (Brown, 1944), grade-school students in a Nevada city (McQueen and Churn, 1960), and adolescents in the Boston area (McCord and Demerath, 1958), revealed that, once social-class factors are rigorously controlled, there are only minor black-white mean I.Q. differences. In these relatively stimulating, educationally-desegregated urban communities, both racial groups secured test averages equal to the national norms.

Thus, I.Q. means of groups are retarded where there are constrictive environmental conditions and elevated where there are at least average conditions. Three ecological projects provide further evidence for this generalization. One project correlated home rentals with the I.Q. averages of the school children in 300 New York City neighborhoods (Mailer, 1933). Moderately high and positive relationships were found; the more expensive the neighborhood, the higher the test scores. Another noted very close and positive associations between such variables as per capita income and the mean I.Q. level of sixth-grade pupils in 30 American cities (Thorndike and Woodyard, 1942). The third project discovered that these ecological correlations tend to be higher for intelligence scores than for scholastic achievement, demonstrating again the extreme sensitivity of the measured I.Q. to the total social environment (Thorndike, 1951).
This research is confirmed by further investigations conducted exclusively among Negroes (Deutsch and Brown, 1964; Roberts, 1948; Robinson and Meenes, 1947), especially since World War II and its attendant expansion of social-class differentiation among Negro Americans. Socioeconomic variables correlate highly and positively with I.Q. ranges in Negro samples. For example, the I.Q. means of groups of Negro thirdgraders in Washington, D. C, tended to be highest in areas where radios were most often present in the homes and where rents were highest.
These results suggest the third hypothesis: when any group moves from a restrictive to a comparatively stimulating environment, its measured I.Q. mean will rise. Dramatic evidence for this proposition comes from the unique situation of the Osage Indians. Like many other

Vol. 11, No. 4

Race: A Social Psychological View

205

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Indian groups, the Osage were granted land for the establishment of a reservation. Oil was later discovered on their land, and the Osage became relatively prosperous. Since the Osage had not chosen their land, the oil discovery was not an indication of native ingenuity beyond that of Indian groups in general. But now they could afford living standards vastly superior to other Indians, and on both performance and language tests they were found to meet the national norms and to have achieved the level of comparable whites in the area (Rohrer, 1942). This finding is all the more impressive when it is remembered that Indian children generally have measured considerably below Negro children in I.Q. tests.
Similar improvements are recorded among white mountain children in east Tennessee, public school students in Honolulu, and white enlisted men in World War II. Wheeler (1942) gave tests to over three thousand mountain children in 1940 and compared their performance to that of children in the same areas and from virtually the same families in 1930. This ten-year span had witnessed broad economic, social, and educational changes in east Tennessee; and the median I.Q.'s reflected these changes in an increment of 11 points, from 82 to 93. Equally remarkable gains are reported for children of many racial groups in Honolulu after a 14-year period of steady improvement in the city's schools (Smith, 1942). And, finally, 768 soldiers, representative of white enlisted men in World War II, took the old Army Alpha verbal test of World War I and provided striking evidence of the nation's rising intelligence between the two wars. Tuddenham (1948) shows that the typical white World War II enlisted

man did better on the test than 83% of the enlisted men of the first war.
Once the Negro American escapes from inferior conditions, his improved performance parallels that of the Osage Indians and the east Tennessee mountain children. Service in the armed forces is one of the most important sources of wider experience and opportunities for Negroes, including those who are illiterate. The Army in the Second World War operated Special Training Units and provided a basic fourth-grade education in eight weeks for 254,000 previously illiterate soldiers--roughly half of them Negroes and the great majority Southerners. A slightly higher percentage of the Negroes than whites successfully completed the intensive course, though how this bears on larger questions of Negro intelligence is a matter of debate, since the men given this special training were selected. There is no debate, however, over the fact that the success of these units proves the educability of many apparently retarded men of both races (Bradley, 1949; Witty, 1945).
Another mode of improvement for many Negroes is to migrate North. Negro Northerners routinely achieve higher test medians than comparable Negro Southerners (Davenport, 1946; Roberts, 1948). And Negro children born in the North achieve higher medians than those who come to the North from the South (Klineberg, 1935; Lee, 1951; Long, 1934; Stetler, 1959). But do the Negro children who migrate improve their group performance as they remain in the North? This was the central question the eminent psychologist Otto Klineberg (1935) set out to answer in what resulted in perhaps the best known research in the field of race differences. Over three thousand ten-to-twelve-year-old Harlem Negroes took an array of individual and

206

Pettigrew

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

group intelligence instruments. These data clearly indicate that the longer the Southern-born children had resided in New York City, the higher their intelligence scores. Those who had been in the North for a number of years approached the levels attained by the Northern-born Negroes. Smaller studies with less elaborate designs obtained parallel results in Cleveland and Washington, D.C. (Dombey, 1933; Long, 1934).
More recently, Lee (1951) replicated these findings in Philadelphia with the most rigorous research on the topic to date. Employing large samples in a variety of different schools, Lee analyzed the test scores of the same children as they progressed through the city's school system. Though never quite catching up with the Philadelphia-born Negro students, the Southern Negro migrants as a group regularly gained in I.Q. with each grade completed in Northern schools. And the younger they were when they entered the Philadelphia school system, the greater their mean increase and final I.Q. The effects of the more stimulating and somewhat less discriminatory North, then, are directly reflected in the measured intelligence of the youngest of Negro migrants.
The major complication in interpreting the Klineberg and Lee work is again introduced by possible selection biases. Those Negro Southerners who migrate North in search of a better life may be selectively brighter and rear brighter children. But other possibilities also exist. Many of the more intelligent Negroes in the South gain some measure of success and establish roots that are more difficult to break than those of the less intelligent. This phenomenon would operate to make the Klineberg and Lee data all the more impressive. Or, perhaps, intelligence has little or nothing to

do with the decision to migrate; personality traits, such as aggressiveness or inability to control hostility over racial frustrations, may be more decisive. In any event, Klineberg (1935) found the Southern school grades of 562 Negro youths who had since gone North were typical of the entire Negro school populations from which they migrated. More research is needed, but it seems that selective migration cannot begin to account for the dramatic improvement in test performance demonstrated by Negro children who move to the North.
Further evidence that Negro ability goes up when environmental opportunities expand derives from the many diverse educational-enrichment programs current in our major cities. The best known of these is New York City's "Higher Horizons" project. This effort provides a selected and largely Negro student body with an expensive saturation of skilled specialists: remedial-reading teachers, guidance counselors, psychologists, and social workers. Its results have been striking; in the first year, the program cut third graders' retardation in reading from six months down to a single month. Backed by major foundation grants, other cities have also begun to experiment. Detroit and Philadelphia tried sending "school-community agents" into ghetto schools in an attempt to win parental support for education. Kansas City's Central High School and Tucson's Pueblo High School initiated imaginative new programs. And Washington, D.C, launched in 1959 a "talent search" project for 200 deprived seventh graders, 92% of whom were Negro. Similar to Higher Horizons in its concentration of staff and exposure of students to new cultural experiences, the "talent search" was soon declared a success. Contrasted with a matched control group, the students of

Vol. 11, No. 4

Race: A Social Psychological View

207

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

the program showed a sharply reduced scholastic failure rate and notable instances of I.Q. increments.
Perhaps the most remarkable demonstration of all is Samuel Shepard's "Banneker Group" work in St. Louis (Baron, 1963; Silberman, 1962). A forceful educator, Shepard performs his "miracles" on the most underprivileged school children in the city without the vast expenditures of other efforts. The Banneker group consists of 23 elementary schools, with over sixteen thousand slum and public housing children, more than 95% of them Negro. A Negro who overcame serious economic disadvantages himself, Shepard adamantly rejects the old dogma that substandard school work is all you can realistically expect from ghetto children. He bluntly challenges the pupils, parents, principals, and teachers of the district to perform up to national standards; he appeals to race pride and resorts to continuous exhortations, rallies, contests, posters, and meetings with teachers and parents. Students who make good grades are asked to stand in assemblies for the applause of their classmates. Teachers are asked to visit the homes of their charges. And parents are asked to provide their offspring with encouragement, study space, a library card, a dictionary, and other books as gifts. As a concrete incentive, Shepard points out the new and better jobs now open to Negroes in St. Louis and the lack of qualified Negroes to fill them.
The results of the Banneker effort speak for themselves. Despite an unending stream of poorly educated migrants into the area from the South, all test indicators have risen. In the first four years of the program, the median I.Q. increased from the middle 80's to the 90's; median reading, language, and

arithmetic levels all climbed; and the percentage of Banneker graduates accepted for the top-ability program in St. Louis's desegregated high schools tripled.
The striking results of these imaginative demonstrations may not be due directly to the exact procedures introduced. Given their vast variety of techniques and their uniform success, the demonstrations probably achieve most of their gains because of the sheer fact of intervention--any kind of thoughtful intervention. Often the rate of initial progress slows once the beginning enthusiasm cools. But this is irrelevant to the larger issue of Negro American intelligence. Dramatic improvement in Negro performance for whatever reason is evidence of the underlying potential for learning heretofore stifled by lack of opportunity and attention. This potential for learning is also evident in the findings of a recent experiment at the University of Texas (Semler and Iscoe, 1963). Negro children learned series of paired material as rapidly and well as white children, even though they came from lower socioeconomic backgrounds and had significantly lower I.Q.'s.
Such demonstrations arouse speculation concerning the effects of desegregation of public school systems. Segregationists have long voiced the unsubstantiated opinion that "school mixing" would mean educational chaos with the Negroes dragging down the higher white standards. But the experience of a great diversity of communities indicates that these fears are unjustified. Administrators of 17 desegregated school systems appeared before the United States Civil Rights Commission in March, 1959, and candidly discussed their problems (Southern Regional Council, 1960). Twelve of the educators dealt with the question of academic standards. Ranging from

208

Pettigrew

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Logan County, Kentucky, and Muskogee, Oklahoma, to Baltimore and Nashville, all twelve reported unequivocally that their academic standards had not been lowered--in fact, many maintained that their standards had improved for both races.
Washington, D. C, provided the acid test. It embarked upon a sweeping process of educational desegregation in 1954 with Negroes comprising three-fifths of the students, many of them from the South with limited backgrounds. A four-tract system of ability grouping and other innovations were adopted. Five years later, in 1959, a factual assessment of the changes were made (Hansen, 1960; Stallings, 1960). Though Negro students, swelled by migrants, now comprised three-fourths of the student body, achievement test scores had risen significantlyfor each grade level sampled, and each subject area tested approached or equaled national norms. Furthermore, both Negro and white students shared in these increments. Such results are not unique to Washington. Louisville reported substantial gains in Negro performance and slight gains in white performance after only one year of desegregation (Southern Regional Council, 1959; Stallings, 1959).
Clearly, desegregation per se does not accomplish these feats. The Banneker demonstration in St. Louis took place in virtually all-Negro schools; Washington and Louisville witnessed sharply improved test medians among their Negro students, whether in biracial or uniracial schools. The principal factor seems to be the new and healthier self-image Negroes acquire in the process. The act of community desegregation bolsters and encourages Negro pupils, parents, and teachers alike. Combining with this heightening of morale is the entrenched

Negro desire for education. Newsweek's (1963) national poll revealed that 91% of the nation's Negroes want their children at least to graduate from high school.
Also important is the sudden interest Negro education finally wins from the whole community. As long as Negro education is a racially-separate system, dominant white interests can and do forget it. But once desegregation forces the community to handle the education of its youth in one package, to consider Negro education as an integral part of the whole process, new attention is given to the schools. Indeed, the rise in white test scores after desegregation suggests that public education as a whole benefits from the greater public interest. Washington offers an illustration. Prior to desegregation, survey testing was only done with the white pupils; Negroes were ignored (Southern Regional Council, 1960). But immediately after desegregation, testing throughout the system was instituted, and the same standards were applied at last to both races. Certainly, desegregation is no panacea for the immense problems faced by public school systems with large percentages of environmentally impoverished children, but it does prepare the way for tackling the real problems of modern education.
Thus, an array of stimulating circumstances--service in the armed forces, migration to the North, and participation in revitalized school systems--all act to lift substantially the intelligence and achievement levels of Negroes. Often these improvements still do not bring the average Negro performance completely up to white norms, but this cannot be considered as evidence for genetic racial differences until all racial discrimination is abolished.

Vol. 11, No. 4

Race: A Social Psychological View

209

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

The Individual Versus the Group
The discussion so far has concentrated on group results, yet many of the most important considerations involving Negro American intelligence concern the individual. No one denies the existence of outstanding Negro Americans. Usually, however, the same individuals are cited--Marian Anderson, Ralph Bunche, George Washington Carver--and are considered "exceptions" and special "credits to their race." The truth is that a surprising number of such "exceptional" Negroes have somehow managed to overcome the formidable obstacles of discrimination. Many have naturally entered the struggle for equal rights. But others achieve such stature in nonstereotyped work that they are no longer thought of as Negro. For instance, the originator of the Hinton test for syphilis, the late Professor William A. Hinton, was well known as a bacteriologist and immunologist at Harvard Medical School but not as a Negro.
Superior intelligence comes in all skin colors. While the intelligence test means of the two races are still divergent, the range of performance--from the most retarded idiot to the most brilliant genius--is much the same in the two groups. Some Negro children score I.Q.'s into the gifted range (130 or over) and up to 200 (Jenkins, 1948; Theman and Witty, 1943; Witty and Jenkins, 1936). To be sure, the frequency of such bright Negroes is less than that of whites, but this, too, can be explained by differential environmental factors. The great majority of these superior Negroes are located in biracial schools in the urban North and West, which suggests that many potentially gifted Negroes go either undiscovered or undeveloped in the segregated schools of the South (Jenkins, 1948; Jenkins and Randall,

1948). Proof that such children do exist in the South comes from programs which intensively seek talented Negro Southerners (Clark, 1956; Stalnaker, 1948). Once found, they receive scholarships and attend a variety of desegregated high schools and colleges in the North, and the great majority of them accommodates well to their new and challenging situations. Indeed, a recent study of Negro scholarship applicants from the South who have attended integrated colleges reveals that they have a far smaller dropout rate than white students at the same colleges (Clark and Plotkin, 1963).
Moreover, it appears that the degree of white ancestry does not relate to Negro I.Q. scores (Herskovits, 1926; Klineberg, 1928). Among intellectually superior Negroes, for example, the proportions of those with varying degrees of white ancestry correspond closely with those of the total Negro American population (Witty and Jenkins, 1936). Indeed, the brightest Negro child yet reported--with a tested I.Q. of 200--had no traceable Caucasian heritage whatsoever (Theman and Witty, 1943). "Race perse/' concludes Martin Jenkins (1948, p. 401), "is not a limiting factor in psychometric intelligence."
There exists, then, a considerable overlap in the I.Q. distributions of the two groups. A few Negroes will score higher than almost all Caucasians, and many Negroes will score higher than most Caucasians. Fig. 3 shows two typical intelligence test distributions with an overlap of 25%, that is, 25% of the Negroes tested (shaded area) surpass the performance of half of the whites tested. Notice how the ranges of the two distributions are virtually the same, even though the means are somewhat different. This figure illustrates one of the most important facts about "race" and

210

Pettigrew

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Figure 3. Typical test distributions with "25% overlap."
measured intelligence: individual differences in I.Q. within any one race greatly exceed differences between races.
There are two practical consequences of this phenomenon for desegregated education. First, when a school system institutes a track program of ability grouping, there will be Negroes and whites at all levels. Second, some gifted Negroes will actually lead their biracial classes even during the initial stages of desegregation. Thus, Janice Bell, a seventeen-year-old Negro girl, led the first graduating class of superior students at Beaumont High in St. Louis; Julius Chambers, a twenty-four-year-old Negro Southerner, became the 19611962 editor of the University of North Carolina's Law Review in recognition of his leadership of his law school class; and Charles Christian, a thirty-sevenyear-old Negro Virginian, led his Medical College of Virginia senior class academically in 1962. "In the study of individuals," summarizes Anastasi, "the only proper unit is the individual."
The Current Conclusion
Intelligence is a plastic product of inherited structure developed by environmental stimulation and opportunity, an alloy of endowment and experience. It can be measured and studied only by inference, through observing behavior

defined as "intelligent" in terms of particular cultural content and values. Thus, the severely deprived surroundings of the average Negro child can lower his measured I.Q. in two basic ways. First, it can act to deter his actual intellectual development by presenting him with such a constricted encounter with the world that his innate potential is barely tapped. And, second, it can act to mask his actual functioning intelligence in the test situation by not preparing him culturally and motivationally for such a middle-class task. "Only a very uncritical psychologist would offer sweeping generalizations about the intellectual superiority or inferiority of particular racial or ethnic groups," comments Tuddenham (1962, pp. 499-500), "despite the not very surprising fact that members of the dominant racial and cultural group in our society ordinarily score higher than others on tests of socially relevant accomplishments invented by and for members of that group."
The principal mechanisms for mediating these environmental effects vary from the poor nutrition of the pregnant mother to meeting the expectations of the social role of "Negro." Some of these mechanisms, like fetal brain injuries, can leave permanent intellectual impairments. Consequently, the permanency and irreversibility of these effects are not, as some claim, certain indicators of genetically low capacity. Fortunately, many of these effects are correctable. Moving North to better schools, taking part in special programs of environmental enrichment, and benefiting from challenging new situations of educational desegregation can all stimulate Negro children to raise their I.Q. levels dramatically.
From this array of data, the over-
whelming opinion of modern psychology

Vol. 11, No. 4

Race: A Social Psychological View

211

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

concludes that the mean differences often observed between Negro and white children are largely the result of environmental, rather than genetic, factors. This is not to assert that psychologists deny altogether the possibility of inherited racial differences in intellectual structure. There may be a small residual mean difference--small not only because of the demonstrably sweeping influence of experience, but also because the two "races" are by no means genetically "pure" and separate.
Psychology is joined in this conclusion by its sister behavioral sciences: sociology and anthropology. Witness the following professional statements:
The Society for the Psychological Study of Social Issues, a division of the American Psychological Association, concluded in 1961:
There are differences in intelligence test scores when one compares a random sample of whites and Negroes. What is equally clear is that no evidence exists that leads to the conclusion that such differences are innate. Quite to the contrary, the evidence points overwhelmingly to the fact that when one compares Negroes and whites of comparable cultural and educational backgrounds, differences in intelligence diminish markedly; the more comparable the background, the less the difference. There is no direct evidence that supports the view that there is an innate difference between members of different racial groups. . . . Evidence speaks for itself and it casts serious doubt on the conclusion that there is any innate inequality in intelligence in different racial groups. . . .
The Society for the Study of Social Problems, a section of the American Sociological Association, concurred, in the same year:
The great preponderance of scientific opinion has favored the conclusion

that there is little or no ground on which to assume that the racial groups in question are innately different in any important human capacity . . . the conclusion of scientists is that the differences in test performance are due not to racial but to environmental factors. This is the operating assumption today of the vast majority of the competent scientists in the field. . . .
The American Anthropological Asso-
ciation passed a resolution by an unan-
imous vote (192 to 0) in 1961:
The American Anthropological Association repudiates statements now appearing in the United States that Negroes are biologically and in innate mental ability inferior to whites, and reaffirms the fact that there is no scientifically established evidence to justify the exclusion of any race from the rights guaranteed by the Constitution of the United States. The basic principles of equality of opportunity and equality before the law are compatible with all that is known about human biology. All races possess the abilities needed to participate fully in the democratic way of life and in modern technological civilization.
The final, definitive research must
await a racially integrated America in
which opportunities are the same for
both races. But, ironically, by that future
time the question of racial differences in
intelligence will have lost its salience;
scholars will wonder why we generated
so much heat over such an irrelevant
topic.
The important conclusion for the
present, however, is that if there are any
inherent distinctions, they are incon-
sequential. Even now, differences in I.Q.
within any one race greatly exceed the
differences between the races. Race as
such is simply not an accurate way to
judge an individual's intelligence. The
real problems in this area concern ways
to overcome the many serious environ-

212

Pettigrew

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

mental deprivations that handicap Ne-
gro youth. To return to the analog)'
with longevity, the problem is akin to
that which faced medicine in the nine-
teenth century. Automatized America
needs to expand the intelligence level of
its underprivileged citizens in much the
same way it has expanded the life po-
tential of its citizens in the past one
hundred years. The success of such pro-
grams as "the Banneker group" in St.
Louis demonstrates that this jobcan be
accomplished when American society
decides to put enough of its resources
into it. "The U. S. must learn," writes
Charles Silberman (1962, p. 151) in
Fortune, "to look upon theNegro com-
munity as if it were an underdeveloped
country."
REFERENCES
ANASTASI, ANNE, 1956. Intelligence and Family Size. Psychol. Bull, 53: 187-209. , 1958. Differential Psychology. Third edition. Macmillan, New York. , and RITA D'ANGELO, 1952. A Comparison of Negro and White Pre-School Children in Language Development and Goodenough Draw-a-Man I.Q. J. Genet. Psychol, 8 1 : 147-165.
BARON, H., 1963. Samuel Shepard and the Banneker Project. Integrated Educ., 1 (April): 25-27.
BEXTON, W. H., W. HERON, and T. H. SCOTT,
1954. Effects of Decreased Variation in the Sensory Environment. Canad. J. Psychol, 8: 70-76. BOGER, J. H., 1952. An Experimental Studyof the Effects of Perceptual Training on Group I.Q. Test Scores of Elementary Pupils in Rural Ungraded Schools. J. Educ. Res., 46: 43-52. BOOK, J. A., 1953. A Genetic and Neuropsychiatric Investigation of a North Swedish Population. Acta Genet. (Basel), 4: 1-100, 133139, 345-414. BRADLEY, GLADYCE, 1949. A Review of Educational Problems Based on Military Selection and Classification Data in World War II. J. Educ. Res., 43: 161-174.
BRODBECK, A. J., and O. C. IRWIN, 1946. The
Speech Behavior of Infants without Families. Child Develop., 17: 147-156. BROWN, F., 1944. An Experimental and Critical Study of the Intelligence of Negro and White Kindergarten Children. J. Genet. Psychol, 65: 161-175.

CALDWELL, M. G., 1959. Personality Trends in the Youthful Male Offender. J. Crim. Law, Criminol, and Police Sci., 49: 405-416.
CANADY, H. G., 1936. TheEffect of "Rapport" on the I.Q.: A New Approach to theProblem of Racial Psychology. J. Negro Educ., 5: 209-219.
CARSON, A. S., and A. I. RABIN, 1960. Verbal
Comprehension and Communication in Negro andWhite Children. J. Educ. Psychol, 51: 47-51. CLARK, K. B., 1956. The Most Valuable Hidden Resource. Coll. Board Rev., No. 29: 23-26.
, and L. PLOTKIN, 1963. The Negro Student at Integrated Colleges. National Scholarship Service and Fund for Negro Students, New York. CLARK, R. E., 1949. Psychoses, Income and Occupational Prestige. Amer. J. Sociol.,54: 433-440. COGHILL, G.E., 1929. Anatomy and theProblem of Behavior. Macmillan, New York.
COMMISSION ON CHRONIC ILLNESS, 1957. Chronic
Illness in the United States. Vol. IV.Chronic Illness in aLarge City: The Baltimore Study. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
COOPER, R. M., and J. M. ZUBEK, 1958. Effects of
Enriched and Constricted Early Environments on the Learning Ability of Bright and Dull Rats. Canad. J. Psychol., 12: 159-164.
CRAWFORD, F. R., G. W. ROLLINS, and R. L.
SUTHERLAND, 1960. Variations between Negroes and Whites in Concepts of Mental Illness and Its Treatment. Ann. N. Y.Acad. Sci.; 84(17): 918-937.
CURTÍ, MARGARET W., 1960. Intelligence Tests of White and Colored School Children in Grand Cayman. J. Psychol, 49: 13-27.
DAVENPORT, R. K.,1946. Implications of Military Selection and Classification in Relation to Universal Military Training. J.Negro Educ., 15: 585-594.
DAVIDSON, K. S., R. G. GIBBY, E. B. MCNEIL, S. J.
SEGAL and H. SILVERMAN, 1950. A Prelimi-
nary Study of Negro andWhite Differences in Form I of the Wechsler-Bellevue Scale. J. Counsult. Psychol, 14: 489-492. DENNIS, W., 1940. TheEffect of Cradling Practices upon the Onset of Walking in Hopi Children. J. Genet. Psychol, 56: 77-86.
, 1960. Causes of Retardation among Institutional Children: Iran. J. Genet. Psychol, 96: 47-59. DEUTSCH, M., 1960. Minority Group and Class Status as Related to Social and Personality Factors in Scholastic Achievement. Monograph of the Society for Applied Anthropology, No. 2: 1-32.
, and B. BROWN, 1964. Social Influences in Negro-White Intelligence Differences. J. Soc. Issues, 20(2): 24-35. DOMBEY, E. H., 1933. A Comparison of the Intelligence Test Scores of Southern and Northern Born Negroes Residing in Cleveland. Unpublished Master's Thesis, Western Reserve University. DRILLIEN, C. M., 1959. Physical and Mental Handicap in Prematurely Born. J. Obstet. Gynaec. Brit. Comm., 66: 721-728.

Vol. 11, No. 4

Race: A Social Psychological View

213

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

EAGLESON, O. W., 1937. Comparative Studies of White and Negro Subjects in Learning to Discriminate Visual Magnitude. J. Psychol., 4: 167-197.
EVARTS, ARRAH B., 1913. Dementia Praecox in the Colored Race. Psychoanal. Rev., 1: 388-403.
FARIS, R. E. L., and H. W. DUNHAM, 1939. Mental
Disorders in Urban Areas. University of Chicago Press, Chicago. FOWLER, W., 1962. Cognitive Learning in Infancy and Early Childhood. Psychol. Bull., 59: 116-152. FRANKLIN, J. H., 1961. From Slavery to Freedom. Second edition, Knopf, New York.
FREEMAN, F. N., K. J. HOLZINGER, and B. C.
MITCHELL, 1928. The Influence of Environment on the Intelligence, School Achievement, and Conduct of Foster Children. 27th Yearbook, Nat. Soc. Social Sci. Educ, Part I: 103-217.
FRIEDSAM, H. J., C. D. WHATLEY, and A. L.
RHODES, 1954. Some Selected Aspects of Judicial Commitments of the Mentally Ill in Texas. Texas J. Sci., 6: 27-30.
FRUMKIN, R. M.,1954. Race and Major Mental Disorders: AResearch Note. J. Negro Educ, 23: 97-98.
GARDNER, G. E., and SADIE AARON, 1946. The
Childhood and Adolescent Adjustment of Negro Psychiatric Casualties. Amer. J. Orthopsychiat, 16:481-495.
GILLILAND, A. R., 1949. Environmental Influences on Infant Intelligence Test Scores. Harvard Educ. Rev., 19: 142-146. , 1951. Socioeconomic Status and Race as Factors in Infant Intelligence Test Scores. Child Develop., 22: 271-273.
GLASS, B., 1955. On theUnlikelihood of Significant Admixture of Genes from the North American Indians in the Present Composition of the Negroes of the United States. Amer. J. Hum. Genet., 7: 368-385.
GORDON, H., 1923. Mental andScholastic Tests Among Retarded Children. Board of Education (Educational Pamphlet No. 44), London.
GOTTESMAN, I. I., 1963. Genetic Aspects ofIntelligent Behavior. In N. Ellis (ed.), The Handbook of Mental Deficiency. McGrawHill, New York, pp. 253-296.
GOUGH, H. G., 1953. A Nonintellectual Intelligence test. J. Consult. Psychol., 17: 242-246.
HAGGARD, E. A., 1954. Social Status and Intelligence: An Experimental Study of Certain Cultural Determinants of Measured Intelligence. Genet. Psychol. Monogr., 49: 141-186.
HAMMER, E. F., 1954. Comparison of the Performances of Negro Children and Adolescents on Two Tests of Intelligence, One an Emergency Scale. J. Genet. Psychol., 84: 85-93.
HANSEN, C. F., 1960. Addendum: A Five-Year Report on Desegregation in the Washington, D. C. Schools. Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, New York.
HARLOW, H. F., 1949. TheFormation of Learning Sets. Psychol. Rev., 56: 51-65.
HARPER, P. A., L. K. FISCHER, and R. V. RIDER,
1959. Neurological and Intellectual Status

of Prematures at Three to Five Years of Age. J. Pediat., 55: 679-690.
HARRELL, R. F., E. R. WOODYARD, and A. I. GATES,
1956. Influence of Vitamin Supplementation of Diets of Pregnant andLactating Women on Intelligence of Their Offspring. Metabolism, 5: 555-562.
HERSKOVITS, M. J., 1926. On the Relation between Negro-White Mixture and Standing in Intelligence Tests. Pediat. Sem., 33: 30-42.
HIGGINS, C., and CATHRYNE SIVERS, 1958. A Com-
parison of Stanford-Binet and Colored Raven Progressive Matrices I.Q.'s for Children with Low Socioeconomic Status. J. Consult. Psychol., 22: 465-468.
HOKANSON, J. E., and G. CALDEN, 1960. Negro-
White Differences on the MMPI J. Clin. Psychol, 16: 32-33.
HOLLINGSHEAD, A. B., and F. C. REDLICH, 1958.
Social Class and Mental Illness: A Community Study. Wiley, New York. HUNT, J. M., 1961. Intelligence and Experience. Ronald, NewYork. HUNT, W.A., 1947a. TheRelative Incidence of Psychoneurosis among Negroes. J. Consult. Psychol., 11: 133-136.
, 1947b. Negro-White Differences in Intelligence in World War II--A Note of Caution. J. Abnorm. Soc. Psychol., 42: 254-255. HURST, J. G., 1963. Relationships between Performance on Preschool and Adult Intelligence Measures. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Psychological Association, held at Philadelphia in August. IVINS, S. P., 1950. Psychoses in the Negro: A Preliminary Study. Delaware State Med.J., 22: 212-213. JACO, E. G., 1960. The Social Epidemiologyof Mental Disorders. Russell Sage Foundation, New York. JENKINS, M.D., 1948. The Upper Limit of Ability among American Negroes. Sci. Monthly, 66: 399-401.
, and CONSTANCE M. RANDALL, 1948.
Differential Characteristics of Superior and Unselected Negro College Students. J. Soc. Psychol., 27: 187-202.
KAGAN, J., L. W. SONTAG, C. T. BAKER, and
VIRGINIA NELSON, 1958. Personality and I.Q.
Change. J. Abnorm. Soc. Psychol., 56: 261-266. KALLMAN, F. J., 1951. Twin Samples in Relation to Adjustive Problems of Man. Transactions N. Y.Acad. Sci.,13: 270-275.
KARDINER, A. and L. OVESEY, 1951. The Mark of
Oppression. Norton, NewYork.
KATZ, I., E. G. Errs, and L. J. AXELSON. The
Effects of Anticipated Comparison with Whites and with Other Negroes upon the Digit-Symbol Performance of Negro College Students. Unpublished paper. KIRK, S. A., 1958. Early Education of the Mentally Retarded. University of Illinois Press, Urbana.
KLEINER, R. J., and S. PARKER, 1959. Migration
and Mental Illness: A NewLook. Amer. Soc. Rev., 24:687-690.

214

Pettigrew

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

, and

- , 1963. Goal-Striving,

Social Status, and Mental Disorder: A Re-

search Review. Amer. Soc. Rev., 28: 189-203.

, J. TUCKMAN, and MARTHA LAVELL,
1960. Mental Disorder andStatus Based on

Race. Psychiatry, 23: 271-274.

KLINEBERG, O., 1928. An Experimental Study of

Speed and Other Factors in "Racial" Differ-

ences. Arch. Psychol., 15: No. 93.

, 1935. Negro Intelligence and Selec-

tive Migration. Columbia University Press,

New York.

KNOBLOCH, HILDA, and B. PASAMANICK, 1953.
Further Observations on theBehavioral De-

velopment of Negro Children. J. Genet.

Psychol, 83: 137-157.

, and

, 1960. Environmental

Factors Affecting Human Development be-

fore and after Birth. Pediatrics, 26: 210-218.

, and

, 1962. Mental Sub-

normality. New Eng. J. Med., 266: 1092-

1097.

, R. RIDER, P. HARPER, and B. PASA-
MANICK, 1959. Effect of Prematurity on

Health and Growth. Amer. J.Public Health,

49: 1164-1173.

LEE, E. S., 1951. Negro Intelligence and Selective

Migration: A Philadelphia Test of the

Klineberg Hypothesis. Amer. Soc.Rev. 16:

227-283.

LIDDEIX, H. S., 1946. Conditioned Reflex Method

and Experimental Neurosis. In J. M. Hunt

(ed.), Personality and the Behavior Disorders.

Vol. I, Chap. 12. Ronald, New York.

LINTON, R., 1956. Culture and Mental Disorders.

Thomas, Springfield, Ill.

LITWACK, L. F., 1961. North of Slavery. Uni-

versity of Chicago Press, Chicago.

LONG, H. H., 1934. The Intelligence of Colored

Elementary Pupils in Washington, D. C.

J. Negro Educ., 3: 205-222.

MACHOVER, S., 1943. Cultural andRacial Varia-

tions in Patterns of Intellect. Teachers Coll.

Contrib. to Educ, No. 875.

MALLER, B., 1933. Mental Ability andIts Rela-

tion to Physical Health and Social Economic

Status. Psychol. Clin., 22: 101-107.

MALZBERG, B., 1944. Mental Disease among

American Negroes: A Statistical Analysis.

In O. Klineberg (ed.), Characteristics of the

American Negro. Harper, New York, pp.

373-395.

, 1953. Mental Disease among Negroes

in New York State, 1939-1941. Ment. Hyg.,

37: 450-476.

, 1956. Mental Disease among Native

and Foreign-Born Negroes in New York

State. J. Negro Educ, 25: 175-181.

, 1959. Mental Disease among Ne-

groes: An Analysis of First Admissions in

New York State, 1949-1951. Ment. Hyg.,

43: 422-459.

, andE. S. Lee, 1956. Migration and

Mental Disease. Social Science Research

Council, New York.

MCCORD, W. M., and N. J. DEMERATH, III, 1958.
Negro versus White Intelligence: A Con-

tinuing controversy. Harvard Educ Rev.,

28: 120-135.

MCGURK, F., 1953. On White and Negro Test Performance and Socio-Economic Factors. J. Abnorm. Soc. Psychol., 48: 448-450.

MCQUEEN, R., and B. CHURN, 1960. The Intelli-
gence and Educational Achievement of a Matched Sample of White and NegroStudents. Schools and Society, 88: 327-329.

METROPOLITAN LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY, 1963.
Progress in Longevity since 1850. Stat. Bull., 44: 1-3.

MYERS, J. K., and B. H. ROBERTS, 1958. Some

Relationships between Religion, Ethnic Ori-

gin and Mental Illness. In M. Skiare (ed.),

The Jews: Social Patterns of an American

Group. Free Press, Glencoe, Ill.

, and

, 1959. Family and

Class Dynamics in Mental Illness. Wiley,

New York.

NATIONAL OFFICE OF VITAL STATISTICS, 1959.
Death Rates for Selected Causes by Age, Color, and Sex: United States and Each State, 1949-1951. U. S.Government Printing Office, Washington, D. C.
NEWLAND, T . E., and W. C. LAWRENCE, 1953.
Chicago Non-Verbal Examination Results on an East Tennessee Negro Population. J. Clin. Psychol, 9: 44-46.
Newsweek editors, 1963. The Negro in America. Newsweek, 62 (Juty 29): 15-34.
NEWTON, EUNICE, 1960. Verbal Destitution: The Pivotal Barrier to Learning. J. Negro Educ, 24: 497-499.
OSBORN, R. T., 1960. Racial Differences in Mental Growth and School Achievement: A Longitudinal Study. Psychol. Reports, 7: 233-239.

PARKER, S., R. J. KLEINER, and ROCHELLE M.
Eskin, 1962. Social Status and Psychopathology. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Society of Physical Anthropology, held in Philadelphia inApril.
PASAMANICK, B., 1946. A Comparative Study of the Behavioral Development of Negro Infants. J. Genet. Psychol, 69: 3-44.
, 1963. Some Misconceptions Concerning Differences in theRacial Prevalence of Mental Disease. Amer. J. Orthopsychiat., 33(1): 72-86.

, and HILDA KNOBLOCH, 1955. Early
Language Behavior in Negro Children and the Testing of Intelligence. J. Abnorm. Soc. Psychol, 50: 401-402. PAVLOV, I. P., 1928. Lectures on Conditioned Reflexes. International, NewYork.
PETTIGREW, T. F. The Negro Respondent: New Data on Old Problems. Unpublished paper.
PIACET, J., 1947. The Psychology of Intelligence. Translated by M.Piercy and D. E. Berlyne. Routledge andKegan Paul, London.
POSTELL, W. D., 1953. Mental Health amongthe Slave Population of Southern Plantations. Amer. J. Psychiat., 110: 52-54.

PRICE, D. O., and RUTH SEARLES, 1961. Some
Effects of Interviewer-Respondent Interaction on Responses in a Survey Situation. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Statistical Association, held in New York, December 30.

Vol. 11, No.4

Race: A Social Psychological View

215

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

RIPLEY, H. S., and S. WOLF, 1947. Mental Illness among Negro Troops Overseas. Amer. J. Psychiat., 103: 499-512.
ROBERTS, S. O., 1948. Socioeconomic Status and Performance on the ACE of Negro Freshmen College Veterans and Non-Veterans, from the North and South. Amer. Psychologist, 3: 266.
ROBINSON, MARY L., and M. MEENES, 1947. The
Relationship between Test Intelligence of Third Grade Negro Children and the Occupations of Their Parents. J. Negro Educ, 16: 136-141.
ROEN, S. R., 1960. Personality and Negro-White Intelligence. J. Abnorm. Soc.Psychol., 6 1 : 148-150.
ROHRER, J. H., 1942. The Test Intelligence of Osage Indians. J. Soc. Psychol., 16: 99-105.
ROTONDO, U., C. B. VIGIL, C. G. PACHECHO, J.
MARIATECUI, and BEATRIZ DE DEGALDO, 1960.
Personalidad básica: Dilemas y vida de familia de un grupo de mestizos. Rev. Psicol. (Lima), 2: 3-60.
SCHERMERHORN, R. A., 1956. Psychiatric Disorders among Negroes: A Sociological Note. Amer. J. Psychiat., 112: 878-882.
SEMLER, I. J., and I. ISCOE, 1963. Comparative
and Developmental Study of the Learning Abilities of Negro and White Children under Four Conditions. J. Educ. Psychol., 54: 38-44.
SILBERMAN, C. E., 1962. The City and the Negro. Fortune, 65 (March): 89-91, 139-154.
SMART, MOLLIE S., 1963. Confirming Klineberg's Suspicion. Amer. Psychologist, 18: 621.
SMITH, S., 1942. Language andNon-Verbal Test Performance of Racial Groups Before and After a 14-Year Interval. J. Genet. Psychol., 26: 51-93.
SONTAG, L. W., C. T. BAKER, and VIRGINIA
NELSON, 1955. Personality as a Determinant of Performance. Amer. J. Orthopsychiat., 25: 555-562.
SOUTHERN REGIONAL COUNCIL, 1959. Did you
Find That There Was Much Difference in the Ability of Negro Children to Recieve and Profit byInstruction? Report No. L-13, December 15.
, 1960. Desegregation and Academic Achievement. Report No. L-17, March 14. STALLINGS, F. H., 1959. A Study of the Immediate Effects of Integration on Scholastic Achievement in the Louisville Public Schools. J. Negro Educ, 28: 439-444.
, 1960. Racial Differences and Academic Achievement. Southern Regional Council's Report No. L-16, February 26. STALNAKER, J. M., 1948. Identification of the Best Southern Negro High School Seniors. Sci. Monthly, 67: 237-239. STANTON, W., 1960. TheLeopard's Spots: Scientific Attitudes Toward Race in America, 1815-1859. University of Chicago Press, Chicago. STETLER, H. G., 1959. Comparative Study of Negro and White Dropouts in Selected

Connecticut High Schools. Connecticut Commission on Civil Rights, Hartford. STEWART, D. D., 1955. Posthospital Social Adjustment of Former Mental Patients from Two Arkansas Counties. Southwest. Soc. Sci. Quart., 35: 317-323. STODDARD, G. D., 1943. The Meaning of Intelligence. Macmillan, New York.
STRINGER, LORENE A., 1959. Academic Progress as an Index of Mental Health. J. Soc. Issues, 15: 16-29.
TANSER, H.A., 1939. TheSettlement ofNegroes in Kent County, Ontario, and a Study of the Mental Capacity of Their Descendants. Shephard, Chatham, Ontario.
THEMAN, V., and P. A.WITTY, 1943. Case Studies and Genetic Records of Two Gifted Negroes. J. Psychol., 15: 165-181.
THOMPSON, W. R., and R. MELZACK, 1956. Early
Environment. Sci.Amer., 194(1): 38-42.
Thorndike, E. L., and ELLA WOODYARD, 1942.
Differences Within and Between Communities in the Intelligence of Children. J. Educ. Psychol., 33: 641-656. THORNDIKE, R.L., 1951. Community Variables as Predictors of Intelligence and Academic Achievement. J. Educ. Psychol., 42:321-338.
TOMLINSON, H., 1944. Differences between Preschool Negro Children and Their Older Siblings on the Stanford-Binet Scales. J. Negro Educ, 13: 474-479.
TUDDENHAM, R. D., 1948. Soldier Intelligence in World Wars I and II. Amer. Psychologist, 3: 54-56. : , 1962. The Nature and measurement of Intelligence. In L. Postman (ed.), Psychology in the Making. Knopf, New York.
WEISSKOPF, EDITH, 1951. Intellectual Malfunctioning and Personality. J. Abnorm. Soc. Psychol., 46: 410-423.
WELLMAN, BETH L., and EDNA L. PEGRAM, 1944.
Binet I.Q. Changes of Orphanage Preschool Children: A Re-analysis. J. Genet. Psychol., 65: 239-263'.
WHEELER, L. R., 1942. A Comparative Study of the Intelligence of East Tennessee Mountain Children. J. Educ. Psychol., 33: 321-334.
WILLIAMS, E. Y., and C. P. CARMICHAEL, 1949.
The Incidence of Mental Disease in the Negro. J. Negro Educ, 18: 276-282.
WILSON, D. C., and EDNA M. LANTZ, 1957. The
Effect of Culture Change on the Negro Race in Virginia as Indicated bya Study of State Hospital Admissions. Amer. J. Psychiat., 114: 25-32. WITTY, P., 1945. New Evidence on the Learning Ability of the Negro. J. Abnorm. Soc. Psychol., 40: 401-404.
, and M. D. JENKINS, 1936. Intra-Race Testing and Negro Intelligence. J. Psychol., 1: 179-192.
WOODS, W. A., and R. TOAL, 1957. Subtest Dis-
parity of Negro and White Groups Matched for I.Q.'s on the Revised Beta Test. J. Consult. Psychol., 2 1 : 136-138.

