Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Editorial comment
Robert C. Cook
To cite this article: Robert C. Cook (1955) Editorial comment, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:3, 129-132, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987237 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987237
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

Vol. 2,No. 3,September, 1955 EugeittCS

QuOTterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

EDITORIAL COMMENT

Eugenic Hypothesis B
Sir Francis Galton coined the term "eugenics" before modern genetics came to birth with the rediscovery of Mendel's experiments in 1900. In the intervening half century knowledge gained concerning heredity in many organisms including human beings has been phenomenal. Yet that day Galton looked forward to, when eugenics would sweep the world like a new religion, is still far in the future.
Genetic research permits no doubt that Galton was right. Along with improvements in medicine and education, should go the assurance that the inborn excellences of tomorrow's children average higher than those of today's children. If the inborn quality of the human breed in terms of its potential for mental and physical health should decline, all our efforts to ameliorate the conditions of human kind would in the end be mainly wasted. Humanity would then lose in each generation a fraction of the heritage from our evolutionary past which makes us most distinctively human.
There are several reasons why eugenics has failed to become the significant moral and social force Galton hoped it would. Partly this has been due to mistakes made by eugenists themselves: mistakes in focus and emphasis and even more in insight. There has been a failure to distinguish between the accident of birth into a particular social pattern and the genetic constitution of the unique individual human baby. Those who are born with a silver spoon in their mouths are not thereby assured of better than normal health or of superior mentality. In a highly heterozygous creature such as man, Galton's princi-

ple of regression toward the mean knows no class barriers. Enthusiasm for eugenics has more than once degenerated into nothing more hopeful or inspiring than a plea for social snobbery. This has furnished ammunition for the enemies of eugenics--the super-egalitarians who, in spite of the evidence of their senses, hold that every baby is exactly as well endowed as every other baby. Some of the proponents of this strange dogma have been, strangely enough, geneticists. Nor has the naive belief that the mental and muscular training of the parents contributes anything to the excellence of their children gained experimental support. The child of the gifted mathematician or musician is likely to resemble its parents because the parents' unusual qualities had a genetic component. E. G. Conklin was right: Wooden heads are, alas, inherited. Wooden legs are not. The ability to profit by training is all that is transmitted.
What is the mechanism which produces change in the genie make-up of populations? Current genetical theory envisions the evolution process as based fundamentally on seven biological vectors: 1) genetic characteristics are transmitted by discrete heredity-units, the genes. These are inherited independently. In populations, as distinct from pedigrees, even the phenomenon of linkage does not introduce an exception to this principle. 2) New alíeles are constantly being created at a slow rate by mutations of individual genes. The great majority of these mutations not only fail to contribute to the fitness of the organism in the hétérozygote; many of them when homozygous are grossly debilitating or actually lethal in existing environments, and perhaps in most -- or all -- environ-

129

130 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ments. 3) There is a constant selective sifting of less adapted and less viable genotypes by reason of their failure to reproduce (negative selection) and by a constant buildup of adapted genotypes by reason of their enhanced chances of survival to reproduction. The principal selective "sieve" of the evolutionary process is thus differential mortality. "Survival of the fittest" means in terms of evolution mechanics mainly one thing: survival to reproduce viable offspring. 4) Success in the struggle for survival is continuously being altered by changes in environment. 5) The phenomenon of genetic drift may alter the "gene-pool" of small isolated populations. During many generations this produces different strains and races. 6) Migration and cross-breeding by increasing variability will offer a wider range of genotypes for selection to act on. 7) Without effective selection eventual deterioration of any adapted species is inevitable by a reason of the buildup of non-adaptive mutant genes. This principle is illustrated in parasitism, where an organ not exposed to selection deteriorates or disappears.
Galtonian eugenics envisioned the enhancement of the inborn qualities of future generations through forces under social control. There is no question that forces under social control do affect the inborn quality of future generations, for better or for worse. Whether such forces are positive or negative in their effect--whether they enhance or debase the quality of the human breed becomes increasingly important as the chances of survival improve. For with a rising rate of survival, death selection obviously becomes increasingly less effective. The hope of eugenics is that birth selection can be substituted for death selection. The evidence from plant and animal experiments is that genotypic birth selection can be extremely effective. If-- and this is the big if--selective control of natality is adequately applied. How this is to be done in the context of a human society with a high degree of individual freedom of choice is indeed the sixty-four

dollar eugenic question. Today the impact of social forces is pro-
ducing some effects which are the reverse of eugenic. Achievement--which in varied contexts represents an ability to respond effectively to many different stimuli--definitely does not bring as one of its inevitable rewards a large brood of children. Rather the reverse. There is no reason whatever to believe that the over-reproduction of those who have demonstrated no notable ability is calculated to enhance the inborn qualities of tomorrow's children. If this differential birth rate is not actually deteriorating the heritage of tomorrow at a slow but indeterminate pace, it could only be that the principles of Mendel's genetics do not apply to human beings. And there is no evidence that our species has some kind of a miraculous dispensation relieving it from what appears to be a universal law of life.
Nor is this the whole story. Selection can be negative as well as positive. A striking example of this was reported by Reed and Palm, who found that in certain midwestern states individuals inheriting the dominant gene for Huntington's chorea had considerably larger progenies than their siblings who did not happen to carry the gene. Few would seriously maintain that a larger proportion of choreics would be advantageous. Yet if Reed and Palm have noted a general trend, that is what we are getting.
To be effective as a selective force, a eugenic program must effectively harness "forces under social control" to favor the reproduction of "superior" genotypes and to discourage the reproduction of "inferior" genotypes. This must, of course, be done in a context of free will. (The definition of "superior" and "inferior" presents so many problems that it cannot be explored here. In terms of evolution dynamics, "superior" means essentially "better adapted"; and "inferior" means the reverse. In a human social context, the added difficulties of defining "adapted" or "superior" are obvious.)

131

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

There appears to be a serious question ianism" rather than a biological Lamarck-

as to the extent to which the "Eugenic ianism really makes no difference in the Hypothesis"1 fits into the genetic and selec- end. The assumption appears to be that

tive evolutionary field of reference. The by hook or crook the postulated congeries

most formidable difficulty is perhaps the of social and eugenic virtues somehow gets

assumption that "group inheritance"--a into the germ plasm.

transmission en bloc--of a whole constella- Such considerations raise the question

tion of desirable characteristics is a bio- whether in the light of the genetic realities,

logical possibility. The block of desirable the Eugenic Hypothesis may actually prove

characteristics assumed to constitute a sort to be anti-eugenic. The Hypothesis invites

of "super-gene" in the Eugenic Hypothesis an "escalator" philosophy which demands

includes: (1) philoprogenetiveness, (2) very little in the way of individual partici-

good health, both mental and physical, (3) pation. Since the "right people" are as-

better-than-average intelligence and emo- sumed almost automatically to be the ones

tional stability, (4) a sense of moral duty who want the big families, there appears to

and responsibility, etc. This assumption be really no fundamental problem of har-

violates at least three of the basic postulates nessing Galton's "social forces." Yet noth-

of the evolution process outlined above. ing known today about the evolution proc-

The most important of these barriers is ess gives any basis for believing that the

that genetic qualities are independently in- human species has a ticket to Utopia.

herited as discrete units. There is no instance known to this writer of correlated groups of genes, which pass as a unit from one generation to the next in a heterozygous population. Nor would one gene be expected to display such an impressive pleiotropy. If the population is homozygous for the many genes which contribute to such a syndrome, there is no problem. And as long as the homozygosity is maintained, there is no need for eugenics. Hence operationally and theoretically this basic assumption is highly moot. Data from human community studies, sometimes cited as supporting the Eugenic Hypothesis, are doubtfully valid.

If the Eugenic Hypothesis fails in the realism of its approach, are alternate hypotheses possible which do fit the genetic realities, and which might command effective motivations to make birth selection an effective eugenic force in a context of free individual choice? As a point of departure an alternative hypothesis -- let us call it "Eugenic Hypothesis B"--is suggested. It bases fundamentally on the assumption that there is one quality which is almost universal in the human species. Whether this quality is conditioned by one gene or many is immaterial. That it is part of our biological heritage can hardly be doubted, any more than we can doubt that the five-

If this assumption that a complex-ofvirtues, homozygously inherited, does not hold, then the argument that philoprogenetiveness will automatically select the best-endowed parents for the next generation lacks support. Even a casual exploration of the world about us should strengthen our doubts that such a force is operating.
There is a further hard-to-define Lamarckian flavor to the Eugenic Hypothesis that seems to run counter to biological realities. That this is a "social Lamarck-
1Proposed by Frederick Osborn, Eugenical News, Vol. XXXVI, No. 2, Vol. XXXVII, No. 1.

fingered, five-toed, mammalian hand and foot is genetically conditioned. This postulate avoids the difficulty of en bloc inheritance discussed above for it assumes the virtual homozygosity of the species with respect to the underlying gene-complex sculpturing the character in question. There are many instances of such virtually homozygous gene complexes characteristic of existing species and genera. The universal human heritage postulated as the basic assumption in "Eugenic Hypothesis B" is the supreme desire built into virtually all women to bear perfect children, without physi-

132 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

cal or mental spot or blemish. Many obstetricians testify to the deepness and universality of this desire. Overwhelmingly the first question a parturient woman asks is not: "is it a boy or a girl?" It is: "is the baby perfect?" All else is secondary.
"Eugenic Hypothesis B" holds that granting the validity of this basic assumption, the way is open to motivate a positive and effective eugenic program. Eugenics ceases to be a form of social Pollyannaism, and becomes a matter of personal choice and participation. Given an adequate dissemination of the A.B.C.'s of genetic knowledge, there is reason to believe that this drive for reproductive perfection may overshadow the more generalized philoprogenetiveness which often goes misty-eyed over the young of our canine and feline distant cousins. This is not the same thing -- though perhaps related to that deep-seated yen for perfection.
Let us face the realities of birth selection as an eugenic instrument. It means a complete reorientation of human reproduction. It means high levels of reproduction by the biologically elite (a group which current knowledge does not yet permit us to define altogether adequately). It means non --or minimal reproduction--on the part of more than a majority of females. And this decision in a free society obviously must be voluntary. For motivation of this part of an eugenic program, Hypothesis B goes to the New Testament: to the Parable of the Talents. And to Matthew 22:14 -- "for many are called but few chosen."
"Eugenic Hypothesis B" holds that the built-in mandate of perfection in procreation is urgent enough to stimulate philoprogenetiveness where it is in the context of the future, and to reduce it where it is not. Only a motivation of such urgency is significant in so surpassing a context. To bring such a motivation into being in the lives of men and women, more knowledge is needed, and a wider and a more vivid and humane dissemination of the knowledge

we now have and of that to be garnered next year and next generation.
Eugenic progress therefore emerges as an extraordinarily complex and difficult field of human endeavor. Since eugenics deals with human births, with conception and death, it is in the center of one of the most highly charged areas of emotional stress in human experience and action. All of the repressed tensions and confusions which Sigmund Freud has revealed in his studies of the subconscious have an impact on the ability of every human being to think rationally and dispassionately about subjects such as eugenics. This aspect of the problem has been explored recently, in a somewhat different context, by Professor J. S. Flügel, in his fascinating "Population, Psychology and Peace," a book which demands the earnest consideration of all eugenists.

Professor Flügel points out that as con-

trol of human reproduction becomes more

general, human life will become more valu-

able. With balanced population, Dr. Flu-

gel hopes, it will be recognized that "par-

enthood is a worthy occupation, one which

is at least as great a service to the commu-

nity as many others which in the past have

been more highly honored. . . . This con-

trol [over birth and death], assuredly one of

the most momentous discoveries in history,

will make us realize the true significance

and import of Ruskin's dictum (which in

an overcrowded world seems so strange and

startling) : 'There is no wealth but life.' "

It is the conservation and enhancement

of this basis of all wealth that is the central

problem of eugenics. The ultimate eugenic

hypothesis should boldly affirm that the

real meaning of this reality must be made

clear to all human beings--clear enough

for the most elemental decisions. When

that philosophy becomes a motivating force

in guiding human destiny, then the sense

of guilt and fear and frustration which to-

day makes any realistic progress toward

peace and prosperity for all seem almost a

travesty, may indeed be banished from the

earth.

ROBERT C. COOK.

