Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The new outlook in eugenics
Frank Lorimer
To cite this article: Frank Lorimer (1964) The new outlook in eugenics, Eugenics Quarterly, 11:3, 125-126, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1964.9987583 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1964.9987583
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

THE NEW OUTLOOK IN EUGENICS

FRANK LORIMER
Statistical Center Manila, Philippines

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Problems and prospects in eugenics are changing with the emergence of new population patterns in technically advanced nations. A mass of empirical evidence on population trends in Europe and America during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries showed widespread and persistent negative associations between fertility and indices of intelligence. This immediately suggested a possible deterioration in man's genetic resources. A series of early English studies in this field was frankly entitled "Studies in National Deterioration." Most scholars insisted that this thesis was subject to serious reservations, both on demographic and on biopsychoIogical grounds. On the other hand, no thoughtful person who examined all the evidence on this subject could accept with equanimity even the possibility that unique human qualities, established in the genetic structure of our species through aeons of natural selection, were being eroded by current reproductive trends. Eugenists insisted on the need at least for serious attention to this possibility and the consideration of possible measures for counteracting any such trend. They were, in other words, constrained to sound an alarm; therefore, they necessarily encountered opposition both among those who preferred complacency and among those engaged in other crusades to which the eugenic thesis seemed inimical.
The situation of the older eugenists was further complicated by their diffi-

culty in defining any measures that could be expected to change the course of human evolution which would also be socially acceptable. The most significant contribution to the solution of this problem came from Frederick Osborn and his associates in the American Eugenics Society (see Osborn: Preface to Eugenics, rev. ed., 1951, pp. 236-242). Osborn noted that the usual differences in size of family were due largely to the uneven spread of birth control. He then focused attention on the kind of eugenics program that could be developed in a society in which all adults were free to choose the number of children they would bring into the world. He postulated as a "working hypothesis" that eugenic goals would be advanced by a general cultivation of the values of family life and interest in parenthood. "Then those individuals most susceptible to the stimulus of the environment will tend to have more children than their less responsible fellows." This simple basic idea was developed with considerable ingenuity and complemented by special attention to specific hereditary disabilities and diseases. Its distinctive virtue is that it takes account of the force of changing social conditions in the determination of reproductive trends and the plasticity of the cultural components in these trends. This insight is confirmed by recent trends in the distribution of births in Europe and in America today.
It is now clear that the negative as-

125

126

Lorimer

Eugen. Quart.

sociation between fertility and indices of intelligence, which in the past was sometimes viewed as inherent in the structure of modern society, was in large part a transitional phenomenon. As the control of fertility approaches universality, this pattern is replaced by more complex and variable patterns. For example, biomodal relations between intelligence ratings and reproductive trends were found in two intensive investigations of local populations in this country recently reported in the Eugenics Quarterly (J. Higgins, E. Reed, and S. Reed, 9: 84-90, 1962; G. J. Bajema, 10: 175187, 1963). These findings are, in general, consistent with recent census data and with the results of other large-scale inquiries. Furthermore, all these relations are highly dynamic. There is no inherent incompatibility between civilization and natural selection that must

be counterbalanced by specially designed and more or less arbitrary eugenic measures. On the contrary, interrelations between culture, reproductive trends, and genetic constitution are highly variable and, it seems, sensitive to the influence of subtle changes in economic and social conditions.
The challenge of eugenics today is less apocalyptic than it formerly seemed to be to some people. Humanity is not on the verge of dysgenic disaster. On the other hand, the possibilities of positive advances in influencing the future course of human evolution seem brighter than ever before. In view of these changes, eugenics is likely to be less isolated as a field of interest in the future, and more widely recognized as an important aspect of demographic, social and biological studies in general.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

