Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Eugenics (Encyclopædia Britannica)
Frederick Osborn
To cite this article: Frederick Osborn (1966) Eugenics (Encyclopædia Britannica) , Eugenics Quarterly, 13:2, 155-164, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1966.9987661 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1966.9987661
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:28

EUGENICS (ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA) *

FREDERICK OSBORN
American Eugenics Society, Inc. New York, New York

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

Eugenics, an applied biological science concerned with increasing, from one generation to another, the proportion o£ persons with better than average genetic endowment. It draws from genetics for an understanding of the processes of heredity; from psychology for analysis of the part played by differences in heredity and environment in the development of personality, intelligence, and character; from medicine and medical genetics for information on hereditary defects and susceptibility to disease; and from sociology, and more particularly demography, for the rates of births and deaths, the mating habits, and the social and physical factors that determine the relative increase or decline of persons with different characteristics. In its scientific aspect it is essentially the study of trends and causal factors in human evolution.
HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT
Early History
The idea of applying knowledge of heredity to the improvement of the human race goes back to earliest times. References to eugenic ideals appear in the Old Testament, and Plato's Republic idealizes a society in which there is constant selection for the improvement of the human stocks. The modern eugenic movement began with Sir Francis Galton (q.v.; 1822-1911), a cousin of Charles Darwin. Galton was among the first to see that the theory of evolution implied
* ©1966 by Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., William Benton, Publisher. Reprinted by permission of publisher.

the possibility that man, in part, might direct his own evolutionary future. His first important work, Hereditary Genius (1869), contained the results of his studies of the families of eminent men as evidence for his belief that "it would be quite practical to produce a highly gifted race of men by judicious marriages during several consecutive generations." He also recognized the effect of social influences on the distribution of births. Much of Galton's long life was spent gathering further evidence to test these beliefs. In 1883 he published Inquiries into Human Faculty, in which he coined the word eugenics. In Natural Inheritance (1889), Galton pioneered the development and application of advanced statistical methods to the study of man.
While Galton's thinking was much ahead of his time, he retained some of the prejudices of an English gentleman in regard to social class and race. In his studies of the families of eminent men Galton underestimated the effects of a favourable environment. But his faults in this respect were far less than those of many of his followers. As a scientist, Galton was pioneering in a new field. He developed and used the normal curve of distribution and the coefficient of correlation and was the first to recognize the value of twin studies for research in heredity. He repudiated the Lamarkian view, then widely held, that acquired characteristics were inherited. He also developed the law of filial regression.
While Galton attached religious significance to the eugenic movement, he

155

156

Brief Reports

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

did not think of it in revolutionary terms, but as ". . .the new duty which is supposed to be exercised concurrently with and not in opposition to, the old ones upon which the social fabric depends."
For all his wisdom and high ability, Galton was not able to gain any wide acceptance for eugenics, largely because much of the scientific and technical foundation was lacking. Psychology was not sufficiently advanced to help him in his studies of individual differences or in assessing the importance of the environment; there was no cultural anthropology to provide an outline of the growth of civilizations. Perhaps most important of all, birth control was so little recognized or accepted that Galton did not take it into account as a possible factor in controlling births.
From Galton to World War II
Galton had endowed a research fellowship in eugenics in 1904 and, in his will, provided funds for a chair of eugenics at University College, London University. The fellowship and later the chair at University College were both occupied by Karl Pearson (q-v.), a brilliant mathematician who helped to create the science of biometry (q.v.). Pearson was a controversial figure who believed that environment had little to do with the development of mental or emotional qualities. He felt that the high birth rate of the poor was a threat to civilization and that the "higher" races must supplant the "lower." His views gave countenance to those who believed in racial and class superiorities. Thus, Pearson shares the blame for the discredit later brought on eugenics in the United States and for making possible the dreadful misuse of the word eugenics in Hitler's propaganda. The English

Eugenics Society, founded by Galton in 1907 as the Eugenics Education Society, opposed Pearson's views, but was itself slow in throwing off the incubus of the pseudoscience of that time.
In the United States the American Eugenics Society had been founded in 1905 by Madison Grant, Henry H. Laughlin, Irving Fisher, Fairfield Osborn, and Henry Crampton. Their views were coloured by the times in which they lived. They believed that the white race was superior to other races, and that the "Nordic" white was superior to other whites. They lacked entirely the Mendelian concept of race; they thought of races as "pure" groups, quite separate from each other. They did not know, as is clearly known today, that all races are mixtures of many types, the distribution of genes among the races varying in proportions rather than in kind, as evidenced by the distribution of the various blood groups among all the races. They believed that the upper classes had superior hereditary qualities that justified their being the ruling class. The science of that day supported extreme views on feeblemindedness and "criminal types." Intelligence tests, introduced in the early 1900s by Alfred Binet, were thought, contrary to Binet's views, to be measures of innate, genetic intelligence. People whose IQ gave them a mental age of 12 or under could be classified as feebleminded or morons, even though the term would then include most of those brought up in deprived environments, such as the southern Appalachian highlands or the areas occupied by the descendants of slaves. Criminality was generally considered a concomitant of feeblemindedness. Studies by R. L. Dugdale, Lothrop Stoddard, and others on degenerate family stocks--the Jukes and Kallikaks of the eugenic literature of that

Vol. 13, No. 2

Brief Reports

157

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

day--were taken to prove that hundreds of persons in each of these families were feebleminded or criminal types because of the inheritance they received from a single ancestor five or six generations back. Claims were made that immigrants from southern and eastern Europe, besides being socially inferior, included a remarkable number of criminal and defective stocks. There was much in the intellectual atmosphere of the U.S. that fostered an extreme hereditarian racist view.
Even before 1905 eugenists had been active in the effort to restrict immigration. Their arguments, along with those of others who advocated restrictions for different reasons, culminated in 1924 with the passage of the National Origins Quota Law limiting quota immigrants to about 150,000 annually, with no more than 2% of each nationality according to the number of persons of their national origin in the U.S. as of 1890, and providing that beginning July 1, 1929, the quota of any country shall have the same ratio to 150,000 as the number of persons of that national origin living in the U.S. had to the total population of the U.S., as determined from the 1920 census of population. In later years it became clear that the material the eugenists had presented to congressional hearings had little scientific foundation.
Eugenists at this time laid great stress on the importance of sterilizing defective persons. By 1931 sterilization laws had been enacted by 27 states in the U.S., and by 1935 sterilization laws had been passed in Denmark, Switzerland, Germany, Norway, and Sweden. Most of these laws provided for the voluntary or compulsory sterilization of certain classes of people thought to be insane, idiotic, imbecilic, feebleminded, and epileptic; some applied equally to habitual criminals, moral perverts, or the feeble-

minded. In most cases the purpose was clearly eugenic, though some laws permitted sterilization for social rather than gentic reasons. In most states the laws were not put to much use, and the number of sterilizations under the law was seldom more than 100 per year. Exceptions were California, where sterilizations averaged over 350 cases per year and a total of 9,931 by 1935, and some of the southern states, with a fairly high rate relative to the size of their populations.
With the advance of science the background for these laws began to be questioned. In 1935 a committee of the American Neurological Association reported on an extensive investigation and evaluation of the "facts and theories which constitute the subject matter of the inheritance of the mental diseases, feeblemindedness, epilepsy and crime." The committee concluded that there was serious question whether "many of the eugenic proposals now current take into account the newer genetic data" and that "though the avowed purpose of such sterilization invariably starts out by being a eugenic one, if often ends by becoming a social one." They exposed many fallacies in the reasoning behind the sterilization laws and concluded that there was no sound basis for sterilization because of immorality or character defect. They recommended sterilization only with the consent of the patient or those responsible for him, and only in the case of certain specified diseases or defects, namely: (1) Huntington's chorea, hereditary optic atrophy, familial cases of Friedreich's ataxia, and a few other rare defects known to be hereditary; (2) feeblemindedness of familial type; (3) schizophrenia (dementia praecox); (4) with serious reservations, manic depressive psychosis;, and (5) epilepsy, 'mainly on the ground of its social aspects. Their

158

Brief Reports

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

recommendation for concerted, coordinated, and planned long-term research was not seriously followed until after 1945, when medical schools began serious work in medical genetics.
By 1935 American scientists had in general repudiated much of the work of such men as H. H. Laughlin and C. B. Davenport at the Cold Spring Harbor (N. Y.) Eugenics Record Office, and the leadership of the American Eugenics Society had passed from persons with strong racist leanings to those who sought a eugenics program that would be scientifically valid and socially acceptable.
In Europe the studies of criminal types were being discredited, and serious work in eugenics continued in the form of family studies by government institutes. Only in Germany did eugenics continue to serve racial and political purposes. There Hitler, exploiting the concepts of the master race and the superman as expounded by some German scholars, developed eugenics-based racism into an extraordinary political weapon.
During the late 1930s, with eugenics at its lowest ebb, demographic changes of great eugenic significance were taking place almost unnoticed. The inverse relation between fertility and education or income reached and passed its peak. Birth-control practices had begun to extend to the lower-income groups, and there were signs that differentials were leveling off at the top. If this change were taking place between economic groups, something of the same sort might take place between individuals of different types of ability within each group. These trends seemed to suggest possibilities for new and practical eugenic applications.
Eugenics After 1945
With the development of atomic weapons, the general public and medical men

alike became educated to the dangers of genetic mutations produced by radioactive fallout from nuclear explosions. X rays used in medicine came under new scrutiny, and the findings of studies on hereditary factors in diabetes and other diseases received new attention. Medicine and public health, professions previously little interested in heredity, recognized a new responsibility. By the 1960s the major medical schools in the United States had included geneticists on their research staffs, and a number had set up departments of medical genetics. Also, heredity clinics had been made available to advise couples on the chances of their having defective offspring. In the same period the experience of adoption agencies led to a more careful selection of foster homes appropriate to the genetic and familial background of the child adopted.
Still other factors arose to increase public interest in heredity. Of these the "baby boom" was perhaps the most important. Births, which had averaged around 2,000,000 per year in the U.S. before the war, rose to over 4,000,000 by the mid-1950s and remained at a high level through the following decade. A similar increase in births took place in Europe, but it was of shorter duration.
During the post-war period there were large increases in crime, juvenile delinquency, and illegitimacy. Questions arose as to the children of the next generation: what would be their home environment, what their heredity? Birth control, given worldwide publicity as a solution to the population problem, raised similar questions in the public mind; would its use be restricted to the people who could afford it and who presumably would provide a good environment for their children and possibly a good heredity, or should public agencies provide free birth-control facilities for

Vol. 13, No. 2

Brief Reports

159

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

people at the lowest income levels, who might not be able to provide their children a good environment, and possibly not a good heredity? Also during the post-war period considerable publicity was given to the practice of artificially inseminating women whose husbands were not able to give them children, leading to questions of the heredity of a child born by such insemination. Meantime, the scientific basis for eugenics was being strengthened by advances in psychology, in demography, and especially in human genetics. As a result of all these factors, public opinion, having swung from a considerable hereditarianism in the first quarter of the 20th century to an extreme environmentalism in the second, was beginning to take a more balanced view of the contributions made by both heredity and environment to qualities of character and intelligence.
The atmosphere by the 1960s was appropriate to a reconsideration of eugenic problems. L'Institut National d' Études Démographiques in France had for some time sponsored important work in the field of population. In England the Royal Commission on Population made its report in 1949, and the Population Investigation Committee at the London School of Economics was giving continuing attention to quantitative and qualitative aspects of population trends in its publication, Population Studies. In the United States a number of the larger universities had set up facilities for training and research in demography, and there had been several nationwide surveys on factors affecting fertility. Genetics, too, made advances, moving on from the gene to the genetic code in the nucleic acid of the cell nucleus and opening up a whole new field of the biochemistry of gene structure and gene behaviour. Advanced studies on the ge-

netics of defect were carried on in government institutes in Europe and in the National Institutes of Health in the U.S.
BASE LINES OF MODERN EUGENICS
Physical and Mental Defects ,
The first genetic differences between individuals to be studied by scientists were departures from the normal in the form of defective development, susceptibility to disease, and mental defects arising from constitutional causes. Scientists have found that genes that cause defects are not limited to afflicted families, but are spread widely through the population. The genetic consequences of artificial radiation, of lifesaving advances in medicine, and of new migration and marriage patterns are reflected in an accumulation of deleterious genes over and above the subtle equilibrium previously established by natural forces.
It is generally accepted that genes causing defects originate in mutations that occasionally take place in one or another of the many thousands of genes present in pairs in every human cell. Usually the mutated gene is recessive, that is, it does not have a harmful effect unless the other gene in the pair has the same characteristics. The chances of two such genes meeting as a pair depend on the number of such genes distributed throughout the intermarrying population. Thus under random mating, if a particular deleterious gene is carried by one person in a hundred, the chances of the mating of persons with such genes are 1 in 10,000. (In a large population, such as that of the United States, such a ratio results in a considerable number of defective persons.)
With an increase in the proportion of carriers of a particular defective gene, there is an even greater increase in the likelihood of a mating in which two

160

Brief Reports

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

such genes will be paired in the same fertilized cell. When this happens, there will be a defect. If the defect is lethal, the two deleterious genes will be taken out of circulation. If the defect is minor, but of a sort to make marriage or reproduction less likely, the genes are to that extent less likely to survive. Thus at some point nature establishes a balance in which, for every new deleterious gene brought into circulation, a similar gene is lost from circulation. Geneticists believe that most people carry at least a few deleterious genes; some estimate the average to be as high as 8%, and at least 2% of the babies born will carry all their lives some major or minor genetic defect.
Most scientists believe that the proportion of carriers of deleterious genes may now be increasing, though the results in the form of an increase in defect would not be apparent for a number of generations. Exposure to X rays and to fallout from atomic explosions is accelerating the mutation rate, while humanitarian medicine is carrying an increasing number of persons with some kind of defect through a period of successful childbearing. Diabetics, for instance, formerly died at an early age, and the genes for diabetes were lost with them. After an insulin treatment was found, these people led longer useful lives, but were not generally able to have children. Now, safe delivery of the children of diabetic mothers is commonplace. The deleterious genes remain in circulation, while new ones are constantly added by mutations. With good medical care, diabetics live normally and bear diabetic children of their own, but the accumulation of certain types of deleterious genes could conceivably reach a point that might seriously threaten man's future.
With strong control measures in effect, defects due to dominant genes could be

reduced to a minimum in a short time. But most defects are due to recessive genes, and these are hard to locate because carriers often do not show the defect. Methods being devised for identifying carriers would facilitate control, but defective genes will never be completely eliminated. The best that can be hoped for is that they might be reduced to those that are constantly arising from new mutations. The possibility of "correcting" nature's mistakes at their source, the deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) molecule, is a hope for the future. It is a guarded hope, however, for the control of the gene--the engineering of human development--is a terrible power, equivalent to the harnessing of the atom. How man uses it should stir concern among all thinking persons.
While present social and medical conditions favour the increase of many genes that cause physical defects and susceptibility to certain diseases, other genes that affect mental disease and mental defect are probably diminishing as a result of the low marriage rate and the institutionalization of the carriers. It is probable that efforts at control will be strengthened by increased use of sterilization in some areas, by increased use of more effective means of birth control, and by a more eugenic use of heredity counseling clinics. Each year an increasing number of defects are being defined, the type of transmission understood, and in many cases means found for spotting carriers.
Psychological Traits
With responsibility for work on mental and physical defects transferred to the professions of medicine and public health, eugenists are now giving major attention to the genetic factors that provide the base for the development of such multifactorial traits as intelligence, character, and personality. The genetic base

Vol. 13, No. 2

Brief Reports

161

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

for these psychological traits is provided by multiple genes in various combinations. They may be broken up and recombined with other genes from one generation to another, making them difficult to trace in family lines. It will take time to locate these genes and trace the processes involved in their transmission. Fortunately, the efficacy of selection does not depend on a full knowledge of the genetic mechanism. For the present and perhaps for generations to come, eugenists will be guided by familial incidence of intelligence and personality and by the survival of family stocks of different types.
Massive evidence from studies on identical and fraternal twins, nontwin siblings, and adopted children reared away from their natural parents indicates that differences in genetic factors play an important part in psychological differences between individuals. These were Galton's findings, and they have been confirmed by larger and more carefully controlled studies. Identical twins are extremely similar; even when reared apart from infancy, they resemble each other in physical as well as mental characteristics to a degree far greater than that shown by fraternal twins reared together.
Children tend to be like their parents in intelligence because of their common heredity, as well as because they usually share a common environment. The evidence on differences in personality is not so clear, largely because these traits are more difficult to measure, but all studies indicate that personality, like intelligence, is the product of the interaction between the environment and the genetic base. This is clearly shown in the extremes of personality, like schizophrenia, which are quite susceptible to measurement.

Environmental and Socioeconomic Factors

As work in the field of individual dif-

ferences has progressed, scientists have

come to feel that the old dichotomy be-

tween heredity and environment is no

longer useful; both are a part of the

processes that begin when the cell is

fertilized and starts its separate life; both

operate in all the processes of growth

and change and decay leading to the

death of the individual; and both con-

tribute to making each individual dif-

ferent from every other individual. Ge-

netic factors can be given value only in

relation to specific environments, since

some qualities that are socially valuable

in one environment may be harmful in

another.

;

There is no scientific basis for ranking any one race genetically superior to another. The geneticist finds that no races are "pure," as shown, for instance, by the finding that blood groups do not in general differ in kind among the races, but only in the proportion of each type. Racial groups differ in their average response to intelligence tests, but these tests invariably involve environmental factors that favour those culturally more fortunate. Even when differences in such factors as place of residence, income, or length of schooling can be controlled, the results may still be influenced by more factors affecting motivation and behaviour. The anthropologist finds no evidence that physical differences between the major races denote a higher stage of development in one race than in another.

In studies of socioeconomic, or other, groups, there is no evidence of genetic differences, except perhaps in the case of comparisons between certain of the professional classes and the rest of the population, in which there is some indication that the genetic factors for response to

162

Brief Reports

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

intelligence tests may be slightly superior. Differences between sodoeconomic classes in intelligence-test response are obviously strongly influenced by differences in environment. It is as yet impossible to measure precisely the relative genetic potentialities of any large population groups. Eugenists today are concerned with increasing the proportion of able individual and family stocks regardless of the race or social grouping to which they belong.
Until very recently, from 30-50% of all children died before maturity, and death was an important factor in the survival of particular stocks. The evidence from some areas where people are still living under primitive conditions seems to favour the belief that under conditions of life as it was everywhere prior to the mid-18th century, the general tendency was toward the survival of the more competent stocks. If so, this situation changed in the industrialized countries, when the death rate began an accelerated decline, dropping to 12 or less per thousand by 1940. In the mid20th century, about 95% of all children lived to age 30, and differential deaths had little effect on differential survival.
While this change was taking place, social class differences in births were widening with the introduction of birthcontrol measures, which reached first into the more educated and better-off classes. With survival from death no longer favouring the more educated and differential births greatly favouring the less educated, who made little effective use of birth control, the inverse relation between births and education or socioeconomic status widened rapidly.
In the United States this inverse relationship reached its peak with the postponement of births and marriages in the last years of the depression. For the period 1935-40 women with one to three

years of college education had a net reproduction rate 33% below that required for replacement of their numbers, and women with four years of high school had a rate 26% below replacement, while women at the elementary school level had a rate twice that of the college women and well above that required for replacement. The upsurge of births after World War II changed this trend. By 1960 among women 35 to 40 years old, who had practically completed their childbearing, high school women and women with one to three years of college had borne more children than the number needed for replacement. Women with less than eight years of elementary school education had had about the same number of children as those who had completed their childbearing during the depression.
The trend toward a reversal of differentials seems likely to continue. Extensive studies made about 1960 on national samples of the U.S. population indicate that the number of children actually desired by couples in the "blue collar" group is less than the number desired by couples in the "white collar" group. When both the husband and the wife were college graduates, only 7% of the last pregnancies were unwanted, while among the couples at grade school level 33% had not wanted their last pregnancy. Of the college couples 92% effectively used contraception, while only 69% of the grade school couples used contraception, and used it less effectively.
It is expected that contraception may soon be used as widely and as effectively at the lowest educational levels as at the highest. In such case, present trends suggest that educational and social class differentials in births may soon bear a direct relation to size of family. The public generally, and many scientists, have assumed that an inverse relation between

Vol. 13, No. 2

Brief Reports

163

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

size of family and education or socioeconomic class must represent an unfavourable, or dysgenic, trend, even though there is little evidence for genetic differences between classes. If the relation between size of family and educational level becomes direct, with the more educated groups having the greater proportion of children, the trend would be generally taken as favourable, or eugenic. But its greatest significance would be an increase in the proportion of children brought up in above-average home surroundings. The major opportunity for genetic improvement will not be found in selection by groups, but in selection of individuals within each group.
There is some limited evidence that at the present time in the United States the abler and the more intelligent members of any group tend to have the most children. In studies made as early as 1927 on graduates of Yale and Harvard, and again on Princeton graduates in 1939, the men were rated by a committee of classmates for degree of success some years after graduation. In each group the highest-rated married men averaged over two children apiece, while the lowestrated married men averaged less than one and one-half children. J. V. Higgins and S. C. and Elizabeth Reed reported in 1962 on the intelligence and family size of a group of 4,000 persons in Michigan with known IQ values. They found that, while there was a slight negative correlation between test intelligence and size of family, this was offset by the larger proportion married at the higher intelligence levels, leaving the IQ potential of the population near equilibrium. A 1963 Michigan study of native whites born in 1916-17 reported a positive, though small, correlation between IQ and fertility. Of the individuals in the IQ range 69-79, 30% left no offspring. Carl J. Bajema in a study made in Ann Arbor,

Mich., in 1964, relating individual education with fertility, showed, for women over 50 years of age, a significant negative correlation between years of schooling and fertility; but among the younger groups of women there was no relation between fertility and years of schooling, indicating a trend similar to that which took place between educational groups in the United States in the same period.
There is thus some evidence that in attempting to increase the comparative fertility of the more intelligent and successful individuals, eugenists are working with and not against present trends.
A number of changes taking place in industrial societies today are favourable to individual selection. There are more opportunities for finding work appropriate to one's genetic capacities. There is a wider choice of mates in our highly mobile society, which favours the production of novel types and offers greater possibilities if there is selection. The trend toward more education for all classes would help make birth control selective within each class of society. Furthermore, the continuing improvement of contraceptive methods can be expected to improve voluntary forms of selection at even the lowest levels of education. To further these favourable trends, the eugenist would urge better training for choice of mate and for marriage, a more general individual and community sense of responsibility for the kind of parents who have more than one or two children, and a continuing study of all the psychological, social, and economic pressures and rewards that would tend toward a voluntary and favourable selection of births within every occupational group.
THE RANGE OF EUGENICS PROPOSALS
There is no general agreement among eugenists as to criteria for selection. The

164

Brief Reports

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

English Eugenics Society has conducted studies designed to identify superior families in every class of society who might be given special incentives to have large families. In the U.S. the Nobel Prize winner H. J. Müller proposed that selection be from men and women of the highest intellectual and social attainments, using artificial insemination to swell the proportion of their children, a proposal that would obviously meet with considerable social, legal, and religious objections. Most American eugenists, however, believe that selection can properly be based on the comparative success or achievement of each individual within the particular group in which he is found. On such a basis of selection, the eugenic policy that would evolve is best described in a report of the American Eugenics Society made in 1961:
One course open to eugenics is to find, and to further, those institutional arrangements, those social, economic and psychological pressures, which would result in a tendency for individuals to have more or fewer children in proportion to their success or achievement in their particular environment. Eugenic policies of this sort would reach into each social, economic and occupational group, and improve the quality of each. The result would be, not a segregation into superior and inferior classes, but a genetic diversification in the process of adapting to the diverse elements of our society. One could then expect a

greater variety of talents, and hopefully, a constantly higher level in those qualities which have a common tendency toward success in all environments. . . . It can probably be assumed that couples with a better than average genetic inheritance will, more often than not, provide a better than average home environment, by whatever criteria quality is to be judged. If this is indeed the case, eugenic policies would work hand in hand with an improved environment to raise the level of human qualities. There is no conflict between those desiring to raise the level of our genetic inheritance and those desiring to raise the level of our social inheritance.
Modern eugenics seems little interested
in authoritarian controls. Rather it is
hoping to shape the social and economic
environment in such a way as to influ-
ence a eugenic distribution of births
throughout entire populations in a vol-
untary and largely unconscious process
of selection.
BIBLIOGRAPHY.--M. H. Haller, Eugenics (1963); C. P. Blacker, Eugenics: Galton and After (1952); F. H. Osborn, Preface to Eugenics, 2nd ed. (1951); J. Sutter, L'Eugénique (1950); American Neurological Association, Eugenical Sterilization: a Reorientation of the Problem, by Abraham Myerson et al. (1937); A. Anastasi, Differential Psychology, 3rd ed. (1958); C. F. Westoff et al, Family Growth in Metropolitan America (1961); C. F. Westoff, R. G. Potter, Jr., and P. G. Sagi, The Third Child (1963); R. Freedman, P. K. Whelpton, and A. A. Campbell, Family Planning, Sterility and Population Growth (1959); T. G. Dobzhansky, Mankind Evolving (1962); F. H. Osborn, "Over-population and Genetic Selection," in F. Osborn (ed.), Our Crowded Planet (1962);
G. Wolstenholme (ed.), Man and His Future (1963).

