Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Attitudes of parents of retarded children toward voluntary sterilization
Medora S. Bass
To cite this article: Medora S. Bass (1967) Attitudes of parents of retarded children toward voluntary sterilization, Eugenics Quarterly, 14:1, 45-53, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1967.9987699 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1967.9987699
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles Citing articles: 4 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:29

ATTITUDES OF PARENTS OF RETARDED CHILDREN TOWARD VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION

MEDORA S. BASS Ardmore, Pennsylvania

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

The purpose of this investigation was
to explore the attitudes of "normal"
parents of retarded children toward
voluntary sterilization and to examine
some of the factors related to these
attitudes. An attempt was made to mea-
sure the degree of favorableness or un-
favorableness, the intensity with which
the attitude was held, and the level of
information on which it was based.
The need to investigate the problems
associated with family limitation for the
mentally retarded was pointed out at
the White House Conference on Mental
Retardation in 1963. Dr. Lloyd M.
Dunn (1963), Director of Special Educa-
tion at George Peabody College, re-
marked that family planning for re-
tarded individuals must be faced openly
and frankly in order to reduce mental
retardation:
I am not asking you to consider family planning . . . primarily on eugenic grounds, though some genetic aspects probably exist. I would contend that other arguments are more compelling and cogent. First, this woman (retarded mother with seven children--all in institutions) and others like her may well be able to function adequately in society if they are not overburdened by parenthood. Secondly, such persons are not likely to be adequate parents, especially for children who are intellectually adequate. What responsibilities do we have to help people prevent or reduce the birth of children into such conditions? In my view, if we could persuade low IQ parents, and those with average intellect who have alredy given birth to two or more low IQ children, from having additional youngsters,

we would reduce by half the number of children destined to be classified as educable mentally retarded during their school years. . . . We who have a special concern for the prevention of mental retardation have even greater need to examine this delicate issue. For too long human reproduction has been a puritanical taboo. Unless answers are forthcoming in this area, other measures will avail us limited gains.
Almost 40 years ago an investigation was made of mental deficiency on practically the entire population of the state of Vermont. Of 82 unions of a retarded individual and a normal spouse, 26.4% of the children were retarded; when both parents were retarded, 44.1% of the children were retarded (Reed and Reed, 1965, p. 2).
The Brock Committee in England in
1934 recommended the legalization of
voluntary sterilization after a study of
3,733 mental defectives showed that
22.5% of their children were retarded
and another 22.5% had died (Brock,
1934).
The Danish program to prevent the
reproduction of the retarded indicates
after 25 years of genetic counseling and
voluntary sterilization that the incidence
of retardation is reduced approximately
50% a generation. Approximately one-
third of the mental defectives have been
sterilized. Kemp studied retarded women
who had had children and had been
sterilized subsequently. Of the 352 liv-
ing children, 31.8% had I.Q. less than
75, 36.1% were between 75 and 90. Of
those 113 above 90,16 were psychopathic

45

46 Bass Eugcn. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

and 50 had nervous disturbances; only five seemed to be without mental problems and with I.Q. above 100 (Reed and Reed, 1965, p. 77).
Benda, et al. (1963) studied retardates of the cultural-familial type in the Fernald School and found 48.8% had one or both parents retarded.
Reed and Reed (1965) made a longitudinal study of the frequencies of mental retardation in several categories of relatives of 289 mental defectives who were in the Faribault Minnesota State School in 1911. The 82,217 relatives of their grandparents were studied, begining in 1911, discontinued and reopened again in 1949. The study covered as many as seven generations. Between 1% and 2% were retarded and these produced 36.1% of the retardates in the next generation. Normal individuals with normal siblings produced only .5% of retardates. There was no evidence of any undesirable results of the sterilization among the 42 individuals who had been sterilized. Among the authors' conclusions were the following:
One of the important humanitarian implications of our demonstration of the importance of the transmission of mental retardation is that a better legal basis must be provided for the voluntary sterilization of the higher grade retardate in the community. . . .
Few people have emphasized that where the transmission of a trait is frequently from parent to offspring, sterilization will be effective and it is irrelevant whether the basis for the trait is genetic or environmental. . . .
When voluntary sterilization for the retarded becomes a part of the culture of the United States, we should expect a decrease of about 50 percent in the number of retarded persons, as a result of all methods combined to reduce retardation. (Reed and Reed, 1963, pp. 77-78)
A poll of physicians in 1963 showed that 79% approved of sterilization in

cases where mental deficiency was hereditary; 66% approved when there were too many children in relation to income. There was no specific question as to approval in cases where retarded adults were not likely to transmit the defect but were not capable of rearing children properly (New Medical Material, 1963, p. 19).
In spite of the recommendations of two committees appointed to study sterilizations over 30 years ago (Brock, 1934; Myerson, 1936), despite the continuing recommendation of experts over the intervening years (Halperin, 1946; Penrose, 1932; Whitney, 1958), and despite recent approval of physicians, there has been a steady decrease in the number of operations performed in institutions since 1946 (Russell, 1962). One factor in this decrease in operations may be the attitudes of parents of retarded children toward sterilization.
There are no statistics available for operations performed outside of institutions for the retarded. The incidence of sterilization may be greater than is generally believed now that 95% of the retarded are living in the community. More programs are presently directed toward creating opportunities for retarded young adults to live a more normal life and to meet others in workshops and in recreational activities where strong and lasting attachments are often formed.
The ability of the better adjusted retarded individuals to maintain a fairly stable and happy marriage, and the supportive and beneficial results of marriage have been discussed in a previous paper (Bass, 1964). This investigator also reviewed the literature on the adequacy of retarded persons as parents and the role of sterilization in the rehabilitation of the mentally deficient (Bass, 1963). There was a consensus

Vol. 14, No. 1

Voluntary Sterilization

47

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

among the few existing studies of sterilization that it was the most appropriate method of family limitation and should be made available on a voluntary basis for the protection of retarded individuals. The experience in Sweden has demonstrated that retarded individuals who are capable of living in the community are also capable of understanding the meaning of sterilization and can give a valid consent (Weintraub, 1951).
Social workers report that parents and the young retarded individuals themselves are asking for assistance in securing the operation. Many of the young couples who plan marriage seem to realize that the responsibilities of parenthood are beyond their abilities. Before counseling these families on the advisability of marriage, more information is needed on the attitudes of parents toward voluntary sterilization.
In summary, an investigation of the attitudes of parents toward sterilization is important for two reasons: to determine whether it is a factor in the decrease in the number of sterilizations performed despite the agreement among experts that it may be beneficial to the retarded; and because a greater understanding of these attitudes would enable counselors working with the retarded to give them more meaningful advice. There is no record of any similar investigation.
SUBJECTS
The original S's were tested in 1959 as part of an investigation of the effect of attitudes on judgment. In order to enlarge the sample, other groups of parents were recruited with the help of organizations for retarded children, as had been done previously. Because sterilization was considered controversial, it was most difficult to obtain the coopera-

tion of parents' associations. The sample is biased by the fact that those groups which were most opposed to sterilization were unwilling to participate. However, the number of Catholics approximates the proportion in the general population and the S's represent a wide geographical area. The 132 S's were "normal" parents of retarded children who volunteered through their local parent association. There were so few fathers in the groups that sex was not used as a variable.
METHOD
The method was adapted from the construction of the Thurstorie type attitude scale (Thurstone et al., 1929). S's were given 88 cards, each one bearing a different statement concerning voluntary sterilization. They ranged from "most unfavorable" to "most favorable." (Further details are available upon request to the author.) S's were also given 11 envelopes marked from 1 to 11. E gave a brief definition of sterilization and defined "voluntary" as meaning with the consent of the individual or, in the case of a retarded child, as with the consent of the parent. S's were asked to judge the statements as to whether they were favorable or unfavorable to voluntary sterilization. S's were then asked to sort the statements into 11 piles, from 1, most unfavorable, to II, most favorable. E stressed that they were not to judge the statement as true or untrue, nor whether they agreed or disagreed with it, but whether they thought the statement supported sterilization or was opposed to it. After S's had finished sorting, they were asked to pick out the pile of statements which most closely represented their own attitude toward sterilization. S's were next asked to place these cards in the cor-

48 Bass Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

responding envelope and mark it with an "X." As a further check, they were asked to put a rubber band around that envelope. S's were next asked to put all the other cards in the envelope corresponding to the pile. E then distributed a card marked with a thermometer (the scale ranged from 0 to 100) and asked S's to mark how strongly they felt about sterilization, irrespective of approval or disapproval. They were next given sheets with 20 true and false statements to check. S's were asked to give their religion and were again told that their names would not be needed as the test was anonymous. After S's had checked the statements, they were asked to write briefly on the back of the sheet why they felt the way they did about sterilization. Some of the groups indicating the most interest in the investigation were asked whether they felt their children would be capable of a reasonably happy marriage; others were asked at what IQ level they believed a retarded individual could understand enough about the operation to give a valid consent.
RESULTS
Of the 132 S's, 26 or 19.5% were Catholic, 10 or 7.6% were Jewish, 74 or 56% were Protestant, and 22 or 16.6% failed to give their religion or indicated that they had none. The proportion of Catholics approximated the national figure often estimated as 20%. The Jews were over-represented and the non affiliated under-represented. The percentages of the total sample and of the four religious groups giving their attitudes as being in the upper five categories of approval, the lower five, and those giving the neutral category are given in Table 1. The highest rate of approval was for the nonaffiliated group;

TABLE 1
PERCENTAGE OF RELIGIOUS GROUPS APPROVING, NEUTRAL, AND DISAPPROVING

Groups

Ap- Neu- DisN prove tral approve

Protestant Catholic Jewish
Religion not given
Total sample

74 26 10
22 132

71.62 16 60
72.72 59.85

2.6 19 10
9.9 7.57

26.6 65.4 30
18.1 33.3

the lowest for the Catholics. Almost twice as many in the total sample approved of sterilization as disapproved-- 59.8% to 33.3%. The Jewish rate of approval most closely resembled that of the total sample.
The attitude scores based on the 11point scale, the intensity scores based on a 99-point scale, and the information scores based on 20 true and false statements are given in Table 2. As might be expected, the Protestants score higher on the attitude scale than do the Catholics, and the nonaffiliated score the highest. There is little difference in intensity scores. The information scores show the Protestants were the highest and the Catholics the lowest. This difference was not significant but was in the expected direction. Thirty-four percent of the sample did not know whether sterilization was the same as castration.
Comparison of scores by geographical

TABLE 2
MEAN SCORES OF FOUR RELIGIOUS CROUPS ON APPROVAL, INTENSITY, INFORMATION

Groups

Attitude 1-11

Inten-
sity 0-100

Infor-
mation 0-20

Protestant Catholic Jewish
Religion not given
Total

8.43 67.88 11.20 3.88 67.46 10.00 7.30 58.20 11.00
8.59 66.95 10.64 7.48 66.91 10.86

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

Vol. 14, No. 1

Voluntary Sterilization

49

TABLE 3
MEAN SCORES ON ATTITUDE, INTENSITY AND INFORMATION BY GEOGRAPHICAL AREA

(Catho- AttiArea lic tude

Pennsylvania
New Jersey,
Cumberland County New Jersey
Gloucester County Delaware St. Louis Dallas Alameda San Leandro

13
10
20 17 11 17 35 26

7.47
7.00
5.05 8.75 18.72 10 7.65 5.74

Inten- Inforsity mation
73.67 9.27

63.80 9.60

52.75
62.25 64.72 78.28
69.65 69.47

11.40
12.67 11.17 9.44
11.65 11.26

area is given in Table 3. There does not appear to be any consistent trend. Of the highest scores one is in the east and the other in the midwest. Of the two lowest scores, one is in the east and the other in the west. The only Catholics who approved of sterilization were from the midwest or the west. It is interesting to note that the Delaware sample had the highest information score and one of the lowest intensity scores while Dallas had the highest intensity scores and one of the lowest information scores.
Twenty-two £ tests were performed. The significant comparisons are listed in Table 4. For purposes of comparison, low intensity was denned as from 1-33, moderate intensity 34-66, and high intensity 67-99. "Unfavorable" included S's who designated piles 1, 2, 3, 4; "neu-

TABLE 5
CORRELATIONS OF THREE VARIABLES: ATTITUDE, INTENSITY AND INFORMATION

N Variables

Sig.

132 Attitude&

Intensity

+.3939

.01

Attitude&

Information +.2670

.01

Intensity&

Information +.0705

tral" was represented by piles 5, 6, 7; and "favorable," piles 8, 9, 10 and 11. The lower mean is listed first on each variable. S's with unfavorable attitudes have lower intensity scores and lower information scores.
The correlations for the variables are given in Table 5.
On examining the data and noting the positive correlation between information and approval, it seemed that the information as to whether sterilization was the same as castration might be an important factor. The scores of 85 S's who indicated that sterilization was not the same as castration and 19 S's who indicated it was the same were compared. The results appear in Table 6. The mean attitude score of S's who had correct information and responded that sterilization "was not the same as castration was 8.26 as compared to the attitude mean of the entire sample of 7.48.
The higher approval scores for those who knew sterilization was not castration compared to those scores of S's who

TABLE 4
SIGNIFICANT t TESTS ON VARIABLES OF ATTITUDE, INTENSITY, INFORMATION AND RELIGION

Attitude

Sig. Intensity

Sig. Information

Sig.

Cath.-Prot. Cath.-Jew. Cath.-No Religion Low. Int.-Mod. Int. Mod. Int.-High. Int. Low. Int.-High Int.

.01 Unfav.-Fav .02 Neut.-Fav. .01
.01
.01
.05

.01 Unfav.-Fav. .01 Mod. Int.-
High Int.

.01 .05

50 Bass Eugen. Quart

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

TABLE 6
MEAN ATTITUDE AND INTENSITY SCORES FOR S'S ANSWERING TRUE AND FALSE TO STATEMENT: "STERILIZATION IS THE SAME AS CASTRATION," AND S'S GUESSING

Groups

Atti- IntenN tude t Sig. sity

False (not

castration)

85 8.26

71

Guessing

26 5.80

True (Castration) 19 5.89

64 53

Not castration vs. castration
Not castration vs.

2.58 .02

guessing

2.97 .01

thought it was the same were significant at almost the .01 level of significance. The t score was 2.58, the significant t being 2.63.
It is interesting to note that those S's who gave any certain answer, indicating they were sure it was castration or not castration, had a higher approval score of 7.82 as compared to 5.80 for the 26 S's who indicated that they were guessing.
The written remarks often indicated a higher rate of approval than was evidenced in the scale. One Protestant mother, who rated her attitude as neutral, wrote:
I approve of voluntary sterilization but I do not approve of involuntary sterilization. I feel that a person who has as many children as they want should be allowed to be sterilized if it is his wish. I myself would not care to be sterilized because I had all the children I wanted because if some unfortunate tragedy should occur and cause the death of all my children, I would surely want more. Of course, if it was a type of operation that could be reversed, that would be different.
A Protestant who judged his attitude as "two" on the 11-point scale wrote, "I am patially [sic] for sterilization in cases where the individual is incompetent in

raising and supporting a family or understanding what it is all about." Another rated herself as neutral and wrote, "Sterilization could be a good thing in controlling births among unfit (such as retarded) and over-population in general. The land can't continue to support the people." A Catholic father rated his attitude as "three" but wrote, "If the individual understands the operation, I would say yes."
In general, all those parents who were opposed to sterilization gave religious or moral reasons, such as, "I believe sterilization is against the laws of God and man," or "Sterilization is immoral."
ADDITIONAL REMARKS
One group of parents was asked whether they believed their child would be capable of marriage. Most of the parents replied "no." The answers would have been more meaningful had it been possible to secure the parents' rating of their child's I.Q. This was attempted with one group of parents, most of whom replied that they had never been told their child's I.Q. However, it would have been possible to have determined whether the older children were educable or trainable.
The question was asked of another group as to what I.Q. level would be required to understand enough about the operation to be able to give a valid consent. This was an attempt to determine whether parents believed the decision to be sterilized could be voluntary. The estimates of I.Q. level were much higher than those found by Sabagh and Edgerton (1962) in their study of mental defectives. Dr. Edgerton told the investigator that some retarded persons with I.Q.'s in the 50's could understand the nature of the operation. This supports the experience with the Swedish sterili-

Vol. 14, No. 1

Voluntary Sterilization

51

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

zation program. Further research is needed on this point in order to determine which factors contribute most to the understanding of the operation. Emotional and personality factors may well be as important as intelligence. If it could be shown that a large majority of the educable retarded could understand the operation and were willing to have it when it was recommended, it might be possible to eliminate all compulsory sterilization statutes for this group. Since there is a general consensus that persons with I.Q.'s of less than 50 are incompetent as parents, compulsory sterilization might be limited to the trainable retarded who are able to live in the community.
DISCUSSION
One of the interesting findings for research in general was the ability of a small minority in an organization who considered the subject controversial to prevent others from participating. Perhaps the finding that almost twice as many persons approved of sterilization as disapproved will help overcome this resistance to serve as subjects in scientific investigations.
The positive correlation of information and approval may well be reciprocal. Those who are interested in the subject and approve are more apt to inform themselves and to remember what they have learned. However, this correlation may mean that educating persons concerning sterilization may increase approval. Therefore, in states where there are laws requiring the sterilization of persons of child-bearing age before they can be released from an institution for the mentally deficient, educational campaigns might facilitate the acceptance of sterilization by the parents and the patients. In India it

has been found that persons who had been sterilized, or a doctor with prestige in the community, were best able to convince potential patients of the benefits of the operation.
The findings that S's who stated they had no particular religion--or who failed to give their religion--had the highest rate of approval would suggest that religious teaching is one of the deterrents of sterilization. It would have been interesting to have had a question asking whether there were conditions under which their church would approve of sterilization. The National Council of Churches of Christ in America, the Methodists, the Episcopalians, and other Protestant churches have expressed approval of sterilization where there are valid indications. Some parents sincerely believed their child needed the operation and at the same time believed it was considered immoral by their church. If these facts were better known, the conflicts and anxieties of many parents faced with the decision of having their child sterilized might be relieved.
Another finding of general interest is the lack of information on sterilization. Over a third of the S's were not aware that sterilization was not castrative. Some, who answered that sterilization was not the same, were of the opinion that the operation would produce masculinizing effects. Despite the fact that they thought it was castration many were in favor of the operation. The rate of approval of those Protestants who thought it was the same as castration was a little less than 50%, and exactly 59% for those of no religion. This last figure compares with 87% approval for the total "no religion" S's who knew it was not castration. Thus, the belief that sterilization is the same as castration is an important factor in the rejection of sterilization. Some parents! indicated

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

52
their attitude as unfavorable; then after answering the questions wrote favorable attitudes. It would be interesting to test a group who knew little of sterilization, give them a few facts and then retest their attitudes.
This investigation was limited in that it was originally designed to measure the effect of favorable and unfavorable attitudes toward voluntary sterilization on the judgment of statements. More specific attitudes toward sterilization could have been obtained had less time been allotted to sorting. It would be helpful to know what the S's attitudes would have been toward sterilization of their own child rather than to voluntary sterilization in general. The fact that some of the parents had very young children suggests that their attitude was not based on a thoughtful consideration of an existing situation. It would be interesting to determine whether parents of adolescent children would differ significantly from parents of young children and whether parents of children with higher I.Q.'s differed from parents of children with lower I.Q.'s. The few parents who believed their child to be capable of sustaining a reasonably stable marriage expressed approval of sterilization.
It might be meaningful to group parents according to the I.Q.'s of their children and investigate which parents believed their children to be capable of marriage and of properly rearing children; which parents thought their children capable of marriage but not of properly rearing children, and which parents thought their children would be capable of understanding the meaning of the operation and of giving an affirmative consent. Some additional remarks indicated the child's ability to understand the operation did not concern the parents as much as the question of

Eugcn. Quart.
the operations being performed with the parents' consent rather than under a compulsory law.
This investigation points to the need of establishing criteria to predict and evalute the ability of the retarded individual to provide proper care for children. This ability might be studied in a pre-kindergarten class where the young retarded people could help with the care of the children under careful supervision.
SUMMARY
The attitudes toward voluntary sterilization of 132 parents of retarded children were investigated. Approval-disapproval, intensity, and information were measured. The attitudes were related to each other, to religion, and to geographic area. The results showed that 60% of the total sample approved of sterilization, 72% of the Protestants, 60% of the Jews, 16% of the Catholics, and 73% of those who did not indicate their religion. Approval was positively related to intensity and information. Over a third erroneously believed that sterilization and castration were synonymous and had lower approval scores. The lack of information on this subject was offered as evidence of the need for counseling these parents. The need for further research was stressed.
CONCLUSIONS
1. Respect for a religious minority appears to be impeding research in the field of voluntary sterilization.
2. Almost twice as many parents approved as disapproved: therefore, it would not seem that parental attitudes are responsible for the decrease in sterilization operations.
3. Approval of sterilization is significantly related to expressed religious

Vol. 14, No. 1

Voluntary Sterilization

53

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

preference. It islowest forCatholics and highest for those without religious affiliation.
4. Approval of voluntary sterilization is positively correlated with information level.
5. The intensity with which these attitudes were held is positively related to degree of approval but is not significantly related tolevel of information.
6. Many parents are unaware that sterilization is legal in almost all states and that it has had the approval ofmany Protestant denominations in cases of valid need.
7. Many parents believe sterilization to be thesame as castration or to have similar effects. These parents have a significantly lower approval score than those accurately distinguish the two operations.
8. In spite of believing that it is illegal and immoral, many parents persist in believing that their child should have the protection of sterilization.
9. Counseling of parents of a retarded child on the scientific, legal, andmoral aspects of sterilization would relieve the anxieties they experience when faced with some of the problems of anadolescent child.
10. There is need for further research to analyze attitudes andrelate them to such variables as the age and I.Q. of the child, andto the ability of thechild to

sustain a stable marriage, to rear chil-
dren and tocomprehend the meaning of
the operation.
REFERENCES
BASS, M. S., 1963. Marriage, parenthood, and the prevention of pregnancy for the mentally deficient. Am. J. Mental Deficiency, 55: 318333.
BASS, M. S., 1964. Marriage for the mentally deficient. Mental Retardation, Aug.: 198202, 2, 4.
BENDA, C. E., N. D. SQUIRES, M. J. OGONIK, and
R. WISE, 1963. Personality factors in mild mental retardation. Am. 'J. Mental Deficiency, 68: 24-40. BROCK, L. F., 1934. Report of the Departmental Committee on Sterilization. Joint Committee on Voluntary Sterilization, London. DUNN, L. M., 1963. White House Conference on Mental Retardation Proceedings, U. S. Govt. Printing Office, pp. 104-105. HALPERIN, S. L., 1946. Human heredity and mental deficiency. Am. J. Mental Deficiency, 51: 153-163. KEMP, T., 1957. Genetic-hygienic experiences in Denmark in recent years. Eugen. Rev.: 11-18. MYERSON, A., 1936. Eugenical Sterilization. Macmillan Co., New York. New Medical Materia, 1962, Hearst Corp., New York, pp. 4,11,19. PENROSE, L. S., 1950. Propagation of the unfit. Lancet, 259: 425-427.
REED, E. W., and S. C. REED, 1965. Mental Re-
tardation: A Family Study. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia. RUSSELL, K.P., 1962. Indications in sterilization. New Medical Materia, Hearst Corp., New York, pp. 4, 11,17.
SABAGH, G., and R. B. EDGERTON, 1962. Sterilized
mental defectives look at eugenic sterilization. Eugen. Quart., 9: 213-222.
THURSTONE, L. I., and E. T . CHAVE, 1929. The
Measurement of Attitude. Univ. of Chicago. WEINTRAUB, P., 1951. Sterilization in Sweden:
Its laws and practices. Am. J. Mental Deficiency, 56: 364-374. WHITNEY, E. A., 1958. Present-day problems in mental retardation. Am. J. Mental Deficiency, 63: 387-398.

