Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Meetings and recent publications
Helen Hammons
To cite this article: Helen Hammons (1961) Meetings and recent publications, Eugenics Quarterly, 8:3, 171-175, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1961.9987480 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1961.9987480
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

MEETINGS AND RECENT PUBLICATIONS

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

ORGANIZATION REPORTS: Association for the Aid of Crippled Children (19591960) ; Josiah Macy, Jr. Foundation (1956-1960) ; The Population Council (I960); The Population Reference Bureau (1960).
These organization reports point up advances in certain aspects of eugenics as described by groups which are not specifically "eugenic." The reports well illustrate the diffuse nature of the field of eugenics and the fact, long recognized by the American Eugenics Society, that many groups and many disciplines are concerned de facto if not de juro with eugenics in the broad sense.
The section on medical genetics in the report of the Josiah Macy, Jr. Foundation would not have been published in the report of a health foundation ten years ago, for it is only in the last decade or so that medical genetics has come to the fore. The viewpoint, that inherited factors are no longer regarded as fixed and unchangeable, is described in this report as hopeful and important in its implications. Some of the recent biochemical research which demonstrates that inherited manifestations are modifiable is mentioned. Medical genetics is described as a discipline "which will have a profound impact upon the whole field of reproduction and 'academic obstetrics'." These conclusions underline the increasing significance of the eugenic position. The recognition that genetic factors may be modified by suitable environmental change gives hope for prevention and treatment of some of the genetically induced defects, according to the report. Many diseases are in reality a combina-

tion of environmental and constitutional factors. Too much emphasis has been placed in the past on the "trigger" mechanism of the environment and too little on the factors of inheritance and susceptibility, the report concludes.
The increasing importance of genetics is demonstrated further by grants reported both by the Association for the Aid of Crippled Children and The Population Council. Fetal physiology and genetics was the first major area chosen for a grant program when the Association for the Aid of Crippled Children began to relinquish its service program. Like the report of the Josiah Macy, Jr. Foundation it emphasizes the complex interplay between environmental and genetic factors which causes congenital defects. A grant has been made for studies by David Yi-Yung Hsia at Northwestern University Medical School in the metabolism of bilirubin and the pathogenesis of kemicterus, and for a study of heredity and environment in identical twins by Frank Falkner at the University of Louisville Medical School.
Likewise grants in the field of genetics have been made by a demographically oriented foundation, The Population Council. A fellowship grant to Shirin Hakim of the Indian Cancer Research Center in Bombay makes possible a year's study at the Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City of hereditary blood factors in humans. A grant was also made for a summer course in medical genetics at Bar Harbor, Maine, and a summer fellowship was awarded at McGill University in Canada.
The report of The Population Refer-

171

172 Recent Publications

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

ence Bureau explores several demographic areas as discussed in its Bulletin of concern to eugenics: Fertility Cult, U.S.A.; U.S.A. Population in 2050; A Protestant Views the Population Crisis; Documents Behind the Population Controversy.
POPULATION, RESOURCES, AND THE FU-
TURE (edited by William J. Gibbons, . S.J.) : Paulist Press, New York, 1961,
63 pp., 25c (paper).
A collection of four articles for the general reader on population, originally written for the Catholic periodicals, Information and The Catholic World. The foreword by William J. Gibbons, Jesuit demographer, describes the articles as exploring demographic and economic problems, especially in underdeveloped areas, in the light of Christian faith. So far as population problems are concerned, he points out that certain methods of resolving them are immoral for Catholics and will remain so.
The lead article by Father Gibbons on Population and Moral Responsibility deals with the rapid growth of population. Artificial means of limiting family size are not acceptable to the Catholic Church, but other methods of limitation are acceptable. But the essential productivity of soil, forest, and sea is much greater than many realize, Father Gibbons suggests. Perhaps several times the number of people can be fed and at advancing levels of living.
Another article on Meeting Expanding Food Needs by Joseph B. Gremillion warns that we produce about 10 per cent less food per capita than in 1900. Methods of increasing food production are discussed, especially through the FAO. The author is not naïve as he states that proving that enough food will be available a decade or a century from now will not

do away with the fact of the pressure of population on resources.
The final word has not yet been said on whether technological advances in nutrition will make it possible to combat the results of population growth. A very large number of non-Catholic scientists believe that population limitation is the answer. But revolutionary technological advances in the future could lend weight to the Catholic position that food production can play a big part in solving population problems.
T H E COMPLETE BOOK OF BIRTH CON-
TROL: Alan F. Guttmacher (with Winfield Best and Frederick Jaffe). Ballantine Books, New York, 1961, 152 pp., 50jf (paper).
An original paperback, not a reprint, described by the publisher as "the first book with all the facts." Any book written by Dr. Guttmacher would command attention. Distinguished gynecologist, persistent advocate of freedom of reproduction in families through such organizations as the American Eugenics Society, the Planned Parenthood Federation of America, and the Margaret Sänger Research Bureau which he now heads, he is also a skilled writer.
Very complete information is included on methods of birth control as well as a discussion of infertility. The chapter on what birth control is and isn't is to the point. The chapter on the churches and family planning deals with Protestant, Jewish, and Catholic positions and is particularly instructive. Dr. Guttmacher clears up many misconceptions when he states that all religious denominations approve of some method of birth control, disagreement being as to method. Thus a permissible method of birth control is available for all, whatever their religious belief.

Recent Publications

173

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

FAMILY PLANNING IN JAPAN: H. Kubo, M. Muramatsu, M. Kinura, and N. · Shinozaki. Asia Family Planning Association, Tokyo, 1961,43 pp. (paper).
"In the past five children have grown into three adults." In these words this booklet put out by the Asia Family Planning Association describes the "death control" over population in Asia in the past. It discusses the present status of Japan's family-planning movement and proposes that every possible effort be made to promote responsible planning.
This booklet summarizes the rapid growth of population in Japan with the decrease of death control and the measures taken which have cut the birth rate so heavily. Family planning has grown most rapidly in the salaried groups and in the cities, but the gap between cities and farming and fishing villages is rapidly narrowing. Socioeconomic reasons for practice of birth control are found to be most important in Japan. However, many do not distinguish clearly between conception control and artificial termination of pregnancy. The booklet regards induced abortion as not "completely harmless" both for medical and humanitarian reasons. The guidance of family planning, both by the Government and by voluntary agencies, is described. Family-planning practices in four districts which have been commended by the Minister of Health are detailed.
"The path we are going to tread on may be strewn with hardship, but the future will be bright." This conclusion illustrates the spirit with which Japan is tackling her population problem. Anyone interested in family planning from the Japanese point of view--and we too often get only the American--will find the booklet worth reading.

CELL HEREDITY: Ruth Sager and Francis J. Ryan. John Wiley &Sons, Inc., New York, 1961, 411 pp., $7.50.
This book describes a wholly new synthesis of developments in genetics, according to the publisher, instead of following the conventional and chronological pattern of most textbooks. Heredity is discussed here at the molecular level. Genetics is presented in key illustrative statements, beginning not with Mendel's pea crosses in 1866 but with the first direct evidence of the chemical composition of the hereditary material in 1943. It is written for scholars in other disciplines as well as for college students because of the authors' awareness that genetics is rapidly becoming of interest to scientists in other fields.
Unsolved problems are not ignored. The authors point out that if replicating cell constituents other than nucleic acids are found, they clearly must be considered in relation to the origin of life. Even if it is shown that only nucleic acids replicate in organisms today, it must still be investigated whether some simpler replicating system might have existed under the conditions of early life, the authors conclude. We may even consider the possibility that the primitive replicating units were cytoplasmic structures and protein-forming sites and that today some genetic information still resides in these materials.
MINDS THAT CAME BACK: Walter C. Alvarez: J. P. Lippincott Company, Philadelphia and New York, 1961, 384 pp., $5.95.
Abstracts of stories collected by Dr. Alvarez of some seventy-five persons who, after having been neurotic, psychotic, or actually insane, wrote up their experiences. Written in narrative form, the

174 Recent Publications

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

book is for general readers and clinicians
rather than the research-minded. The
"recoveries" of some schizophrenics and
manic-depressives form a puzzle for re-
search. These psychoses are among the
most stubborn illnesses with which medi-
cine deals, and our increasing biochem-
ical knowledge has not yet led to their
conquest. William James' classic study,
"Varieties of Religious Experience," is
referred to a number of times, and it
makes us wonder just how much science
has learned since its publication at the
turn of the century about valid religious
experience versus psychotic episodes. All
but a very few psychotic persons fail to
be better for their great religious experi-
ence, the book indicates.
OTHER PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED
Radioactive Substances: Marie Curie. Philosophical Library, Inc., New York, 1961,94 pp., $2.75. A translation from the French of Marie Curie's own story of her discovery of radium and her investigation of radioactive substances as presented to the Faculty of Sciences in Paris.
The Impact of the New Physics: Frank Hinman. Philosophical Library, Inc., New York, 1961, 174 pp., $4.50. Popularly written interpretation by a biologist of the fundamentals of the new physics, particularly as related to human behavior and values.
Abstracts--The Third World Congressof Psychiatry: Montreal, 1961.J. J. Dunbar & Co., Canada, 893pp. (2 vols., paper). Includes biochemical studies in schizophrenia, cytogenetic advances in psychiatry, and reports on twin studies. Each abstract printed in two languages.
Microbial Cell Walls: Milton R. J. Salton. John Wiley &Sons, Inc., New York, 1961, 94 pp., $3.50. The 1960 CIBA lectures in microbial biology, showing the application of new techniques of chemistry, biophysics, and biochemistry to the rapidly advancing study of microbial cell walls.
Integrated Principles of Zoology: Cleveland P. Hickman (2d ed.). The C. V. Mosby

Co., St. Louis, 1961, 972pp., $7.75. Second edition of a textbook on zoology with a chapter on human heredity that includes medical genetics, radiation, and eugenics. Illustrated.
Biology--Its Principles and Implications: Garrett Hardin. W. H. Freeman and Company, San Francisco, 1961, 682 pp., $8.00. Another textbook in the biology series of which Curt Stern's "Principles of Human Genetics" is one. Part IV deals with heredity, with only brief mention of eugenics. Color illustrations. A teacher's manual is supplied.
Heredity--An Introduction to Genetics: A. M. Winchester. Barnes &Noble, Inc., New York, 1961, 269 pp., $1.75 (paper). Part of the College Outline Series. A simplified and readable introduction to genetics for the student and general reader seeking information on heredity. Material keyed to standard textbooks.
Ressentiment: Max Scheler (edited by Lewis A. Coser and translated by William H. Holdheim). The Free Press of Glencoe, New York, 1961,201 pp., $4.00. Translation from the German of a philosophical study described by the editor as a major contribution to social psychology and sociology.
Family Planning News: Quarterly Bulletin of Family Planning Federation of Japan, Inc. (edited by M. Muramatsu). Tokyo, No. 1, June 1961. A revival of the bulletin published both in English and Japanese by the Family Planning Federation of Japan until 1957. Now to be published only in English, it will carry news about family planning in Japan.
MEETINGS
The first major scientific conference sponsored by the International Atomic Energy Agency in the Western Hemisphere will be held in Mexico City November 21--December 1.
The conference, to be devoted to scientific papers on the use of radioisotopes in animal biology and the medical sciences, will also be sponsored jointly by the Food and Agriculture Organization and the World Health Organization.
Twelve other scientific conferences, sym-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

Recent Publications

175

posia and seminars scheduled by IAEA in 1961 were also announced. These will be held in Argentina, Yugoslavia, Austria, Belgium and two sites yet to be determined.
Among the topics to be discussed at the Mexico City meeting on the uses of radioisotopes are these: advances in technique and methodology; general physiology; biochemistry and metabolism; mineral metabolism; skeletal physiology; physiology of reproduction; physiology and biochemistry of the ruminant animal; physiology and biochemistry of lactation; glandular function, endocrinology; poultry; physiology, nutrition and pathology; microbiology and immunology; hematology; dentistry; and clinical research.
The meetings are expected to point up the wide variety of biological and medical investigations that can now be carried out with radioactive isotopes. They will also stress that the results of such research can be expected to lead to considerable practical benefits,including the development of more effective methods of medical treatment and more efficient farm animal production.
The Mexico City conference will follow- up one held in Copenhagen last September on the use of radioisotopes in industry and the physical sciences, cosponsored by IAEA and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
Second Conference on Experimental Clinical Cancer Chemotherapy will meet November 2 and 3 at the Statler-Hilton Hotel, Washington, D. C, sponsored by the

National Cancer Institute's Cancer Chemotherapy National Service Center.
FELLOWSHIPS
THE POPULATION COUNCIL, 230 Park Ave., New York 17, N.Y., offers 25 fellowships for training in the field of population at predoctoral and postdoctoral levels during the 1962-63 academic year, for study in universities in the United States and other countries. Particular consideration is given to students from economically underdeveloped areas. Awards are given for one year. Fellowships are for training in demography, although related study in sociology, economics, biostatistics and other relevant fields may form part of a total program. Applications should be received before February 1, 1962. Requests for application forms should be addressed to the Fellowship Secretary.
THE ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN MEDICAL COLLEGES, 2530 Ridge Ave., Evanston, 111., offers fellowship grants under its Foreign Fellowships for Medical Students program for 1962. The purpose of the program is to provide selected medical students the opportunity to benefit from unusual clinical experiences abroad, and to study and practice preventive medicine in remote areas of the world where health services are often carried on in primitive surroundings. Closing date for filing applications is December 31, 1961.
HELEN HAMMONS

STATEMENT REQUIRED BY THE ACT OF AUGUST 24, 1912, AS AMENDED BY THE ACTS OF MARCH 3, 1933, JULY 2, 1946 AND JUNE 11, 1960 (74 Stat. 208) SHOWING THE OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT, AND CIRCULATION OF EUGENICS
QUARTERLY, published Quarterly at Baltimore, Maryland, for October 1, 1961.
1. The names and addresses of the publisher, editor, managing editor, and business managers are: Publisher, American Eugenics Society, Inc., 230 Park Ave., New York 17, N. Y. Acting Editor, Richard H. Osborne, 230 Park Ave., New York 17, N. Y. Managing Editor, None. Business Manager, Juliet Friedman, 230 Park Ave., New York 17, N. Y.
2. The owner is: (if owned by a corporation, its name and address must be stated and also immediately thereunder the names and addresses of stockholders owning or holding 1 percent or more of total amount of stock. If not owned by a corporation, the names and addresses of the individual owners must be given. If owned by a partnership or other unincorporated firm, its name and address, as well as that of each individual member, must be given.) American Eugenics Society, Inc., 230 Park Ave., New York 17, N. Y.
3. The known bondholders, mortgagees, and other

security holders owning or holding 1 percent or more of total amount of bonds, mortgages, or other securities are: None.
4. Paragraphs 2 and S include, in cases where the stockholder or security holder appears upon the books of the company as trustee or in any other fiduciary relation, the name of the person or corporation for whom such trustee is acting; also the statements in the two paragraphs show the affiant's full knowledge and belief as to the circumstances and conditions under which stockholders and security holders who do not appear upon the books of the company as trustees, hold stock and securities in a capacity other than that of a bona fide owner.
5. The average number of copies of each issue of this publication sold or distributed, through the mails or otherwise, to paid subscribers during the 12 months preceding the date shown above was: (This information is required by the act of June 11, 1960 to be included in all statements regardless of frequency of issue.) 1,030
JULIET FRIEDMAN, Business Manager. Sworn to and subscribed before me this 6th day of October, 1961.
SADIE SCHERR
(My commission expires March 30, 1962.)

