Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Use of intelligence tests in population studies
Philip E. Vernon
To cite this article: Philip E. Vernon (1954) Use of intelligence tests in population studies, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:4, 221-224, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987198 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987198
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

USE OF INTELLIGENCE TESTS IN POPULATION STUDIES*

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

PHILIP E. VERNON
Professor of Educational Psychology Institute of Education University of London

I N THE PAST 50 years there have been in-
numerable investigations of the intelligence test scores of population samples such as different national or racial groups, also of subgroups within populations, such as children of different social class, or from families of different size. Though the investigators' aim has usually been to compare the innate intellectual capacity of these groups, they have become increasingly aware that their test results might be affected by cultural or environmental differences. As early as 1923, Gordon showed that valid comparisons of normal English children and of canal-boat or gipsy children on the Binet test were distorted by the latter's lack of schooling. Much controversy was aroused by the Army Alpha and Beta testing of American recruits in 1917-18 when it was pointed out that the differences between the scores of men of different national descent might be due, not to genetic factors, but to the differing socio-economic and educational advantages of these populations. More recently the Iowa investigators, Bernardine Schmidt and other American psychologists, have published evidence of very large effects of early upbringing and of education on the I.Q.: while Eells, Havighurst and Davis have claimed that most group test items give marked advantage to children of superior social class. Though these views, together with the Communist condemnation of intelligence tests, may be exagerated, even the more cautious students of the heredity-environment problem, such as Burks and Burt, admit that environment may account for roughly a quarter of the

variance in scores on reliable tests like the Stanford-Binet. Unfortunately, genetic population differences are usually quite small, hence even a minor cultural difference may seriously distort, or obliterate, a genetic one. Consider, for example, the Scottish mental surveys of 11-year-old children in 1932 and 1947. A decline of about
1 point of I.Q., attributable to the greater fertility of the least intelligent families, might have been expected over this period. Actually a rise occurred in mean group test score, and this was plausibly interpreted as due largely to the greater familiarity of most Scottish children with such tests on the second occasion. Representative samples were also tested with Stanford-Binet and/or Terman-Merrill, that is, individual tests which were probably not influenced by this increase in test sophistication. Yet even here no decline was found; the two population means were almost identical. Numerous possible explanations have been discussed, but the simplest one is that a 25 per cent impregnation of test results with environmental components might be sufficient to invalidate the predicted decline. The conditions of upbringing and the amount of stimulation of intellectual development that the average child gets in large families might account for the observed difference of about 10 I.Q. points between only and 2-child families on the one hand, and children of families of 8 and over on the other. My colleague, Mr. C. Bibby has calculated the effects on the mean I.Q. of the next generation and has shown that the anticipated drop of about

2 points might be halved, or wiped out alto-

*Presented at World Population Rome, September 1954.

Conference,

gether, or even that a slight increase might

221

222 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

occur, depending on the strength of this adverse environmental effect. I do not suppose myself that this is the whole explanation, but I do hold that our present tests cannot provide direct proof of the existence of genetic family differences.
Now this figure of 25 per cent still implies that the major differences between children of high and low I.Q. are innately determined within any one cultural group, such as the British or the American whites. But it is almost certainly an underestimate when cultural differences are greater, as between British whites and African Negroes, or even between British adults who have received advanced secondary or tertiary education and those who left school at 14 or 15. I have recently published strong evidence of greater environmental effects on intelligence tests among young adults and have shown how largely their performance depends on the quality and quantity of education and the stimulating or depressing nature of their intellectual environment during adolescence. In other words, genetic influences are predominant only so long as the childhood environment and primary schooling are relatively homogeneous or standardized for all members of the populations being tested. This means that most national or racial comparisons are entirely illegitimate, since there are such wide cultural differences in the childhood intellectual stimulation and the schooling that different countries provide. Anthropologists such as Nadel and psychologists with experience of race differences like Biesheuvel have further pointed out the effects of motivation and attitude to taking tests. Such factors can generally be ignored in testing children in our Western civilization, since they are all brought up at school to give oral or written answers to questions set by adults, and to work quickly at intellectual tasks on their own. But the cultural pattern is often very different in, say, Africa or aboriginal Australia. The attitude to working at speed may be absent, and the accepted method of tackling problems may

be group discussion rather than individual effort. Thus their performance on European or American-made tests is likely to be hopelessly unrepresentative.
Far too many psychologists have sup posed that by substituting pictorial, nonverbal or performance tests for verbal group or Binet tests, they could eliminate environmental influences. It is surely obvious that children of superior social class gain far more experience with blocks, pictures and the like than those of lower class, and that there are still greater cultural differences in reactions to such materials between primitive and civilized communities. Nadel and Biesheuvel supply many illustrations of this. In my own research with recruits there was no indication that the g or general intelligence factor measured by a non-verbal test of the Matrices type was any less dependent on education than that measured by verbal tests, nor any less correlated with family size. When such nonverbal or performance tests do show smaller differences than verbal ones between groups with different upbringing, it is likely that they are either lessstatistically reliable tests, or else that they measure a mixture of other abilities -- spatial, manual, etc. -- besides general intelligence.
The views that I have stated so far may sound very disheartening, but actually they imply, not that all population studies of intelligence are invalid, only that very much greater precautions are needed than have usually been taken in the past. Moreover they do not affect the use of tests for predictive or other purposes within any one cultural group. Take for example the selection of bright children for advanced secondary education in Britain, or of "intelligent" recruits for specialist jobs in the Armed Forces. It does not matter if their test scores are somewhat dependent on social background and education, since on the whole the better-class and better-educated individuals also do better at secondary school work or in complex occupations than do the less privileged. Thus even

223

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

if it were possible to devise tests which really measured innate potentiality, they would actually give poorer predictions than those we employ at present.
But our conclusions do mean that the search for "culture-free" tests is illusory. Even if we attempted to discover some intellectual skill new to both cultures that we wished to compare--say the learning of Esperanto or calculus--the relative levels that they reached would still depend as much on the similarity of this skill to their own cultural habits as on their basic intelligence. However some progress might be made in the direction of culturally intermediate tests. According to Shimberg, if mental tests are constructed from words and situations familiar to rural children, such children do better on them than do urban ones, although normally inferior on more conventional, presumably urbanloaded, tests. No one has tried applying to British or Americans a test designed by Australian aboriginees to suit the ways in which aboriginees normally express their intellectual capabilities. But it would probably be wiser to take pairs of groups whose divergences were less extreme, and then to attempt to arrive at a test which would be fair to both. Careful anthropological investigation would be needed first to discover the forms taken by the most complex intellectual functions in each group. We must realize that intelligence itself is a different entity in each group. True, it is limited by some universal innate potentiality (which we have no means of measuring), but the way it realizes or manifests itself depends on the group's values and ethos. Thus although Western civilization values highly symbolic reasoning, and this activity provides scope for our most highly saturated g tests, another group's intellect might be most fully extended in a very different field of activity --say religious rituals, hunting or farming. It would be necessary then to devise tests within this field, and by means of factor analysis to arrive at the structure or make-

up of the Highest Common Factor or g in the group's abilities. But if the cultures were not too dissimilar, tests might be found which had good g loadings in both. I would suggest tentatively that one of the most fruitful types of test for spanning a variety of cultural groups might be oral directions. It is a pretty universal activity to give verbal instructions and orders for the carrying out of complex tasks, and such directions can be expressed in very simple language which need be little affected by differences in schooling. Anthropologists might indicate to us a number of other widespread values and activities which would better repay exploration than the popular pictorial, diagrammatic, maze, or formboard tests.
I doubt whether this approach could readily be extended to comparisons of subgroups within a culture, such as members of different-sized families. Eells's and others' attempts to arrive at tests unaffected by social class do not seem very promising, and they ignore the well-established existence of genetic class differences. Conceivably a social psychologist or anthropologist might construct new intelligence tests which reflected Western lower-class values. This might be easier if he himself was, say, of Oriental origin, so that his own outlook would be less impregnated with our upperclass values. But the alternative, and more fruitful, approach is to control or match cultural differences between sub-groups (much as Chronological Age has normally been matched in all investigations of children's intelligence). Numerous research studies such as Burks's and Leahy's, Van Alstyne's and Hebb's, indicate the factors providing intellectual stimulation in early childhood which need to be held constant--time given by adults to conversation and play with children, vocabulary level and rationality of adults, provision of play materials and books, goodness of schooling, and motivation towards doing tests. By applying a carefully constructed rating scale of these relevant environmental influences,

224 Eugenics Quarterly

it should be possible to match, say, families of 2 and 4, or of 5 and 9, children; though we could hardly hope to equate families of 1 and 12 children. Adjacent social-class groups might be similarly compared. In actual practice, analysis of covariance would obviate the need for precise matching. The trouble is, however, that this procedure would probably over-compensate; for only the genetically more intelligent large families might provide as good environmental stimulation as small fami-

lies. We seem then to be forced back to the technique of researches such as Lawrence's, where orphaned children who were brought up in the same institutional environment did show differences in I.Q. which correlated to a small extent with the social class of their fathers. I would conclude, then, that the most rigorous investigations of fertility problems should be based on orphans or foster children whose true parents' families differed in size.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

MARRIAGE AND FAMILY LIVING takes pleasure in announcing the November, 1954 issue
The International Issue on the Family
Under the editorship of William Fielding Ogburn, distinguished authors describe and analyze family life in 15 countries or areas of the world: The Arab world, the Balkans, Brazil, China, England, France, India, Israel, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Russia, Scandinavia, Siam, and the United States.
The authors are residents of the diflterent countries or have lived or studied there. Single copies JÖ.OO; Bulk orders of 10 or more #1.50 each. Reserve your copy of this pioneering comparative study of the family by writing:
The National Council on Family Relations 5757 South Drexel Avenue Chicago 37, m .

