Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The structure of heredity counseling services
Lee R. Dice
To cite this article: Lee R. Dice (1958) The structure of heredity counseling services, Eugenics Quarterly, 5:1, 38-40, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1958.9987346 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1958.9987346
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:24

38 Eugenics Quarterly

píete efficiency but with sufficient efficiency so that if the method can be applied to human semen it seems possible that artificial control of sex determination is not too far around the corner. What kind of advice are we going to give when we are faced with problems in this area?
And last summer there was an even more startling announcement from biologists in France, who reported that, by inoculating into the eggs of young ducklings of one genetic strains of ducks an extract of desoxyribose nucleic acid from a different strain they were able to bring about a transformation of the genetic type. This has not been confirmed yet. Whether actual transformation of genes or of the effects of genes can be brought about in this way is not clear, but with recent developments and methods of artificially synthesizing the hereditary material of bacteria it seems certain that within a few years we will have a much better knowledge than we do now of the chemical structure of the hereditary material. And if a transduction is a phenomenon that youcan find in higher animals as well as in bacteria, it seems possible that we might eventually be

substituting desirable for undesirable genes in the germ cells of certain genotypes.
These are problems that I'm sure the members of the panel are not likely to want to discuss this afternoon. I just suggest that heredity counseling is, in the next few decades, going to steer into stormy waters. If we can give some thinking to these problems in advance and clear up questions of our own ethics in relation to such things, we may be better prepared when the time comes.
The questions which have been posed to our panel this afternoon relate to the problems of heredity counseling as the problem now exists, and I feel sure that within this area we will still have quite enough to dispute about this afternoon. We should all have a sufficiently lively time.
The first speaker is Professor Lee R. Dice, who, more than any other, I think, was instrumental in the establishment of the work in human genetics that has developed to such a splendid extent at the University of Michigan. Professor Dice is going to discuss the structure of heredity counseling services.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

THE STRUCTURE OF HEREDITY COUNSELING SERVICES

LEE R. DICE Department of Zoology University of Michigan

HEN IT IS DESIRED TO ORGANIZE AN HE- family pedigrees and to ascertain, so far REDITY COUNSELING SERVICE the first ques- as may be possible, the mode of heredity tion asked is: "What facilities are needed of the trait or traits in question in each to organize such a service?" This is not an particular kindred under consideration. easy question to answer because local situ- Many of the questions asked of a counations vary greatly. As a partial answer I seling service pertain to medical traits. submit the conclusions I have reached Diagnoses of the affected members of each from my own experience in organizing an kindred must be obtained or verified. The heredity clinic at the University of Michi- presumed normal members must usually gan. be examined also in order to be certain
Personnel is the most important factor that no affected individual is mistakenly in any effective counseling service, so let classed as unaffected. These diagnoses and us first consider the staff. At least one staff examinations require the services of onemember of the service must, of course, be or more physicians, who often must be asthoroughly versed in human genetics. This sisted by clinical laboratories of various, geneticist must be competent to analyze kinds.

39

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

The minimum professional staff of an heredity counseling service is, consequently, one human geneticist and one physician. Neither of these persons need necessarily work full time in providing counseling service, but they must be able to work together as a functioning team. The most favorable situation is where the heredity counselor is at the same time both a human geneticist and a doctor of medicine. Unfortunately, very few persons have this combined training. Usually, therefore, the geneticist must be a different person from the physician.
Not every geneticist with special training in human heredity nor every physician will make a successful genetic counselor. A broad sympathy with human frailties is needed as well as knowledge of the wide distribution of human defects. The counselor must be able to give due weight to all the hereditary features of each kindred which comes to him for advice. He must be able tactfully to call attention to the average and to the superior heredity which the family carries as well as the particular defect which has brought the family to his attention.
In addition to the professional staff of geneticist and physician, an heredity clinic needs a secretary to copy and file records, answer correspondence, make appointments, and otherwise keep the work running smoothly. A laboratory assistant to draw pedigrees, make photographs, type bloods, and do other related types of laboratory work can be of great help. For certain kinds of study there may also be needed a field worker who can visit relatives in their homes and make appointments for certain of them to come to the clinic for examination or for the physician to examine them in their homes, if this is possible.
An heredity counseling service need not always be organized as a special administrative unit. Counsel in heredity is being given by a number of human geneticists who are not associated with any organized counseling service. Cooperation with one

or more physicians is nearly always required. A disadavantage of such an arrangement is that, lacking a formal organization, the service will probably be discontinued when either the geneticist or the cooperating physician is unable to continue. A handicap is that the geneticist may find difficulty in securing access to all the confidential medical information he may need to complete his pedigree analyses. Furthermore, such cooperative undertakings must usually be on a part-time basis for the staff members and one or more of them may find difficulty giving the work the attention it needs. For these reasons, I strongly recommend that every heredity counseling service be organized on a permanent basis with adequate staff to provide the needed service.
The most favorable location for an heredity counseling service is in association with a well-equipped hospital. The Heredity Clinic of the University of Michigan operates as a unit of the University Hospital and has the same position as any other of the hospital clinics. This favorable administrative location gives the staff of the clinic access to the hospital records, use of the clinical facilities of the hospital laboratories, and freedom to ask advice from any of the members of the hospital professional staff. Conversely, the hospital staff may easily refer their patients to the Heredity Clinic for advice about heredity.
Financial support for any heredity counseling service is difficult to secure. Few persons would be willing or able to pay the considerable expense required to make the necessary examinations and diagnoses of their relatives before dependable advice about their heredity could be given. Those families most in need of genetic advice often are the very ones least able to pay for it. Furthermore, many of those individuals who greatly need counsel about their heredity are so little interested in the subject that they would refuse to pay any fee at all.
The Heredity Clinic of the University

40 Eugenics Quarterly

of Michigan is s u p p o r t e d through the Medical School as a part of the training of medical students and to provide material for research in human genetics. Heredity counseling services elsewhere are supported in various other ways.
This problem of financial support for h e r e d i t y counseling needs much careful consideration and experiment. Probably the problem will be solved differently by different communities.
Human heredity actually is a phase of public health. The heredity of the population should be of at least as much concern to each commonwealth as are infec-

tious diseases. I look forward to the time when heredity counseling will be available in every large center of population. Such a development, however, is not likely to be achieved in the near future. For one thing, it would be impossible to staff more than a few such services with the geneticists now available who have had training in genetic counseling.
Interest in genetic counseling, however is rapidly spreading. Knowledge of the mode of heredity of human defects also is expanding. It is only a question of time, in my opinion, before heredity counseling service will be demanded by communities all over the nation.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

DISCUSSION

CHAIRMAN GLASS: TO keep our discussion always we will have in the field of human ge-

focused on the entire presentation of the panel, netics a sufficient number of individuals who

I think it will be better for us to reserve the main discussion until after the presentation of topics. But we can take time, as each speaker concludes, to ask any questions for specific clarification.

have had an experimental basis for their understanding of the intricacies of human genetics.
This is an interesting topic that Dr. Neel has been asked to discuss this afternoon. It's already been raised this morning: "The Meaning

The second speaker on the panel is theman of Empiric Risk Figures for Disease or Defect."

directly responsible for the development of the I know that other members of the panel have

Department of Human Genetics at the Uni- been working on this same problem and are

versity of Michigan, Dr. James V. Neel.

anxious to hear what Dr. Neel is going to say.

My ownmost intimate period of acquaintance

with Jim Neel was when he was struggling with DR. JAMES V. NEEL: For the benefit of you

something that had gotten into hisDrosophila who do not know the background, I cannot

stock that was making genes mutate at a fan- resist taking this opportunity to point out the

tastic rate. Whether it was a gene that was rare authority which the previous speaker

doing this, or, as we might now suspect, some brought to his presentation. Dr. Dice wasre-

kind of a virus that had gotten in there and sponsible for getting the first human heredity

become attached to the chromosome, no one clinic in this country under way in 1941.

can say. But, from very interesting work on Scarcely a month passes now but that wewho

Drosophila, Dr. Neel decided that he wanted to go into the field of human genetics. He had the courage to relinquish an established program in the genetics of Drosophila and enter medical school as a student to prepare himself for an ambivalent kind of career in human genetics.

are carrying on with the Clinic he founded get an inquiry from some place as to how you organize such an undertaking. These inquiries, as well as this very symposium, must, I'm sure, be a tremendous source of satisfaction to Dr. Dice as he looks back 16 or 17 years.
All I have been asked to do this afternoon

I think it's rather interesting that among is to define empiric risk figures. Other speakers

those who are on this panel I believe the will deal with the problem of how we use these

majority started out as workers on some more figures. My function is all the easier, because

lowly organism than Homo sapiens. And per- Dr. Warkany, in effect, gave my talk for me

haps that is a good thing--not necessarily an this morning, but I will go over again some of

essential thing--but I hope, personally, that the things that he said earlier.

