Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Editorial comment
Editorial comment
To cite this article: Editorial comment (1955) Editorial comment, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:2, 65-67, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987226 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987226
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

Vol. 2, No. 2, June, 1955 Eugenics Quarterly

EDITORIAL COMMENT

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Report on Annual Meeting
The 1955 meeting of the Society was held on April 22nd during the sessions of the Groves Conference on the Family, at the University of Pennsylvania. The meeting was marked by papers which covered a broad eugenic range, and they were subjected to competent scientific discussion.
The morning session was opened by Dr. Barton Childs of the Harriet Lane Clinic at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore. In an authoritative paper on hereditary factors in disease, Dr. Childs clearly showed the increasing interest of doctors in genetics. But all of his emphasis was put on the cure of hereditary diseases, and none on their prevention. If, as seems probable, the paper was representative of present-day medical thinking, it would appear that the medical profession has reached at least the first stage in accepting eugenics. They recognize the importance of heredity in a very great number of diseases, but they are not ready as yet to take any responsibility for reducing the incidence of the genes which are known to cause the diseases.
Dr. Stanley Gartler of the Institute for the Study of Human Variation at Columbia was a discussant. He pointed out that due to increasing advances in medical research new therapy is constantly being created for the hereditary diseases. We must accept at the same time as a result an increase in the incidence of these diseases. Since many of such diseases are chronic, heavy financial burdens are imposed on families and society. Psychological problems also arise for normal members of the family, and therapy is required not only for affected individuals but for relatives fearful of inheriting disease.

Dr. Gordon Allen of the Research Branch of the National Institute of Mental Health suggested broadening the concept of heredity and family health to include normal variations as well as medical variations. Family health is dependent not only on physical health but also upon the intelligence and emotional qualities of the parents, and with respect to these traits normal heredity is probably the marriage counselor's strongest ally.
The afternoon session was under the able chairmanship of Dr. Franz Kallmann. Dr. C. Nash Herndon gave a paper on Heredity Counseling, and Frederick Osborn spoke on the need for social and economic conditions under which the more responsible parents would have the larger proportion on children. These two papers gave rise to an active discussion.
Dr. Emily Mudd asked whether Mr. Osborn's proposals would not tend to increase the birth rate, and was that desirable. The reply was that in general the birth rate of couples at the educational level of high school or better was below replacement, while that of couples who had not gone through high school was substantially above the rate required for replacement. Our efforts at educational advance would be much more cumulative in their nature if this condition could be reversed. We don't know whether such a change would make for genetic improvement, but it could certainly do no harm. What was contemplated was an increase of some births and a decrease of others, without either increasing or decreasing births as a whole.
Mrs. Mudd then asked how the more responsible or better parents would be defined or picked out. The answer to this was that no one would try to define or pick out

65

66 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

the couples most desirable as parents. The them. He questioned Osborn's use of the

idea is that it should be possible to develop material from the Indianapolis study, feel-

social conditions under which couples who ing that the number of couples involved

wanted children enough to assume the sac- was too small, and that the birth rate of

rifices involved would have more children all of the groups practicing family planning

than couples who were less willing to un- was substantially below replacement. Using

dertake such responsibilities. Some basis a number of charts, he illustrated the need

for this eugenic hypothesis is found in the for more studies, to learn more about the

way births are distributed among people social conditions which affect size of fam-

all of whom have accepted and practice ily, and about the extent to which the ca-

family planning. On a purely voluntary pacities of parents are related to their ge-

basis, perhaps almost unconsciously, par- netic potential. But he felt that eugenics

ents who practice family planning effec- was moving in the right direction and that

tively apparently tend to have children in this type of discusion was valuable in point-

proportion to their ability to give them ing to the next things to be done.

proper care; those who are highly regarded General Charles A. Lindbergh who was

by their neighbors having more children to take part in the afternoon discussion,

than those who are not so well thought of. was unable to attend because of a sudden

More and better studies are needed before call to the West Coast.

we can be at all certain that such a ten- The meeting was held jointly with the

dency is the rule. But the trend is hopeful Marriage Council of Philadelphia and the

and gives us a lead for finding other condi- Groves Conference on Marriage and the

tions in addition to family planning which Family. There were about 150 people pres-

will result in more of our children being ent at the afternoon session. The members

born in homes which will best develop their of the Society were the guests of the Mar-

capacities. Whether the results would also riage Council of Philadelphia at lunch and

improve genetic qualities from one genera- had the privilege of hearing Dr. Mudd talk

tion to another is still a matter of opinion; on the family-oriented society of Japan.

though it is hard to believe that people who

make the best parents are on the average of

inferior genetic stock.

Minutes of Annual Business Meeting

The Annual Business Meeting of the

Continuing the discussion, Robert Cook American Eugenics Society was held at

put forward a second eugenic hypothesis, Houston Hall, University of Pennsylvania,

namely, that when people have fully ab- Philadelphia, at 3:30 P.M. on April 22, 1955,

sorbed the eugenic point of view and when immediately following the joint program of

they have a better knowledge and more the Society and the Groves Conference on

widespread understanding of heredity, Marriage and the Family. The President,

there will be a natural tendency for those C. Nash Herndon, M.D., presided. The fi-

with the better heredity to have the larger nancial report for 1954 was presented. The

families. Heredity counseling as described following directors were elected through

by Dr. Herndon would be an important 1957: Ernest Burgess, Watson Davis, Lee R.

educational part of such a process. It must Dice, Mrs. Shepard Krech, Gardner Mur-

be remembered that even a slight tendency phy, Frank Notestein, Warren Thompson.

along these lines would be enough. Natural Plans for the 1956 Anual Meeting of the

selection has always been a hit-or-miss af- Society were discussed. The Society's pol-

fair. icy of meeting with larger groups such as

Professor Frank Lorimer cautioned the Groves Conference was approved. It against accepting either hypothesis until was suggested that the Eugenics Society exwe have more factual evidence to support plore the possibility of meeting with the

61

American Society of Human Genetics in 1956.
It was announced that the Eugenics Society has accepted an invitation to be a sponsor of the Ninth International Congress of Genetics to be held in Montreal, Canada in 1958. The Society voted to act as a sponsor of the First International Congress on Human Genetics to be held in Copenhagen in August 1956. A motion was passed to form a committee to contact Dr. Tage Kemp, organteer of the Conference, with Dr. C. Nash Herndon as representative of the Society.

A three-year grant of $12,000 from the Population Council, Inc. was announced.
Dr. Frank Lorimer, following up on his letter to the Editor in March 1955 EUGENICS QUARTERLY, suggested that research be carried out on larger aspects of eugenics such as (1) What are the kinds of things we need to know? (2) What influences people to have babies? (3) What new creative approaches can be developed?
The meeting was adjourned at 4:15 P.M. Respectfully submitted,
FREDERICK OSBORN
Secretary

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

