Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Differential mortality in israel by socioeconomic status
H. V. Muhsam
To cite this article: H. V. Muhsam (1965) Differential mortality in israel by socioeconomic status, Eugenics Quarterly, 12:4, 227-232, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1965.9987633 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1965.9987633
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:28

DIFFERENTIAL MORTALITY IN ISRAEL BY SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS

H. V. MUHSAM
Hebrew University Jerusalem, Israel

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

It is a worldwide experience, corroborated through the last hundred years whenever and wherever investigated, that socioeconomic status and mortality are negatively correlated: higher classes consistently enjoy low mortality, while lower classes suffer relatively high mortality. It might, however, be questioned whether this differential is characteristic only of the period of demographic transition from high to low mortality and reflects merely the temporal sequence of classes in achieving the decline in mortality. It seems indeed obvious that the higher socioeconomic strata are the first to be able to take advantage of food, shelter, curative services, etc., to protect themselves from the hazards of life and, thus, to gain a lead in the decline of mortality. But with the general rise in levels of living, or through the provisions of the "welfare state," adequate protection and medical services become gradually available to all social classes: does the classical socioeconomic differential in mortality [persist] under such conditions?
DIFFERENTIAL MORTALITY IN ISRAEL
A reversal of the traditional pattern of differential mortality appears in Israel in the official statistics of deaths for the years 1961-1962, for the first time (Central Bur. Stat., 1963). It is expressed clearly in the mortality of the five main socioeconomic strata (two of which are sometimes split into two substrata each)

which are, in general, recognized in
Israel. These strata are the following:
I. Persons born in Europe and America, who immigrated before 1948
II. Persons born in Israel III. Persons born in Europe and
America a. Who immigrated in 1948-1954 b. Who immigrated since 1955 IV. Persons born in Asia and Africa who immigrated before 1948 V. Persons born in Asia and Africa a. Who immigrated in 1948-1954 b. Who immigrated since 1955.
On the main socioeconomic indicators for which information is readily available, the five classes rank practically in the above order (Table 1.)
It is true that there are certain reversals, in the rank order, partly ascribable to differences in age structure and similar disturbing factors. But in certain criteria, such as education among persons 65 and over, who weigh heavy in mortality, and the two very sensitive indicators of housing conditions, the differentiation between main strata is uniform and outstanding.
With respect to mortality, the rank order is completely mixed. According to the expectation of life at age 15, the seven strata rank as shown in Table 2. Expectations of life at age 15 years are used in this comparison, since almost all persons of lower age, and, in any event, infants of less than one year of age, are born in Israel; consequently, no data for mortality at lower ages exist for any stratum except II.

227

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

228

Mühsam

Eugen. Quart.

TABLE 1
SELECTED CHARACTERISTICS OF SOCIAL STRATA IN ISRAEL.»

I II Ilia Hit

Median number of years of school
attendance Persons aged 15 > Persons aged 65 >
Meeaanrnienrcsome of salary and wage 1956-57 1959-60
Per cent white collar in labor force, 1962
Per cent overcrowded (2 or more persons per room)
Per cent owning electric refrigerator

10 10.5
9.9 8.5

336.7 468.2
51.2
17.8 87.0

315.6 456.0
37.0
30.0 71.1

8.3 8.8 7.2 7.8
v
270.8 334.5
33.7
A
34.8 27.7 66.2 53.7

· Data from Census 1961,unless year of special survey specified.

IV
6.2
42
291.7 348.3 30.6 58.0 40.0

Va Vb
5.9 6.0 2.2 1.2
262.1 289.7
17.0 67.6 64.0 18.6 10.5

The most striking fact is the low rank of stratum I (long-established immigrants from Europe); the mortality record of this stratum is very near the bottom of the ranking, which is occupied by the lowest socioeconomic stratum ÇVb-- most recent immigrants from Asia or Africa). On the other hand, stratum IV (long-established immigrants from Asia or Africa), which ranks fairly low on all scales except income, shows the second best mortality record; it might be mentioned that this is the only group where males have a higher expectation of life than females. It should be noted that stratum Va (immigrants from AsiaAfrica who came during 1948-1954), which is intermediate between strata IV and Vb, actually ranks between these two in its mortality record; this strengthens the confidence we are prepared to put in the apparently excellent health record of stratum IV. A similar remark

might be made with respect to the order of strata I, Ilia, and III&, although, in this case, circumstances may be very different.
DISCUSSION
The reasons for this peculiar ranking of social strata with respect to their mortality are obviously not known.
They might be put into relation with constitutional, if not racial factors, because the socioeconomic classes are here defined at least partly by ethnic criteria, and the strictly socioeconomic ranking is rather incidental to the ethnic classification.
Heredity or Tradition
Indeed, some authors (Sheba, 1962) ascribe a few of the many observed differentials in morbidity to hereditary factors, while others (Kallner, 1962) try

TABLE 2
EXPECTATION OF LIFE AT AGE 15 OF SOCIAL STRATA IN ISRAEL.

Males Females Both sexes combined

II IV
61.6 60.9 62.7 60.5 62.2 60.7

n i b Va Ilia

Vb

59.6 59.2 58.5 57.5 54.6 60.3 60.5 59.2 59.3 58.9 60.0 59.9 58.9 58.4 56.8

Vol. 12, No. 4

Differential Mortality in Israel

229

to explain them, at least partly, by late effects of the conditions of life in the respective countries of origin as well as traditions of personal hygiene and standards of medical care brought from the respective countries of origin.

see Table 2) indicates that the high mortality of class Vb (new immigrants from Asia and Africa) is largely connected with the recency of immigration: health education reaps apparently very early fruits.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

Medical Services
It is also very unlikely that difference in the availability and utilization of medical services accounts for the observed mortality differential. In Israel, preventive, diagnostic, and curative medicine of highly uniform standards serve all parts of the population, largely through health insurance; and if any group enjoys some advantages, it could only be the long-established immigrants of European origin; the excess mortality experienced by them must therefore be explained otherwise.
Finally, mortality differentials are often ascribed to differences in norms and habits concerning personal and environmental hygiene. With respect to environmental sanitation, highly uniform conditions prevail throughout the main parts of Israel, and the small size of the country and the concentration of a large part of the population in three main towns ensures a very uniform environment for almost all inhabitants.
Personal Hygiene
Regarding individual hygiene, cleanliness of the person and the home and related habits, the main cleavage in Israel, separates new immigrants from Asia and Africa from the rest of society. This factor has, therefore, some effect on the high mortality encountered among the most recent arrivals from Asia and Africa. The gain in expectation of life recorded after a stay of about ten years (as reflected in 1961-62 in the mortality of immigrants of the years 1948-1954;

Causesof Death
In any attempt to explain a difference in general mortality between various groups, the most promising approach consists in the analysis of causes of death: it should, indeed, be asked whether certain diseases are so much more frequent in some of the groups as to explain at least a substantial part of the difference in overall mortality.
Although causes of death have repeatedly been studied in Israel (Kallner, 1957, 1961, 1962), they have never been analyzed with regard to the duration of residence of the deceased in Israel. This is easily explained by the fact that no precise information on the size and age structure of the populations at risk of dying was available before the results of the 1961 census were published, and it is the publication of these very results that made it possible to study general mortality and to discover the ranking of the various strata which we are discussing here.
At present we know about differences in causes of death only between persons of European origin and those originating from Asia or Africa. It was found that in both these sectors of the population, arteriosclerotic and other degenerative heart diseases and malignant neoplasms are the most frequent causes of death; but both of these main killers take a much heavier toll among persons born in Europe than among those born in Asia or in Africa.
Since roughly one-half of the deaths of adults in Israel result from these two

230

Mühsam

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

causes, and at the higher ages they claim, relatively speaking, about twice as many victims among persons born in Europe than among persons born in Asia and Africa (Kallner, 1957), this would be enough to lead us to expect higher mortality, at least for the elderly, among persons of European origin than among immigrants from Asia and Africa. In fact, there is almost nothing to compensate for this excess mortality of immigrants hailing from Europe: the third ranking cause of death, vascular lesions affecting the central nervous system (i.e., mainly apoplexies), is about equally frequent in both sectors; and only diseases that are relatively rare as a cause of death of adults, such as tuberculosis, dysentery, and other infectious diseases, as well as maternal deaths and deaths caused by accidents and violence, are more frequent among persons born in Asia and Africa than among those born in Europe. But it is hard to believe that this is enough to compensate for the balance in favour of Asian and African descent created by the differential in the main killers.
It should be remembered that infant mortality can not be taken into consideration here, because the differentiation is made between persons born in Europe and those born in Asia or Africa: infant mortality affects almost only persons born in the country. On the other hand, it is known (Kallner, 1962) that infants born to parents hailing from Asia and Africa have a much lower chance to survive the first year of life than those born to parents of European origin. At the same time, it should be stressed that part of the observed excess mortality from arteriosclerotic heart diseases and malignant neoplasms of persons born in Europe may result from a less favorable age structure; but although it is not known how much of

the excess may be a result of this factor, there is no doubt that it is unable to "explain away" the whole difference.
In order to understand the surprising ranking of our main socioeconomic strata with respect to mortality, we are thus forced to explain the excess mortality of the higher classes from arteriosclerotic heart diseases and malignant neoplasms.
It is obvious that these two groups of diseases are not a result of the immediate effect of any environmental factor: they are, indeed, often called, together with some rarer conditions, "degenerative diseases"; that is to say, they are ascribed rather to the natural aging and ultimate fading away, which is the fate of all men. On the other hand, the age at which a degenerative disease actually strikes the individual ultimately depends probably less on his inborn constitution than on the long-term action of various, though largely unknown, environmental conditions. These differ for different social and economic strata as well as, in Israel, for persons hailing from different parts of the world; and it is just through the study of the specific social and economic conditions of various population groups (i.e., by the epidemiological approach) that medical science often tries to pin down environmental factors that may play a role in the etiology of the socalled degenerative diseases.
POSSIBLE CAUSES OF DIFFERENTIAL
MORTALITY
A number of characteristics can be cited with respect to which persons born in Europe differ, in general, from those born in Asia and Africa, and in which new immigrants differ from veteran settlers, to such an extent that they may be suspected of having some bearing on mortality from these causes. Most of

Vol. 12, No. 4

Differential Mortality in Israel

231

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

these characteristics can be considered to fall into either of the following groups: physical and mental implications of economic activity and occupation, and nutritional preferences.
Occupation
Differences in the occupational structure of the socioeconomic strata, whose mortality differentials we wish to explain, were already mentioned (Table 1). Two aspects of the occupational patterns are suspected to be connected with the excess of mortality from degenerative diseases in the higher classes; one is the considerable prevalence of highly sedentary occupations among veteran settlers of European origin, and the other is the nervous tensions and mental stresses required from many of them in their social and economic activities. The latter aspect is perhaps not a consequence of the occupational preferences of this group, but rather of traditional ways of life, attitudes, and a philosophy carried over from their countries of origin into Israel; but too little is known about the prevalence of such mental traits or their impact on mortality to justify a more detailed discussion in this context.
Nutrition
Only about dietary habits of the various socioeconomic strata in Israel is more information available (Bavly, 1961, 1962, 1964; Israel Inst. Appl. Soc. Res., 1958). The most important differences that may have an effect on the mortality differential, which we wish to explain, are the following: immigrants from Asia and Africa have a tendency to prefer fresh vegetables which can be consumed raw (salads) and carbohydrates (bread and rice), while persons of European origin consume more milk and milk products, animal proteins, and canned

food. Although the above-mentioned earlier studies did not bring out a longsuspected difference in the consumption of hydrogenated fats (margarine) and poly-unsaturated fats, the most recent, unpublished data,* point toward a considerable preference of persons born in Asia and Africa for poly-unsaturated vegetable oils. Families of Asian and African descent consumed, per capita, in addition to the same amount of margarine as families hailing from Europe, 50% more poly-unsaturated fats; in view of their modest indulgence in meat, they consumed obviously also less animal fats than persons born in Europe.
CONCLUSION
These findings seem to be consistent with the observed picture of causes of death, at least as far as coronary heart diseases are concerned. And they are not contradictory to the differential in overall mortality experienced in Israel. But neither is the role of dietary habits in the etiology of heart diseases sufficiently well founded in theory, nor the whole complex of problems of differentials in food habits and in causes of death in Israel satisfactorily covered by empirical data, to permit any final conclusions on causal relationships.
Excess mortality of higher socioeconomic strata from arteriosclerotic and degenerative heart diseases has also been observed elsewhere (Logan, 1955), but as far as we know, the excess mortality from certain causes has never before been observed to reverse the classic inverse correlation between social status and mortality. It is probable that one of the conditions for the occurrence of such a reversal is a very low level of
*Thanks are due to Mr. Alon of the Central Bureau of Statistics of Israel for having communicated to me the relevant preliminary findings from the 1959-60 survey of consumption.

232

Mühsam

Eugen, Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

general mortality. That this condition is actually fulfilled in Israel is easily seen: the expectation of life at birth in Israel in 1962 was as high as 70.8 for males and 72.8 for females--a level that is only slightly below the highest expectations recorded until now. Another condition for the reversal of the negative correlation between socioeconomic status and mortality is probably a very peculiar constellation of social status and the various elements of what may be called the "way of life," where many components of the latter, which are favorable for survival to high ages,obtain in relatively low social classes, while unfavorable conditions are accumulated in the higher strata of society. We do not yet recognize well enough the conditions that are actually favorable to longevity, nor do we know exactly the"wayof life" of various social strata in Israel. But we think that we are entitled to draw the conclusions that the study of dietary habits, mental attitudes, types of physical exercise, and other components of the "Oriental" or "non-Western" way of life, i.e. the way of life of immigrants hailing from Asia and Africa, may not only explain the positive correlationbetween social class and mortality in Israel, but may also make an important contribution to the understanding of the etiology of the so-called degenerative diseases, and perhaps of the determinants of the persistent causes of premature death in modern society.
FINAL COMMENT
A final comment is required about certain reservations regarding the reliability of the basic statistical data on which we constructed our analysis of mortality differentials between socioeconomic strata in Israel. The data used in computing the expectations of life shown in Table 2 suffer, in fact, from

a serious shortcoming: for a considerable percentage of the deceased, the place of birth or the year of immigration is not specified in the certificate of death, and they can therefore notbe attributed to anyof the socioeconomic strata used in this analysis. Fortunately, in only 2.4% of thedeaths, thecountry of birth is "not stated." Butfor 15.3% of deaths of persons born in Europe and 14.4% of deaths of persons born in Asia or Africa, the period of immigration is unknown. It should be pointed out that before death rates were computed andexpectations of life computed from these death rates, all "not stated" cases were distributed, within the appropriate agegroup, among the various classes, in the proportion of theknown cases. Wedo not think that this procedure biased the rates to such an extent that our main findings are actually erroneous. But a certain amount of provisionality attaches to all our conclusions.
REFERENCES
BAVLY, S., 1961. Food Consumption and Level of Nutrition of Urban Wage and Salary Earners' Families. Central Bureau of Statistics, Jerusalem.
BAVLY, S., 1962. Nutrition of the rural population of Israel (in Hebrew). Briuth Hatzibur, 5: 4-50.
BAVLY, S., 1964. Food Habits and Their Changes in Israel. Ministry of Education, Jerusalem.
CENTRAL BUREAU OF STATISTICS, 1963. Statistical
Abstract, 1963. Jerusalem, Israel.
ISRAEL INSTITUTE OF APPLIED SOCIAL RESEARCH,
1958. Changes in Food Habits in Yemenite and Iraqi Communities in Israel, Jerusalem (processed). KALLNER, G., 1957. Ethnic differences in relation to morbidity in Israel. Harofé Haivri (1957): 1-12.
KALLNER, G., 1961. Differences in morbidity
among Jewish groups in Israel. Jewish J. Sociol.,3 : 263-273. KALLNER, G., 1962. Mortality statistics. Israel Med. J.,21: 1-11. LOCAN, W. P. D.,1955. Social class variations in mortality. Proc. World Population Conf., 1954, 1: 185-213.
SHEBA, C., et al., 1962. Epidemiological surveys
of deleterious genes in different population groups in Israel. Amer. J. Pub. Health, 52: 1101-1106.

