Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Excellence in a democracy
To cite this article: (1958) Excellence in a democracy, Eugenics Quarterly, 5:3, 185-186, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1958.9987370 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1958.9987370
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

185

population that would result from an ex-
trapolation of recent growth rates may not occur because of substantial rises in death rates; and the usefulness of an approach to the population problem that stresses international tolerance without consider-

able emphasis on the fact that the world operates as a collection of only partially interrelated segments.
GEORGE F. MAIR
Smith College

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

Excellence in a Democracy*

It is now widely recognized that our society has given too little attention to the individual of unusual talent or potentialities. To make such an assertion is not to deplore the unprecedented time and money we have devoted to raising the general level of achievement. It would serve no purpose to replace our neglect of the gifted by neglect of everyone else. We are all too prone to such wild swings of the pendulum in our national life. We must learn to view these matters in a perspective which will permit us to repair one omission without creating others.
It has not always been easy for Americans to think clearly about excellence. At the heart of the matter is a seeming paradox in democracy as we know it. On the one hand, ours is the form of society which says most convincingly, "Let the best man win," and rewards winners regardless of origin. On the other, it is the form of society which gives those who do not come out on top the widest latitude in rewriting the rules of the contest. It is crucial to understand this tug of war between equality and excellence in a democracy. When the rewriting of the rules is prompted by the standards of fair play, by elementary considerations of justice, by basic value judgments as to what sort of a "best man" the society wants, democracy can have no quarrel with it. Indeed, it is the core process of a democracy. But when the rewriting of the rules is designed to banish excellence, to rule out distinguished attainment, to inhibit spirited individuals, then all
From The Pursuit of Excellence: Education and the Future of America. © 1958 by Rockefeller Brothers Fund, Inc. Reprinted by permission of Doubleday & Co., Inc.

who have a stake in the continued vitality of democracy must protest.
Every democracy must encourage high individual performance. If it does not, it closes itself off from the main springs of its dynamism and talent and imagination, and the traditional democratic invitation to the individual to realize his full potentialities becomes meaningless. More, perhaps, than any other form of government, a democracy must maintain what Ralph Barton Perry has called "an express insistence upon quality and distinction."
The eighteenth-century philosophers who made equality a central term in our vocabulary never meant to imply that men are equal in all respects. Nor do Americans today take such a view. It is possible to state in fairly simple terms the views concerning equality which would receive most widespread endorsement in our country today. The fundamental view is that in the final matters of human existence all men are equally worthy of our care and concern. Further, we believe that men should be equal in enjoyment of certain familiar legal, civil and political rights. They should, as the phrase goes, be equal before the law.
But men are unequal in their native capacities and their motivations, and therefore in their attainments. In elaborating our national views of equality, the most widely accepted means of dealing with this problem has been to emphasize equality of opportunity. The great advantage o£ the conception of equality of opportunity is that it candidly recognizes differences in endowment and motivation and accepts the certainty of differences in achievement. By allowing free play to these differences, it

186 Eugenics Quarterly

preserves the freedom to excel which counts for so much in terms of individual aspirations and has produced so much of mankind's greatness.
Having committed ourselves to equality of opportunity, we must strive incessantly to make it a reality in our society. . . .
With respect to the pursuit of excellence there are several considerations that we must keep firmly in mind.
First, we must not make the mistake of adopting a narrow or constricting view of excellence. Our conception of excellence must embrace many kinds of achievement at many levels. There is no single scale or simple set of categories in terms of which to measure excellence. There is excellence in abstract intellectual activity, in art, in music, in managerial activities, in craftsmanship, in human relations, in technical work.
Second, we must not assume that native capacity is the sole ingredient in superior

performance. Excellence, as we shall later have occasion to note, is a product of ability and motivation and character. And the more one observes high performance in the dust and heat of daily life, the more one is likely to be impressed with the contribution made by the latter two ingredients.
Finally, we must recognize that judgments of differences in talent are not judgments of differences in human worth.
To sum up, it is possible for us to cultivate the ideal of excellence while retaining the moral values of equality. Whether we shall succeed in doing so is perhaps the fundamental issue in the development of our human resources. A challenge must be recognized before it can be met. Our society will have passed an important milestone of maturity when those who are the most enthusiastic proponents of a democratic way of life are also the most vigorous proponents of excellence.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

