Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Afternoon session: Special reproductive patterns in the presence of psychiatric family problems
Chairman: Paul H. Hoch M.D.
To cite this article: Chairman: Paul H. Hoch M.D. (1959) Afternoon session: Special reproductive patterns in the presence of psychiatric family problems, Eugenics Quarterly, 6:2, 112-112, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1959.9987400 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1959.9987400
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

Afternoon Session SPECIAL REPRODUCTIVE PATTERNS IN THE PRESENCE OF PSYCHIATRIC FAMILY PROBLEMS

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

Chairman: PAUL H. HoCH, M.D.
Commissioner of Mental Hygiene, State of New York Professor of Clinical Psychiatry, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University

Introductory Remarks by Chairman:

It is a great pleasure and privilege to be invited to participate in the meeting of the American Eugenics Society. The high quality of the papers which will be presented is an assurance that the Society is very much interested in extending our knowledge in this important field.
In eugenics we see a healthy trend to grapple with complex problems on the research level before implementation is asked for or recommended on a practical level. Unfortunately this was not always the case in the past. Quite often in the past before certain hypotheses or assumptions were substantiated they were applied in practice. Soon after they were introduced some of these hypotheses had to be withdrawn or replaced when new knowledge was gained. This, of course, left the practical application of some of these eugenic principles in a confused state. We strongly feel that the practical application of eugenics should be done especially in psychiatry in an unassailable fashion. This means that the practical application of eugenics should be applied only in

cases where reliable and confirmed knowledge is at our disposal to make eugenic recommendations
The papers this afternoon deal with the important problem of mating and fertility patterns. The understanding of these patterns will lead to a better formulation of eugenic principles. We are especially interested in the relationship of these patterns to the functional psychoses and to mental retardation. The eugenic approach to schizophrenia and to manic-depressive psychosis will also depend to a very large degree as to how successful we will be in the future in treating these disorders. If treatments can be found which will cure these persons, this would influence the eugenic approach considerably. In the future there will have to be a constant interplay between therapeutic endeavors on one hand and prophylactic endeavors on the other. They will influence each other--at least in my opinion--far more in the future than has been the case until today.

112

