Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Family planning among Japanese on public relief
Yoshio Koya M.D.
To cite this article: Yoshio Koya M.D. (1957) Family planning among Japanese on public relief, Eugenics Quarterly, 4:1, 17-23, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1957.9987304 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1957.9987304
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:24

FAMILY PLANNING AMONG JAPANESE ON PUBLIC RELIEF

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

YOSHIO KOYA, M.D.* Nippon University Tokyo, Japan

T
X HE POPULATION PROBLEM COUNCIL estab-
lished in the Japanese Cabinet made the
following recommendations on November
29, 1949: In order to prevent a sharp increase in the population which will have adverse effects on the economic reconstruction and promotion of public health in this country, and to bring a sound cultural life to realization, it is considered necessary to furnish married couples with necessary information on contraception by teaching reasonable methods and to give guidance of conception control to all classes of our nation so that married couples can regulate the number of births freely and voluntarily by means of conception control. Here we will discuss family planning in
Japan in regard to a specific point in the
above statement: "to give guidance of
conception control to all classes of our
rtation."
Why did the Population Problem Coun-
cil recommend such a matter to the Japa-
nese Government? It did so obviously be-
cause it feared that the average quality of
the next generation would certainly deteri-
orate if conception control were practiced
faithfully only by a certain class of people,
while other classes showed little or no in-
terest. This is not to say that the Council
had sufficient concrete knowledge to say
with confidence in which class more chil-
dren were desired and in which the number
of offspring should remain small. Behind
the statement lay the belief that the danger
mentioned above might be averted to a
*An article in Japanese on this material appears in the Japanese Medical Journal, No. 1692, September 29, 1956. Dr. Koya was assisted by Drs. H. Kubo, M. Muramatsu, S. Yuasa, H. Ogino, and S. Agata.

certain degree if conception control were spread equally among all classes.
Seven years have elapsed since these recommendations were issued, but it is all the more important today to consider the specific recommendations for guidance in conception control. The strongest reason for this is the great decrease in the Japanese death rate in recent years. The rate was as low as 7.8 in 1955, a rate almost equal to, or perhaps even lower than, the occidental low level. Decrease in infant mortality is particularly conspicuous. If present conditions continue, of a hundred newborn infants only 3.9 would die before their first birthday. Also the death rate during the earlier years of life has been lowered considerably. As a result only 7 to 8 per cent of girls born would die before they reach marriageable age and the remaining 92 to 93 per cent would mostly participate in the reproduction of the next generation through marriage.
Comparison here between the present situation and that of the prewar years is interesting. If we review the life table for 1935, we note that of a hundred newborn infants, more than 10 were dead before their first birthday and 25 to 26 failed to reach marriageable age.
The real significance of these developments, as Frederick Osborn has pointed out, is the fact that death can no longer exert a selective influence. And, if it can no longer do so, then birth becomes the important factor instead. In other words, the average quality of the next generation today depends more upon this: ·which class with what quality has a higher birth rate than others?

17

lj Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

When we examine closely the present status of the dissemination of family planning practice in Japan with special attention to quality not a few problems are found. The most important is that family planning has become widespread very rapidly only among the intellectual class and is not easily disseminated among extremely poor people.
In saying this, I am not trying to imply that the poor are inferior as to quality, of course. As our study has clearly revealed, a person's poverty has nothing to do with his qualitative characteristics, especially in Japan today. There are a number of families who have become extremely poor because of financial difficulties due to war damages or to the rapid postwar changes in social institutions. Also many have been brought to their present misery because of disease, notably tuberculosis, which has deprived them of the means of subsistence.
Despite all these reservations, however, I cannot but look on the present situation with anxiety where the practice of conception control is thus unsatisfactorily disseminated among a particular class of people, with the result that many unwanted children are born year after year. It is hard to believe that leaders of future Japanese cultural development could be produced from among children born unwanted, poorly educated, and raised in undesirable circumstances. No doubt some are endowed with superior genetic quality even among them. But obviously it is not easy for such quality to develop to the full if their surroundings remain unfavorable. This is not simply common sense but is well supported by scientific evidence.
In view of these considerations, the Japanese Government recently has taken a step forward to enforce a program for dissemination of contraceptive practice among the extremely poor. This may well be called a timely action on the part of the Government. However, the actual enforcement of the program seems to have met unexpectedly with various difficulties and the results

so far are not so good as anticipated. Yet this program by all means must not only be enforced but carried out successfully.
An Experiment and Survey in Family Planning
With a view to contributing to the planning of such a conception control program, we started an experiment and survey in April 1953 with those who were receiving public relief from the Japanese Government. The experiment is now in its fourth year, and data for the third year have become available recently. Here the results of the experiment will be described, using chiefly the findings of the third year.
Our experiment was an intensive educational program in family planning in a specific test area, and our survey was a nation-wide one of families receiving public relief. For the experiment, 418 families were chosen in 9 districts of Katsushika Ward, Tokyo. For the survey 1,789 families were chosen in 63 districts extending from Hokkaido to Kyushü. The present report is concerned mainly with the educational experiment in family planning. A mass of material is contained in the nation-wide survey which does not permit satisfactory reporting here, but a few of the results will be referred to for the purpose of comparison.
Composition of the population: The selection of the 418 families for the experiment was made under certain conditions. The first was that no family be included in which the wife was 50 years old or over. Secondly, the husband and wife must be living together. As a result extremely few old people were included and there were sharp age indentations between 20 and 40 years of age. In this population of 418 families, the average age of husband has been computed to be 43.3 years, and that of wife, 36.9. Similar results appeared in the nation-wide survey of families on public relief, namely, 41.7 and 35.3 years, respectively, for the husband and wife.

19

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

Circumstances before and after public relief; Through investigation we intended to learn the reasons, direct or indirect, for these families receiving public assistance.
Our first inquiry was concerned with time of arrival in this area. Of the 418 families, 2(50, or 62 per cent, moved into the area after 1943. Especially numerous were the families who settled during 1944 and 1945 when the air raids were most severe. Most of the families were driven into the area, having been deprived of their homes and property.
The unemployed, of whom there had been none before relocation, numbered 162, or 39 per cent. Factory workers or workmen had decreased to about one-third, clerks to about one-fifth, and shopkeepers or peddlers to less than one-third. Increases were shown in laborers, odd-job men, and ragmen.
Most of the unemployed at present have had only elementary or middle-school education, but even here there are 14 families with husbands graduated from colleges or universities. Also 3 husbands reported to be college graduates are working as laborers or odd-job men. These findings show that unusual changes have occurred in these families' circumstances since the end of the war. What caused them to fall to their present circumstances? According to our investigation the answer is simply disease of one kind or another. Of the 418 husbands under observation, only 157 can be regarded as healthy or normal. The remaining 261, or 62 per cent, are either actually suffering from disease or are unwell. Of the diseases reported, the most important was tuberculosis, with an incidence of 40.0 per cent.
Inquiries were made of these families as to their income status as well as their housing conditions. Actual earnings of their own differed considerably from one family to another, but as many as 162 families had no employment at all, and their average monthly income was only 4,879 yen, or about .S13.fi. To supplement this, on the

average 4,541 yen comes from the national treasury, making a total monthly income for these families of 9,420 yen, or approximately $26.2.
These findings are in accord with the income of the 1,789 families in the nationwide survey, where the average own income was 5,085 yen and average Government assistance 4,017 yen, making a total monthly income of 9,102 yen, or $25.3. It is most difficult to imagine how such families with perhaps as many as 5 or 6 members can live within such a low income.
Information about housing conditions in these 418 families is also of interest. Those with only one room numbered 192, or 46.0 per cent, while those with two rooms numbered 155, or 37.1 per cent. Few families could afford more than two rooms. As many as 5 or 6 persons have to live in this limited space, and the inconveniences and health hazards of such crowded quarters are beyond imagination. It was found that 27.9 of all the deaths in this group were due to infectious disease. In some of the homes children were frequently seen crowded together in a small room with a tubercular mother in the bed. And 44.3 per cent of all the couples shared the same bedroom with children over ten years of age, with consequent undesirable effects upon the sex education of the children. Reproductive activities: In order to institute an intensive educational program of family planning among these families, it was necessary for us to know their previous reproductive histories and the possibilities of their accepting our teaching in family planning. Our investigation included the number of pregnancies, natural miscarriages, induced abortions, child deaths after birth control, and living children.
Table 1 is a summary presentation of information obtained and tabulated on consultation cards. We found it particularly valuable to keep such cards at the time of personal interview, giving full details about previous pregnancies and deliveries, as well as the condition of living children.

20
Number o£ Pregnancies
Number of Families
Total Number of Pregnancies in All Families
Number of Natural Miscarriages
Number of Induced Abortions
Number of Child Deaths
Number of Living Children

Eugenics Quarterly

TABLE 1

0 12 3 4 5 6 78 14 27 43 71 81 70 44 35 18

9 10 11 12 Total Average
per 8 5 1 1 418 Family

Average of
1789 families

.... 27 86 213 324 351 264 247 145 72 50 11 12 1802 4.4

4.5

1 5 16 20 16 15 9 3 6

91

.... .... 6 14 18 22 32 22 20 19 9 1 3 166

4 23 9 24 21 31 14 11 6 1 3 147

.... 27 75 171 281 285 195 179 102 39 29 9 6 1398

0.2 0.4 0.4 3.3

0.4 0.3 0.3 3.7

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

Table 1 shows that each family on the average has recorded 4.4 pregnancies, 0.2 natural miscarriages, 0.4 induced abortions, and 0.4 child deaths after birth control, the number of living children per family being 3.3. If these figures are compared with those obtained in the nation-wide survey of 1,789 families, interesting observations can be made. The average number of pregnancies differs very little between the two, but in the nation-wide group more natural miscarriages and fewer induced abortions are found, since it includes some rural population. The number of living children in the nation-wide survey exceeds that of the 418-family group by 0.4. Readiness to accept family planning education: Before initiating our educational program, we investigated their readiness to accept such a project: the extent to which they actually wanted to learn about conception control. The results shown in Table 2 were almost completely opposite to what was generally believed. It had been thought that people belonging to this social class were very indifferent to conception

TABLE 2

Guidance Guidance Opinion Desired Not Desired Not Known Total

Number of

Families 264

147

7

418

Per cent

63.1 35.2 1.7 100.0

control or family planning, and consequently would be the most difficult group to handle. On the contrary, it was discovered 63.1 per cent, or 264 out of the 418 families, actually wanted our teaching. There were only 147 families who did not desire guidance, but the majority of these either had no need for controlling conception (e.g., because they were sterile or had been sterilized) or at least believed they needed no such information (e.g., because it was immediately after childbirth or because they thought the wife had already passed childbearing age) as shown in Table 3.

TABLE 3

REASONS FOR NOT DESIRING GUIDANCE No.

Either the husband or the wife is sick, hence no marital relations 71

No pregnancy has occurred over the

past five years or more, so believe

no control is necessary

29

Sterile (involuntarily)

9

Believe that child-bearing ages have

already passed

4

Pregnant at present ...

5

Immediately after childbirth now-- 7

Have been sterilized

3

Have not yet decided to do some-

thing for conception control

1

Want children, no contraceptive mea-

sures are needed

.

18

Total

147

% 48.3
19.7 6.1
2.7 3.4 4.8 2.0
0.7
12.3 100.0

21

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

However, among those with no interest in conception control, there were 18 families who stated it was because they wanted children. When we examined more closely the families who wanted children, one childless family was found, 8 families with only one, 6 families with 2, and only 3 families with 3 or more children. This kind of finding may appear in any other social group and does not prevent us from saying that the group as a whole was more than normally cooperative. Thus, among those families whom we thought should be practicing conception control, 98.5 per cent actually desired to do so.

Why, then, did they want to control conception so strongly? The following may clarify the situation:

Per cent

For economic reasons

87.9

For both economic and wife's

health reasons

6.8

For reasons related to wife's

health

1.9

Other reasons

3.4

Location and number of personal inter-

views: None of the locations generally

used for contraceptive consultation seemed

practical for families on public relief.

Bringing together a group of people to a

certain place, so-called "group work,"

seemed futile in most cases. The most im-

portant problem was how to find an ap-

propriate physical set-up for the guidance

program.

We finally discovered a method which proved workable. Use was made of the local welfare agencies where these people on public relief must come once a month without fail. Taking advantage of their attendance at these agencies, we took them to separate rooms and gave necessary instructions about family planning.

No proper equipment or facilities are available for teaching family planning in these agencies, of course. For example, it is hardly possible to give instructions in the use of a vaginal diaphragm. Therefore,

the selection of recommended methods was of necessity limited.
Guidance was given rather frequently at first, but as the program progressed teaching was reduced to, say, once every other month. But the educational gap between these infrequent visits of our staff was usually filled by the aid of local case workers.
The personal interviews were conducted in the form of a very confidential talk. We were able to answer any questions raised, but perhaps this could not be expected of general family planning education under present conditions in Japan. However, it should be remembered that whoever is responsible for the personal consultation, the attitude of the teacher is the most important factor. No matter what the question, not a shadow of scorn or blame must be shown. The key to ultimate success in such a consultation is the presence of confidence between the two individuals concerned. Success is solely dependent upon how much sympathy and good will the interviewer shows to these needy families. Recommended contraceptive methods: Because of the restrictions stated above, recommended methods were limited for the most part to condoms and tablets. The use of sponges or jellies with applicators is not fitting to those who live a simple life. Contraceptives were given free of charge after detailed explanations as to their actual use, and the amount given was sufficient to last until the next interview.
The rhythm method was never recommended except when specifically desired, because we already knew that this method was apt to fail when used among families such as these. Results of educational work: In the group of 418 families a certain number of families have dropped out of our project because they became ineligible for public relief. At the same time other new families have been added. Thus, the total number of families continuously observed for three years is 277, and the following results refer to these families.

22 Eugenics Quarterly

TABLE 4

Before Guidance End of First Year End of Second YearEnd of Third Year

Year

Apr. 1952Apr. 1953

Apr. 1953Apr. 1954

Apr. 1954Apr. 1955

Apr. 1955Apr. 1956

Number of Pregnancies

' "v 92

52

48

33

Prpfrnanry ttaf*

53.9 27.6 24.5 16.5

Number of Live Births

44

14

16

11

Number of Induced Abor-

tions

45 35 26 22 .

Number of Miscarriages and

Stillbirths

S3 60

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

Number of pregnanciesand pregnancy rate.- ty Law. Furthermore, the Eugenic Protec-

Table 4 shows the trends in this respect. tion Law has a provision that an induced

In the year previous to the initiation of our abortion be performed "for economic or

project, the 277 families recorded 92 preg- physical reasons." The families we have

nancies. In the third year only 33 preg- handled are a case in point of this specific

nancies occurred, a decrease to 32 per cent provision, and, because of that, we can

of the number before the project. This hardly sweepingly condemn their frequent

reduction in the number of pregnancies resort to induced abortion. Considering

means that the contraceptive instruction the circumstances, pretty good results have

had fairly great success, we believe.

been obtained in checking their frequent

More exact evaluation of the results, use of induced abortion.

however, calls for the use of the pregnancy Number of live births.- Some pregnancies

rate. We have calculated the rate accord- were terminated by induced abortion for

ing to the Stix-Notestein method and found reasons stated above, and some resulted in

that it decreased from 53.9 for the year miscarriages or stillbirths. The remainder

previous to the start of our project to 16.5 constitute the total number of live births

for the third year of the work, 30.6 per cent observed. If a comparison is made between

of the figure for the year before our work the births the year previous to our project

started. This is a remarkable and rapid and the third year, a decrease frcm 44 to

effect.

11, one-fourth, has been recorded. Figures

Induced abortion.- In our experiment em- for the birth rate have not been given, be-

phasis was placed not only upon correct cause our group does not include wives over

and faithful practice of contraception but 50 years, hence is not comparable with

also upon the reduction of induced abor- other groups.

tions. As a result induced abortions have

decreased from 45 to 22 in the course of three years. In a group on public relief Conclusions

even a decrease in induced abortions of this Five years have passed since the Cabinet

extent can be considered fairly good, be- agreed to adopt the dissemination of family

cause when a woman is protected by public planning as a national policy in Japan.

relief an induced abortion can be per- Today the extent of its diffusion is said to

formed on her without charge by a well- be nearly 35 per cent, and at the same time

trained doctor in a hospital or dispensary the upward trend of induced abortion thus

if she so desires. Such an abortion is a part far observed has recently been slowing

of the medical social services given to any- down gradually. This progress is gratifying,

one who comes under the Daily Life Securi- but the next big problem is to ascertain any

23

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

uneven or unbalanced dissemination among various groups differing geographically, occupationally, or socio-economically.
Family planning seems to be practiced least successfully in the outlying, less civilized rural areas where most of the villages without doctors are found as well as among those sunk in poverty in the cities.
Our findings from our three-year experiment in teaching family planning and our nation-wide survey are of great value for the successful enforcement of the Government program for disseminating family planning among the extremely poor, we believe. Many interesting and significant points came out, but most important was to discover a suitable teaching approach to people. The problem is not only to find an appropriate place, but a study of "by whom, in what kind of place, and how" in family planning should be discussed. In regard to the question of "where" we took advantage in our experiment of visits to local welfare agencies. However, this approach may not be applicable under the present system of the health and welfare administration in Japan. Conditions must be carefully examined and considerations in relation to the budget weighed before health centers can be used effectively for such purposes. Such a program will almost certainly meet with failure if people are merely ordered to come to certain places for guidance.

In regard to the question of "by whom," it should be well understood that the attitude of the counselors is of great importance, particularly in dealing with families in extreme poverty. A feeling of inferiority is often found among these groups which is very apt to result in lack of cooperation or even in resistance to the program.
In solving the question "how," a way of teaching must be found which fits into actual living conditions. It is especially necessary to teach these families about contraceptives which they can afford to use and which are not rendered impracticable by their housing situations. In our case, we recommended mainly the use of condoms and tablets, but vaginal diaphragms could be used in some instances.
The Japanese Government launched a program for the teaching of family planning in this specific social class last year. Still in its early stages, it may be expected that many difficulties will arise. It is our earnest hope, however, that the Government's efforts will have great success because the program has so much significance both from the standpoint of social policy and racial selection.
Acknowledgments
The author is greatly indebted to the Population Council, Inc. for its valuable assistance to our experiment and survey.

