Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Invasion of privacy
Conrad Taeuber
To cite this article: Conrad Taeuber (1967) Invasion of privacy, Eugenics Quarterly, 14:3, 243-246, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1967.9987730 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1967.9987730
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 8 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:29

Communication

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

INVASION OF PRIVACY

CONRAD TAEUBER Assistant Director
Bureau of the Census

For purposes of this discussion it may be useful to consider the subject in relation to the confidentiality of census records and to the propriety of asking the public to answer the questions. It is also desirable to differentiate among three types of data collection and compilation of the Bureau of the Census:
1. National Censuses provided for by Title 13 of the U.S. Code in which replies are mandatory;
2. Other Bureau surveys taken at more frequent intervals under the provisions of Title 13 in which the replies are voluntary; and
3. Surveys conducted by the Bureau for other agencies of the Federal Government under provisions of their laws, in which the Bureau is involved primarily as a collecting and compiling service.
The requirement to maintain confidentiality can be defined more clearly than many other aspects of the Bureau's obligations. The law which requires confidential protection of information given by any respondent to the Bureau of the Census is quite specific. Section 9 of Title 13 states, in part, that neither the Secretary of Commerce nor any other officer or employee of the Department (including, of course, the Director of the Census) may:
* Presented at a panel discussion on this topic arranged by the Committee on Social Statistics of the Eastern Sociological Society, held at the Society's meeting in New York City, April 16, 1967.

(1) use the information furnished under the provisions of this title for any purpose other than the statistical purposes for which it is supplied; or (2) make any publication whereby the data furnished by any particular establishment or individual under this title can be identified; or (3) permit anyone other than the sworn officers and employees of the Department or bureau or agency thereof to examine the individual reports.
These provisions do not apply, of course,
to information which is secured by the
Bureau from public records.
For the enforcement of the above
limitations on the possible uses of data
in such a way as to violate confidential-
ity, Section 214 of Title 13 provides:
Whoever, being an employee . . . , publishes or communicates, without the written authority of the Secretary or other authorized officer or employee of the Department of Commerce or bureau or agency thereof, any information coming into his possession by reason of his employment under the provisions of this title, shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than two years or both.
A Presidential Proclamation at the
time of the 1960 Census assured the
public that: "There need be no fear that
disclosure will be made regarding any
individual person or his affairs." It
stated also that:
Individual information collected in the Eighteenth Decennial Census will not be used for purposes of taxation, investigation or regulations, or in connection with military or jury service, the enforcement of school attendance, the regulation of immigration, or the

243

244

Communication

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

enforcement of any individual, state or local law or ordinance.
In accordance with these provisions, steps are taken to avoid any direct or indirect disclosure of information about any individual. Details will not be published for any area or group unless the number of cases in the group is such that no one could be identified from the information about the group. Normally at least three cases must be present before any details can be published for the group. The minimum number may be larger in some instances. Even if the minimum number is met, publication may still be withheld if one unit (for example, a business establishment) is so dominant in the group that publication of the total would effectively reveal the figures for the dominant unit. Disclosure analysis also requires that there be no inadvertent disclosure, as when figures for a total and one part of the total might each meet the requirements for publication, but the publication of these two would enable a person to secure information for another part of the total which is being suppressed to avoid disclosure.
The release of information in the form of the Mooo sample from the 1960 Census was carefully screened to comply with all the requirements of confidentiality. The records in that tape give no information which would identify the area in which the person lives except by broad region and size of place. Moreover, information such as that relating to occupation and industry is given in such broad categories that it would not be possible for anyone to identify a person with a highly unusual occupation who might have been included in this small sample.
The provisions regarding confidentiality of census information apply whether the information was collected under the

mandatory powers or in connection with a voluntary survey. Again and again the courts have upheld the Bureau in its refusal to supply information about an individual to regulatory, administrative, or judicial agencies. Some years ago one of the regulatory agencies endeavored to secure individual information about a business establishment from the census. When this was refused, the agency endeavored to secure the copies of the reports to the Census Bureau which the firm had kept in its files. After the matter had been reviewed in the courts, the Congress adopted an amendment making it clear that it was the intent of the Congress to protect these file copies in the firm's possession in the same manner as the originals which had been filed with the Bureau of the Census.
These stringent provisions for the protection of information about an individual affect any discussion of the invasion of privacy.
The Presidential Proclamation issued in March 1960 said:
Life and liberty in a free country entail a variety of cooperative actions for the common good. The prompt, complete, and accurate answering of all official inquiries made by census officials should be regarded as one of the requirements of good citizenship.
There are no similarly clear-cut rules for determining when it is proper to ask a person to yield his privacy in order to provide information considered essential by the Government. The balance between the individual's right to privacy and the Government's need for information is often a delicate one. We attempt to give full weight to these considerations by limiting the questioning to those items for which there is a demonstrated need and which the public generally is willing to accept as appro-

Vol. 14, No. 3

Communication

245

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

priate to the census. One reason for our preference for a mail approach to census-taking is that this approach reduces the extent to which a neighbor comes to ask questions for the census. When an enumerator comes to collect the information, she is asked to assure that it is given in private, i.e. that the information is not collected in the presence of a third party who has no right to it.
Making the proper choices requires a good deal of judgment. We solicit the help of advisory committees, hold public meetings with interested persons, and conduct the planning for a census in such a way that there is widespread opportunity for comment and discussion. There are differences of opinion. A few persons believe that the census should be confined to a headcount for apportionment purposes, citing this as the constitutional basis for the decennial census. Others point to the need for a broad range of information about social and economic conditions and the changes which are occurring.
Views concerning the limits of permissive invasion of privacy change from time to time. It is unlikely that a proposed question on income in 1970 would arouse the reaction that appeared when such a question was suggested for 1940. The value of this information has been so clearly demonstrated that this is now considered to be a field in which the inquiry is entirely appropriate. The decision not to include a question on religion in the 1970 Census was taken in the light of the demonstration that at this time a significant proportion of the population would regard such a question as an improper invasion of their privacy on the part of the Government.
In contrast to a census in which replies are mandatory, the Bureau's current surveys generally are not taken under

powers to compel a reply. Nevertheless, the same provisions of confidentiality apply. Every proposed new inquiry is subjected to careful consideration from the point of view of essentiality, as well as the possibility that the query would be considered an improper invasion of individual privacy by a significant number of people. Collecting information on possible public reaction is an important part of any pretest. In sample surveys the interviewers usually have more opportunity to explain the relevance of an inquiry that is challenged by a respondent than is the case in the census and thus may be in a better position to justify a line of questioning which initially arouses opposition.
The Bureau's services as a collecting agent for another governmental organization are becoming an increasingly important phase of its work. Such work for another agency may be undertaken under the provisions of Census law or under the legal authority of the other agency. An effort is made to inform respondents as fully as possible as to the agency concerned and the uses which will be made of these data. Here, too, the rules of confidentiality apply to all information submitted to the Bureau, except where the respondent is specifically informed in advance that his individual return may be given to the agency for which the survey is being taken.
In such surveys for other governmental agencies, the nature of an inquiry and the context within which questions are asked may lead to the inclusion of items which would not be considered suitable in a census or a survey done by the Bureau as part of its own program. Even here, however, it is essential that there be a broad general agreement that the questions are relevant and do not constitute any improper invasion of the individual's privacy. In many instances

246

Communication

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

the subjects of such an inquiry, however, have certain characteristics or conditions which make them especially receptive to the questions involved--as a sample, the aged who might be asked about income and medical care. Questions addressed to a particular group may be more acceptable to that group than to the general public.
Careful adherence to the provisions listed above frequently leads the Bureau into conflicts with persons and organizations which have an interest in utilizing the data collected by the Bureau. The provisions against disclosure of individual information make no distinction between good and bad uses, nor do they give the Director of the Bureau the option of deciding that a piece of information might be used to the advantage of the individual and, therefore, may be released to a third party without the prior written authorization of the individual concerned. The Bureau is occasionally requested to supply information concerning a person with the justification that some benefit would accrue to the person if this information is given to the requestor, for example, an inheritance. Such requests must be refused along with those which on the face of it might appear to be injurious to the person involved.
The advent of the electronic computer has led to the suggestion that information collected by different agencies about a person or a firm might be merged, thus reducing the burden of duplicate reporting and increasing the amount of

information which becomes available for analysis. Fears have been aroused that such a merging of records might lead to improper uses of information given for specific purposes and that individuals might thereby have their privacy invaded under circumstances which make it impossible for them to exercise any control over the use of information about themselves. Two points may be made in this connection. First, the Congress has taken a considerable interest in this matter and will doubtless review proposals with care to insure the maintenance of rigorous guarantees of confidentiality of information pertaining to individuals. Second, the state of the art is such that much time must elapse before significant advances can be made in merging information from large datafiles.
Unless we can develop and maintain the confidence of the public in our willingness and ability to provide confidential treatment of information given to us in confidence, we cannot continue to ask individuals to give us information which they would not willingly give to any other individual.
When the Government asks individuals to waive their privacy, it must be able to give assurance that the information will be used only for statistical purposes. The inquiries must be relevant to the Government's needs, and it must be possible to give the respondent an adequate reason for asking him to give up some part of his privacy for the public good.

