Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Population genetics of mental illness
N. E. Morton
To cite this article: N. E. Morton (1967) Population genetics of mental illness, Eugenics Quarterly, 14:3, 181-184, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1967.9987724 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1967.9987724
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:29

POPULATION GENETICS OF MENTAL ILLNESS

N. E. MORTON Department of Genetics University of Hawaii Medical School
Honolulu, Hawaii

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

The classification of mental illness into two categories, defect and disorder, corresponds to profound differences in the state of genetic understanding. Several techniques are yielding good results in the study of mental defect, and the tempo of productive research has accelerated markedly in the last decade. In contrast, genetic study of mental disorders is in a much more primitive stage of development, on which a consideration of the more advanced field may shed some light.
MENTAL DEFECT
A review of the clinical, biochemical, and cytological evidence on mental defect is beyond the scope of this paper. The important common element of these studies is that they have led to definition of specific genes and chromosomal anomalies which may be recognized by suitable tests at an early age and in many cases can be detected in heterozygotes. Such a simple correspondence between genotype and phenotype is essential for precise genetic analysis, prediction of risks in relatives, detection of preclinical cases, and prompt treatment. Phenylketonuria and galactosemia are examples of genetic conditions in which both detection and treatment are highly evolved, while Down's syndrome (mongolism) is an instance of clear genetic understanding which has not so far led to effective treatment.
As the number of defined genetic entities in mental defect has grown, twin studies and other crude methods of genetic analysis have been abandoned.

However, there remains a large proportion of cases in which neither an exogenous cause nor a specific genetic mechanism has as yet been clearly identified. This group decreases as more adequate medical histories implicate environmental agents and more refined biochemical and cytogenetic techniques identify new genetic entities. In this murky area of "mental retardation of unknown etiology" the methods of population genetics are helpful in a way that is quite different from the familiar role of pedigree analysis in establishing the mode of inheritance of a well defined entity (Morton, 1962).
Book (1957) studied the effect of first cousin marriage on all grades of mental retardation (I.Q. < 70). For each cousin family, another family living in the nearest house was selected as a control. Using only marriages in which neither parent was retarded, the frequency of mental defect was 1.3 per cent among children of unrelated parents and 5.5 per cent for cousin marriages. This corresponds to a genetic load of .694 ± .341 detrimental equivalents per gamete expressed as mental retardation. Dewey et al. (1965) in a retrospective study estimated a genetic load of .192 ± .066 per gamete for severe mental defect (I.Q. < 50). Since a typical recessive gene for mental defect appears to have a frequency of about .002 per gamete, these studies suggest that many genetic entities producing mental defect have yet to be characterized.
Dewey and his colleagues showed that the recurrence risk in sibs was sharply

181

182

Morton

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

bimodal, the low-risk (sporadic) group having a normal inbreeding coefficient, while the high-risk group had a segregation frequency approaching one-quarter and a marked excess of parental consanguinity. Thus single, highly penetrant recessive genes were responsible for a large part of the high-risk group, which also included at least one chromosomal anomaly. Recessive genes did not appear to play an important role for low-risk cases, which must represent exogenous causes, chromosomal aberrations, polygenic inheritance, and other mechanisms. This study illustrates a number of methods of consanguinity and segregation analysis which may be useful with other heterogeneous traits, such as estimation of prevalence, gene frequencies, and mutation rates, extraction of information from samples which exclude isolated cases, and tests of genetic hypotheses about low-risk and high-risk conditions.
MENTAL DISORDERS
So far biochemistry and cytogenetics have not revealed the causes of many mental disorders, although progress has been made with acute intermittent porphyria (Tschudy, 1965). Psychiatric diagnosis is sufficiently uncertain to cast doubt on attempts to discriminate genetic entities by mental symptoms alone. The delayed age of diagnosis for many mental disorders is an additional impediment to genetic analysis. Because of these difficulties, recessive inheritance has seldom been demonstrated, but several dominant disorders have been recognized through large pedigrees (Huntington's chorea, and Pick's and Alzheimer's diseases). Dominant inheritance has been suspected for some cases of idiopathic epilepsy, but the evidence is inconclusive.
Empirical risks in twins and other

relatives have provided evidence for a genetic component in schizophrenia and manic-depression, but are subject to criticism on grounds of diagnosis and sampling (Pastore, 1949). None of these studies was corrected for the mode of retrospective ascertainment in a way that would now be considered adequate.
The elevated incidence of parental consanguinity in schizophrenics (Kallmann, 1938) should not be accepted as evidence for recessive inheritance, since the precaution was not taken to eliminate abnormal parents, who might contribute to the incidence of mental disorder in their children through nongenetic or polygenic mechanisms. At least for cases of juvenile onset, in which parents are living and not of advanced age, it might be possible, although difficult, to select parents who are normal by psychiatric criteria and to perform the same kind of consanguinity analysis that has been carried out for mental defect. In such sibships, a bimodal distribution of relevant psychological or biochemical test scores would permit segregation analysis and provide support for major genes, which is now lacking. In the absence of such evidence, it is unreasonable to take seriously a recent suggestion that the frequency of schizophrenia is maintained by a balance between the selectively favorable and unfavorable effects of a hypothetical dominant gene with low penetrance (Huxley et al., 1964).
POSSIBILITIES FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
Genetic analysis of variability can proceed in either of two ways: by identification of the specific contributions of major genes, and by statistical manipulations which are based on the assumption of an indefinitely large number of genes with individually imperceptible effects. After a long period, memorialized by

Vol. 14, No. 3

Population Genetics of Mental Illness

183

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

Falconer (1960), when the second approach was in the ascendancy because of its practical application to plant and animal breeding, the major gene hypothesis has received new impetus from the identification by biochemical, cytological, statistical, and experimental breeding techniques of genes with substantial effects on quantitative traits, leaving in some cases only a minor fraction for which the traditional methods of quantitative genetics are uniquely suited (Robertson, 1965). The normal variation of serum cholinesterase is largely due to two loci (Harris et al., 1963), and major genes with large selection coefficients account for a considerable part of the effect of inbreeding on mortality and morbidity (Dewey et al., 1965).
In the light of this work, we may predict that in the future major genes (very likely as many different ones as have been identified in mental defect) will be found to account for many cases of mental disorders, leaving a component due to polygenes and nongenetic mechanisms that will defy analysis. On this assumption, genetic analysis of mental disorders, as of other heterogeneous traits, should be directed to the characterization of major genes, rather than to elaboration of non-disprovable hypotheses about the residual cases.
Methods are now available which permit concentration on familial cases, without bias in tests of genetic hypotheses and estimation of prevalence and fertility. Emphasis on familial cases favors discrimination among genetic entities and recognition of biochemical and cytological mechanisms which may be less common among isolated cases. As Stephens (1953) has stressed for the muscular dystrophies, "a recognition of the different forms of expression of the same gene in large groups of individuals

makes classification of the types of dystrophy easier and their overlapping better understood." However, it is desirable to study also a subsample not restricted to familial cases, so as to determine whether low-risk and high-risk sibships exist and, if so, what their different etiologies are. Careful attention must be paid to recording probands and independent ascertainments, so that the segregation analysis and prevalence estimate will be valid. For these studies a stable population with a reasonably high consanguinity rate is favored, and the North Swedish area, in which the prevalence of schizophrenia reaches 3 per cent, naturally suggests itself (Book, 1953).
Among less traditional genetic methods, the diallel cross of different populations may be helpful. In Hawaii, for example, a registry of mental defects and disorders exists. The population of about 700,000 is under a high level of medical care, and its mating structure includes more than 520 different interethnic crosses which are distinguished on birth records and which therefore may be determined by record linkage for almost any native-born individual in the population (Chung and Morton, 1962). Possible differences in prevalence and expression among ethnic groups may be explored, using the methods developed by geneticists for incomplete ascertainment, and these differences may be clarified by the great variety of interpopulational matings. Such a diallel cross also permits many rigorous studies of nongenetic effects--for example, the association of the ethnic group of one spouse with the expression of morbidity in the other.
While such novel studies in populations like those of North Sweden and Hawaii may contribute to our understanding of genetic factors in mental disorders, a major advance depends on

184

Morton

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

improved recognition of specific geno-
types by biochemical, cytological, or
other methods. This was clearly stated
by Book (1960), andI cando no better
than quote him:
A crucial proof of genetical etiology is impossible without a diagnostic method that identifies an almostone to one relationship with thecausative gene mutation. This is the case in illnesses as phenyketonuria and amaurotic idiocy which have been mentioned asexamples. In other conditions which arestill indentifiable in terms of mental symptoms only, no decision is possible. Here thegeneticist and his co-workers must proceed to test different biological correlates. The repetition of traditional family and population surveys, although they surely contribute toepidemiology, will never enable the geneticist to prove his case definitely.
REFERENCES
BOOK, J. A., 1953. A genetic and neuropsychiatric investigation of a North Swedish population, with special regard to schizophrenia and mental deficiency. Act. Genet., 4: 1-100, 133-139, 345-414.

BOOK, J. A., 1957. Genetical investigations in a North Swedish population. The offspring of first-cousin marriages. Ann.Human Genet., 21: 191-221.
BOOK, J. A., I960. Genetical etiology in mental illness. Milbank Memorial Fund Quart., 38: 193-212.
CHUNG, C. S., and N. E. MORTON, 1962. Genetics
of interracial crosses in Hawaii. Proc. Second Int. Cong. Human Genet., 134-138.
DEWEY, W. J., I. BARRAI, M. P. Mi, and N. E.
MORTON, 1965. Recessive genes in severe mental defect. Amer. J. Human Genet.17: 237-256. FALCONER, D.S., 1960. Introduction to Quantitative Genetics. Ronald Press, New York.
HARRIS, H., D. A. Hopkinson, E. B. ROBSON, and
M. WHITTAKER, 1963. Genetical studies on a new variant of serum cholinesterase detected by electrophoresis. Ann. Human Genet., 26: 359-382.
HUXLEY, J., A. HOFFER, E. MAYR, and H. OSMOND,
1964. Schizophrenia as a genetic morphism. Nature, 204 (4955): 220-221. KALLMANN, F. J., 1938. The Genetics ofSchizophrenia. J. J. Augustin, New York. MORTON, N.E., 1962. "Segregation andlinkage." In W. J. Burdette (ed.), Methodology in Human Genetics. Holden-Day, Inc. 17-52. PASTORE, N., 1949. The genetics of schizophrenia. Psych. Bull., 46: 285-302. ROBERTSON, A., 1965. The nature of quantitative genetic variation. Proc. Genet. Soc. Amer. (in press). STEPHENS, F. E., 1953. "Muscular disorders." In A. Sorsby (ed.), Clinical Genetics. Butterworth, London. TSCHUDY, D. P., 1965. Biochemical lesions in porphyria. J.A.M.A., 191: 718-730.

