Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Heredity counseling
Jan A. Böök M.D.
To cite this article: Jan A. Böök M.D. (1955) Heredity counseling, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:3, 174-183, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987242 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987242
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

HEREDITY COUNSELING Medical Genetics and Counseling Practices
JAN A. BÖÖK, M.D. Associate Professor of Medical Genetics
University of Uppsala, Sweden

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Contemporary Status of Medical Genetics
It is certainly a commonplace to say that during the last 50 years a revolution has occurred in the medical treatment of human diseases. The implications of this revolution are manifold. Everybody is now well aware of the immediate consequences of the large-scale use of antibiotics, vitamins, hormones, vaccines, the improvements of sanitation and the control of nutritional deficiencies. Never before in history has medical science been able to restore health and save the lives of such large numbers of individuals. In all advanced countries of the Western hemisphere, the public health situation has changed radically. We have experienced a shift in the relative incidence of those diseases which constitute the major threat against public · health. This change, which deserves a special emphasis, is one of the long-range effects of the introduction of a new medical era. Public health work and medical research will gradually become faced with problems that are not new in the sense that we will largely be exposed to new disease entities, but new in the sense that the populations will be exposed to a special category of diseases on a larger scale. It is not necessary to accept this new situation with the old view that the sum of evil will remain constant, but medical research will need a reorientation. In fact, such a reorientation has been under way for several years. However, as it originated outside the medical profession in the biological sciences, it has, no doubt, in many quarters been met with a certain reluctance and a great deal of misunderstanding. We have now to a large

extent succeeded in competing with diseaseproducing agents in the environment, or at least we have the possibility of doing so. In the future, it will be necessary to lay much more emphasis on disease-producing agents and weaknesses that are inherent constituents of the individual. A future medical research and training that does not include genetics on equal terms with bacteriology, virology, biochemistry and environmental medicine will be very unrealistic, and is predisposed to serious drawbacks. It is no longer a matter of trying to get the medical profession interested in genetics. The public will require that something be done about the increase of genetic disorders.
Some indications of the increase of genetic disorders may be extracted from mortality statistics. From 1936/40 to 1951, the general mortality in Sweden decreased from 1,169 to 987 per 100,000 population per year. A classification of the different causes of death according to the 1948 international list A discloses some interesting features which illustrate this point. During this short period of only some 15 years, deaths due to infections and parasitic diseases have decreased from 107 to 28, and respiratory diseases, most of which are due to bacteria or viruses, from 114 to 54 per 100,000 population per year. Table 1 shows some further changes. A satisfactory explanation of these changes is, of course, not possible without detailed studies of individual disease entities, but it appears justifiable to conclude that the trends of increase concern groups of diseases for which genetic factors are of relatively high significance.
Figure 1 illustrates the same trends in

174

175

another way by showing the relative increase or decrease of the different groups of causes of death in Sweden 1936/40 to 1951. Those groups in which genetic factors appear to contribute significantly have been marked by an arrow.

Reservations have, of course, to be made insofar as the official statistics as yet pay no attention to genetic diseases or defects. One also has to observe that the general conclusion of an increasing importance of genetic disorders has been based on an

30
TvJMORSU
10

«ELATIVE FftEOUUNCIES OF DIFFERENT CROUPS OF CAUSES OF DEATH IN SWEDEN \<üb/A0 TOiqÇI. CLASSIFICATIONS A U O f e DIMGTO THE WH« IMTEItUAtTlOUM. UST A .
I1SJ

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Hfl

176 Eugenics Quarterly

TABLE 1 INCREASE OR DECREASE OF CERTAIN CAUSES OF DEATH IN SWEDEN 1936/40 TO 1951. Classification According to the 1948 International List A. The Figures of Column 1 and
2 per 100,000 Inhabitants Per Year

Causes of Death

Increase (+) or Decrease (--)
1951 as compared to 1936/40

Infectious and Parasitic Diseases Respiratory Diseases Genito-Urtnary Disease's Digestive Diseases Mental Diseases and Defects . Congenital Anomalies Tumors Circulatory Diseases
Nervous Diseases

28.3 54.3 25.3
39.0
4.6 7.3 164.6 323.9 146.5

--78.7 --59.7 --20.7 --12.0
+ 1.6 + 2.3 + 8.6 +18.9 +21.5

-Ts.5
--52.4 --45.0 --23.5
+53.3 +46.0 + Sä + 6.2 +172

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

analysis of the different components of the group as they appear in Sweden. For instance, the major cause of death in group III is diabetes, whereas nutritional diseases in the sense of vitamin deficiencies or starvation hardly exist in this country.
Without further elaboration of this point, however, I think that the tendencies are clear enough to underline the justification of the views expressed in the first paragraphs of this paper.
Similar changes have been observed in other Western countries. In the United States, for example, deaths due to pneumonia, influenza, tuberculosis, diphtheria, typhoid fever and other intestinal infections have been reduced to approximately 1/8 from 1900 to 1947 (Neel, 1951).
Some important changes are under way due to the increasing number of people who reach old age.This means that a larger number of individuals will survive to become the victims of those genetic disorders which appear later in life. This trend is perhaps most obvious in the field of certain genetically determined mental diseases as, for example, the major psychoses (the clinical groups of schizophrenia, manic-depressives and various types of senile psychoses) .
During the relatively short time that has elapsed since the turn of the last century, medical genetics has developed from a sort of pedigree curiosity of rare defects to a vast field of research that basically concerns almost every clinical discipline. But few

medical schools and research centers have as yet wholeheartedly opened the gates and accepted the necessary and practical consequences of this development.
Although much has been learned about medical genetics during the last 50 years, we are badly in need of organized attacks on the important issues with which we are faced today. Some of these concern the epidemiology of genetic diseases. Severe genetic diseases and defects disable some 5 to 10 per cent of the Western populations. Yet, even today, one does not find genetic diseases mentioned in epidemiologic surveys or handbooks. We need more information about gene action in terms of biochemistry and developmental pathology. Only the first steps have been taken in the investigation of the genetics of common diseases. Genetic analyses will undoubtedly reveal a vast number of new etiologic entities. Until we know more about such entities, the analysis of the type of genetic transmission and the distribution of pathologic genes in the populations must often remain more or less speculative.
Genetics has opened a large new field of medical research, but already at our present level of knowledge we have reached a period when a number of practical applications are not only possible but highly desirable. In the following we will consider one such field, viz. the estimation of individual genetic risks and how such estimates may be used in clinical practice. The expression

177

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

"genetic counseling" has now been generally accepted to specify such practical procedures.
Basic Elements of Counseling
Genetic counseling is b a s e d on a thorough knowledge of general genetics and more specifically of the genetic features of individual morbid entities. Although the principles are easily understood, counseling can be learned only by serious studies and experience. Its practice, to be professionally acceptable, should be reserved for the specialist in medical genetics. The patient or family who wants such advice should, together with a full history and details of the clinical examinations, be referred to the medical geneticist. Further clinical studies or evaluations of individual family members, which may prove necessary, should be carried out in collaboration with the clinician, but the responsibility of the genetic interpretations and the explanations should always lie with the medical geneticist. This requirement appears desirable and necessary as there are no cookbook answers to the problems of genetic counseling. Medical genetics is a specialty and should remain so. It is neither desirable nor practical to require that every clinician should specialize in this field. On the other hand, it is necessary for him to have some knowledge of general principles and to be informed about how much and what kind of assistance he may expect from the medical geneticist. In this paper I intend to give some such general information.
I have deliberately used the expression medical geneticist. A specialist in this field should, besides his M.D., have at least a basic university degree in general genetics, three years' training in a recognized center for human or medical genetics and an additional two years' training in optional clinical departments.
How human geneticists who are not physicians should be incorporated in counseling procedures is a problem that we have not, so far, been faced with in Europe.

Here human genetics, with few exceptions, has been developed by physicians and not by geneticists, as largely has been the case in the United States. Perhaps this should create no problems at all, as human geneticists could collaborate with the clinicians on similar terms as, e.g. clinical psychologists collaborate with psychiatrists. In any case, to make the distinction clear, I suggest the expression medical geneticist for a physician specializing in genetics and human geneticist for a Ph.D. in genetics who is specializing in the human field.
Basically, the object of genetic counseling should be to give information about the nature of genetic diseases and defects and to explain the risk a specific individual may run of contracting such a disorder. For clinical or private patients, specific advice should, in general, be avoided. Counseling or decisions about the desirability of children is, of course, a highly personal matter. Some patients will consider a risk of 10 per cent high, others negligible. Many patients will stress this point as they have been accustomed to specific advice from doctors which has to be followed in detail. The counselor may to some extent solve this dilemma by explaining what decision he himself would make under similar circumstances, but stressing that personal matters influence his decision as well as do cold figures.
Quite often parents who have a child with some congenital malformation of obscure etiology or some genetic disease fear that the same disaster will be repeated in all subsequent children, and may suffer mentally from a feeling of guilt or inferiority. In such cases, information given by the experienced medical geneticist is the rational psychotherapy.
In some countries, as e.g. in Scandinavia, where sterilization and abortion on genetic grounds is regulated by law, another aspect of counseling enters the picture. In Sweden, such operations are in principle optional and will be granted by a special committee of the Royal Medical Board only on request and after rigorous control of

178 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

the premises. However, in this controlling procedure will enter also the broader aspect of the desirability of the reproduction of individuals affected with certain genetic diseases or carriers of corresponding genes. In such cases, it should be noted that the individual concerned has already made a decision of his own by applying for sterilization after receiving genetic information. In other cases, sterilization cannot be strictly voluntary. Applications may be made by guardians of individuals who, due to mental disease or defect, are incapable of judgment in a legal sense. The total responsibility of granting or rejecting a sterilization then rests on the above-mentioned committee.
The idea that eugenic sterilization or abortion would substantially decrease the load of genetic disorders has, of course, since long been abandoned. Still these operations are of definite value for individuals who do not want to or cannot use other methods of birth control. The medical geneticist of the committee scrutinizes the genetic material of the application and makes a decision in regard to the justification of granting abortion or sterilization on such grounds. It should perhaps be mentioned that these operations seldom are granted on genetic reasons exclusively, but rather on mixed genetic, social and medical grounds. For example, the largest number of sterilizations concern mentally defective individuals where the major reason is that they are not very well fitted to raise children.
Genetic counseling, in a wide sense, consequently has its individual as well as medico-social aspects. The latter are concerned with the genetic risks for larger groups of people and how these risks can be met by public information, legislature, changes of the environment and other procedures. This field of activity, which could be called epidemiologic control of genetic disorders, has hardly been touched upon yet insofar as public health organization and planning

are concerned. I should like to make perfectly clear that such undertakings have practically nothing in common with previous so-called eugenic movements, the most outstanding effect of which has been to discredit medical genetics. In all Western countries, I consider it a first-rate desideratum that experts of medical genetics participate in public health work.
The increasing importance of genetic disorders and the fact that approximately one individual out of ten is exposed to appreciable risks of disease, severe disability or death primarily due to genetic dysfunction also make it highly desirable that international organizations, e.g. WHO, start some serious thinking about these problems. The practising physician will, perhaps, take a greater interest in the individual aspects of counseling as his immediate concern should be his patients and their welfare. To explain such counseling, one may, schematically, separate theoretic and empiric risks.
Theoretic Evaluation of Genetic Risks This simply implies the use of Mendelian
principles to calculate the probability that an individual will inherit a specific morbid gene. The practical application of this method still has severe shortcomings of which the most important are that it requires:
(1) monogenic inheritance (2) adequate diagnostics referable to the
genotypic level (3) reliability in separating different
genetic entities which superficially may impose as the same clinical disease (4) age-independent diagnosis or adequate knowledge of the variation in the age of onset
Unfortunately, these conditions are rarely fulfilled, but considerable advances may be expected in the future as our knowledge pertinent to (2) and (3) improves.
Figure 2 has been constructed to demonstrate some common examples of theoretic risks. It should be observed that the pre-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

DOMINANT

ONE PAÎtNT DISPLWNq

C^

"SIHPl-E DOH. D1SOS.BER.WITH COHPLETE PENETRANCE.

AFFECTED CHILD
RECESSIVE
BOTH W2£UTS MOÜHRU BUT CRÜÜías OF OU£ SltfPLÊ" tec. MoßöiD CEMÉ. WITH COMPLETE PEVJETRhWOE IU ÖOUßLE bOSE AS SHCWH By THE APPEARANCE OF AU AFFECTED CWLD.

A
25'/.

ß\S<. f

ONE PAÎB1T A SIMPLE R.ECDI50to£ft.WTH COHfLETE
\)T KCt«.i\tÄ OF IDENTICAL HOS&lb CjENE AS SHOW W TW£
5W OF (\ SIHlLKai-Y ftfFECTEb CHILD.

AL I /£\
Rist FOR.

¿"0°/

\WITH COHPLETÈ A . L/MKELATED TALENTS

THE OTHER. PATLB1T B. PAÜÉMTS h s T C o u S I U S

RISK FOB.
CHILbREN
NIFICRUT **

* T Í fciSKT-oR.

CHILDREN

IF THÉ OlSofi-DEÖ. IS J

X FT

ONÉ HUSTACCOUMTFORTHE ADDITIONAL

PiLO&l&IUTy THAT THIS PARENT HAS i£-

CEIYED ONEPATHOLOGIC GENÈTUtOOCiH

THE UWiHATED LI(JE lMCB£ASlMC,T«ElilS)C

¿EXLINKED ¿IMPLE RECESSIVE
(COMPLETE MALE "PARENT AFFECTED WITH A M R E
·O
·o NO Ö.ISK FORCHILMEN BUT ftU. S WILL B ECATIR1ERS
O'/.

10TH PARENTS NORMAL 6UTTHE\U1F£ A CA8SÜEH AS SHOWN BY THE ATPE^RPlNCE OFftNAFFECTED BOY.

RUT f O % WILL
FIGURE 2

o^ soy. RISK FOR 5UBSEOUENT BOYS

180 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

dictions are valid only if the premises given having its individual properties. There is

in the text are fulfilled. In every case, it certainly some difference between giving

will, of course, be necessary to examine the the parents a risk figure of 1/100,000 and

parents and siblings and highly desirable to 1/4, although it should be admitted that

collect as much objective data as possible probably in 99 cases out of 100 the first

about other relatives.

estimate would have been correct.

Some actual examples

· II. A young lady wishes to marry her first cousin. One of her sisters, who married a

I. A 36-year-old woman with a 4-year-old resident of the same rural district, has two

boy who at the age of 6 months had been children, one of whom was recently diag-

.diagnosed as a chondrodystrophic dwarf in nosed as a case of juvenile amaurotic idiocy. an orthopedic clinic inquired about the She inquired about the risk that her chilrisk of having another similarly affected dren would contract the same disease.

child. Neither of the parents were dwarfs. According to the extensive investigations

Without further investigations, one would in Sweden by Sjögren (1931), juvenile

have given the following information: This amaurotic idiocy is a clinical and genetic

is apparently a case of genetic chondrodys- entity due to a single recessive gene differ-

trophy known to be due to a dominant ence. The frequency of the gene lies be-

pathologic gene. The majority of the chon- tween 1/100 and 1/250 but may be even

' drodystrophics are new mutations and higher than 1/100 in certain geographic

therefore have normal parents and siblings. isolates. As the sister is a hétérozygote, the

The mutation frequency is approximately chance that the inquirer is also a hétérozy-

1/100,000 newborns. The risk of having gote is 1/2. The coefficient of relation be-

another similarly affected child should be tween first cousins is 1/8 and the chance

the same as the mutation frequency, or that both partners of the planned marriage

negligible.

will be hétérozygotes is 1/16. Consequent-

However, a closer examination of the ly, the theoretic risk for the children is

family revealed important complications 1/64. Naturally, if it should happen that

which made the above conclusion invalid. the couple has one child with the disease,

The parents, who were first cousins, both the risk for subsequent children will in-

had a short stature and displayed skeletal crease to 1/4 as the heterozygosity of both

disproportions suggestive of a slight or partners is then certain. In case the in-

moderate chondrohypoplasia. This trait, quirer marries an unrelated man, the risk

which had no clinical significance, was for the children is between 1/400 and

found in two younger sisters of the patient 1/1,000.

(there were no further siblings) and could

be followed as due to a simple dominant Empiric Risk Figures

gene with complete penetrance when the pedigree was extended. Now the following interpretation appeared more likely. The patient apparently is homozygous for a rare dominant gene, the heterozygous expression of which is only slight or moderate skeletal disturbances. As both parents are hétérozygotes for the same gene, the risk for homozygosity and gross disturbances for each child is one in four.

In most cases that occur in the practice of a counselor in medical genetics, the type of inheritance is not sufficiently understood or sometimes one cannot even be sure that genetic factors are of decisive importance. Furthermore, the question of the genetic homogeneity of most clinical disorders will" add to the complexity. Pending further investigations about the details of the genetic background, which will require long-

This case demonstrates the necessity of term projects for every disorder, there has

regarding each counseling procedure as been only one way to get useful informa-

181

TABLE 2
EMPIRIC RISK FIGURES FOR A NUMBER OF GENETIC OR SUPPOSEDLY GENETIC DISEASES AND DEFECTS

Diseases or Defect

Approximate
Frequency Among New-
borns or Morbid
Risk

Risk for Sibs.
Parents Unaffected.

Risk for Sibs One
Parent Affected

Risk for Children of One Affected Parent

Anencephaly

Cleft Palate Alone Congenital Cataract with Idiocy

Congenital Luxation of the

Convulsive Disorders (Grand AiaT)

.

Diabetes Metlitus (Appearing before the age of 50)

Harelip or Harelip Combined with Cleft Palate

Hydrocephaly

Imbecility or Feeblemindedness (Unspecified)

Malformations of the CNS

Microphthalmus or Anophthalmus with IdiocyMongoloid Idiocy Pyloric

Spina Bifida Strabismus

1:1,000 1:10,000 1:2,500
1:50,000 1:1,000
1:1,500 1:300
1:200 1:1,000 1:1,000 1:100 1:200 1:100 1:100,000 1:700 1:250
1.0-1.5:100
1:1,000
1:50

1 0.01 2-12 15
3 5 2-4 15-20 4 1 13-18 3 15 10
5 10-15
1 10

50 17 10 10-15
14 30-40
15
10-15 17

50 7
10 10 3-6 10-15
2
30
15
10-15

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

tion. For a very large number of clinical disorders, many of which are quite common, twin and family research, together with careful studies of the environmental conditions under which a specific disorder may develop, have shown that genetic factors contribute significantly to the etiology. This contribution, of course, varies considerably and in some cases its practical significance may be doubted. However, so far it has not been possible to extract unambiguous information from these data about the mechanism of inheritance. Therefore, for practical purposes, one has to be content with empiric risk figures which should be regarded only as temporary substitutes. To obtain such figures, certain principles of collecting the data must be strictly followed. The index cases or propositi, must represent the same clearly defined clinical entity and constitute a random sample. The family members must as far as possible have been professionally examined. Then the morbid risks which can be calculated for children, siblings and other relatives may be used as reasonable estimates in actual counseling.

By the use of this procedure, a number of known pitfalls are avoided; but there are many complications which, at our present level of knowledge, cannot be taken care of. The only counselor who is able to select the most reasonable prediction is the trained medical geneticist.
Some actual examples
I. A 55-year-old man presents the following problem. He has two sons aged 25 and 19 by his wife who is now 50. The older son developed a schizophrenic psychosis at the age of 21 and since that time has been in a mental hospital. The younger son, who has an excellent school record, now wants to go to a university to study law. His father wants to know what the chances are that also this son will contract schizophrenia and if the stress of higher studies is likely to influence these chances.
The investigation confirmed a diagnosis of catatonic schizophrenia for the older son. Among close relatives, no further cases of schizophrenia were revealed. Neither parent displayed any gross psychopathology. The mother was a shy, somewhat sus-

182 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

picious and rather self-occupied person a stillborn girl with anencephaly and spina

with hypochondric tendencies. She had bifida. There are no pathological findings

had some short neurotic episodes in her on the parents or the living girl. No other

twenties. The younger son was an am- cases of malformations have occurred

bitious but rather introvert person with among the relatives known to the inform-

some further moderately expressed schizoid ant. The gynecologist asks what the chances

features. His IQ was 135. He had no his- are that this woman by the same husband

tory of mental illness or adaptational diffi- will have (1) another child with anenceph-

culties.

aly, (2) another child with a malformation

An individual does not contract a schizo- of the central nervous system irrespective

phrenic psychosis unless he has inherited of type.

specific genetic potentialities. There is at present no general agreement whether these potentialities are inherited from one or both parents. Besides heredity, other yet unknown factors, probably environmental and in the form of stress, must coincide to cause the disease. Most cases of schizophrenia occur between the age of 15-50 years. Consequently, the chances that the parents will contract the disease are slight. It is justified to regard the mating as one between two non-psychotic individuals. Under such circumstances, the empiric risk for a sibling of a schizophrenic has been found to be approximately 10 per cent, provided he lives to be 50 years old. The corresponding risk for a random individual in the Swedish population is approximately 1 per cent. It is possible that the mental characteristics of the mother and the younger son indicate a genetic susceptibility for schizophrenia or neurotic illness related to this disease. This might increase the abovementioned risk but, again, there is no gen-

The general morbid risk of anencephaly with or without spina bifida (which here equals the incidence among newborns) in Sweden is approximately 1/1,000, with a slight preponderance for females. Investigations here and abroad indicate that the repeat risk for siblings is in the neighborhood of 1 per cent. There is no proof that all cases of anencephaly biologically represent the same thing. There is reason to suspect that this defect may be caused by pathologic genes as well as by non-genetic factors. In a Swedish series (Book and Rayner, 1950), the empiric risk of spontaneous abortions in sibships with an anencephalic was increased to about 20 per cent. We have reason to suspect that some of these abortions may concern embryos with central nervous system malformations. This possibility seems worth consideration in planning of the treatment of threatened abortion when the patient has had an anencephalic child.

eral agreement on this point. On the other The total general morbid risk for all

hand, there are no findings which indicate CNS-malformations in Sweden is approxi-

that in this case the risk should be less than mately 1/500. Investigations in Great

10 per cent. The figure of 10 per cent is an Britain indicate that this compound risk

average risk calculated empirically from a for siblings of anencephalics is 2 to 7 per

large amount of material on families of this cent. All the risk figures given here are

same type. One must always make the res- purely empiric and derived from series of

ervation that an individual family occa- unselected families. A specific family may,

sionally may represent an exception. Final- of course, represent an exception.

ly we don't know in what way university studies would influence the risk. II. A 28-year-old woman married to an unrelated man had one spontaneous abortion, one normal and healthy girl and now

In Table 2 a number of empiric risk figures have been summarized to exemplify the approximate risk involved for different disorders. These are all figures which I have found useful for counseling in Sweden.

183

They should not be taken too literally, but rather as indicating the magnitude of the average risk. Furthermore, they should not be used without due consideration of the complexities of genetic counseling as outlined earlier in this paper.
Conclusions
By now there are several centers with counseling services in the United States and the Scandinavian countries. They have all started on a modest scale. The general experience has been that these centers have met with increasing interest by the public as well as by clinical colleagues. As knowl-

edge of these genetic clinics and the kind of services they can supply has spread among physicians and the public, the number of private inquiries and referred clinical patients has increased rapidly. Therefore, it seems certain that these services meet a rather extensive latent need for sound professional information on genetics.
REFERENCES
BOOK, J. A. and RAAYNER, S. 1950. A Clinical and
Genetical Study of Anencephaly. Amer. J. Human Genetics 2:61-84. NEEL, J. V. 1951. Some Applications of the Principles of Genetics to the Practice of Medicine. Med. Clin. North Amer. 35:(2): 519-533. SJÖGREN, T. 1931. Die Juvenile Amaurotische Idiotic Hereditas 14:197-426.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

BOOK REVIEWS

CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY: Melville Herskovitz, Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 1955, 569 pp.
As shown by its subtitle this is an abridged edition of the same author's Man and His Works (1948). Though designed primarily as a text it should attract a wider public for several reasons. Its subject matter is of great human interest; its style is clear; its development is logical; it is relatively free of both theoretical dogmatisms and scientific technicalities; and it has an abundance of illustrative ethnological materials and excellent photographs. Basically descriptive, it broaches a number of theoretical problems, most of which are treated in balanced pro-and-con form, some of which are limited to indoctrinations of the Boas school of thought, and some of which are skimmed over with a light but far from decisive touch. Covering a very wide range of current ethnological findings, this is certainly one of the best introductions to its field. In what follows we limit ourselves to matters directly or remotely related to eugenic issues. These are primarily racial differences, relations of race and culture, and certain moot points in the theory of cultural development.
The two chapters on races dealing with

the evolution of man from earliest known fossil types to modern man and with modern racial differentiation are too brief for more than cursory treatment. Neither chapter uses the terms geographic isolation or mutation. While the author stresses the "consistency of change" toward larger size in the evolution of cranial capacity, he nowhere notes the considerable differences in this respect among modern racial types. One also wonders why HOOcc is given for the cranial capacity of Neanderthal man and 1300cc for "modern man." Which "modern" is this? An average of all extant types may conceal considerable differences among them. The author notes (27) that not all students of these matters class all modern races in the same species.
The chapter on existing racial differentiations is extremely sketchy. Mutation, geographic isolation and climatic selection as factors are neglected. In his discussion of the "breeding isolate" he consequently omits the fact that entire groups may be such and not merely family lines. While the extensive crossing of racial types is rightly emphasized, the problem of racial differentiation seems to be confused with variability in genetic composition within a given population. These are different

