Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Editorial comment
To cite this article: (1954) Editorial comment, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:2, 1-2, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987170 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987170
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

Vol I,No. 2June 1954

EU§TttÍCS ^UdTtCrly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

EDITORIAL COMMENT

The Organization of the World Population Conference

Any expression ofpublic interest in sci- After these replies had been received, the

ence through governmental action brings Council took definitive action.

a risk of damaging the freedom of scientific A Resolution of the Economic and Social

inquiry. Yet itis obvious that governments Council, June 10, 1952, isthe "charter" of

can play an important role in the advance- the conference. The Council had consid-

ment ofscience and inthe application of ered alternative proposals as regardsre-

scientific findings to public affairs. Can sci- sponsibility for the organization of the con-

ence enter theforum of human affairs ference. One suggested procedure was an

without losing its virtue? The problem be- assignment of primary responsibility to the

comes especially acute with respect toin- International Union as the recognized non-

quiries on subjects beset by conflicting governmental scientific association in this

interests, passions, and prejudices. It is field. This suggestion was rejected in favor

further complicated in actions involving in- of a decision that the conference be held

ternational relations.

under the auspices ofthe United Nations,

The plans for theWorld Population "in close collaboration with the InternaConference, to be held under the auspices tional Union forthe Scientific Studyof

of the United Nations in Rome, August Population and interested specialized agen31--September 10, 1954, represent aunique cies."

experiment in cooperative inter-governmen- According to a decision of critical im-

tal and private action in the advancement portance, the conference is restricted to

of science, with respect both for legal prin- scholars invited "in their individual capac-

ciples and for scientific principles. Viewed ity," rather than as representatives of gov-

in this light, the organization of the con- ernments, agencies, or organizations. Invi-

ference has great theoretical significance. tations are issued to experts nominated by

The idea of aworld conference on popu- governments (whether or not members of

lation problems under the auspices ofthe the United Nations), nongovernmental

United Nations was first advanced in a organizations, and interested specialized

UNESCO resolution. The Population Com- agencies, and a small number of other ex-

mission of the United Nations, after due perts with ascientific interest in population

consideration, recommended that action on questions.

this proposal be postponed indefinitely. The Council authorized "the Secretary-

The subject was again brought tothe at- General, in close collaboration withthe

tention of the Population Commission in International Union for the Scientific

a somewhat different light through a re- Study of Population and interested special-

quest to the Secretary-General of the United ized agencies, to establish a small prepara-

Nations by the President of the Interna- tory committee to becomposed of their

tional Union for the Scientific Studyof representatives and a small number ofin-

Population. The subject was referred by ternationally recognized population ex-

the Population Commission to the Econom- perts, this committee to assist the Secretary-

ic and Social Council for its consideration. General in formulating an agenda . . . . and

The Council directed the Secretary-Gen- in making the necessary arrangements for

eral to obtain the views of member govern- the Conference." The Secretary-General

ment on the desirability of holding such a has consulted this committee on all mat-

conference and on appropriate procedures. ters of principle and onmany details of

1

2 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

conference organization. And his decisions have, in fact, been in accordance with the recommendations of this committee.
The financing of the conference is also a cooperative venture. Its operational expenses are covered by appropriations by the United Nations as the sponsoring agency and by the Government of Italy as host. The International Union has received subventions for its expenses in connection with the conference and for grants toward the expenses of participating scientists from John D. Rockefeller III, the Ford Foundation, the Population Council, and private sources in France and in Italy. Assistance is also expected from the Governments of Brazil and India, and from the International Bank, the ILO, and UNESCO. The Population Association of America has received a grant from the Carnegie Corporation toward the expenses of United States scientists taking part in the conference.
A list of twenty-six special topics was selected for consideration in meetings of the conference. Primary responsibility for planning the program in each of the twenty-six special meetings and three plenary meetings was assigned to a particular scientist as "organizer." These twenty-nine organizers include citizens of eighteen nations. They have exercised active initiative but have maintained effective coordination through correspondence with the Population Division of the United Nations and with a Sub-Committee on Organization appointed by the Preparatory Committee.
Some of the topics selected for special consideration at the conference are subjects of more general interest; others are more specialized and technical in charac-

ter. Neither series is limited to questions of formal demography. Several of the meetings are focused on relations between population changes and economic development in countries in process of industrialization. Other meetings are concerned with biological and social aspects of population trends which have frequently been neglected in conventional treatments of population problems. One of these meetings is concerned with the genetic aspects of population trends.
It is expected that about 500 scientists, with broad geographical representation of the world's scientific community in this field, will participate in the conference.
The object of the conference is the exchange of ideas, the advancement of science, and the dissemination of scientific findings. It is recognized that knowledge is rarely advanced by the passage of resolutions. The Economic and Social Council prescribed that no resolutions on matters of policy be considered. The Preparatory Committee has carried this principle a step further in recommending that no attempt be made to formulate resolutions even on technical subjects. It is expected that the proceedings of the conference will be published and that they will provide an instructive document. Otherwise, the achievements of the conference will for the most part be intangible and invisible. It is, nevertheless, possible that they may be momentous in promoting a scientific approach to issues of weal and woe that are linked with changes in the magnitude, distribution, and characteristics of the world's population.

