Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The rages of Europe: Myths and facts
F. Keiter
To cite this article: F. Keiter (1963) The rages of Europe: Myths and facts, Eugenics Quarterly, 10:1, 22-32, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1963.9987538 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1963.9987538
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

THE RAGES OF EUROPE: MYTHS AND FACTS
F. KEITER
University of Wuerzburg Germany

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Having lived through a period of the wildest kind of exaggeration of racism in his own country, the author is particularly sensitive to semimythical, unproven ideas and speculations in the study of human races. He offers the following comments, therefore, in the hope of clarifying the concept of race in the light of recent genetic and anthropological investigations.
Races are intermediate between the individual and the human species. Efforts to formulate a typology for this intermediate region have often resulted in subjective and unscientific thinking. Here, for example, one would include what can be called emotional types, that is, those identified by facial expressions and the feeling responses thus aroused in the observer. Closely allied are what we may call semantic types, when the response aroused by the physiognomy is given a socially significant meaning. Thus for some racists a blue eye anywhere in the world is indicative of fair Nordic heroes who reached the given region some time in the dim past.
Then there are the logical types based on the variations in somatic traits such as coloration, stature, head form, and others, and their different combinations. Simply to make a statistical tabulation of the varied combinations of these traits in a given population is considered to give a scientific and hence valuable demonstration of the Mendelian independence or correlation of the traits and their various combinations. But it is not sound science when some combinations

of traits are made the basis of special types while other combinations are arbitrarily omitted. By this method Gobineau came to see only two different "primary racial types," the fair and dark; Ripley came to see only three important racial types in Europe; Deniker, six; Giinther, seven; Skerlj, ten; and Males, seventeen. The number of European "races" that can be abstracted by this artificial method becomes a function of the number of traits employed. Biichi found in Untertoggenburg, Switzerland, 47 actual among 81 possible combinations (81 = 34) of only four traits. If he used six traits, then he would have 64 combinations represented in his restricted materials of some 200 individuals. To make such combinations "races" and to choose arbitrarily some of them as important, calling the residual combinations "racially mixed," is a way of thinking which is absolutely pre-Mendelian but which still strongly influences much thinking on race in man.
The next types to be mentioned are functional types, held together by some sort of pleiotropic biological causality unifying a more or less large complex of single traits. The pigmentation of eyes, hair, and skin is correlated, making for fair and dark "types." In this category also may be placed body build or "constitutional types" (Kretschmer, Sheldon, their predecessors and followers). For the question of race it is of some importance to know how far such functional types break up the population into separate units. The sexes or the age levels have

22

Races of Europe

23

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

that consequence. No anthropologist tries to characterize populations without separating sex and age groups. We have used a general test for the deviation of "types" from the random distribution of the traits constituting the type. If there are many more individuals who have blue eyes, fair hair, and white skin in common than could be expected by random combination, then the scores for "fair type" vz. "dark type" show a broader variance in the population than the variance effected by random distribution. We have found the following standard deviations:

TYPE

Scores
for the Random type distribution

Fair-dark complexion

1.59

Heavy-lean bodybuild

2.55

Large-narrow metrical indices 2.53

Flat-pointed physiognomy 3.76

1.29 1.88 2.41 2.70

The typological deviations from random distribution can be very marked, but the distributions remain unimodal and normal. There is no breaking up of the population into the "types," at least those comparable to the splitting into different sex and age groups
The only legitimate approach to the study of human races is that based on an
analysis of the historico-geographical specializations of the genetical features of human populations. This involves a study of the gradations and adaptations of these features from place to place under the combined influences of physiographic and historical environments. We shall illustrate this approach from studies of variations among European populations, after the following series of general observations.
1. Individuality, or individual differences among members of a group, has probably been equally great from the time of the subhuman primates onward to the human populations of today. The

same may be said of the presumed "purer" races of the past. The idea of distinguishing pure from mixed races thus becomes a pitfall for the racist. It has been shown by Battaglia, Trevor, and others that race mixture does not increase the variance in the population at all once the different stocks are merged and fully mixed (panmictic). The same unexpected result shows up in our Hamburg families: parents who are dissimilar do not have more variable children than very similar parents.
These facts are of general importance, for they undermine the old idea that physical disharmony is characteristic of racially mixed humans, especially since extreme traits do not occur more frequently in mongrels than anywhere else. For research on the history of human populations the consequence is clear enough also: we are no longer entitled to infer the extent of racial mixture or purity in the past from a study of variances in anthropological traits.
2. There are no "pure-bred" races. In the natural, geographic-historical differentiations of mankind, we must not expect to find applicable the results of artificial breeding of races in livestock. The degree of unity, style, and high value in specialized directions achieved by skilled breeding cannot be expected in natural human races. On the contrary, human races are to be compared with the natural differentiation of races found in all kinds of animals and plants living in the wild.
3. Continuity in space and time is a very general feature of racial distributions. Therefore, it is possible to map racial characteristics in many cases in some sort of "isarithms" (lines connecting the points of identical value), comparable to the isobars in meteorological maps. Biasutti has presented "linee iso-

24 Keiter

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

cephaliche" ("isocephals") for the distribution of the head index in Italy; blood groups are mapped with "isogenes" for B or O, etc. Breaks in such continuities, at least in settled populations, are usually the exception.
4. Gaussian or normal distribution is the rule for individual variation in all racial traits within a population. That holds whenever we make any consistent scale for the assessment of the traits.
If we plot population means themselves, they too conform to a normal distribution. Population means of contiguous regions in Europe are distributed in most cases quite like individual values are distributed in a single population
Histograms for prehistoric skull populations give similar results. It is very interesting to see how the distribution of racial traits in a whole continent follows this statistical rule, despite the fact that until recently the belief in historic singularity dominated all analyses of type differentiation and classification.
5. We can calculate a grand mean for all the mean values of a trait in many populations. Then we can see in what directions the single populations deviate from that grand mean. In 49 series of prehistoric skulls, 32 different patterns of deviation from these grand means are possible theoretically. Not less than 22 patterns have been found empirically. In Tyrol, for 38 different population districts (Bezirkshauptmannschaften), 12 patterns of deviation from the grand mean for the whole country are theoretically possible, and 11 of these patterns have been found in existence (Keiter, 1933).
Such findings, of course, are not encouraging to the hypothesis of a small number of more or less universally distributed European races usually held in anthropology. A general rule that might

be deduced from these observations is that a very high proportion of all patterns theoretically possible are actualized more or less completely in the populations.
6. Biasutti's great work on "razze e populi della terra" makes broad use of a general principle in anthropological research that seems very sound to me. Let me baptize it the principle of shifting means (Prinzip der Mittelwert-verschiebung). Human populations differ mostly in the sense that their means shift from district to district and from one historical era to another, whereas the variance within the various populations remains about the same. Very often the numbers at one extremity of the distribution of variants become more frequent as the numbers at the opposite extremity decrease. That holds not only for populations and sub-groups therein but is also very clearly the way, for example, that changes in the means of measurements occur in successive age classes. Shorter children become rarer and rarer with ongoing age at about the same rate as taller children become more and more frequent. The principle of shifting means has the very convenient practical consequence that we have in hand all information worth having as soon as we know the value of the mean.
7. If the means shift in the same direction for a longer distance and with a plurality of parallel steps, then we get racial dines. The concept of clines has become very general in biological research today. It may be remembered that it was used very long ago by Heinroth and Rensch in Germany ("Formenketten").
The study of racial clines in Europe is very promising. Every cline must be proved empirically, since clines and their directions are not deductive necessities.

Races of Europe

25

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Every cline depends on some combination of climatic, orographic, and historical reasons. To discover these reasons is a desirable goal but one that has received little attention up to the present.
The data for Europe show clear dines for pigmentation. There obviously is not one single fair race opposed to other dark races, but progressive degrees of fairness and darkness are found from north to south. A cline for higher stature in northern Europe is not quite so clear but expressed well enough. The classic typology of three main races in Europe given by Ripley (1899) unconsciously made use of the facts of clines in pigmentation and stature:

ing out in an exact manner the regularities in geographical distribution is multivariate analysis, a statistically current summing up of all the single traits concerned in "supertraits." We are only beginning to employ such calculations in Germany; in 1958 the term "multivariate analysis" was used publicly for the first time in a meeting of the German anthropologists. The author himself is using a simplified procedure, omitting the calculations of correlation matrices but without loss of statistical validity. A number of different calculi meeting this requirement are possible, for example, the "Trennlogarithmus," a statistic of cumulated frequencies, and others. A

North Central South

Stature
tall medium short

Pigmentation
fair medium dark

Headform

"Races"

dolichoid = Teutonic, Nordic brachoid = Alpine dolichoid = Mediterranean

The Alpines are medium both in pigmentation and in stature compared with the fair, tall Nordics and the dark, small Mediterraneans. The third trait used in that classification is the headform. The center for brachycephaly is located in central Europe, the heads becoming narrower both in the direction of Scandinavia and toward Sicily
To this extent, Ripley's taxonomy would seem justified. But it was not long before it acquired a series of fictitious additions. To the round heads of the Alpines in central Europe were added round faces; to the round faces, small concave noses--without statistical investigations and quite incorrectly. All our data show, on the contrary, a very precise cline in the profile of the nose with small, concave noses in the north, increasingly bigger and more convex noses toward the European south. The Alpines have not concave but medium nose forms.
8. An extremely useful tool in work-

more exact description of these methods is not possible here. Some characteristic findings of multivariate distance between European populations on a tentative calculus are:

Ten traits: measurements and

eye color

TrQuCorr*

Men and women

4.25

The same population (Mennon-

ites) in eastern Germany

migrated 150 years ago to

Russia (Keiter, 1934)

0.77

Eastern and Western Schleswig-

Holstein (Sailer, in Fischer,

E.) 1.29

Two extremely different popu-

lations investigated by the

same author (Sailer, in Fisch-

er, E.), Fehmarn and Keuper-

franken

2.22

* TrQuCorr =: the sum of the differences in means divided by the standard deviations and corrected for intercorrelations.

26 Keiter

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

North Germany (Fehmarn, Sai-

ler)--Balkan (Weninger, in

Poch-Nachlass, Serben)

1.53

North Germany (Fehmarn, Sai-

ler)--Caucasus (Weninger in

Poch-Nachlass, Mingrelians) 2.47

North Germany (Fehmarn, Sai-

ler)--West African Negroes

(Weninger, Poch-Nachlass) 5.72

19 physiognomical estimations

North Germans--Frenchmen

(Keiter, 1960)

1.56

Northern Germans--Southern

Italians (Keiter, 1960)

2.11

Parallelism of geographic and anthropological distances between populations is often conspicuous but of course not necessary. For the known series of prehistoric skulls in Europe such a parallelism is surprisingly lacking for the earlier periods. Series are found to be similar when widely distant in space and dissimilar when near neighbors. Incompleteness and inconsistency of our archaeological materials probably account for this. The morphological distance of modern from palaeolithic skulls, however, agrees well enough with historical distance.
The multivariate distance between the sexes is smaller than the distance between European Whites and West African Negroes. A similar finding has been reported by Giles (1960) for the skulls of men, women, whites, and Negroes in the United States of America.
9. The interpretation of anthropological findings on European populations, especially with regard either to historical connection or historical uniqueness of certain complexes of traits, is hampered very much by the small number of traits available. The logical principle of reconstructing racial history is the same as in historical reconstruction.

Fritz Graebner termed it "Quantitaetskriterium." Similarities have to be so frequent that they cannot be caused by mere chance. Although the random emergence, for example, of the same complex of traits in Sweden and Sicily may produce individuals in both countries that look somewhat alike, incorrect diagnosis of anthropological relationship becomes less likely when many trait-complexes are assessed simultaneously.
To enrich the resources of racial traits available for comparison, the Vienna School of Anthropology, where the author himself was a pupil, has tried to describe populations in terms of many finer qualitative traits of physiognomy. Within the relatively limited area of Germany, Scheidt (1931) and the author found in 68 out of 125 such comparisons remarkable differences between local populations. For Italy, the author has worked with 10 different local populations. For France, a large sample has been compared physiognomically with Germans and Italians with the result that the geographic and the anthropological distances of the three populations from each other agree very well (Keiter, 1961).
Such cautious methods are valuable in other anthropological work also. We were able to differentiate in Hamburg without previous knowledge of descent between western and eastern Germans who had been investigated to establish paternity (Kneiphoff, 1955).
It seems clear, however, that many physiognomical differences definitely belong more to the range of individuality than to race.
10. We anthropologists have all too frequently not been very careful in determining whether differences between populations really are differences in genetic endowment. There seems to be a

Races of Europe

27

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

certain predisposition among biologists to deem differences found between living forms as primarily genetic. In man we have learned how erroneous such an assumption may be. There is always the possibility that differences may mean merely collective phenotypes, not racial genotypes. Indeed, the cultural anthropologists in the last generation have been taught to think preferably in terms of differences in collective phenotypes and to stress differences in learned behavior. Although the physical anthropologist is readier to attribute morphological differences between populations to genetic origin, he should be aware of other possibilities as well. Genetic differences between populations cannot be simply assumed; they must be demonstrated. It can be said, however, that environmental forces have rather unspecific effects, while the specific formation of body and personality requires endogenous, genetic factors. Thus a race might easily and rapidly become taller in a favored environment, but Mongols can scarcely be changed into Caucasians or Lapps into Armenians by environmental influences.
The general European brachycephalization is a case in point. I am not able to solve its mystery. I observe, however, that within my own family investigations, the head form turns out to be less heritable than many other bodily traits. That is a finding that favors the hypothesis of change in the collective phenotype of Europeans. I doubt the often quoted distinction betwenn curvoccipital and planoccipital brachycephals (Toldt). Is not an increase of planoccipitalism simply parallel to the increase in cranial index? The author's own experience with the "Karnerschaedel" in the ossuaria of the Austrian Alps has led him long ago to that suspicion. Environment-

al influences on the head form are relatively easy to imagine, because a change in shape need not affect the total mass of the head. The same mass (though being in itself genetically determined) can be formed either as longer and narrower oi\ shorter and rounder.
11. The extent of the average variability of anthropological traits decreases as one proceeds from single individuals to groups of families and to massed populations. It seems that these stages in the narrowing variance from the individuals up to the single mean for a whole region have never been shown empirically. According to Steiner's data, the standard deviations for the frequency of whorl patterns in 180,000 fingers of school children in the district ("Landkreis") Harburg, south Hamburg, become smaller and smaller as the size of the population groups, whose means are compared, becomes larger and larger:
Standard deviation
153 individuals 78 trios, child-mother-father 49 small villages, variation in means 59 big villages, variation in means 10 small towns, variation in means
1 Landkreis Harburg, grand mean
It becomes clearer with such a demonstration how inadequate is the simple statement "in the Landkreis Harburg, 30 per cent of all fingerprints show whorls." Where in these different degrees of variability does the interest of the raciologist begin? How are chance, genetic drift, and significant differences within the Landkreis Harburg to be distinguished correctly?
With these eleven points, our general remarks on the characteristics of geographic variation in European peoples come to their end. Now let us try to summarize the facts of race in Europe, freed from the burden of myths and semimyths.

28 Keiter

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

As far as the author can see, study of racial traits of the body has diagnostical validity, ecologicalvalidity, and validity for historical reconstructions. The diagnostical reliability of our data in ascribing European individuals correctly to their place of descent is good, much better than many workers in field might suppose. As was shown by the author at the Paris Congress, August 1960, blood groups and dermatoglyphs are of rather poor value for that purpose, whereas an thropometry and physiognomical analysis give high percentages of correct diagnoses in the attribution of individuals to their population. Here in the United States it may sound curious to say that by taking into account all kinds of bodily information available an anthropologist can, in 90 per cent of all cases, assess correctly whether an individual born in Germany came from a northern district of that country or from one only 300 miles to the south. Such a high degree of geographic differentiation can be expected in the old peasant populations of Europe.
The ecological interpretation of the distribution of racial characteristics in Europe by means of physiological or genetic adaptations is still at its beginning. Today in anthropology the zoological rules of Bergmann, Gloger, and Allen are much alluded to. I must confess that I am impressed by them also. At least we have in them a theoretical tool to account for a certain, if not too great, percentage of the difference found between European populations. In pigmentation for example, the fulfillment of Gloger's rule in European man is notable. It is clear that pigmentation decreases step by step as one proceeds northward in Europe. Keiter (1938-1940) has distinguished a southernmost belt with pre-

vailingly dark-brown eyes in Spain, North Africa, and the Orient; a second belt of brown eyes in Italy, the Balkans and southern France; a third belt of characteristically color-mixed eyes in central Europe, Northern France, and Russia, and a fourth and last belt of blue eyes in northern Europe and around the Baltic. The difference between darkbrown and simply brown eyes usually is not stressed enough. Color-mixed eyes are easily taken for a sign of race mixture, though they are only a step in depigmentation. Completely blue eyes in northern Europe, however, are by no means universal, nor is there reason to suppose them to have been so in any "purer race" of the past. If observation is exact enough, some slight pigmentation can very often be found in blue eyes also.
The Bergmann rules which calls for taller stature in northern races needs some modification. Bulky build as an adaptive response to colder climates against too much loss of body heat should be added to taller stature as general characteristics of northern populations. Bulky build or athleticism is clearly a general trait increasing in Europe from west and south to north and east. Taking five measurements together, we get for the Fehmarn Islanders in the Baltic Sea a sum of 2368 mm., for Spain only 2241 mm. Compared measurement for measurement, the Spanish male is on the average 3.4 per cent smaller than the Fehmarn male. This comparison shows about the maximum average difference to be expected between population groups within Europe. The size of the head increases in its absolute value from south to north remarkably, but in a general European survey, head size varies equally and in the same direction as stature.

Races of Europe

29

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Another cline that might be mentioned is hair form, though not as firmly established as the others. From north to south the hair becomes more and more wavy and, to a certain extent, approaches the Negro condition.
The many physiognomic differences that exist between European groups still have not been thoroughly investigated along these lines. There is, however, some reason for believing that flatter faces with stronger jaws and smaller noses are to be found in northern and eastern Europeans, and more pointed faces with big noses, slender jaws, and retreating chins in southern and western Europeans. The old popular notion of "Slavic" and "Jewish" faces coincides with that cline. Southern Europeans all in all do not look less "Jewish" than Jews themselves. Slavic faces are rather common in Sweden and northern Germany also. The agreement of these differences with the ecological rule of Allen is remarkable. More mass and less body surface are to be expected in northern animals, less mass and more body surface in southern animals. That is the essential difference between flat and pointed human faces also.
Ecological and historical considerations go hand in hand insofar as ecological adaptation is an aspect of the history of populations. But population history is a series of wanderings, movements, and displacements also. In ages past the population pressure in Europe followed a typical polarity. Peoples from the more favored southern climate with its higher cultural equipment pressed northward in consequence of their increasing number and superior cultural power. People from the poorer, less enviable north strove to get access to the more desirable southern parts of the continent. As they were poor in cultural equipment, they

had to compensate for this lack by personal bravery and heroism. In the northern nations it has always been tempting to interpret these barbarian enterprises as the outcome of heroic racial abilities and to stress their importance. To the southern nations, on the contrary, these northern heroes looked wild, subhuman, and were the objects of alarm. The movements southward since the Bronze Age are very conspicuous historically. Similarly, the Roman movement northward is also documented, perhaps even more fully. But other earlier movements to the north in neolithic times also occurred, although these are not generally acknowledged by German researchers. It has been denied recently by Kurth (1960). But we have good reason to believe that Childe, Coon, and Howells are correct on that point. With the beginning of agriculture in the neolithic area, the density of populations rose more rapidly in the south where it appeared first. Nonagriculturalists of northern Europe were not prone to accept quickly this new way of life and, as a result, immigration of southern peasant populations northward seems to be a very likely hypothesis.1
But because of the very close proximity of the Near East to the Mediterranean and to Europe proper, these wanderings of the neolithic agriculturalists must not be interpreted as a clash of very different races, but rather as events disturbing somewhat the continuous clines in the racial traits of European populations. For the Egyptians, the Greeks were a Nordic people; for the Greeks, the men from the Balkans were northern barbarians. The concept of north and south is
1 Of course it might be objected that in America corn and agriculture moved northward without the physical migration of Central Americans. But the situation is different in the New World, since the distances are much greater and the vast deserts have no parallel in Europe.

30 Keiter

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

a relative one, just as in the United States today the term 'Yankee' is a relative one.
In the past, when the concept of distinct racial types was current, the possibilities of reconstructing historic happenings seemed much greater than they do now with this new approach of continuous variation within and between populations. A hundred years ago, Hofrat Schliz dared to ascribe to every prehistoric site in Germany a special cranial type. But with the application of multivariate analysis of "super-traits," the errors and distortions of the past can be corrected, and a sounder approach can be achieved.
Our knowledge of the physiology and the ethology (genetical behavior characteristics) of European races in a strictly scientific sense isvery meagre. Up to now only suppositions and assumptions have been possible. It is rather likely, however, that adaptation to the very different climates of Europe has some relevance to population genetics and hence to human psychology also. Usually, phenotypic and genetic adaptations show some parallelism. A climate which tends to burn the skin deep brown in summer also tends to have more genetically deeply pigmented inhabitants. But does a similar parallelism also hold for the conspicuous differences in character and behavior of European populations? Are the various European 'national characters' a continually shifting field as wehave found to be true for the bodily differentiation of European populations? If at least we could rely on firmly established data for the collective phenotypes, genetical hypotheses could be formulated in a more than impressionistic way. Up to now nobody really knows, for example, whether the so-called 'stiffness' or reserve of the northern compared with the southern European really exists; or, if it does, how gen-

eral it is. Still less are we clear on the anthropodynamic meaning of 'stiff' behavior. Is there a greater or lesser tendency to suppress emotionality or simply less or greater emotionality? Is there a coincidence of these two factors? Twenty years ago I attempted a survey on the global history of mankind to find out what hints or insights could be gained from cultural history of promise for further research in human ethnology. That was an enterprise broadly parallel to the work of Boas, Linton, Benedict, Mead, and others but, because communication was difficult under the political conditions of those days, carried out independently. All these studies proved to be much more significant in downgrading the importance of racial facts for history than in bringing to light positive data.
As long as mythical and semimythical ideas on theracial traits of Europeans are not fully replaced by exact data, and the modern approaches of population research and population genetics are ignored, the parallel study of physiology and behavioral traits lacks foundation. The new ideas on the biology of populations, stemming mainly from English and American workers, have given the study of bodily traits a new fascination in itself. Such studies clearly suggest that the facts revealed by the continent-wide investigation of the biological dynamics of the population are not less grand and sublime than the fictions of any semimythical semiscience of races in Europe.
REFERENCES
ALLEN, JOEL A., 1905. The influence of physical conditions in the genesis of species. Radical Rev., 1 : 108-140. Reprinted in Ann. Report Smithsonian Inst. for 1905.
ASMUS, GISELA, 1952. Die Haarfarbe als Gradmesser der Bewanderung Niedersachens. Z. Morph. Anthropo. Stuttgart, 4 4 : 1-14.
BATTAGLIA, R., 1954. Genetica umana e l'incrocio razziale. In: Biasutti, R., Razze e popoli, I (2): 332-354.
BENEDICT, RUTH, 1940. Race, Science andPolitics.

Races of Europe

31

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Viking Press, New York. (German translation, Müller and Kiepenheuer, 1947,Uergen II, Oberbayern, p. 226).
BERGMANN, C., 1847. Über das Verhältnis der Wärmeökonomie der Tiere zu ihrer Grösse, Göttinger Studien.
BIASUTTI, R., 1954. Razze e popoli della Terra II. Le Nazioni Europee. Torino.
BIRDSELL, J. B., 1957. Some population problems. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia, 2 2 : 47-69.
BOYD, W. C., 1950. Genetics and the Racesof Man, pp. 453. Oxford.
Büchi, E., 1942. Untertoggenburg Anthropologische Untersuch, im Bezirk Untertoggenburg (Kt St. Gallen, Schweiz) Zürich, Orell Füssli, p.412.
CHILDE, G., 1935. New Light on the Most Ancient East. London.
Cold Spring Harbor-Symposia on Quantitative Biology, Vol. XV und XXIV, 1950and1959. Papers by Strandskov, Buzatti-Traverso, Washburn, Laughlin, Spuhler, Lasker, Coon, Birdsell, Lundman, et al.
CONRAD K., 1941. Der Konstitutionstypus als Ge-
netisches Problem. Springer, Berlin. 280 pp. COON, C., 1954. Climate and Race. Smithsonian
Inst. Rep. 1953, pp. 277-298. COON, C., 1954. The Races of Europe. Third
Printing. New York. 739 pp. DENIKER, J., 1912. The Races of Man (translation
from the French). FISCHER, E. (Ed.), Deutsche Rassenkunde, 12
vol. (Articles by Grau, Göllner, Keiter, Ried, Saller, Scheidt, et al.) GARN, S. M., 1961. Human Races. Charles Thomas, Springfield. 137 pp. GILES, E., 1960. Race and Sex in Crania by Discriminant Analysis. VIe Congrès internationale de sciences anthropologiques et ethnologiques, Paris.
, and H. K. BLEIBTREU, 1961. Cranial
evidence in archeological reconstruction: a trial of multivariate techniques. Am. Anthropol., 6 3 : 48-61. GOBINEAU, Comte A. de, 1853 (first printing). Essai sur L'inegalitè des Races Humains. GRAEBNER, F., 1923. Ethnologic In: Die Kultur d. Gegenwart, Bd. Anthropologie (III,5) pp. 435-587. Leipzig-Berlin, Teubner.
GÜNTHER, H. F. K., 1924. Rassenkunde des
Deutschen Volkes, 5. Aufl., Lehmann München. 513 pp. HEINROTH, O., 1922. Die beziehungen zwischen vogelgewicht, eigewicht, gelegegewicht und brutdauer. J. Ornithol., 7 0 : 172-285. HOWELLS, W. W., 1959. Mankind in the Making, the Story of Human Evolution. Doubleday, New York. 382pp.
, 1959. Boas as statistician. Am. Anthropol., 6 1 : 112-116.
HULSE, F., Adaption, selection and plasticity in ongoing human evolution. Human Biol. 32: 63-79.
HUNT, E., The continuing evolution of modern man. Cold Spring Harbor Symp., 2 4 : 245253.
, 1961. Malocclusion and civilisation.
Am. J. Orthodontics 4 7 : 406-422.

KAUFMANN, Hèlène, 1959. Analyse Anthropolo-
gique et Statistique de Walsers Orientaux et
de romanches de l'Oberhalbstein. Genève.
328 pp.
KEITER, F., 1933. Zur anthropologie des steiri-
schen obermurgebietes um murau. MAGW,
6 3 : 293-319 (Wien). , 1933. Geographische korrelationen
und kombinationstypen als hilfsmittel d. rassenanalyse (Tirol!) Anthropol. Anzieger München, 10.
, 1935. Deutsche und Berber. Die Gesichtszüge mitteleuropäischer und nordafrikanischer europider bevölkerungen. Z. Morph. Anthropol. 3 3 : 474-490.
, 1931. Schwansen und die Schlei. G. Fischer. 114 pp.
, 1934.Russlanddeutsche Bauern und
ihre Stammesverwandten in Deutschland. G. Fischer, Leipzig. 96 pp.
, 1938-1940. Rasse und Kultur, eine Kulturbilanz der Menschenrassen, S Bde. Stuttgart Enke, pp. 298,334, 500.
, 1941. Rasse und gesicht in Europa. insbes. Südeuropa. Verh. Physico-medica, Würzburg.
, 1943. Rassenkundliche Untersuchungen an französischen kriegsgefangenen. Z. Rassenkunde, XIV, pp. 30-43.
, 1955. Der Vaterschaftslogarithmus (Trennlogarithmus), Kurze Darstellung und Arbeitsanweisung (Mimeograph). Gerichtsanthropologisches Laboratorium, Hamburg.
, 1956, 1958. Gesichtszüge in Italien
und Libyen, I and II, Homo. ; , 1960. Norddeutsche, Franzosen, Italiener im morphognostischen paarvergleich. MAGW, 9 0 : 55-66.
, 1960. The Racial Diagnosis of Individuals. VI. Internat. Congr. Anthrop. and Ethnol. Sciences, Paris. KNEIPHOFF, Hiltrud, 1955. Veränderungen des rassischen Bevölkerungsbildes durch die Flüchtlinge, Homo 6 : 145-148. Göttingen. KRETSCHMER, E., 1961. Körperbau und Charakter. Springer, Berlin, 23./24. KURTH, G., 1959. Rassenbegriff, rassengenese, rassengeschichte, rassensystematik. In: Anthrop. Ed. Heberer, G., Fischerlexikon, Frankfurt Main, pp. 162-296. LEBZELTER, V., 1923. Zur physischen anthropologie der Balkan-Halbinsel MAGW, Wien.
, 1929. Rasse und volk in Südosteuropa. MAGW, Wien. LUNDMAN, B., 1952. Umriss der Rassenkunde des Menschen in Geschichtlicher Zeit. Munksgaard, Kopenhagen. 117 pp.
, 1954. Einige Veränderungen im anthropologischen typenspektrum Schwedens 1850-1950. Z. Morph. Anthropol., 4 6 : 205209 (Stuttgart).
MALES, Br., 1938. Die Rassentypen bei den Ser-
ben und Kroaten. Z. Rassenkunde, 7.
MARTIN, R., and K. SALLER, 1956. Lehrbuch d.
Anthropologie 3. Stuttgart. 2086 pp. (to be continued). NEWMAN, M. T., 1960. Populational analysis of finger and palmprints in Highland and Lowland Maya Indians, Am. J. Physical Anthro-

52 Keiter

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

pol., 1 8 : 45-58. Pöch-Nachlass, Serie A, 1927-1959. PhysischeAn-
thropologie II Bände. Monographien von Hesch, M. (Letten, Littauer, Weissrussen), Rolleder, A. (Serben und Montenegriner), Tuppa, K., (Mischeren und Tipteren), Wastl, J. (Baschkiren), Weninger, J., (Neger, Albaner, Armenier, Mingrelier) --und Weninger, Marg. (Georgier), aufgrund der österreichischen Kriegsgefanganen-Untersuchungen vom ersten Weltkrieg.
, 1956. The Race Question in Modem Science, Ed. UNESCO. Papers by Comas, Klineberg, Leiris, Levi-Strauss, Little, Rose, Dunn, Morant, Shapiro. Whiteside Inc., New York, 373 pp.
, 1955. Rassenfrage heute, Ed. Deutscher Koordinierungsrat und Ges.f. deutschjüdische Zusammenarbeit. Papers by Weinzl, Mainz, Salier, Koch, Andersen, Grozinger, Zurukzoglu, Schaller, München, Süddeutscher Verlag. 93pp. RENSCH, B., 1947. Neuere Probleme der Abstammungslehre, Die transspezifische Evolution. F. Enke, Stuttgart. 407 pp. RIPLEY, W. Z., 1899. The Races of Europe, a Sociological Study. Appleton, New York. 624 pp.
SAUSER, G., 1938. Die Oetztaler. Innsbruck. 715 pp.
SAUTER, M. -R., 1922. Les Races de l'Europa.
Payot, Paris. 341 pp. SCHAEUBLE, J., 1957. Anthropologische Studien in
den sog. Colonias alemanas in Südspanien. Z. Morph. Anthropol., 4 8 : 151-202 (Stuttgart) .
, 1956. Ober die wandelbarkeit Anthropologischer merkmale, tagungsbericht Freiburg d. Deutschen. Ges. f. Anthropol. Musterschmidt, Göttingen, pp. 151-162. SCHEIDT, W., 1931. Physiognomische Studien an niedeisächsischen und oberschwäbischen Landbevölkerungen. G. Fischer, Jena. pp. 128. Tafelband. SCHREIDER, E., 1957. Gradients ecologiques, regulation thermique et differenciation hu-

maine. Biotypologie, 18s 68-183 (Paris). SCHULZ, A. H., 1957. Die Bedeutung der Prima-
tenkunde für das Verständnis der Anthropogenese. Ber. 5. Tag Dtsch. Ges. Anthrop. Freiburg, Supplement zu Homo, pp. 13-28. SCHWIDETZKY, Isle, 1951-1952. Wo steht heute die Rassenkunde? Z. Naturwiss. Unterr. Bonn, 4: 344-351.
SHELDON, W. H., W. B. TUCKER, and S. S. STEVENS.
1940. The Varieties of Human Physique. Harper, New York.
SKERJ K, B., 1938. Zur Rassenkunde der Jugoslaven. Z. Rassenkunde, 1,
SOLE-SAGARA, 1955. Estado actual de la investagaciàn constitutional en Espana, Anthropologie differentielle No. 3 (Comptes rendus du congrès de Mayence 1953). Genève 1955.
STEINER, O., 1955. Empirische bestiramung der topographischen Streuung von anthropologischen häufigkeitszahlen, Z. "Homo" Göttingen, 6 : 114-122.
THOMA, A., 1956. Recherches sur l'affinité des caractères morphologiques. J. Genet. Humaine, 5 : 32-51.
, 1960. Anthropometric characters and selective survival. Ann. Historico-Naturales musei nationalis Hungarici, 5 2 : 471-480 (Budapest). TOLDT, C., Untersuchungen über die Brachycephalie der alpenländischen bevölkerung. MAGW (Wien), 4 0 : 69 and 197.
TREVOR, J. C., 1953. Race Crossing in Man. Galton Laboratory, London. 43 pp.
WALTER, II., 1959. Der Zusammenhang der Hautfarbenverteilung und Intensität ultravioletter Strahlung. "Homo," Göttingen 9 : 1-13. , 1960. Der einfluss der ostvertriebenen auf das anthropologische merkmalsbild der bevölkerung eines niedersächsis-
chen landkreises (Einbeck) Z. Morph. Anthropol, 5 0 : 222-232.
ZIECELMAYER, G., und H. K. LIEBERICH. Stati-
stiche Untersuchungen zur augenfarbenverteilung im südbayrischen raum. Acta genetica et Statistica Basel, 9 : 133-148.

