Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Retrospect: World population conference
N/A
To cite this article: N/A (1954) Retrospect: World population conference, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:4, 252-253, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987205 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987205
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

Retrospect: World Population Conference

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

The World Population Conference was held in Rome from August 30th to September 10th of this year under the auspices of the United Nations with the collaboration of the International Union for the Scientific Study of Population and the interested special agencies. This Conference was, in the words of the Secretary General, the largest meeting of scientists ever held under the auspices of the United Nations.
There was good reason for so large a meeting. The conference was concerned not only with demographic statistics but also with the inter-relation of population trends with economic and social development, with the use of resources, with biological heredity and population genetics, with the relation between fertility and intelligence, with legislation and services relevant to population change, with migration, and with the control of mortality and fertility. The significance of current trends in mortality, fertility, marriages, and migration had drawn together men and women from all the scientific disciplines concerned with the study of man, including economics, conservation, anthropology, sociology, psychology, biology and human genetics, medicine, and public health. There were in all some 660 participants and contributors, as well as observers and members of the press. They came from 44 nations, including 7 representatives from countries behind the iron curtain.
The meetings were held in the spacious conference rooms of the FAO, equipped with ear phones and provided with simultaneous translation by the interpreters of the United States. The attendance at the public meetings ran between 200 and 300 and at the technical meetings, which were held at the same time in a smaller conference room, between 150 and 200. At the general sessions held at the beginning and end of the conference there were never less than five or six hundred present. So large an attendance demonstrated a keen interest on the part of the participants, many of whom were foregoing their first opportunity to see the sights of interest in Rome.

There was little publicity and no startling announcements. The aim was a thorough scientific examination of the trends in population of the world today, their determinants and consequences, and their bearing on major problems facing the United Nations and the member states; and to bring about among the participants a better understanding of the interrelationships of their various disciplines. In both of these aims the conference was, we believe, immensely successful.
The greatest change of recent times has been the extension of human life. In the countries peopled by Europeans, expectation of life at birth has almost doubled in the past hundred years, and the possibility of a similar increase in the life span has been demonstrated in a number of the less developed countries. Probably no other advance promises so much for human happiness. It was natural, therefore, that the conference should give its first attention to trends in mortality in areas both of lower and of higher death rates. But if all mankind is to be permanently endowed with an average length of life of 70 years or more, the high fertility of the past must be reduced, or else at some near or distant point life would lose its value in a too crowded planet. Fertility was, therefore, the next subject of discussions: What are the present trends of low and high fertility, and what, for both areas, is the probability of change?
Pressures of population growth are among the causes of international and of internal migration, and these subjects occupied three sessions of the conference, together with accompanying problems of industrialization. Changing age compositions due to the lowering of mortality have economic and social consequences of no mean order, and these were considered at two sessions.
Finally all these problems lead up to the demographic aspects of economic and social development, which were discussed in four sessions. The first considered the problem of population and resources, the second that of population and agriculture, the

252

253

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

third that of the relation of population to capital formation, investment and employment (a subject of special interest to such institutions as the World Bank and all government planning agencies), and the fourth, the inter-relation of population, economic development and social change with special reference to programs for underdeveloped countries.
Two sessions on biological change indi cated the speed with which new avenues of approach are being opened in the study of the effect of population changes on the distribution of genetic factors, and considered the relation between fertility and intelligence. The representatives of the Communist countries contended that permanent biological changes were brought about solely by changes in the environment, and they denied the existence of the genes which are the postulates of modern genetics. But this view was not supported by the able group of human and plant and animal geneticists who were present. It was the general view that differences in mortality and fertility, assortative mating, migrations and other factors--many of them under human control--affect the distribution and frequency of various genes, and that these in turn play a large part in determining the differences which are found between human individuals.
Paralleling these sessions were a number of meetings deveoted to technical problems of materials and methods of demographic study and research. Finally on the last day of the conference two meetings were devoted to a summary of the findings on the outlook for world social implications of population trends.
Over 300 papers were prepared for presentation to the 28 working sessions of the conference. These papers were mimeographed and circulated to the discussants some weeks in advance. It was, therefore,

not necessary to read the papers at the meetings, and there was time for full discussion. At most of the meetings there was general agreement on a number of findings, and the rapporteurs were able to report not only the principal points in the discussions but also a set of general conclusions arising out of the meeting. The reports were circulated on the last day of the conference, and after correction by the participants in the various meetings, the rappprteurs will prepare them for final publication. It is hoped that the first volume of the proceedings containing these reports will be published shortly in a single volume of about six-hundred pages, making available, soon after the end of the conference, a summary of the conclusions reached in the various meetings. This publication will be followed by a complete documentation containing in a number of volumes, all of the papers presented at the conference and the more important discussions.
The conference was financed by grants from the United Nations and the Italian government, and grants from individuals and foundations. From a small surplus remaining and an expected additional grant, money will be available to supplement the provisions of the United Nations for publication of the proceedings.
The results of the conference should justify the confidence shown by these generous contributors. In the words of M. Sauvy, the eminent French demographer: "Without pretending to solve the world's problems, the World Population Conference of 1954 has laid a sound base for the weighty discussions now arising on these subjects in every country of the world . . . Bringing together scientists of diverse disciplines . . . it should make a discreet and telling contribution, directing men's interest away from wars toward the struggle for a better life."

