Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Genetic studies of population
Bruce Wallace
To cite this article: Bruce Wallace (1954) Genetic studies of population, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:2, 10-15, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987172 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987172
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

GENETIC STUDIES OF POPULATION*

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

BRUCE WALLACE
The Biological Laboratory Cold Spring Harbor, N. Y.

J.HE PURPOSE OF THIS ARTICLE is to pre-
sent a simple outline of the modifications that concepts in population genetics have undergone during the past two or three decades. Awareness of these modifications is important for those interested in eugenics but whose genetic experience is limited to the basic laws presented in the elementary textbooks; errors made by eugenists in the past can be traced in part to the limitations suggested by these basic lawsStudents of human genetics may be interested in a brief statement of the current direction of experimental studies in Drosophila populations; the nature of these studies may emphasize the unique nature of the data on human inheritance and the possible importance of these data in advancing our fundamental understanding of the genetic structure of populations in general.
The two outstanding themes one finds throughout the history of population studies are the increasing awareness of the nonuniformity of the individual members of the populations and the appreciation of the genetic consequences of this heterogeneity. We will attempt to emphasize these themes by reviewing the techniques and purposes of classical genetic studies and by tracing some of the experimental investigations of natural and laboratory populations.
The science of genetics is one of the younger biological sciences; its birth can be placed at 1900, the year in which Mendel's papers were rediscovered. Mendel, through
*This paper was prepared while the author was working under Contract #AT- (30-1) -557, U. S. Atomic Energy Commission.

the study of different varieties of peas and their hybrids, determined the methods by which hereditary differences are transmitted from parents to offspring; the rules describing this transmission are known as Mendel's Laws.
Following the rediscovery of Mendel's results, confirmatory studies were initiated in many laboratories. For convenience these studies may be regarded as having had two main purposes: (1) The confirmation and extension of Mendel's discoveries through the analysis of many different kinds of organisms; in the United States Dr. C. B, Davenport was especially active in this field. (2) The identification of the physical particles that control hereditary patterns. These studies, known as Classical Genetics, include the identification of the chromosome as the bearer of hereditary material; the recognition that the gene, the determiner of a given trait, is a segment of the chromosome; the proof of the linear arrangement of genes on chromosomes; and the construction of maps in which the position of each gene on the chromosome is determined within very narrow limits. Outstanding in carrying out these studies was the group of investigators led by Professor T. H. Morgan at Columbia University; the material that proved invaluable in their research was the common fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster. A third type of genetic analysis may also be mentioned at this point--developmental or physiological genetics. Much has been learned of normal physiological processes through the analyses of gene-controlled abnormal developmental patterns. This type of analysis includes the outstanding biochemical studies of the microbiological geneticists.

10

11

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

The aspect of these studies pertinent to the present discussion is the necessity for using, in both the classical and physiological studies, easily distinguishable genetic traits. In mapping the chromosomes, for instance, it is essential that each mutant individual develop its characteristically abnormal appearance and be classified correctly; in analyzing physiological properties, too, the normal and abnormal individuals must be unmistakably identifiable. These considerations led to the use of mutant genes whose effects are not markedly affected by uncontrolled genetic variability or to the establishment, through inbreeding, of experimental material in which uncontrolled genetic variability is reduced to a minimum. Preoccupation with these sharp and easily classifiable mutants led to the mistaken assumption among nongeneticists that most--even all--gene mutations are "good" in the sense that they give clear-cut ratios of affected and nonaffected individuals in every cross- This is an erroneous impression; there are not only many traits determined by the interaction of numerous, equally important genes with small individual effects (polygenic traits) but many of the so-called "good" mutations have their expressions sharply altered by variations in modifier genes. The experimental requirements of classical genetics are basically unfavorable for studies on genetics of natural populations. In the study of populations one cannot be satisfied with the early, over-simplified concepts; an appreciation of the genetic variability is essential.
In tracing the reason for the increasing emphasis on genetic studies of variation within populations, we can consider one technique of classical genetics. It was mentioned above that these early experiments were carried out largely with "pure" lines or carefully inbred strains; the necessity for establishing these lines was in itself an acknowledgement of genetic variability. By inbreeding brothers and sisters or by self-pollinating a plant for a number of

generations, one decreases the genetic variability in the line. An inbred line of this sort is extremely valuable in certain types of experiments: Different individuals from one such line have a highly uniform appearance when carrying the same mutant gene; these individuals also react similarly to specific environmental conditions. The mouse colony maintained at the Jackson Memorial Laboratory in Bar Harbor, Maine, is probably the most famous collection of inbred material; these mice are especially useful in cancer research. Different inbred lines obtained from the same original material are almost invariably different; each separate line has its own unique characteristics. This phenotypic divergence can be used as a crude measure of the genetic variation which was present but concealed in the original material.
Systematic studies aimed at the demonstration and measurement of genetic variability present in natural populations of Drosophila were initiated during the 1920's. As late as 1938, Th. Dobzhansky discussed the uniform appearance of individuals of one species (D. pseudoobscura) captured throughout the Death Valley region of California. Dobzhansky pointed out, however, that this apparent uniformity was no proof of genetic identity of the different individuals. The analyses used in this and later studies exposed recessive mutations that were ordinarily hidden in population beneath the cover of the dominance of their normal counterparts (alíeles). Beneath this façade of normalcy of most individuals in a population lie genetic variants capable of producing the most bizarre and pathological developmental abnormalities. The frequency of these recessive mutations hidden in natural populations is indeed startling; if a lethal malformation produced by a recessive gene affects one person in every million, approximately one person in every thousand will carry the responsible gene concealed by its normal allele. If a hundred-bed hospital were sufficient for the simultaneous study of all such

12 Eugenics Quarterly-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

affected persons within the United States, a city the size of Albany, N. Y., or Salt Lake City, Utah, would be required to house all carriers of the trait.
In sharp contrast to the relatively uniform outward appearance of the members of natural populations such as those of the Drosophila species discussed above, other species are composed of individuals with markedly different appearances- The latter species are called polymorphic. Man may serve as an excellent example of a polymorphic species. As early as 1930, Professor R. A. Fisher showed that permanent polymorphism within a population is best explained by the action of natural selection: If individuals carrying two different alíeles of a gene (for instance, the carriers in the above illustration) survive better or reproduce more rapidly than individuals carrying only one or the other of the two alíeles, both alíeles will be retained in the population and both of the contrasting appearances caused by the different alíeles will be "normal" for the population. The validity of this argument was quickly established for a number of polymorphic species. Finally--and this is very important-- it has been shown that those species composed of seemingly identical individuals can be polymorphic for cryptic genetic conditions. In the California Drosophila populations mentioned before, there are at least three microscopically distinguishable forms of one particular chromosome. Flies carrying the six possible combinations of these variants (which we may call AA, AB, AC, BB, BC, and CC) are indistinguishable in outward appearance but one can easily demonstrate that those with two different variants (AB, AC, or BC) are more viable, live longer, or are more fertile than those carrying two chromosomes of the same type (AA, BB, or CC). The co-existence of these "hidden" variants within natural populations results from an active and intense selection for their co-existence and not from a passive indifference on the part of natural selection. Natural selection is

continuously fitting together and trying different combinations of the hereditary endowment of these populations. The number of cases similar to this one is now so great that the absence of morphological differences upon which selection can act is no longer considered evidence that selection is inoperative.
In spite of the demonstration that natural populations carry enormous stores of genetic variation and that the existence of such variation is the result of natural selection, there persists a feeling that this demonstrable variation deals merely with genetic frills, that basically the different members of a species are identical. Now, genetics deals solely with the inheritance of differences; to postulate that important "genetic" structures are unvarying removes these structures from genetic analysis. Experimentally we are limited to the evaluation of the role observable differences play in population dynamics and to a re-examination of those situations which seemingly indicate a lack of variation.
The very same experiments that first demonstrated the existence of many concealed mutant alíeles in populations seemed, paradoxically, to support the idea of an essential uniformity among the individuals of these populations. In order to appreciate this point, some understanding of the experimental procedures is required. An individual member of a cross-fertilizing species (fly or man) carries a certain number of pairs of chromosomes; one member of each pair has been received from his mother and the other from his father. If we now consider just one of these pairs, we can see that the two members need not be identical; one has been handed down from one side of the family tree while the other has been coming down the other side, so they have been separated in different individuals in the general population for a considerable time. The properties of the individual who carries these two chromosomes are ascribable to the joint action of the pair of chromosomes and not to either

13

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

chromosome alone. In Drosophila we pos- preceding paragraph, the genetic variants

sess special breeding techniques for forming found within a population need not inter-

individuals in which the two members of a act in a predictable manner. To illustrate

chromosome pair are identical (homozyg- this situation we must postulate that a

ous individuals). By observing different in- dime in the combination 1 dime, 2 pennies

dividuals carrying pairs of identical chrom- is worth only 9 cents and that this combi-

osomes, we determine the array of effects nation, therefore, represents 11 cents while

produced by the chromosomes present in a the same dime in the combination 1 dime,

population.

1 nickel, 2 pennies is worth 12 cents and

As an analogy we can consider the mon- that this combination represents 19 cents.

ey possessed by five school children. The Two types of experiments have demonstrat-

amount possessed by each child--12 cents, ed this kind of gene interaction. In one 23 cents, 17 cents, 9 cents, and 5 cents-- experiment a number of seemingly identiis ascribable to the combination of coins cal chromosomes (that is, individuals car-

possessed by each child. The relative pro- rying these different chromosomes in the

portions of types of coins--1 dime, 2 pen- homozygous condition were indistinguishies; 4 nickels, 3 pennies; 1 dime, 1 nickel, 2 able on the basis of viability or developpennies; 9 pennies; and 1 nickel--is a sepa- mental rates) were allowed to recombine

rate story. We can find out the kind of with one another. Chromosomal recombi-

coins which the children have only by ex- nation is a perfectly normal process in nearamining the 24 coins present in this small ly all living organisms; the two members of population -- an examination comparable a pair of chromosomes exchange segments

to the study of individual chromosomes. In so that an individual transmits to his offan analysis of the chromosomes of one spring not exact replicates of the chromoDrosophila population it was found that somes he received from his parents but

about 20 per cent of all chromosomes were shuffled segments of these chromosomes.

lethal in homozygous individuals. An ad- Now if our experiments dealt with chroditional 30 per cent, although not killing mosomes that were really identical, recomall individuals under similar tests, reduced bination between them would yield noth-

their chances of survival. Impressive as ing new; the recombined segments would

these figures are to those not familiar with merely reconstitute models of the original the extent to.which seemingly deleterious chromosomes. This is not the case; the genes can accumulate within populations, recombined segments form chromosomes

there was still a large portion of chromo- with new properties--new effects on viabil-

somes--roughly one-half--that seemed to ity and developmental rates. The original have no effect on homozygous individuals. chromosomes must have been different Recently it has been shown by using cer- from one another but this difference was

tain statistical refinements that within these not revealed until new chromosomal or

populations of Drosophila at least 95 per gene combinations were formed experimencent of all chromosomes have a demonstra- tally. Apparently a dime can be worth 9 bly deleterious effect on homozygous indi- cents in some combinations and 12 cents

viduals. For practical purposes, it appears in others.

that any one chromosome carried by an Another demonstration of the unexpect-

individual would produce a hereditary dis- ed and so far unpredictable interactions of

ease or at least a constitutional weakness genetic variants is based on combinations

if it were not for the fact that most indi- of dissimilar chromosomes. If one tests the

viduals in every population carry two chro- different chromosomes carried by different

mosomes of a pair differing in gene content. individuals of a Drosophila population,

Contrary to the coin analogy used in the one finds that these differ from one anoth-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

J4 Eugenics Quarterly
er--some are lethal when homozygous, oth- This situation is made more complex by ers are semilethal, others reduce viability the suggestion that there is a longitudinal somewhat, and a few, very few, have no organization of material within each chrodemonstrable effects. If the special breed- mosome and that this organization is the ing technique is used to make not homozy- result of selection acting within local popugous individuals but individuals carrying lations. We know, in the case of the Calirandom combinations of these different fornia fruit fly, Drosophila pseudoobscura, chromosomes, these latter individuals are that certain combinations of microscopicfound to be very similar- In one such ex- ally recognizable chromosomes do not ocperiment the matings were made system- cur together in natural populations; among atically so that each of the different chro- those combinations that do not exist are mosomes was tested in combination with those that would not preserve certain gene two different chromosomes; chromosome b combinations but would allow them to be for instance, was tested in the combination disrupted by recombination. We do not yet a/b and in the combination b/c. Measur- know what types of genetic systems are esable differences between individuals carry- tablished in the widespread, cosmopolitan ing a chromosome in one combination and species of Drosophila and other organisms individuals carrying the same chromosome whose movements over the face of the earth in a different combination were just as are so intimately entangled with man and great as the differences between individ- his agricultural produce. uals carrying unrelated combinations. One Emphasis within this short sketch has can illustrate the apparent strangeness of been placed on the growing recognition of these genetic experiments by repeating the the genetic complexity existing within popsame sort of a test with coins (whose val- ulations. At each level of investigation ues, fortunately, are additive). Compare, there have been situations that appeared for instance, the differences in value of identical but which proved upon re-examsuccessive pairs of randomly chosen coins ination with new techniques to be dissimiwhen every pair is included in the test and lar. An appreciation of the importance of the differences in the value of successive genetic interaction has led to an effort to pairs when one stipulates that each pair study the genetics of populations without must contain a penny or a dime. The lat- destroying these interactions. The techter combinations are much more like one niques of classical genetics, insofar as they another than the unspecified combinations limit themselves to the analysis of few seare. lected genes under the highly artificial con-
Finally, recent experiments made by a ditions of homozygosity, are no longer sufnumber of workers have revealed that the ficient. The scope of the analysis has shiftgenetic structure of a population is sub- ed to an analysis of many situations which jected not only to selection at the level of as a whole can be regarded as characteristic the individual but also at the level of the of the populations under investigation. population itself. The effect of the latter The data available to the human genetiselection is the retention in the gene pool cist give him an unique advantage in this of the population of those alíeles that give type of population analysis. These data on the average and in random combination have been used in the past to demonstrate with one another individuals of the highest that Mendelian inheritance operates in our fitness. This selection tends to integrate species; a demonstration that requires speeach population since the particular ge- cial techniques developed for just this purnetic variants that give rise to favorable pose. This point has, indeed, been demoncombinations in one population need not strated; Mendel's Laws do operate in hube the same as those retained in another. man inheritance. The data available can

15

be applied directly to the analysis of human and other Mendelian populations. Indeed, it seems as if investigators of Drosophila populations have been striving to get data for their studies like that possessed by human geneticists for human populations but, simultaneously, human geneticists have been busy devising analytical techniques that transform their population data into the sort demanded by classical genetics- The situation will be improved when the Drosophilist can turn to the human geneticist for guidance in experimental procedures.
At the outset we stated that our purpose was to trace the origin of the concepts of population genetics and to outline the

modifications these concepts have undergone in recent years. The real purpose, however, was something quite different. If the student of human genetics has been stimulated to regard his data in a slightly different light and to re-examine the bases upon which some of his analyses are built, we will have succeeded in our real purpose. Similarly, we will have succeeded if we have persuaded the non-geneticist to examine some of the recent literature on experimental population studies and to incorporate the results of these experiments in his thinking about general population problems.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

THE FLOW OF EVOLUTION
"To the geneticist the majestic flow of evolution represents the outward claim of an unceasingly stirring world. Everywhere he discovers chance: chance in the origin of mutations, chance in their consequences upon development, chance in their shuffling into innumerable combinations. Indeed, the realm of chance is awe-inspiring. Granted the origin of life on the earth, the evolution of none of its specific, present or extinct forms seems to have been of a higher necessity. Their peculiar existence, our own existence, is or was accidental. Of the endless number of possible courses which the evolution of life could have taken, the few hundred millions of species which at most originated on our planet bear witness of only an unbelievably limited accidental sample. But perhaps more awe-inspiring yet than the chance aspect of evolution is the fact of evolution itself. . . .
"The geneticist who analyzes the material and the methods of evolution in terms of molecules and of chance is not by that token a callous fellow. To reproach him with lack of religious humility is nothing but a remnant of long-worn-out pseudo-religious bigotry. One might wonder whether lack of humility is not present rather in those who try to evaluate the processes of the universe by the limited and changing standards of man's intellect, and, shocked by the inapplicability of their standards, want to deny the existence of those processes. The geneticist's probing into the elementary events that underlie evolution opns up vistas into the methods of world's being and becoming which must impress all faculties of the human mind." (Curt Stern, Scientific Monthly, October 1953.)

