Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Population growth and the alliance for progress
J. Mayone Stycos
To cite this article: J. Mayone Stycos (1962) Population growth and the alliance for progress, Eugenics Quarterly, 9:4, 231-236, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1962.9987530 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1962.9987530
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

POPULATION GROWTH AND THE ALLIANCE FOR PROGRESS*

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

J. MAYONE STYCOS
Cornell University Ithaca, New York

Along with atomic energy, Nikita Khrushchev, and automation, the rate of world population increase will be listed by future historians as one of the outstanding phenomena of our contemporary period. In a world characterized by spectacular rates of growth, Latin America has the dubious honor of being outstanding. During the mid-fifties, when such European Latin societies as Spain, Portugal, France, and Italy grew by less than 1% annually, the average Latin American republic was increasing by 2.7% per year. Seven of the twenty republics had a growth rate of 3% or more, and only four had rates less than 2%. At 2% a population doubles at 35 years, and at 3% it doubles at 23 years. Latin America, which grew by 100 million in the first half of the century, is expected to grow by another 350 to 450 million in the second half.
Needless to say, annual increases in gross national product barely match such rates of population growth, with the result that per capita increases in income in Latin America are characteristically unimpressive. For most countries there is no good reason to believe that these rates of growth will decline in the near future. Indeed, they may well increase. In the first place, death rates in Latin America may be expected to decline further, and they are almost sure to decline at a faster rate than fertility. We may take infant mortality rates as an indica-
* Paper read to the meeting of the Society for Applied Anthropology, Kansas City, May, 1962. Excerpts from this paper were published in the Population Bulletin, Vol. XVIII, No. 6, October 1962.

tion of the progress still to be achieved in the conquest of death in Latin America. The lowest recorded rate in Latin America (Argentina's) is still from two to three times that of most of the Scandinavian, European, and North American countries, and Brazil's rate is probably about three times that of Argentina.
Given this general situation, it is almost literally impossible to ignore the population problem in Latin America, although both the United States and Latin America have come as close to this as is humanly possible. The United States, so insensitive to Latin feelings in most areas in the past, has maintained a sensitivity to the assumed Latin American population values and mores which should earn the envy of every applied anthropologist.
Responsible Latin leaders have been equally unrealistic about population growth, though not for the religious reasons usually attributed to them. Attitudes tend to be of three general kinds. By far the most frequent takes population growth as given and worries about how to adjust to it. Indeed, the growth figures are used to justify bigger budgets for everything from cottage industries to latrine programs. Such reports have a monotonous ring, beginning with "In 1975 our population will be--. Therefore . . ." The second school of thought turns a liability into a distinct asset. Victor Alba, in listing seven popular "myths which are accepted by everyone" in Latin America, includes the belief that "The population increase is cause for

231

232 Brief Reports

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

pride, and population growth should benefit the economy" (1). Population growth mystically becomes equated with "dynamism" while population stability is viewed, like a motionless pool, as "stagnant." A third school views population growth as undesirable but is optimistic that "education" and "economic development" will slow down the rate of growth "as has inevitably occurred in Western European countries."
All three positions have one thing in common: population growth is a "natural" phenomenon. It cannot or should not be tampered with by deliberate policy. It must be adjusted to until through vague natural forces it declines "by itself." Let us consider in turn the three components of population change --migration, fertility, and mortality--to see to what extent such a belief is justified.
Migration: Of the three demographic variables, migration most appeals to those leaders who do regard population as pressing on resources. It has an undeniably logical appeal. There are many empty spaces in Latin America--why not move people into them? Unfortunately, colonization programs are not only enormously expensive but thus far have met with less than modest success in getting people to move. People in rural Latin America move without much urging, but largely to the already overcrowded cities. Colonization programs may temporarily divert attention from basic reforms such as land distribution, but they can be expected to do little to solve the problem of population increase. As regards international migration, the possibilities seem even more limited. The population types most willing to migrate from a given country are least desired by other countries, and the types most desired are least willing to move.

Fertility: Despite phenomenal reductions in mortality in the past few decades, few Latin American countries show signs of fertility decline, and one can provide quite plausible arguments for why they may be expected to show rises in birth rates. Age at marriage is relatively late in many countries, and early consensual unions may be unstable. Improved economic opportunities may lower ages at marriage and lead to more stable marital relationships, producing higher fertility if compensating family limitation measures are not introduced. Indeed, the only countries showing relatively low birth rates are those where European-type populations have been prominant and consensual marriages relatively uncommon -- Argentina, Uraguay, and Chile. Improved maternal care and the reduction of sterilizing infections such as gonorrhea may be expected to have the same positive effect on fertility. Despite this ominous situation, as put by one commentator on Central America, one ". . . will look in vain for discussions of family limitation in the region's economic, sociological, or medical writings" (2).
If the question of birth control is raised with Latin officials, they tend to shrug it off as impracticable in the face of church intransigence and popular religious values. Whether the Catholic position on this matter will be redefined in the future remains to be seen and can probably not be affected materially by secular policies in any event. Population information, beliefs, and attitudes are another matter. Studies of Catholics in Puerto Rico, Jamaica, Peru, Santiago, Chile, and Mexico City show the lower classes to be overwhelmingly in favor of having small families, and of being generally favorable toward birth control when they know what it is. Experi-

Alliance for Progress

233

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

mental studies conducted in Puerto Rico and Jamaica by the author and others showed that even a very small dose of education in family planning produces a sizable change in information and actual behavior. These results invariably surprise officials who tend to project to the lower classes attitudes characteristic of only a small articulate middle class, which rarely includes themselves. I believe that in most Latin countries we could expect family planning programs to be received far more favorably than in Asiatic countries, where lower educacational levels and greater emphasis on extended family forms create greater indifference to planning. But to wait until educational levels in Latin America reach the point where people will by themselves seek out birth control information and apply it, even assuming that they will, is to slow up or prevent economic development for a long time.
An even less explored avenue is age at marriage, which has been responsible for a great deal of variation in fertility among societies and over time within the same societies. Yet, serious consideration of policies to discourage early marriage is never heard. On the contrary, drives to legitimize common-law relations and reduce promiscuity by early marriage receive considerable attention, just as do schemes to subsidize high fertility by providing monetary or other benefits for those with larger families.
Mortality: Mortality in Latin America has been declining for a longer period of time than in underdeveloped countries elsewhere but can be expected to decline considerably farther. If a child survives into young adulthood, his life expectancy is not markedly below that of his North American counterpart, but his chances for reaching adulthood are much less. The importance of infant mortality in

the total mortality picture is seen by the fact that in nine Latin countries, over 30% of all deaths occur to children under the age of one, and in only two countries is the percentage below 20. In six countries, child deaths (under age five) account for over half of all deaths; and in only five countries is the percentage less than 40. In the United States child deaths account for only 8% of all deaths. Implications of these data are clear. It is largely the deaths of children which are keeping Latin American countries from growing faster than they are today, yet it is precisely in this area where public health is putting its biggest efforts and where it can be expected to have the most dramatic results in the shortest time for the least expenditure. In Latin American countries, public health is popular and non-controversial; consequently, it is one of the areas for which foreign aid is sought and most easily attained. Moreover, unlike many aspects of technical aid, it can show almost immediate concrete results, a fact which further increases its popularity.
In a purely technical sense, then, of the three major demographic variables mortality, at the present stage of Latin American development, is the one most subject to control. Unfortunately, however, the area of mortality is even more bound by ethical considerations than is fertility, and the relentless pursuit of longevity for every individual conceived is so taken for granted that discussion of mortality manipulation in a broad sense is never heard in government or academic circles. For purposes of discussion, then, let us take the position that mortality control should be viewed as an integral part of economic development plans and subject to planning as rational as in other spheres. The implication of this point of view is that reduction of

234 Brief Reports

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

mortality would be phased in such a way as to produce major economic and social gains to the society.
Ethical justification for such a xiew can be found in the argument that during the transitional period of economic development phased mortality control will provide enriched lives (better health, education, and standards of living) for a smaller number of survivors rather than relatively impoverished ones for a larger number of survivors. At the same time, the entire economy would benefit both because of gains in average productivity and because allocations which would have gone to investments for the dependent age population could go to capital investment. Moreover, the rational planning of mortality control can be viewed as at least as ethical as the laissezfaire philosophy in the United States, for example, where the direction of medical programs and medical research is often determined by emotional appeals rather than by rational considerations.
Phased mortality does not imply ignoring problems of health. Rather, it means, for an initial period, a refocusing of attention away from the diseases of infancy and toward diseases affecting those in the productive age groups, and the shifting of attention from the problems of mortality to those of morbidity.
Concentrating on the productive age groups is to direct health efforts towards a population group which represents society's capital; these are the individuals in whom the society has invested heavily for up to two decades in nurturance, education, socialization, etc. Only after about two decades can they begin to repay this debt. Moreover, in high mortality societies, the hardier tend to survive to this age, making further investment in them a good gamble. (For example, about as high a proportion of

twenty-year-olds reach age fifty as newly born reach their fifth year in Latin American countries for which data are available. The discrepancy between the mortality rates of Latin America and the United States is much greater during childhood than during adulthood.)
Children are especially likely to die from whooping cough, measles, and intestinal and respiratory infections. Adults are more liable to accidents, malaria, tuberculosis, and typhoid. Consideration should be given to giving a higher priority to preventive and remedial programs for the latter causes of death.
Probably of even greater cost to the economy than mortality are the disabling diseases which produce absenteeism and low productivity. Studies of the incidence of such diseases in the general population in Latin America are not known to the writer, but competent investigation in other underdeveloped areas may serve as a guide. Despite the fact that poorly educated people tend to under-report illness to investigators and are less likely to stay away from work for illness than are better educated individuals, a field survey in Ceylon "revealed that on an average weekday five percent of the population was unable to work because of illness or injury. Of the total number disabled, over thirty percent had been disabled for three months or longer at the time of the visit. . .
"In these areas, demography really relates to the study of the sick man. In a careful evaluation of the health status of a representative village population situated about thirty kilometers from Cairo City, Weir et al (1952) found that ninety-five percent of the village inhabitants were suffering from bilharziasis; ninety-three percent harbored amoebic infection; eighty-nine percent were suf-

Alliance for Progress

235

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

fering from trachoma; fifty-one percent of the males and sixty-six percent of the females reacted positively to tuberculin tests indicating exposure to tuberculosis infection; and in spite of routine programs of dusting the villages three times a year with DDT, fifty percent were infested with lice and seventy-eight percent with fleas.. . In addition to the non-killing diseases mentioned so far, we have to remember that in the case of the so-called fatal diseases many more suffer than actually die. Malaria, for instance, may kill only one person for every hundred or so who suffer from recurrent attacks" (3).
Population and the Alliance for Progress: The Alliance for Progress has been pressing for various kinds of social reforms in Latin America and has a number of strings attached to the economic aid which it is in a position to offer. It appears unconcerned that its advocacy of tax reform and land distribution runs counter to the values and institutions of important groups in each Latin American country. This callousness to local mores, however, does not extend to the area of population. As phrased in a recent handout by the Department of State ".. . The United States has not suggested to any other government what its attitudes or policies will be as they relate to population control or the adoption of specific measures in their implementation . . . The United States, when requested, has provided assistance to governments seeking additional knowledge about their populations, specifically in the conduct of censuses and the improvement of vital statistics." This unusual devotion to pure science, shared also by the Organization of American States, has not been without its uses, since each improvement in census or vital statistics shocks Latin American officials into a

realization that their nation's birth rates and population growth are even greater than had been supposed. However exquisite the future refinements in demographic data collection and techniques in Latin America, on the other hand they will contribute little knowledge about how to deal with population problems and may even divert concern from this. (Alliance policies should not be without important consequences for population redistribution. Insofar as land reform increases agricultural productivity, it should further free rural workers for urban migration, a push which will be reinforced by the pull of new urban housing developments.)
What could the United States be doing? The most important thing would be to insure that Latin American leaders are informed about population dynamics and that they seriously discuss avenues of affecting population growth. Such information and discussion would inevitably challenge comfortable beliefs about "natural" declines in the rate of population growth and would direct attention to the feasibility of direct attacks on the problem. It would expose the weaknesses in the migration solution and bring to the forefront the potentials inherent in the control of fertility and mortality. A United States official position on solutions need not be taken; the only position would be that solutions should seriously be discussed.
A second thing the United States could do would be to encourage research on a wide variety of possible solutions, including those acceptable to the Catholic church. Thus, in addition to basic census and vital statistics studies, investigations of popular attitudes toward marriage, fertility, mortality, and migration are sorely needed. Such research has recently been described by Bishop Pike

236 Brief Reports

as a "moral imperative" for the United States. "It is time for the President to add uf> the evidence and direct the investigation of a project of research designed to enable mankind to cope with the population crisis" (4). If the Bishop be correct, wehave one of the mostcompelling combinations of moral and pragmatic imperatives ever to face this country.

REFERENCES
1. ALBA, VICTOR, 1961. A Latin American style and the new social forces. Latin American Issues, ed. Albert Hirschman, Twentieth Century Fund, pg. 45.
2. SMITH, ROBERT S., 1962. Population and eco-
nomic growth in Central America. Econ. Develop. and Cult. Change, X (2): 143.
3. SWAROOP, SATYA, 1959. The study of morbidity in underdeveloped areas. International Population Conference, Vienna. Christoph Reisser's Sohne, Druck.
4. New York Times, May 17, 1962.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

