Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Effect of birth control on the intelligence and character of succeeding generations
Frederick Osborn
To cite this article: Frederick Osborn (1954) Effect of birth control on the intelligence and character of succeeding generations, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:2, 27-31, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987174 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987174
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

Effect of Birth Control On the Intelligence and Character of Succeeding Generations

FREDERICK OSBORN

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

T
X H E INTRODUCTION OF CONTRACEPTION Was
accompanied in both England and the United States by greatly increased differences in average size of family between the so-called upper and the lower socio-economic groups. There was concern that if the more intelligent people had the fewest children our national intelligence would deteriorate, and various proposals were made looking toward reversing this trend. But the question was raised, "Do we know enough about human heredity, or about the distribution of hereditary factors for intelligence and character, to warrant encouraging or discouraging childbearing among particular social groups?" Today it is quite generally recognized that what we do know leads to the conclusion that any selection of births by broad social classes would leave out a great number of people of high genetic potential and include a great number of people of low potential. Eugenics must be based not on social class differences but on the differences in the quality of the different family stocks which are found scattered throughout the various socio-economic classes.
The problem is complicated by the fact that there is a social "inheritance" of the environment which in turn affects the development of intelligence; this can be traced from one generation to another and is easily mistaken for genetic inheritance. Test intelligence, which is the only kind of intelligence we know how to measure, is affected by differences in the environment as well as by differences in heredity. Hence the various interpretations which have been put on tests of the intelligence of social classes.

Social Class Differences In Test Intelligence
These differences have been the subject of much discussion and some serious study ever since the introduction of intelligence tests. Tests of drafted men in the army i» World War I provided the first large-scale demonstration of these differences. Yerkes found a hierarchy of test performance1 by occupations, with the laborer and the medical or engineering officer so far apart that there was no overlapping between the middle 50 per cent of the two groups- These and other similar findings aroused concern at the time, the tests being taken to reflect hereditary as well as environmental differences. But gross differences in intelligence test rating for groups with quite different backgrounds cannot be accepted as having significance with regard to hereditary capacities.2 Perhaps the original interpretation of early intelligence tests is still prevalent because it reflects some of man's deepest prejudices.
Studies on the relative importance of heredity and environment refer to these two factors as they operate here and now in our population. Any drastic change in the distribution of cultural environments or any curtailment or expansion of the range of innate mental ability will alter the relative contribution of either factor.3 In recent years the great increase in the proportion of people completing grade
1 Yerkes, Robert, Distribution of Intelligence by Occupations, Memoirs National Academy of Sciences, 1921.
2Lorimer, Frank and Osborn, Frederick, "Dynamics of Population," The Macmillan Company, New York, 1921.
3Schwesinger, Gladys C., "Heredity and Environment," The Macmillan Company, New York, 1933.

27

28 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

school and of those attending high school member that the inverse relation of I.Q.

has undoubtedly diminished the differences and fertility and its intensity are local in

in test intelligence between the different space and time.5 Among English couples,

occupational groups. But the differences married from 1851-1861, the upper and

are still important, and all the more so since the intelligence of children is much influenced by the environment provided by the parents. On tests4 of large numbers of children made in Madison, Ohio City, and in New York State villages, I.Q.'s ran from an average of 115 to 116 for the children of professional people down to from 89 to 91 for the children of unskilled workers. Studies of foster children indicate that these differences can be accounted for by the known differences in the environment. Obviously a low response to intelligence tests tends to be perpetuated by a disproportionate distribution of births at the lower occupation levels, and we cannot seek

middle classes had 89 per cent as many children as the average for all classes, and agricultural laborers 105 per cent as many. At that time class differentials were relatively small. But among English couples married from 1891-1896, the upper-classcouples had only 74 per cent of the average as against 115 per cent for the agricultural laborer. The differences were beginning to be significant.6 By 1920, differences in the use of contraceptives had still further increased. In the United States, the estimated standardized birth rate had fallen to 69 in the cities but was at 128 for the rural areas.7

the cause solely in differences in genetic Since that time the differentials between

capacity.

social groups have declined, probably as a

Intelligence tests measure only a few as- result of the increased spread of birth con-

pects of human abilities, and we have as trol. There is evidence to which we will

yet no certain way of knowing how the refer later that, as the idea and practice of

various classes differ in other abilities oi family limitation becomes generally adopt-

personality.

ed throughout the population, birth dif-

We have then a situation in which the ferentials between social classes disappear

different socio-economic classes are known or are even reversed. But with respect to

to differ considerably in their average test present trends, the evidence as to the social

intelligence but with little indication of results of class differentials in births seems

the extent, if any, to which these differ- quite clear. They are injurious. In each

ences may be due to variations in genetic generation a major proportion of children

inheritance. Among small professional are brought up in the homes which have

groups there is some evidence of better been least affected by our efforts to raise

than average genetic capacity, and for cer- educational standards and to improve the

tain border-line elements at the low end of home environment, and a very much small-

the economic scale the reverse is probably er proportion of children are brought up

true, but for the large social groups in be- in the homes which reflect these efforts. The

tween these extremes the evidence is not present distribution of births is therefore a

clear.

factor directly opposed to the aim of im-

Relation oí Fertility to

proving the education and home environ-

I.Q. of Social Groups

5"139th Year Book," National Society for the

In considering differences in fertility be-

Study of Education: Intelligence, Its Nature and Nurture, 1940, Part I, p. 228.

tween different social groups, we must re- 6Lorimer, Frank and Osborn, Frederick, "Dynam-

ics of Population," The Macmillan Company, New

4 Lorimer, Frank and Osborn, Frederick, "Dynam- York, 1934, p. 79.

ics of Population," The Macmillan Company, New 7 Thompson, Warren and Whelpton, P. K., "Pop-

York, 1934, p. 159.

ulation Trends in the United States," 1933, p. 274.

29

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ment of the country's children. There can be little doubt that differential acceptance of birth control contributes to a lower social inheritance, and to a lower development of intelligence. In the words of the National Resources Report of 1938, "This tendency carries social implications of such importance that they cannot safely be ignored."8
Looking to the future, we may expect that birth differentials b e t w e e n social groups will decline. All the present evidence indicates that these differentials are the result chiefly of the varying use of contraceptives. In the United States, at least, we may expect a continuing increase in the acceptance of family limitation and a constant increase of effectiveness in the means of controlling fertility. Our social inheritance should greatly benefit by such a change.
Relation of Fertility to I.Q. of Individuals
Differences between individuals in I.Q. and in every other measure of ability are far greater than differences between the average of the different social groups. Individuals may vary from imbecile to genius, from saint to criminal. Controlled studies of twins and of foster children indicate clearly that genetic factors run in family lines and play an important part in individual differences in developed qualities. Differences in fertility between different types of family stocks may therefore have important effects on the genetic inheritance as well as on the social inheritance of each succeeding generation.
There are no large-scale studies of differences in the fertility of various types of family stocks. The p r o b l e m has been tackled indirectly by studies which compare the average intelligence of sibling groups with the number of brothers and sisters in each group- If the smaller sibships have the higher intelligence rating
8 National Resources Report, 1938.

and the larger sibships the lower intelligence rating, we infer that there is an inverse relationship between intelligence and fertility.
In "Problems of a Changing Population," published by the National Resources Committee in May, 1938, a number of studies are cited on this relation between intelligence and size of family. In the words of the report,9 "These studies show that there is a general tendency for children with inferior cultural-intellectual development to come from larger families than those with superior development, as measured by tests." This tendency for the more intelligent children to come from the smaller families appears in many studies. It was a cause of much concern following on the report of the Scottish Council for Research and Education on a large number of children.10 One group was tested in 1932, and another fifteen years later in 1947. "The phenomenon of decreasing average score with increasing size of family is fully confirmed beyond all possible doubt." Yet the same studies suggest ". . . that at least in Scotland the average level of intelligence of school children has not fallen but may actually have risen over the past fifteen years."11
These apparently contradictory findings have not been fully explained. It has been suggested that the intelligence tests used in the Scottish survey are favorable to the child brought up in a small family and unfavorable to children brought up with many brothers and sisters and thus may not correctly reflect either genetic capacity for intelligence or actual developed intelligence, if applied to questions other than those used in the tests.
There are a number of small studies which indicate that when effective family limitation is universal in any particular
9 Ibid., p. 148. 10 "Royal Commission on Population Report," His Majesty's Stationery Office, London, June 1949, pp1.1I1b5id4-.155.

30 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

social group the more successful members of the group have larger families than do their less successful neighbors. The first studies to show such a trend were made by Eden and Hutchinson in Stockholm during the early 1930's12; other studies have been made on various groups of college graduates; and more recently in the carefully controlled Indianapolis study13 on a group of over a thousand couples known to have practised family limitation effectively. The birth rate of all these groups was below replacement, and the studies do not deal with large enough numbers to be considered conclusive. But they all point toward a positive relation between size of family

intelligence test scores and the size of family2. There is an increasing genetic significance attaching to whatever correlations may be observed between intelligence test scores and fertility in urban societies today, because of the increasing equalization of opportunity.
3. No precise quantitative values can be assigned to these relations, and net effects may be widely different under different conditions.
4. These conclusions are not, at present demonstrable 'scientific facts,' but they warrant large expenditure of energy in further research on the problem.
5. Meanwhile, they should be taken into account as probable, or at least

and quality of the home among parents in those groups which practice contraception effectively, and there are no studies known

possible, relations in studying the expected effects of changing social conditions."

to the present writer which point in the opposite direction. The trend toward a

The Changing Process of Selection

more universal acceptance of birth control Three processes seem to be operating in may, therefore, be considered highly favor- the world today.15 In the first, there is no

able. acceptance of family limitation; social

Since genetic differences between indi- group differentials are at a minimum and

viduals are known to be so much greater individual variations in family size are due

than average genetic differences, if any, be- more to physical than to psychological

tween any large social group, it seems evi- causes. Birth rates are high; death is the

dent that any favorable relationship be-
tween the fertility and genetic capacity of
individuals would quite easily offset an un-
favorable relationship between the fertil-
ity and the average genetic capacity of so-
cial groups.
The evidence as to the results of these
conflicting processes has been summarized
by Frank Lorimer and his tentative conclusions are as follows:14
"I. There has been some low negative association between genetic capacity for intelligence and fertility during the

major factor in selection. This is the situation in the major underdeveloped areas of the world today, as it has been always everywhere in the past. In the second type of process, family limitation is accepted by part but not all of the population and the use of contraception is extremely uneven. Here class differentials are very large. Their social effects are injurious. The genetic effects are not known and may be more than offset by individual differences of fertility within each group. This is the process operating in the United States and West-

last half century and perhaps longer, ern Europe today.

but this association has been much less than the observed correlations between

The third process operates within small groups found only among people of West-

12 Eden, Karl, Arvid and Hutchinson, Edward P.,

"Studies of Differential Fertility in Stockholm," P. S. King & Son, London, 1935.

14 Lorimer, Frank, Trends in Capacity for Intelli-

13"Social and Psychological Factors Affecting Fer- gence, Eugenical News, vol. 37, no. 2, June 1952,

tility," Vol. I, Whelpton, P. K. and Riser, Clyde V., p. 22.

Milbank Memorial Fund, New York, 1946; Vol. II, 15 Osborn, Frederick, Selective Processes in the

Whelpton, P. K. and Kiser, Clyde V., editors, 1950; Differential Fertility of Family Stocks, The Ameri-

Vol. III, 1952.

can Naturalist, July 1952, p. 203.

31

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ern European descent. Here family limi- economic groups. Class differentials are

tation is accepted by the entire group and diminishing, and the continuing spread of

the control of fertility is reasonably effec- birth control will further reduce or may

tive. Such studies as are available on groups of this latter kind indicate that when everyone plans their family, differentials between people of different economic levels are much reduced or even reversed. The social results should be beneficial, and because the fertility differentials in such groups appear to favor family stocks which have made the best showing in their particular environment there should be a trend toward genetic improvement from one generation to another. These findings are tentative; the studies are based on numbers too small to give valid results, but there is no evidence of a contrary effectConclusions

reverse them. On the basis of genetic effects, we are not warranted in believing that one particular social group should have more or less children than another; we are warranted only in desiring wide individual variations in size of family, related to the quality of the particular family. The first step is the simple though difficult process of spreading effective means of fertility control throughout the whole population, so that parenthood may become responsible in the fullest sense of the word.
We have seen that among groups in which all couples plan the size of their families there are indications that the couples who are most successful among their neighbors, most responsible in regard to their

In summary, present differences in the children, most fond of children, have the

birth rates of different socio-economic largest families. It should be possible to

classes are undoubtedly injurious to the find means to encourage these trends to-

social inheritance of the next generation. ward responsible parenthood. If we have

But the genetic effect is less well known the patience and thie understanding for

and is less important than the genetic ef- such a task, we may look forward hopefully

fect of differences in size of family of differ- to the future improvement of both our so-

ent family stocks within the various socio- cial and of our biological inheritance.

