Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Editorial comment
Alan F. Guttmacher M.D.
To cite this article: Alan F. Guttmacher M.D. (1956) Editorial comment, Eugenics Quarterly, 3:2, 67-68, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1956.9987268 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1956.9987268
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

vol. 3, NO. 2, june, 1956 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

EDITORIAL COMMENT

Medical Application of
GeneticTheory
The contention is easy to defend that the acquisition of knowledge for knowledge's sake is a sufficient goal. Mendel's epoch-making experiment on the inheritance of flower color is a case in point. Yet knowledge for knowledge's sake becomes slightly esoteric, an intellectual luxury, when any practical results from pure science are not applied to the welfare of mankind. This in some measure is the relationship of genetics to medicine. Important theoretic knowledge has been amassed, but there is insufficient clinical application of it.
Why is this? There are two reasons; the prime one is the regrettable ignorance of practicing physicians about genetics leading to lack of faith in its dictates. It is probable that not a single leader of medical thought, older men who have risen to pre-eminence in their respective fields, was taught a word about human genetics during his years of medical school. Recent graduates from a few schools have had a course in the subject and when age bestows upon them the cloak of leadership, the situation may improve. However, medical genetics will not attain its full clinical application until this discipline is as much an integral part of medical curricula as electrocardiography or minor surgery.
A second retarding influence stems from the fact that the clinical application of

human genetics often has a legal aspect, for example, such procedures as therapeutic abortion, contraception or sterilization. Long ago medicine surrendered its leadership in these specific areas to the Church, which framed existing statutes before human genetics became of age and now uses its unabridged power to thwart any change. This unqualified surrender to the Church will require decades of assault by legal, social, medical and genetic scientists before any breach can be made in the restrictive barriers.
Yet attempts are being made. I was an invited guest recently at a meeting in New York City of the American Law Institute, where the current "antiquated abortion statutes" were under scrutiny. Those present were representative liberal leaders of the American Bar, most of them professors of law at the great law schools of this country; others were judges, active and retired. The abortion statute of New York State prescribes that under certain conditions pregnancy may be terminated before a fetus is capable of survival if "done to save the life of mother or child." How abortion can save the life of a child is not apparent. The laws of most other states omit reference to salvaging the fetus but otherwise are similar. A few use the phrase "to preserve the health of the mother." Even the most liberal American statute makes no reference to any eugenic consideration. The study group took cognizance of this omission and is planning to frame a model statute to include eugenic considerations as well as maintenance of the mother's health. One of the group suggested that a pregnancy, legally proved

67

68 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

the result of incestuous relations, be included under eugenic indications. The majority opinion was expressed by Judge Learned Hand, who deemed it safer to crawl before trying to walk. The conclusion was that it would be wiser to concoct a pill small enough for a legislator to swallow, rather than one so large that it would stick in his gullet.
A somewhat similar group of physicians, sociologists, lawyers, biometricians, zoologists, public health officers and coroners met at Arden House in the late spring of 1955 under the auspices of the Planned Parenthood Federation to consider the abortion problem, its illegal and legal ramifications. Their deliberations will soon be published. In them one will find the same urgent emphasis on the legal recognition of certain eugenic grounds as indications for therapeutic abortion.
Most readers know that so respectable and widely used a procedure as contraception is legally banned in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the State of Connecticut. In each the physician is constrained by law from even advising any mechanical or chemical means of birth control to a woman who has produced hemophiliac sons, a mother of amaurotic

idiots, or parents whose children are fatally affected by pregnancy iso-immune reactions. Yet it is legal in these jurisdictions to employ less well-tried medical techniques, such as a polio vaccine or heart surgery.
In many states the legal status of sexual sterilization is quite ambiguous. In twenty there is no law either forbidding or sanctioning the procedure. In the remaining twenty-eight states there are statutes, but most legalize the sterilization of the mentally deficient. Country-wide the status of voluntary sterilization on any other eugenic grounds is ill-defined and the operation is only infrequently performed for genetic indications other than mental deficiency. Furthermore, all but the more courageous physicians are intimidated from taking any positive action in matters which lack unanimity of social acceptance for fear of gaining the opprobium of medical colleagues.
The only solution is for the genetically oriented scientist and layman to take medicine to task for its perpetual ignorance in this field and for its reactionary unwillingness to apply it to human welfare.
ALAN F. GUTTMACHER, M.D.
The Mount Sinai Hospital

