Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The use of paper ghromatography in human biology
H. Eldon Sutton
To cite this article: H. Eldon Sutton (1955) The use of paper ghromatography in human biology, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:4, 205-211, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987249 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987249
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

THE USE OF PAPER GHROMATOGRAPHY IN HUMAN BIOLOGY*
H. ELDON SUTTON
Institute of Human Biology University of Michigan
Methods

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

J.HE TECHNIQUE OF SEPARATING Similar
chemical compounds by means of their differential affinities for other materials was established in the earlier part of this century by the work of Tswett, who separated chlorophylls a and b from each other. The separation is based upon the fact that the rate at which molecules in a moving phase (usually liquid) pass over a stationary phase (usually solid) is related to the relative affinities of the molecules for the moving and stationary phases. Each chemical substance has its characteristic affinities for the two phases and hence possesses a characteristic rate of movement in the system. In practice a large vertical glass tube with an exit at the bottom is packed with some finely divided solid material such as starch or alumina, and the mixture of materials to be separated is added to the top of the column. A solvent, usually organic, is then passed slowly through the column and the different materials in the mixture become separated. Continued passing of solvent through the column (elution) will result in the emergence of the materials at the bottom, in an order inversely related to their affinities for the stationary phase. An alternate procedure, particularly useful for slowly moving molecules, is to stop the elution as soon as the materials are separated from one another in the column. The stationary phase is then carefully removed from the tube and divided into sections from which can be obtained the separated compounds.
*Studies on the heritability of biochemical differences which have been carried out at the Institute of Human Biology have been supported in part by McGregor Fund of Detroit and the U. S. Public Health Service, National Institutes of Health.

The original work was done with colored mixtures separated on columns of white powder. The process gave rise to descending bands of color; hence the name "chromatography." The method was soon extended to colorless compounds using other methods of detection: chemical, physical, and even biological for those substances recognizable only by their effects on living systems. A variety of materials also has been used for the stationary medium, a marked advance being the development of ion exchange resins which can be manufactured to satisfy a wide variety of needs.
During the early 1940's, a group of English investigators was experimenting with new combinations of mobile and stationary phases in the hope of discovering more efficient means for separating certain chemical compounds. Among the materials which they used for the stationary phase was cellulose. Cellulose is composed of many sugar units hooked together in long chains. Each of these sugar units has free hydroxyl groups which can attract water molecules and bind them loosely, so that cellulose fibers placed in a medium containing water will soon become covered with a thin film of water. Columns were therefore devised in which wet cellulose was the stationary phase and an organic solvent the moving phase. The cellulose was visualized as largely inert in the separation process, acting as a support for the stationary water.
This system gave satisfactory results, but a further idea occurred to the investigators: rather than pack the cellulose into a glass tube, why not use a piece of thick paper,

205

206 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

allowing the moving solvent to flow therefore not show the same rate of migra-

through the plane of the paper? This idea tion through the capillary.

proved to be an excellent one and resulted Regardless of the exact mechanism of

in the publication in 1944 of a paper by the Chromatographie separation in paper,

R. Consden, A. H. Gordon, and A. J. P. it is essential that the compounds which

Martin, on the principles of "paper" chro- are to be separated be present in quanti-

matography. For their studies of chroma- ties sufficiently small that their solubilities

tography, including the contributions in the solvent not be exceeded. When this

which led to the development of paper precaution is ignored, the moving solvent

chromatography, Martin and R. L. M. carries only so much of the material as it

Synge were awarded the Nobel Prize in can dissolve, and the usual result is an ill-

Chemistry in 1952.

defined streak rather than a clear-cut sepa-

ration. Since the volume of solvent which

Characteristics

should contain all of a particular com-

It will perhaps be advantageous at this point to enumerate some of the characteristics of paper chromatography, since these have been important in determining the uses which have been made of the technique. The earlier explanations of the mechanism of paper chromatography assumed the existence of two solvent phases -- an immobile water layer attached to the surface of the cellulose fiber and a mobile organic layer filling in the remaining interstitial space. The differences in rate of migration which were observed for different compounds were thought to be a result of the differences in partition or relative solubility between these two phases, the more hydrophilic molecules spending a greater proportion of time on the average in the aqueous layer. Actually there seems

pound is exceedingly small -- that contained in approximately one square centimeter of filter paper -- the technique is successful only with very small quantities of material. With amino acids, for example, the best results are obtained when not more than about five-millionths of a gram of each amino acid are present in the mixture to be analyzed. Except in unusual cases, this has meant that paper chromatography, unlike the earlier column chromatography from which it was developed, is not useful for separating compounds in order to purify them for further manipulations. But it is useful in detecting the presence of compounds in unknown mixtures and in some cases in estimating the quantities of the compounds which are present.

little reason to suppose that two discrete phases exist. The creation of an interface from the initially homogeneous solvent mixture would require more energy than is likely to arise from the bonding of the water to the cellulose. All that is required, however, is a gradient in solvent composition from the slower moving solvent adjacent to the capillary walls to the faster moving solvent at the center of the capillaries. The likelihood of a molecule migrating away from a particular point within the capillary depends upon the chemical nature of the molecule and the solvent composition at that point. Thus molecules of different structure will be unequally distributed across the capillary and will

In column chromatography, the usual procedure is to allow the solvent to percolate through the packed column until the compounds of interest have emerged at the bottom. This is desirable because further steps are usually to be carried out on the separated compounds. Since this is not true of paper Chromatographie separations, there is little point in allowing the process to continue beyond the point of actual separation. Unless the molecular structures of the compounds in the mixture are very much alike, good separation can be obtained when the solvent has migrated only a short distance through the paper. For complex mixtures, a migration of twentyfive to fifty centimeters is common. For

207

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

easily separated substances, as little as five centimeters is sometimes sufficient. The filter paper is then removed from the solvent and allowed to dry. In the earlier studies, as mentioned above, the solvent was allowed to flow through the filter paper by gravity. A much more common procedure now is to place the filter paper vertically in the solvent with the mixture to be separated applied just above the level of the solvent. The solvent will rise through the paper until it reaches the top, at which point it will stop if the process has been carried out in a closed container in which the atmosphere is saturated with solvent. This "ascending" technique, first used by Williams and Kirby (1948), makes it unnecessary to pay close attention to the chromatogram during the resolution of the mixture.
Nothing has been said as yet concerning the detection of the compounds on the paper once they have been separated. If they happen to be highly colored, as was true of the chlorophylls originally studied, the problem of detection does not exist. Few of the compounds of interest have that gratifying property, however, and it is necessary to make them visible by other means. This can sometimes be achieved simply by viewing the resolved chromatogram under ultraviolet light, although this procedure is rather non-specific since so many compounds are to some extent fluorescent. Nevertheless it has proved useful in differentiating among a limited group of known compounds. The most common procedure is to add to the chromatogram a reagent which will produce a visible reaction with only a limited group of compounds. Because the amount of unknown material present on the chromatogram is extremely small, it is essential that the reaction be a very sensitive one.
The existence of a reagent which reacts with most jamino acids and a few related structures has greatly simplified investigations of amino acid metabolism in the last few years. This reagent, called ninhydrin,

will react to form a characteristic color in some cases with as little as half a microgram of the particular amino acid. Acidbase indicators have also been used to advantage, if the unknown substance departs sufficiently from neutrality. In fact almost any compound can be detected on a chromatogram by some reagent, although the specificity and sensitivity, and hence the utility, may vary widely with different reagents.
Another means of detection which has proved invaluable in studies involving radioactive materials consists in placing the chromatogram in contact with unexposed film. After a time appropriate to the intensity of the radioactivity, the film is developed and all parts of the chromatogram containing radioactive material appear as exposed spots at the corresponding point on the film. Such a technique is of particular use in ascertaining the fate of a labeled compound when added to an actively metabolising system. It has been largely through the use of radioactive tracers combined with paper chromatography that marked advances have been made in recent years in our knowledge of photosynthetic processes.
The rate of migration of a substance in a particular solvent system is expressed as an KF value, defined as the distance moved by the substance divided by the distance moved by the solvent. Since this RF value is a ratio, it is essentially constant, regardless of the distance moved by the solvent. It may be altered markedly, however, if the nature of the solvent is changed. This can be accomplished either by changing the proportion of water in the solvent mixture, or by changing the material used for the organic phase. The addition of small amounts of acidic or basic substances can also induce marked changes in RF values, especially if the substance to be analyzed is itself somewhat acidic or basic. It is thus possible to prepare two-dimensional chromatograms in which an initial separation by one solvent is followed by another sepa-

208 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ration by a second solvent in a direction perpendicular to the first. In complex mixtures, it is seldom possible to separate completely all of the compounds of interest with one solvent, since some of them will be so similar as to require an inordinate amount of time for the separation, with a gradual increase in diffuseness of the spots. By making use of the two-dimensional method, it is thus possible to separate with the second solvent many of the compounds which fail to separate clearly in the first solvent.
Uses
The versatility of paper chromatography has led to its use in virtually every area of chemistry and biology, including the study of man. A number of amino acids which had escaped detection by earlier methods have been found on chromatograms. One of the earliest applications of paper chromatography was made by C. E. Dent (1947) of the University College Hospital, London,' who made a study of the increased amino acid excretion which is characteristic of Fanconi's syndrome. Amino acids have received by far the greatest attention in Chromatographie studies, because of the availability of an excellent reagent for making them visible and because they occur in sufficiently high levels in blood, urine, saliva, etc., to make their study feasible. Sugars also received attention soon after the development of the Chromatographie procedures, since a very sensitive color reagent was developed for them. However, they proved to be somewhat less interesting biochemically, both because so few of them occur at detectable levels in body fluids and because sugars have shown little individual variation which had not already been demonstrated by older methods.
One of the more useful applications of paper chromatography has been in the field of steroid metabolism. The other techniques available for separating and identifying such steroids as the sex and adrenal

hormones are extremely laborious. The paper Chromatographie procedures developed for steroids also have their limitations, it is true, because of the much greater solubility of these compounds in fat solvents as compared to water. Nevertheless, chromatography has provided a ready means of distinguishing between many of the steroid metabolites and of estimating roughly the quantities present. One technique which has been used in working with such fat soluble compounds is to "reverse" the phases of the filter paper. This is achieved by coating the cellulose fibers of the paper with a water repellent material, such as silicone, before the paper is placed in the solvent. The water-rich portion of the solvent then stays in the faster moving area of the capillary away from the capillary walls and the hydrophobic compounds stay closer to the capillary walls, resulting in a decreased rate of migration. Such substances as fatty acids and inorganic salts have also been studied in man by paper chromatography, but only to a limited extent.
The problem of quantifying the results of paper chromatograms has not been completely solved yet. Procedures have been developed for eluting the spots from the paper and applying some colorimetric method to the solution obtained. The laboriousness of these procedures largely nullifies the speed and simplicity of paper chromatography as compared to older methods. Another method has been to measure the area of the spot produced on the filter paper. This procedure is based on the fact that the greater the concentration of the compound to be determined, the greater the diffusion away from the center of the spot. This method has met with moderate success for some substances, but only if fairly large quantities of the material are present. The intensity of the color produced by reaction with a colorproducing agent has also been used as a quantitative measure. Whatever the procedure applied, it is necessary to compare

209

the results with those obtained with known quantities of the same materials treated in exactly the same manner. On one-dimensional chromatograms, the standards and the unknown substance can be placed on the same piece of filter paper and carried through the same treatment. On two-dimensional chromatograms, it is necessary to have the standards and unknowns on different chromatograms, which introduces another source of error. By carefully standardizing the methods for preparing chromatograms, we have been able to reduce the error for some amino acids, as measured by color intensity on two-dimensional chromatograms, to about fifteen per cent. This applies to the more accurately measured amino acids only, since others may involve much greater error. For most of the amino acids this accuracy is sufficient for the detection of individual differences, since the variation between individuals is

frequently of considerable magnitude. The area of human variation which has
been explored most thoroughly by paper Chromatographie methods is that of amino acid excretion. These studies have dealt mostly with urine, but some have included blood levels of amino acids also. This interest in amino acids is largely a result of three facts: (1) the Chromatographie procedures for amino acids can be made to yield quantitative information for most of the amino acids; (2) there are no alternative methods of amino acid assay which are uniformly superior to paper chromatography; and (3) there are known to exist rather large variations between individuals in amino acid excretion, some of which are known to be under genetic control.
The use of paper chromatography in studying Fanconi's syndrome has already been mentioned. In this case the results of amino acid analyses of the urine may help

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Figure 1. Diagrams of two two-dimensional amino acid chromatograms showing a difference in excretion rates for /3-aminoisobutyric acid (I) and lysine (II). The area of the spot is an approximate measure of the amount of amino acid present. An aliquot of urine containing 50 micrograms of creatinine was applied to the lower left-hand corner of the filter paper. The two chromatograms represented were from a husband and wife and were collected the same morning. The chromatogram on the right is typical of a "high" excretor of /3-aminoisobutyric acid while that on the left (showing little, if any, of Spot I) is typical of a "non-excretor."

210 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

establish a diagnosis. Another inherited disease which has as one aspect the excretion of large quantities of amino acids is Wilson's disease (hepatolenticular degeneration). The excretion of unusual quantities of cystine has been known to occur as a normal trait, although paper chromatography has revealed that the defect in renal tubular reabsorption actually affects lysine and arginine and perhaps a few other amino acids as well. The standard tests for cystine in the urine would fail to distinguish between these three conditions. Cystinuria is frequently first recognized by the formation of cystine stones. By chromatographic analysis of the urines of relatives of patients with cystine stones, it has been possible to detect affected individuals who may not yet have developed stones.
In addition to those amino acid anomalies which sometimes result in pathological conditions, several are known which apparently occur as normal variations. Perhaps the most striking of these is the condition in which large amounts of ßaminoisobutyric acid are excreted in the urine. This amino acid was completely unknown in nature until discovered in the urine of certain individuals by Dent (1948). With Crumpler, Harris, and Westall he reported the identity of this substance in 1951, and since that time several reports, notably that of Harris (1953), have shown that the excretion of this amino acid is a genetically controlled trait which occurs in about 10 per cent of the English population measured. It was suggested that high excretion results when an individual is homozygous for this recessive gene. Studies made in the Institute of Human Biology of the University of Michigan indicate that a racial difference exists in the frequency of this trait, since it was found that eleven out of seventeen Chinese excreted quantities in excess of any of twenty-nine Caucasoids (Sutton and Clark, 1955). Diet was shown to be relatively unimportant in the etiology of these differences, and the effects of urine dilution were largely removed by

expressing the results as creatinine ratios. The metabolic significance of this amino acid is still unknown, as are the environmental influences which may alter its excretion. Another amino acid excreted in different amounts by the Chinese and Caucasoid populations is lysine. The excretion of this amino acid, also known to be influenced genetically, is much more complex, since twin and sibling studies reveal that individuals can fluctuate widely due to unidentified environmental factors (perhaps diet). Nevertheless, twin studies indicate a high heritability for the variation in lysine excretion and certain individuals are known to excrete consistently large quantities of lysine in environments which do not induce the same phenomenon in other persons. The higher excretion of lysine in the Chinese is interesting because lysine is one of the essential amino acids which are required in the diet since they cannot be synthesized in the body. Lysine is an important building block for proteins. Whether a marginal protein diet would reduce the excretion of lysine in high excretors has yet to be ascertained. Further studies seeking identification of the genetic factors influencing lysine excretion, knowledge of their action in the variety of environments in which human beings exist, and discovery of the possible significance of this interaction to the well-being of the individual should prove most interesting.
Differences in amino acid excretion less striking than those discussed above also have been observed. Twin studies have been carried out at the Institute for the Study of Human Variation, Columbia University, and at the Institute of Human Biology whose objectives included measuring the genetic component of the variability in amino acid excretion (Berry, et al., 1955; Gartler, et al, 1955). The results indicate that the excretion of several other amino acids may reflect genetic heterogeneity in the population, although the various genotypic differences are as yet unrecognized.

211

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

The idea that "patterns" of metabolism provide an efficient means of recognizing

may exist within the normal range of vari- some of theinnate differences which exist

ation has been particularly developed by among individuals. Paper chromatography

Roger Williams at the University of Texas. is, of course, only a chemical technique and

Some of the studies of hisgroup using pre- its ultimate contributions will depend

dominantly paper Chromatographie analy- upon the ingenuity with which it is used. ses of human fluids have already been sum-

marized (Williams et al., 1951). Chromatography would be a useful technique in the study of "patterns" of excretion, since a number of substances canfrequently be measured simultaneously. Development of this work awaits objective means of de-

References
BERRY, H. K., DOBZHANSKY, T H . , GARTLER, S. M., LEVENE, H., & OSBORNE, R. H. 1955. Chroma-
tographic studies on urinary excretion patterns in monozygotic and dizygotic twins. I. Methods and analysis. Amer. J. Human Genetics 7:93107.

scribing and summarizing such patterns. Contributions
The studies in amino acid excretion cited above have been presented to illustrate some of thepossible applications of

CONSDEN, R., GORDON, A. H., & MARTIN, A. J. P.
1944. Qualitative analysis of proteins: a partition Chromatographic method using paper. Biochem. J. 38: 224-232.
CRUMPLER, H. R., DENT, C. E., HARRIS, H., &
WESTALL, R. G. 1951. -aminoisobutyric acid (methyl--alanine) : a new amino acid obtained from human urine. Nature, Lond., 167:307.

paper chromatography. Most of the studies which have been carried outby means of paper chromatography could also have been carried outby other techniques now available. The difference would have been in the time, expense, and technical personnel required. Paper chromatography is a

DENT, C. E. 1947. Theamino-adduria in Fanconi syndrome. A study making extensive useof techniques based on paper partition chromatography. Biochem. J. 41: 240-252.
· . 1948. A study of the behavior of some sixty amino-acids and other ninhydrin-reacting substances on phenol-"collidine" filter-paper chromatograms, with notes as to the occurrence of some of them in biological fluids. Biochem. J. 43: 168-180.

simple procedure which can be carried out with a moderate amount of inexpensive

GARTLER, S. M., DOBZHANSKY, T H .& BERRY, H. K.
1955. Chromatographie studies on urinary excretion patterns in monozygotic and dizygotic twins.

equipment. Its low cost has made it available to many workers who do not have

II. Heritability of the excretion rates of certain substances. Amer. J. Human Genetics 7: 108-121. HARRIS, H. 1953. Family studies on the urinary

access toother techniques. It is still largely excretion of -aminoisobutyric acid. Ann. Eugen.,

a research tool, although some hospitals are beginning tomake limited use of it. It

London, 18: 43-49.
SUTTON, H. E., and CLARK, P. J. 1955. A biochemical
study of Chinese and Caucasoids. Amer. J. Phys.

has already proved useful in recognizing Anthrop. n.s. 13: 53-65.

certain biochemical differences

between

WILLIAMS, R. J. 1951. Biochemical Institute Studies. IV: Individual metabolic patterns and human

persons, andits usefulness should increase disease: an exploratory study utilizing predomi-

as refinements in technique are developed.

nantly paper Chromatographic methods. Univ. Texas Pub. No. 5109, Austin, Texas.

It appears to be most promising as a tool

, & KIRBY, H. M. 1948. Paper chroma-

for studies of human variability and may tography using capillary ascent. Science 107:

481-483.

