Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Frequency and distribution of pathologic genes in human populations
Berlin Dahlem & Hans Nachtsheim
To cite this article: Berlin Dahlem & Hans Nachtsheim (1955) Frequency and distribution of pathologic genes in human populations, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:1, 9-17, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987214 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987214
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

FREQUENCY AND DISTRIBUTION OF PATHOLOGIC GENES IN HUMAN POPULATIONS
The Effect of Mutation Rate and Mutagenic Factors, Selective Pressure and Counter-selection*

Berlin-Dahlem Max-Planck-Institut, f. vergl. Erbbiologie u. Erbpathologie
HANS NACHTSHEIM

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

T
A HROUGH EXPERIMENTAL GENETICS, w h i c h
uses plants and animals as its objects of research, we have gained a wealth of knowledge in recent decades permitting us to evaluate to a large extent the significance for the evolutionary process of the factors mentioned in the title of this paper. The situation is completely different in the case of human beings who are very awkward subjects owing to the impossibility of carrying out crossbreeding experiments with them. It is therefore not surprising that our knowledge should still be quite limited with respect to the effect of such factors of evolution as mutation and selection on the genie composition of human populations over the generations. The fact that general conformity to the laws of heredity applies to human beings no less than to plants and animals and that it has therefore been possible to draw important conclusions concerning human beings from the results of experimental research does not relieve the human geneticist of the task of collecting data on human beings and of attacking the problems with distinct methods enabling us to evaluate the peculiarities of the course followed by the domesticative and evolutionary process of the human race. To a considerable degree, this task is yet to be undertaken. In presuming to speak here of the rate of mutation and mutagenic factors, selective pressure and counterselection in their effort on the frequency and distribution of pathologic genes in human
*Given at the World Population Conference, Rome, September 1954.

populations, I can hardly report any positive results, nor do I wish to rely on the results of experimental research to speculate on what might be the case with respect to human beings; I should rather--to the extent that this is possible within the present frame of reference--like to present in the following remarks an outline of the problems involved and tasks confronting future research.
The Rate of Mutation
As in the case of plants and animals, in man too the tendency toward mutation, i.e.., the mutation pressure, also varies with the individual genes. At least one mutation of a gene, i.e., the development of two distinct forms of a gene, two alleles, is in fact the very prerequisite for the concept of the gene as such. To cite an example: the mutative change in the holandric gene which leads to Ichthyosis hystrix gravior, i.e., to the development of the so-called porcupine man, has been observed or recorded in the literature only once. The first bearer of this character appeared in England in 1717. He transmitted it to all his male descendants: his 6 sons, several grandsons, great-grandsons, etc. The character lasted for 6 generations but then died out in the 19th century, and with it the changed allele. The skin changes in these definitely vital porcupine men are so striking that one might indeed have expected a report on the subject if a second mutation of the gene had been observed in some civilized country during the

9

10 Eugenics Quarterly-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

last centuries.

rope, is subject to repeated renewal as a

Still other examples of single mutations result of frequent new mutations of the

of human genes could be cited and, via correlated gene (Kemp) . Such new muta-

hereditary diseases which have occurred by tions can be regarded as applicable to those

way of mutation only twice or independent- cases where both parents of a chorea patient

ly of one another on but a few separate are normal, if these parents have reached an

occasions, we have arrived by continuous advanced age. Julia Bell has the distinction

succession at diseases which can be charac- of having assembled all of the relationship

terized as "ever sporting diseases" (Good- tables of patients afflicted with Hunting-

man and Reed) as a result of the strong ton's chorea published up to 1934. These in-

tendency toward mutation on the part of clude 151 genealogical tables, some of them

the correlated genes. However, in the case extending over 5, 6 and 7 generations, and

of most hereditary diseases we unfortunate- covering 991 chorea cases (511 males, 445

ly still lack an adequate picture of their females, 35 sex unknown). They include 6

frequency and distribution throughout the family strains whose oldest choreic in the

various countries and continents, and genealogical series is descended from two

among the various races, i.e., a picture completely healthy parents who died at an

which is necessary in order to be able to advanced age. Should these 6 cases be re-

classify every hereditary disease in a specific garded as new mutations? Involved are 5

category with respect to the mutability of European family strains and a North Ameri-

its gene. Here, too, but one example. can one; the only thing recorded concerning

Huntington's chorea, a serious nervous the latter is that the proband was born

disorder not too infrequent in European in Brooklyn and that his father also suffered

countries, reflects a simple dominant course from chorea, although the parents of the

of autosomal transmission, generally of 100 latter died at the ages of 93 and 87, re-

per cent penetrance, although as a rule this spectively, without any sign of choreatic

does not occur until an advanced age. The disease; there is no information in the re-

onset of the disease occurs between the ages port (Smith) as to where the proband's

of 30 and 40, but often even later, i.e., at a parents and grandparents had lived.

period when the patients have already re- At any rate, the material available thus

produced. In spite of the seriousness of the far is too scanty to permit comparative

disease, the selective pressure is therefore evaluation of the frequency of the disease

slight and the disease often asserts itself in the Old and New Worlds, or even the

very stubbornly throughout several genera- assumption of a different frequency of

tions in the individual family strains. For mutation in both areas. It is noteworthy

instance, in the United States it has been that not one authentic case of Huntington's

possible to trace the big choreatic family chorea has yet been reported from Japan

strains back to the 17th century. Previous- (Komai).

ly, the disease is not presumed to have Given the relatively simple and clear-cut

existed in North America and, according to hereditary conditions as well as the well-

the reports, 962 cases of Huntington's. known clinical picture of Huntington's

chorea in the U.S. are all believed to go chorea, a general survey of the incidence of

back to 6 or 7 ancestors (probably includ- the disease in the civilized countries should

ing 3 brothers) who emigrated from Eng- present no insuperable difficulties. With

land in the 17th century (Davenport). international cooperation, it should thereby

In Europe, too, it is often possible to trace be possible to compile data which would

the disease back for several family genera- enable us to answer many of the questions

tions. There is also a tendency to assume with respect to the genogeography and

that Huntington's chorea, at least in Eu- population genetics of the disease which we

11

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

have only briefly touched upon here. But let us consider the hereditary diseases
for which previous attempts have been made to calculate the rate of mutation. These diseases are approximately 20 in number. We are omitting those characterized by recessive transmission because from the very outset there is too great a factor of uncertainty to permit reliable evaluations. Most suitable for calculation are simple dominant hereditary diseases with 100 per cent penetrance as well as those characterized by sex-linked recessive transmission. The following survey includes the 7 autosomal dominant and the 2 sex-linked recessive diseases, with indication of the calculated rates of mutation. In the case of certain diseases, two calculations have already been carried out in various countries (a and b in Table 1:) this applies to chondrodystrophy in Denmark and Sweden, to retinoblastoma in London and Michigan (U.S.), to hemophilia in London and Denmark and to progressive muscular dystrophy (pelvic girdle form) in Utah (U.S.) and Northern Ireland.

TABLE 1

Disease

Rate of mutation

Epiloia (tuberous sclerosis)

4-8 X 10-6

Chondrodys trophy

a. 4.2-4.8 X 10-8

Pelger's nuclear anomaly

b. 7 X 10"5 2.7 X 10-8

Aniridia

1.2X108

Retinoblastoma (glioma retinae)

1.4 x 10-s

2.3 X 10-8

Thalassemia

4 xlO-4

Sickle cell anemia

1 ^ 10"2

Hemophilia

a. 2 y 10"^

b. Progressive muscular dystrophy a.

3.2 X 10-8

b. 4.54-6.47 X 10s

There are two basic methods for calculating the rate of mutation, a direct and an indirect one. The direct method is very simple, but its applicability is limited. It follows the formula: Rate of Mutation

Number of New Mutants u = 2 X Total number of Individuals

The formulas for the indirect method differ according to the type of hereditary transmission:

Dominance Recessiveness Sex-linked recessiveness

u = i/z (1-f) x u = (l-f) x u = y3 (l-f) x.

In these formulas u represents the rate of mutation; /, the relative reproductive fitness of the mutant; x, the relative frequency of the mutants in the population. (I demonstrated the use of these methods on the basis of examples cited in a communication in the 1954 issue of Naturwissen-schaften.)

In calculating the rates of mutation, careful consideration must be given to many possible sources of error. In my opinion, such care has, as a rule, not been sufficiently exercised hitherto, and I would maintain that this has resulted almost universally in the calculation of excessively high rates of mutation. On this subject, too, we can cite but a few examples.

First of all, the number of mutants for whom the rate of mutation is to be calculated must not be too small in the population under study. The calculation is worthless when, as happened in one instance, it is based on one case in 44,000 births of a disease which was, moreover, of the recessive hereditary type. When Patau and I calculated the mutation rate for Pelger's nuclear anomaly in 1946, our material was likewise still very limited and at the time we explicitly attached less importance to the results than to the demonstration of the method. Since then, the data on Pelger's nuclear anomaly have increased substantially and it has been possible to make a new calculation on a broader basis. It is interesting to compare the results. In 1946 we reached a mutation rate (u) of approximately 1:10,000 (1 X 10-4) for Pelger's anomaly; today, the results indicate a rate of 1:37,000 (2.7 X l O 5 ) .

The material on Pelger's anomaly also serves to illustrate another source of error. As already stated, cases where the carrier of

12 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

a 100 percent penetrant-dominant hereditary disease has two normal parents are in general considered new mutations. However, it is possible for an error originating with illegitimacy to creep in. Such a source of error can be eliminated through a paternity examination. In the available data on Pelger's anomaly there are 4 cases in which both parents were non-Pelger individuals. In 3 cases paternity was established positively by examination; in the fourth case it was not possible to make the examination and certain doubts actually do exist with respect to the paternity involved. Now if in calculating the rate of mutation we therefore omit the uncertain case, we obtain the result already indicated: u equals 1:37,000. If we are less conservative, however, and include all 4 new mutations in our calculation, we arrive at u equals 1:28,500. With one new mutation less, the estimated rate of mutation for this material drops from 3.5 X 1°'5 t o 2-7 X 1°'5- (Detailed information will be found in my report "Die Mutations rate menschlicher Gene" in Naturwissenschaften,41, 1954, 385.)
False diagnoses can also give rise to excessively high estimates of the rate of mutation, as illustrated by the case of thalassemia, for which the very high rate of 4 X 10'4 was calculated, i.e., 400 mutated alleles per one million gametes. The heterozygous carriers of the thalassemia gene show evidence of being afflicted with thalassemia minor which is harmless and which can only be detected in the blood picture, whereas the homozygous carriers suffer from thalassemia major, or Cooky's anemia, which is almost always fatal during childhood. It is obvious then that a homozygous individual with Cooley's anemia can only be the product of the union of two heterozygous parents. Now Silvestroni and Bianco have examined the parents of 31 children hospitalized with a diagnosis of Cooley's anemia and found a completely normal blood picture in the case of 5 sets of parents. The diagnosis proved to be false in these cases: the clinical

picture showed an erythroblastic anemia which resembled fatal Cooley's anemia but which was actually relatively harmless. This was further demonstrated by the fact that the 5 children of the parents with a normal blood picture were cured. In the case of thalassemia and even more so of sickle cell anemia, for which the highest known rate of mutation for a human gene has been calculated (10,000 mutated alleles per 1 million gametes!), it is probable that other sources of error, which have thus far not been compeletely clarified, are involved
(Allison).
One final example. We know today that in many hereditary diseases the same or at least a very similar clinical picture can be produced not only by different genes ("heterogenie") but also by non-hereditary phenocopy caused by exogenous factors. If heterogenes or phenocopies play a role in a hereditary disease, this factor represents another very serious source of error in calculating the rate of mutation.
Retinoblastoma is a highly malignment tumor of the eye in infancy, and it has been established that its transmission is simple dominant, with high (ca. 80 per cent) penetrance. Two calculations for the rate of mutation are available: one for London (1.4 X 10B), the other for Michigan (2.3 X 105). However, in comparison with the number of sporadic cases, the number of retinoblastoma cases concentrated in families is slight. Since prior to the development of present-day operative techniques children with retinoblastoma almost always died, the possibility of transmitting the changed allele existed only if the disease failed to manifest itself, and there was an inclination to consider the sporadic cases as new mutations in the calculation of the mutation rate.
In the meantime, my collaborator F. Vogel recently investigated a third population group (Berlin-Brandenburg area) with respect to the disease and, on the basis of certain considerations, came to the conclusion that the sporadic cases of retino-

13

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

blastoma were for the most part nonhereditary. It can be calculated on the basis of the data that, as a result of the therapeutic successes achieved in treating retinoblastoma in recent decades (by surgery, irradiation), at least 20 per cent of all the retinoblastoma carriers belonging to the generation of parents of the present patients have reached the stage of normal reproduction. This should be reflected by an increase in the number of demonstrably hereditary cases. No such increase has taken place. Moreover, with hereditability in all the sporadic cases, up to 50 percent of the descendants of surviving retinoblastoma carriers would in turn presumably be afflicted with retinoblastoma, a percentage which is somewhat reduced only as a result of the less than 100 per cent penetrance. Unfortunately, the available data on this subject are still very inadequate. I have already called for international collaboration in this question which is also very important from the viewpoint of eugenics because only in this manner can representative family series be compiled. The available results, however scanty, are nevertheless striking: of 42 children, only three (i.e., 7 per cent instead of 50 per cent) have the disease.
Vogel came to the conclusion that a maximum of 25 per cent of the sporadic retinoblastoma cases are new mutations. For the moment, the question as to whether the remaining 75 per cent should be considered phenocopies caused by exogenous factors or somatic mutations is left unanswered. Of course, the resultant calculation of the mutation rate gives a completely different picture. The following is a comparison between the calculations of the previous authors and those of Vogel for the three populations investigated: Where previous authors estimate 14-23 mutated genes per 1 million gametes, according to Vogel's calculation there are only 4.4 per 1 million. This would mean that the retinoblastoma gene is the most stable of all human genes for which calculations have

Authors
Philip-Sorsby Falls-Neel Vogel

TABLE 2

RATES OF MUTATION

According to other authors
1.4 X 10-"
2.3 X 10-6

According
to Vogel 3.7 X 10-6 6.0 X 10-6 4.S X 10-6 4.4 xlO-6

been made to date. These few examples will suffice to indi-
cate the uncertainty of the foundations on which we are presently calculating the mutation rate of human genes, even in the case of relatively simple and clear-cut (autosomal-dominant) hereditary transmission. These are merely preliminary and tentative efforts and much preparatory work remains to be done before reliable data on the frequency and distribution of pathogenic human genes are available to us for calculating the mutation rates of such genes on a fairly sound basis.
Mutagenic Factors
If our knowledge concerning the frequency of mutation of individual human genes can be considered slight, we must confess that we have practically no positive knowledge at all regarding the effect of mutagenic factors on human hereditary characteristics. Thus far, therefore, we are left with nothing but the conjecture that the factors proven to be mutagenic in the case of other organisms are likewise mutagenic in human beings.
Since Muller first reported in 1927, that, using X-rays, he had succeeded in effecting a substantial increase in the mutation rate among Drosophila, irradiation genetics has become an important field of research in experimental genetics in its own right. After Charlotte Auerbach obtained similar results in Drosophila with mustard gas during the last war, a new area of research developed alongside that of irradiation genetics, i.e., chemicogenetics, which investigates the effect of chemical substances on hereditary characteristics. On the basis of

Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

experiments carried out thus far with ani- to human beings only over long periods of

mals and plants, the principal mutagenic time and through the observation of several

factors are the following: all short-wave generations. However, even in the case of

rays; hard, medium and soft X-rays; radium the individual exposed to irradiation, such

rays (beta and gamma rays); high-speed injury may manifest itself in the form of

neutrons; ultraviolet rays; extreme tem- reduced fertility. The number of childless

peratures (temperature shocks); and, marriages among X-ray physicians and tech-

among the chemical substances, mustard nicians (17 out of 55 = 31 per cent, accord-

gas, formaldehyde, phenol, numerous car- ing to Loeffler) is reported to be higher

cinogenic substances.

than among the average population. In 18

With respect first to the effect of irradia- per cent of the men, damage to the semen

tion on hereditary traits, the result has been was detected; in some cases, the lesion re-

that the mutagenic effect increases with the ceded and it even became possible to pro-

dosage. At an irradiation of 30-40 roentgen, create phenotypically normal children. An

the spontaneous rate of mutation in Droso- increased number of miscarriages has been

phila doubles; at 100 roentgen, it is tripled; reported among women who were once X-

at 1,000 roentgen, it increases 22-fold ray assistants (Naujoks), but this is not

(Muller, Timofe'eff-Ressovsky). Of par- necessarily the result of injury to the germ

ticular importance, however, is the finding cells. At any rate, these observations with

that there is no threshold value below respect to human beings are still insuf-

which the rays are inactive; on the con- ficient to provide us with a picture of the

trary, there is a cumulative effect when ex- real hereditary damage resulting from work

tremely small amounts of radiation con- with short-wave rays. Natural irradiation,

tinually strike germ cells. These results of i.e., spontaneous cosmic radiation, high-

experimental irradiation genetics had an altitude radiation etc., is so slight that its

alarming effect. The question arose as to harmful effect on germ cells scarcely needs

whether, under these circumstances, patients to be taken into account.

undergoing X-ray and radium therapy (and As mentioned above, it is only in the last

even more so, the attending physicians and fifteen years or so that chemical substances

assistants), as well as all persons engaged have been recognized as mutagenic factors.

in the testing of materials in X-ray and We have barely begun to delve into this

radium plants, in the production of X-ray subject--even at the animal experimenta-

tubes and in the obtaining and processing tion level--and the list of chemical sub-

of radium, are not to a greater or lesser ex- stances known to have a mutagenic effect

tent exposed to the risk of germ-cell injury. will certainly become far more complete

If a nurse in a modern radiotherapy insti- in the years to come. We still know nothing

tute receives an average daily dose of 0.8 about the influence of chemical substances

roentgen, this represents approximately 240 on mutability in human beings, but we

roentgen per year of 300 working days have reason to assume that their effect on

(Zimmer). At a daily dose of 0.25 roentgen human populations is much greater than

and with only 200 working days per year, is that of the physical factors. Some ex-

a medical X-ray specialist is exposed to a perimental researchers already feel justi-

total dose of 750 roentgen Qager and fied in drawing the conclusion that all

Stubbe). These data show the necessity for carcinogenic substances are also mutagenic

effective protection against irradiation in (Demerec, Strong). This conclusion is per-

all work involving short waves.

haps premature, but meanwhile we must

Since injury from irradiation affects the reckon with the possibility that these sub-

individual less than his descendants, it will stances do have a mutagenic effect. Among

be possible to provide evidence with respect the substances considered at the present

15

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

time to be carcinogenic--and, after all, Thalassemia appears almost exclusively

more or less every individual in a civilized among Italians, sickle cell anemia among

society is susceptible to the effect of carcino- Negroes and mulattoes. However, the dis-

genic substances--are aromatic hydrocar- tribution of the disease within a nation or

bons, certain azo dyes, aniline, certain race is by no means uniform. For instance,

synthetics (cellophane), tobacco (tobacco thalassemia is particularly widespread in

tar), cigarette smoke, the benzpyrene con- the Po Delta and in Sicily, and the high

tent in the air of large cities and certain rates of mutation have been computed on

alimentary substances like butter yellow. the basis of such populations with numer-

Also coming to mind in this connection are ous bearers of the trait. If the calculations

the universal and progressive denaturing of were based on populations from other sec-

foodstuffs as a result of canned-food con- tions of Italy, the rates of mutation would

sumption and vitamin deficiencies (but also be far lower. In such cases, a search should

the body's absorption of innumerable sub- be made for mutagenic factors, even though

stances administered to it for therapeutic local differences in the distribution of a

purposes), as well as chemical contracep- pathologic gene need by no means be

tives and temporary sterilization agents in- caused by a different rate of mutation.

volving the closest possible contact with the

germ cells. To be sure, not a single case of Selective Pressure and Counterselection

injury to a child resulting from unsuccess- Individuals who are carriers of a heredi-

ful contraception with chemical agents has tary disease or of a hereditary anomaly are

been proved beyond refutation (Gesenius), in general more or less at a disadvantage

but this fact still does not rule out the possi- compared to normal individuals in the mat-

bility of damage to the genotype by such ter of reproduction, i.e., they are under

preventative agents. The detection of such greater selective pressure. The selective dis-

adverse effects, we repeat, will require advantage is represented by the symbol /

generations of observation.

in the formula for calculating the rate of

We are completely aware of the difficul- mutation. If we postulate the reproductive

ties involved in research concerning the fitness /, of the normal individual as equal

effect of mutagenic factors in human beings. to 1, the / value for the individual with a

However, there is no reason to adopt an hereditary disease lies between 1 and 0. If

attitude of resignation. In this field, too, all sufferers from a hereditary disease die

there are ways and means of carrying out before the onset of sexual maturity, / equals

important preliminary work. For instance, 0. In the case of infantile amaurotic idiocy,

a universal survey of hereditary diseases in myatonia and pancreatic fibrosis, children

the civilized countries, such as the one already die in infancy or in early child-

called for in the preceding section, and the hood. The diseases in question are inherited

systematic study of the frequency and dis- recessively and transmitted solely through

tribution of pathologic genes in the various the phenotypically healthy heterozygotes.

countries and among the various races on In the case of dominant transmission it is

the different continents could give us indi- likewise often only the homozygous cases

cations concerning the effect of mutagenic which are more or less fatal, as thalassemia

factors, if geographical differences exist with and sickle cell anemia, whereas in such cases

respect to the rate of mutation of a gene. heterozygotes are merely affected with a

Table 1 shows the two hereditary diseases harmless form of anemia. The dying off of

with the highest rates of mutation, thalas- the heterozygous carriers of dominant semia (4 X 10"4) a n d sickle cell anemia characters even before sexual maturity (1 X 102). Both diseases are definitely would make transmission completely impos-

linked with nationality or race factors. sible and the mutated gene would already

16 Eugenics Quarterly

be eliminated in the generation in which the correlated character made its appearance. In the case of most dominant hereditary diseases at least some of the heterozygotes reach the age of reproduction. For instance, it is true that in chondrodystrophy 80 per cent of the trait carriers die during their first year of life, but beyond this age viability is normal. To be sure, in the latter event his chances of reproducing are nevertheless still limited inasmuch as a crippled chondrodystrophic dwarf does not have the same prospects of finding a marriage partner as a normal individual. In the case of Pelger's anomaly, which, at least in heterozygotes, represents a harmless blood

variant, the selective disadvantage of the heterozygotes compared with the non-Pelger cases is slight, amounting to only 5 per cent.
It is obviously clear that the frequency of a hereditary disease whose carriers are more or less seriously exposed to extinction before they have reproduced can remain unchanged in the population only when the number eliminated is balanced out by new mutations. The question as to how it happens that mutation and elimination balance each other out and, consequently, that an equilibrium is established in the population has been answered very satisfactorily by Stern with an example which is cited here (Table 3).

TABLE 3
(According to Stern) Frequencies of a pathogenic dominant allele A in successive generations. Rate of mutation, 1: 100,000.
Size of population: 1 million. Reproductive fitness of A = 0.5.

Generation
0 1 2 3 4 5

Normal Allele o
2 mill. (·)

Newly Mutated Allele A
20 20 20 20 20

PATHOGENIC ALLELES A
Remaining Allele A from Previous Generations
10 10+5 10+5+2.5 10+5+2.5+155

Total Number of A Alleles
20 30 35 37.5 38.75

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

00 20 10+5+2.5+1.25+. (·) More exactly: 2 million a alleles minus the number of A alleles in every generation.

40

In a population of 1 million individuals per generation, a pathogenic allele A may appear with a mutation rate of 1:100,000 per gene, and its reproductive fitness will amount to only half that of the normal allele a. If the pathogenic allele was not yet present in the initial generation and appeared with the indicated frequency as a new mutant from the following generation onward, and with the elimination of half the A alleles in each generation in accordance with the table, a state of near equilibrium would be reached after only 4-5 generations.
However, the picture is basically altered when the carriers of hereditary diseases, who previously died prematurely, are kept alive by successful therapy and thus enabled

to reach sexual maturity and to reproduce. In this manner the selective pressure is moderated, if not completely eliminated, i.e., a counterselection sets in. Reproductivity /, which amounted to 0 or to a fraction of 1, approaches the value 1 of normal individuals. There is no doubt as to the very great successes achieved during the last half century in the treatment of many hereditary diseases. Here, we shall cite only a few examples.
The pathological condition of cleft lipjaw-palate is one of the most frequent deformities of the body, manifesting itself in various forms ranging from the simple cleft of the upper lip, i.e., harelip, to a complete cleft in the roof of the palate, i.e., cheilognathouranoschisis. In Germany, 1-2

17

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

cases in every 1,000 births have the anomaly in some form or other. Other civilized nations present similar statistics. The anomaly is twice as frequent in the male as in the female sex. As late as the previous century, all children with a cleft palate died. At the present time, operative techniques have been developed to such a degree that the malformation need no longer be fatal. In most cases, the operation leaves only slight externally visible scars, and today the bearer of the deformity has practically the same chance of attaining sexual maturity and reproducing as a normal individual. With a frequency rate of 1:1,000 for this malformation, there are approximately 1,000 deformed children for every 1 million births; as late as the last century most of these would still have been eliminated by natural selection. Even though the cleft lipjaw-palate is in some cases not the result of heredity, the number of hereditary cases in successive generations is bound to increase as the result of countersection. As a matter of fact, it is reported that the number of cleft lip-jaw-palate cases has doubled during the last century (v. Verschuer).
The same situation prevails in the case of two other very widely distributed malformations of the body, so-called congenital dislocation of the hip-joint and club-foot. Even cases of bilateral dislocated hip-joint have been operated successfully and no longer represent an obstacle to marriage; persons afflicted with club-foot can be "decrippled" by surgery and are likewise no longer at a disadvantage compared to individuals with a healthy heredity.
I should like to mention diabetes mellitus as the classical example of the effect of counterselective measures. Since the introduction of insulin therapy, the life expectancy and functional ability of the sufferer from diabetes mellitus have increased considerably. Whereas previously diabetic men and women were largely infertile, it is now possible, thanks to insulin, not only to eliminate impotence in men and sterility

in women patients, but to bring about successful pregnancies through sex hormone treatments. Previously, when female diabetics did actually succeed in becoming pregnant, at least half the children of such mothers died before birth or shortly thereafter. The fact cannot be doubted that there has been an increase in the number of diabetics in the last half century (Pannhorst).
Since the recognition of normal blood transfusions as a very effective therapeutic measure, even hemophilia is hardly any longer a threat to the life of the hemophilic. The first genuine (homozygous) female hemophilic, born of the union of a hemophilic male with a female transmitter, was recently described (Israels, Lempert and Gilbertson). The pregnancy of this hemophilic woman and the birth of her child proceeded normally: subsequent heavy hemorrhages were successfully controlled by means of blood transfusions.
In nearly every field of hereditary disease similar therapeutic successes have been reported which, both from the standpoint of the patient and that of the attending physician, can only be welcomed. However, as geneticists and eugenists we must not lose sight of the other side of the picture of such counterselection. Referring to Table 3 again, if the reproductive fitness as determined by selective pressure is raised by means of counterselection from A=0.5 to A = l (without any change taking place in the mutation rate of 1:100,000), the number of A alkies will increase from generation to generation and the number of mutants or hereditary disease cases in the population will increase correspondingly.
To be sure, we still lack all satisfactory data enabling us to arrive at an exact evaluation of the degree and effect of counterselection in the individual hereditary diseases. In this field, too, almost all of the work still lies before us, and in conclusion I should like to cite the phrase with which Curt Stern prefaced his paper at this conference: "Research needed!"

