Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The hereditary abilities study: The University of Michigan
Steven G. Vandenberg
To cite this article: Steven G. Vandenberg (1956) The hereditary abilities study: The University of Michigan, Eugenics Quarterly, 3:2, 94-99, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1956.9987273 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1956.9987273
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3
View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

THE HEREDITARY ABILITIES STUDY The University of Michigan*
STEVEN G. VANDENBERG
University of Michigan

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

In recent years important advances have been made in many areas in genetics, but there has been no large scale interdisciplinary investigation of twins since Newman, Freeman and Holzinger's work in the thirties at the University of Chicago. Marked progress has also been made since that time in the theory and practice of psychological measurement and anthropometry, while a whole new area in biochemistry has opened up: the paper-chromatographic assay of amino acid excretion. In 1952 the Institute of Human Biology of the University of Michigan received a grant from McGregor Fund of Detroit to undertake a study of the relative similarity of identical and fraternal twins on wide samples of anthropométrie, biochemical psychological variables. Data analysis has been supported since July 1955 by a U. S. Public Health Service grant. We chose to study a large number of variables, rather than to concentrate on a few traits previously reported to be under hereditary control.
This decision was based on the fact that the main usefulness of comparing identical and fraternal twins lies in the detection of traits which are under hereditary control. To work out the exact mode of inheritance other methods have to be used, such as, for instance, studies of pedigrees. On the other hand such studies cannot be undertaken until reasonably accurate ways have been worked out to measure the trait
*This investigation was supported in part by a research grant M 1045 from the National Institute of Mental Health of the National Institutes of Health, Public Health Service.

one wishes to study. A total of 45 pairs of identical twins and
37 pairs of fraternal twins finished the complete battery of examinations used in this study. We are extremely grateful to these young men and women for their cooperation.
(Data collecting was discontinued after April 1955 after preliminary calculations had indicated that the addition of further pairs was not likely to change the nature of the conclusions which could be made from the results for the 82 pairs examined.)
With the exception of three pairs of undergraduate students from the University of Michigan, the twins came from junior and senior high schools in Ann Arbor, Ypsilanti, Dearborn and Detroit. A great deal of credit is due to the school officials who made the names of twins available, and permitted the use of school facilities and school time.
The majority of the twins were between 16 and 18 years of age. In several of the schools all the like-sexed twins were seen. To allow a meaningful comparison, no boy-girl twin pairs were used in this study. It is possible that a few fraternal twin pairs were overlooked in some of the large high schools in Detroit. This would in general lead to an underestimate of genetic control because these overlooked twins would tend to be particularly dissimilar fraternal twins.
After the twins were located, a field worker visited their home to secure their cooperation and to interview the parents. The most important question asked by her

94

95

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

was whether there had been any events given by the late L. L. Thurstone and R. B.

which which would lead to dissimilarity Cattell, both of whom had conducted

between the twins, such as major illness or studies of the heritability of mental traits

separation for a significant length of time. before our study was started. (2)

In this interview we were also interested In addition several other traits and char-

in securing information about the socio- acteristics were examined. Sibley W.

economic status of the parents of the twins Hoobler of the Cardiovascular Unit of the

because of the reported relationships be- University Hospital arranged for an exami-

tween intelligence and socioeconomic vari- nation, during which an extensive set of

ables.

measures of cardiovascular function was

. After the parental interview arrange- collected. The twins were also seen by

ments were made for the twins to come to Harold F. Falls of the Ophthalmology

Ann Arbor for two days. In addition ar- Clinic who gave the twins a detailed exam-

rangements were made to administer eight ination, including a refraction.

hours of paper-and-pencil tests in the high Each twin pair visited the Orthodontics schools in which the twins were enrolled. Department of the Dental School where

During the visits to Ann Arbor the twins Robert E. Moyers had made arrangements

were given a complete anthropométrie for a careful examination by James P.

examination by Philip J. Clark. The an- Alderisio who made dental casts and

thropométrie measures collected include frontal and lateral head X-rays as well as

height, weight, length and circumference X-rays of the hands.

of extremities, handgrip strength, speech recordings, hair samples and black and white photographs of the head in profile and in face, the hands and ears as well as color photographs of the iris of both eyes.1
The biochemical data obtained by H. Eldon Sutton include the level of a number of amino acids in the blood, urine and saliva, from which can be calculated the rates of renal absorption of some of these substances.

Before reporting any findings it may be useful to review briefly the rationale of twin study method.
By comparing the average within-pair differences of identical twins with the average within-pair differences of fraternal twin pairs, it is possible to obtain an estimate of the importance of heredity in the determination of a trait. The proportion of the variance attributable to genetic factors has been called heritability.

The first urine sample was collected upon arrival at the laboratory while the two additional samples were first morning samples. The field worker collected these on certain days by going to a number of homes of twins.
The psychological measures collected by Steven G. Vandenberg include, besides the paper-and-pencil tests given in the school, a number of tests administered individually in the laboratory. For some details on these measures see below. Valuable advice on the selection of psychological tests was

Differences between identical twins can only be due to non-genetic (i.e., environmental) factors, because identical twins have identical genetic makeup. Some of the better known non-genetic factors are differences in diet, differences in the parental treatment of the two twins, illness of one twin only. There may be others. Fraternal twins are subject to the same difference producing influences. In addition they differ considerably in their genetic makeup. Therefore, fraternal twins will be more dissimilar than identical twins on

traits which are under genetic control.

Without burdening the reader with the

1 For a full list of anthropometric variables see (1).

details of the statistical procedures used in

96 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

practice, we can say that the discrepancy between the two sets of differences for any specific trait will constitute an indication of the degree of genetic control over that trait.
Implicit in this argument are at least two important assumptions. First of all it is assumed that non-genetic factors will tend to lead to greater differences in fraternal pairs than in identicals or, in other words, that identicals will not be exposed to more similar non-genetic environments. It may well be that identical twins are treated more alike than are fraternals. This would lead to an overestimate of the importance of heredity. On the other hand, it is also possible that there are non-genetic factors which affect only identical twins.
Price (3) has reviewed evidence on prenatal conditions and came to the conclusion that these frequently may have effects which would lead to underestimates of heredity.
The second major assumption of the twin method is that the non-genetic and genetic influences operate independently. This may be a questionable assumption, especially with regard to certain psychological traits.
In any comparison of identical and fraternal twins the most important step is the decision whether any given twin pair will be diagnosed identical or fraternal. Until recently such zygosity diagnoses had to be based on physical similarity of traits generally thought to be under genetic control: hair color, eye color, size, etc. Conclusions about the heritability of such traits could be criticized as based on circular reasoning. As the genetic mechanisms of more and more blood types became known it became possible to make more accurate diagnoses of zygosity: whenever the two members of a twin pair differ in any blood group they cannot be identical twins. With the blood typing sera available, plus criteria derived from the iris photography, fingerprints, and head X-rays, it was possible to reach about 97 per cent certainty in the diag-

nosis of the twins in this study. In this connection, it should be noted that any errors of diagnosis will lead to an underestimate of genetic control. Finally it may be pointed out that for many traits we do not possess accurate techniques of measurement yielding results which can be quantified. Most of the errors in the measuring techniques can be expected to be random. They would affect data for both types of twins equally. To the extent that faulty measurements cause identical twins to appear less similar than they really are, the effect of heredity will be obscured.
The psychological tests fall into three main categories: cognitive tests, personality tests, and tests of motor coordination. Since the statistical analysis of these results is not completed, we can generally only indicate the kinds of questions we are asking and the sorts of answers we may receive.
The cognitive tests are aimed at measuring a variety of intellectual abilities. A person may be poor at certain tasks, say mathematical problems, while he is good at other tasks which might for instance depend on verbal ability or mechanical insight. Therefore, tests were selected which would measure these different aptitudes separately, such as Thurstone's battery of verbal ability, arithmetic ability, spatial visualization, memory and reasoning ability. A few of the many other tests included were the Vocabulary Test of the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children, the Miller Mechanical Insight Test, and the Stanford Spelling Achievement Test.
In addition people differ in the speed with which they can solve problems. For a few selected tests a record was made of the time required for completion of each problem. We were thus able to determine to what extent "personal pace" is under genetic control, and whether this speed aspect is related to the usual measures of intelligence which are based primarily on number of questions answered correctly.
So far it looks as if for certain tasks the "personal pace" aspect may well be inde-

97

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

pendent of the accuracy of the performance. Whether this "personal pace" factor is related to temperamental factors remains to be seen.
Psychologists can measure intellectual traits rather accurately. Until recently they have not been quite so successful in defining and measuring personality traits. There are, however, several promising new approaches. It has for instance been shown repeatedly that the perception of certain ambiguous stimuli is to a large extent dependent on the personality of the observer. For this reason a number of perceptual tasks were included in this study. ·
In addition it has been shown that personality traits play a part in the performance on tests which require the learning of a new coordination of eye and hand. Several such motor-coordination tasks were administered to the twins. Also included were several personality questionnaires and a vocational interest form.
Other measures of individual differences in personality can be obtained by recording the reaction of the autonomie nervous system to sudden noise or other startling events. (The autonomie nervous system controls such aspects of emotional reactions as breathing rate, heartbeat, blushing, etc.)
By making a continuous recording of the changes in heartbeat, breathing rate and the electrical resistance of the skin (psychogalvanic reflex"), we hoped to discover the role of heredity in the determination of the marked differences found among people. These differences could be both of the degree and kind of reactions shown.
The results of our heritability calculations to date are to some extent in agreement with previous reported findings and also with popular ideas about hereditary factors. As might for instance be expected, the degree of hereditary control over such anthropométrie variables as stature or span exceeds that for most psychological traits.
Of the biochemical variables lysine appears to be about as much under heredi-

tary control as are the anthropométrie variables while most of the other biochemical variables were found to be more subject to environmental influences.
Figure 1 illustrates the relative importance of heredity for some variables. The striped bars represent the within-pair variance of the identical twins while the blank bars represent the within-pair variance of the fraternal twins. (For easier visual comparison all within-pair variances of the identical twins were made equal.)
The psychological tests differ considerably in the degree of heritability. Some of the cognitive variables appear to be much more under hereditary control than are others. In previous studies intelligence tests were used which were heavily loaded with items measuring verbal intelligence. Our findings so far indicate that several of the other factors in intelligence are as much or more under hereditary control than is verbal intelligence. An example of a non-verbal test which measures one of these factors is Raven's Progressive Matrices test.
Among the other factors not shown in Figure 1 are spatial visualization and perceptual speed. The latter is the name proposed by Thurstone for the ability to perform quickly relatively simple tasks of comparing and checking numbers or designs. Certain aspects of motor coordination such as dexterity or rotary pursuit also appear to be more under hereditary control than is verbal intelligence. Perhaps most surprising is the finding that some aspects of personality as measured by several of the part-scores on certain questionnaires are as much under hereditary control as are some of the intellectual performances.
Several questions are raised by these results. Some of these we hope to be able to answer in the course of data analysis now under way. First of all, it may be asked if all of these measures are separately controlled by heredity. It may be that some of them are highly correlated, so that we are

98 Eugenics Quarterly
CATTELl. JR. PERSONALITY TEST: NERVOUS TENSION
THURSTONE TEMPERAMENT TEST: VIGOROUS
TWEEZER DECTERITY ROTARY PURSUIT FUCKER FUSION FREQUENCY MECHANICAL INSIGHT WISC VOCABULARY TEST STANFORD SPELLING TEST RAVEN'S PROGRESSIVE MATRICES PMA SENTENCE COMPLETION PMA ARTTHMETIC ABILITY OPTICAL DENSITY ML URINE/ MINUTE

Inurnil 1

|

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

SHOULDER WIDTH NOSE HEIGHT
FINGER LENGTH
FIGURE I. A COMPARISON CF THE WITHIN PAIR VARIANCE OF IDENTICAL AND FRATERNAL TWINS FOR A FEW ANTHROPOMETRIC, BIOCHEMICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL TRAITS.

99

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

repeatedly measuring the same underlying traits. This might even be true for traits for which there does not exist a high correlation in the general population. The effect of the environmental influences might well be to attenuate and obscure correlation due to genetic interrelationships.
If relationships exist between anthropométrie and psychological variables such as are claimed by Kretschmer or Sheldon, one would expect to find evidence for this in our data. (4)
Another question which we hope to answer has to do with the various theories about the nature and organization of human intelligence. Psychologists in England generally hold that it is most profitable to regard intelligence as a general capacity. They admit that one can distinguish some specific abilities but their treatment tends to minimize the importance of specific factors. On the other hand most American psychologists feel that this "general-factor" theory of intelligence makes intelligence a rather vague, abstract quality while specific abilities like verbal ability, spatial visualization, or reasoning ability are much more concrete entities.
A comparison of heritability estimates of these special abilities with heritability estimates of general intelligence will be of great help to ascertain the relative merits of these competing theories.
It is a long-standing tradition in psychology to regard intelligence and personality as two separate aspects of an individual which at most exert some slight influence on one another. Recent studies on

animals have shown that--for animals at
least--this distinction is perhaps not always
useful. It may be that the distinction re-
flects in part a philosophical tradition
rather than empirical facts. Data from this
study may throw some light on this ques-
tion.
Besides these theoretical issues which
are of interest primarily to psychologists,
the practical contribution we hope to make
to human genetics will be one of indicat-
ing which techniques or tests appear to be
measuring best those psychological traits
found to be under genetic control. Future
workers in this area may thus benefit from
our work by choosing traits for which the
more accurate techniques are available.
REFERENCES
1. CLARK, P. J. 1956. The heritability of certain anthropometric characters as ascertained from measurements of twins. Am. J. Human Genet. 8, (1) 49-54.
2. THURSTONE, T. G., THURSTONE, L. L., and
STRANDSKOV, H. H. 1953. A psychological study of twins. 1. Distributions of absolute twin differences for identical and fraternal twins. Report No. 4, The Psychometric Laboratory, University of The Psychometric Laboratory, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. CATTELL, R. B. 1953. Research design in psychological genetics with special reference to the multiple variance method. Am. J. Human Genet. 5: 76-93.
BLEWETT, D. B., and BELOFF, J. R. 1955. The in-
heritance of personality. Am. J. Human Genet., 7, (2) 122-146. 3. PRICE B. 1950. Primary bases in twin studies; A review of prenatal and natal difference-producing factors in monozygotic pairs. Am. J. Human Genet. 2, (4) 293-352
4. KRETSCHMER, ERNST. 1955. Körperbau und
Charakter. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. SHELDON, W. H. 1940. The Varieties of Human
Physique; An Introduction to Constitutional Psychology. New York: Harper and Bros.

