Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Present status of research on populations
Frank Lorimer
To cite this article: Frank Lorimer (1955) Present status of research on populations, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:3, 133-139, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987238 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987238
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

PRESENT STATUS OF RESEARCH ON POPULATIONS
Their Structure, Composition and Quality1

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

FRANK LORIMER
The American University

T.HE WORDS STRUCTURE/ COMPOSITION/
"quality," and "characteristics" are used rather loosely in describing demographic phenonmena. Sometimes these words are used interchangeably; at other times a particular term is used in a special sense, but even so its precise significance is not always clear. For example, in reports on the 1930 and earlier censuses, data were presented on "Composition and Characteristics." The same kinds of data are now presented simply as "Characteristics." The Bureau of the Census now gives no explicit recognition to the concepts symbolized by the terms "structure," "composition," or "quality." One might rashly conclude that either the Census must be derelict in its duty or that I have been ensnared into legerdemain with obsolete concepts. But there is good reason to take a more charitable position, both as regards the performance of the Census Bureau and as regards the wisdom of those responsible for drafting the present program.
"Structure," if used with restraint and precision in reference to a population, seems to me to be a nice word. It has a distinct significance that is important in demography, though it has no proper place in census operations. Apart from the effects of migration, a population can be conceived as a purely biological phenomenon. Members are added by birth and lost by death. But birth is merely an incident in the process of conception, gestation, and maturation--which also involves differentiation by sex--and death is normally a culmination of senescence. Each person at any time has a particular position with re-
1Paper presented to the Population Association of America, Princeton, May 21, 1955.

spect to these biological processes. The relative numbers of persons in these different positions are determined by previous vital rates and these relative numbers are functionally related to future vital rates. Lotka, therefore, had good reason for referring to the biologically determined ageand-sex composition of a closed population by a distinct term, i.e., "structure." Semantic confusion could be reduced by strict adherence to this limited usage.
The essence of Lotka's unique contribution was the systematic analysis of the interrelations of demographic structure and vital rates. This line of investigation is being carried on and needs to be carried on --especially as regards the effects of changing rates--because it has important implications that have not yet been adequately taken into account in population studies. We are now painfully aware of ways in which a too direct application of stable population functions to empirical populations can lead to gross errors--especially in the case of inferences based on observations at a particular point in time--as has been shown by Karmel, Whelpton, Woofter, Vincent, Stolnitz, and others. Man is an animal, but he is a mobile animal and a social animal. The age and sex composition of many human populations deviates appreciably from a biological structure, due to the effects of migration. Moreover, human behavior is influenced by changing social conditions, and behavior at particular ages may be influenced by previous behavior at earlier ages. The uncritical application of stable population theory to real populations can, therefore, lead to irrational conclusions. This suggests the need for caution, but it does not impair the value

133

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

134 Eugenics Quarterly

of analytical theory or critical applications of this theory.
The influence of fertility on age distribution has received special attention in some recent studies. The persistent but fallacious notion that changes in age distribution are largely due to changes in mortality has two sources. (1) The effects of postponement of death in extending the lives of individuals is a common observation, whereas the effect on a population of changes in the size of successive birth cohorts is less obvious. (2) Demographers have sometimes been misled in contemplating life-table populations which explicitly represent given levels of mortality, forgetting that they implicitly involve corresponding levels of fertility. Experimentation with stable populations shows that

their age structures are determined mainly by levels of fertility. In other words, assuming constant rates, similar agestructures result from combining different sets of age-specific death rates with a given set of fertility rates; but very different age structures result from combining different levels of fertility with a given set of agespecific death rates. This is illustrated in the Chart below.
Similar results are obtained by experimenting with the effects of progressive changes in vital rates on the age structures of initially stable populations. A decline of mortality, in conformity with an observed age-incidence pattern, sometimes increases slightly the proportions of children and of aged persons in relation to numbers of adults in the middle agerange, thus pro-

·/. BY 5YR. ACE GROUPS

STABLE AGE DISTRIBUTIONS WITH DIFFERENT VITAL RATES

FERTILITY (ESTIMATED) INDIA, 1921 - 31 MORTALITY-INDIA, 1921-31
FERTILITY -SAME AS IN MORTALITY-JAPAN, 1 9 2 6 - 3 0
FERTILITY-UNITED STATES, 1 9 2 0 (WHITE FEMALES, B.R.A.)
MORTALITY- SAME AS IN 16

12 12

20 30

AGE

135

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ducing a slightly lessefficient age structure; but changes in mortality usually have little over-all effect on age structure. On the other hand, a progressive reduction of fertility tends to reduce the ratio of children to adults in the middle age range and also to increase proportions in advanced age classes.
Incidentally, it may be noted that the influence of age composition on the crude death rate is sometimes misinterpreted. For example, the crude death rate of the U.S. population, 1939-11, was 10.8 per thousand, whereas the general death rate in the corresponding life table was 15.7 per thousand. Such a difference is sometimes interpreted as showing the influence of an "abnormal" age distribution at this time, with the implication that if age-specific death rates remain constant the crude death rate must rise. But in a stable population with the 1939-41 age-specific death rates of the United States and with a constant increase of 1 per cent per year, the general death rate would be only 11.9 per thousand; a slightly higher constant rate of increase gives a general rate as low as the observed crude rate. One can not, therefore, assume that under present conditions crude death rates will necessarily rise.
My own experimentation in this field, reported in the UN Population Bulletin, has been on a rather elementary level. I have experimented with a few selected schedules of fertility and mortality. I am happy to report that the subject has been treated analytically in an investigation by Ansley J. Coale. His findings will be published in the near future in an article on "The Effects of Changes in Mortality and Fertility on Age Composition." These findings, in general, confirm my expectations; but they are more securely grounded and his findings have a general significance that my experiments could not insure.
The investigation of changes in the sex composition of populations, subsequent to the distribution of births by sex, affords relatively smooth sailing for demographers.

The investigation of changing sex ratios among aged persons has properly received much attention by scientists concerned with social security programs and the whole field of gerontology. The widening of sex differentials in mortality, discussed by Dorn, raises many important problems.
Attention has been directed to the investigation of erratic deviations in apparent sex ratios at successive ages. Grauman has proposed a measure of such deviations in an index of errors in census reports. Incidentally, the thesis that such deviations can generally be attributed to the perversity of females in statements on this delicate subject received a rather severe blow in the study of U.S. census data recently published in the Journal of the American Statistical Association.
The problem of the determination of sex ratios at birth remains, so far as I am aware, shrouded in mystery. Probably the most important contribution to this subject during the last decade is Tietze's finding, reported in Human Biology, 1948, that the sex ratio in some 6,000 embryos, 3 to 7 months after conception, in the Carnegie Institution's collection was only about 108 males per 100 females, whereas sex ratios in the vicinity of 130 males per 100 females have generally been reported for late stillborn fetuses. It is certain that, among embryos at an early stage of gestation, there is a marked excess of males--contrary to expectation on genetic theory. Various hypotheses have been advanced to account for this apparent anomaly; but there seems to be no decisive evidence in support of any one explanation. In this context, I note that Spiegelman has provided useful ammunition for the defense of demographers against those who insist that God generally supports military activity by providing a surplus of male infants in the event of war.
The most important recent contribution to information on the composition and characteristicsof our population has been the refinement of census procedures in obtaining data on such critical characteristics

136 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

as employment and unemployment, family composition, éducation, mobility, and income. The wealth and accuracy of such data now available to the demographer is of a quite different order from that provided 20 years ago. This must be credited in part to the competence of the census staff, but in part it must be attributed to the force of interests more potent than demography in legislative circles. Fortunately economic, social, and hygienic data are also demographic data. Therefore, the volume of information on the "characteristics" of populations rises with the growth and diversification of technology and social interests.
The concept of the "composition" of a population is essentially heuristic; its content is always relevant to some particular inquiry. Populations can be classified in all sorts of ways for different purposes: residence, income, occupation, education, race, religion, politics, membership in associations, body build, food preferences, etc. The variations treated in such classifications are real, but they are generally complex, continuous, and overlapping. Classification usually involves the selection of some more or less arbitrary criteria; and different criteria are useful in different investigations.
Two types of classification have very general relevance to population studies: classification by sex and age, and classification by area and type of community. In describing empirical populations, as regards the first of these categories, it is preferable to speak first of their "sex and age composition"-- reserving the term "structure" for analytical treatments. Classification by area and type of community defines one kind of population components, but it is convenient here to refer to the distribution of population. Research involving such classification is reviewed in this series by Donald Bogue.
Apart from these two modes of classification, no other system of defining the composition of populations seems to be peculiarly relevant to demography. Apparently,

the utility of classification by race or ethnic origin is diminishing; but classification by characteristics associated with social status may be increasing in importance. The latter was found to be very useful in dealing with data from the Indianapolis study on factors affecting fertility--though, in this case, within a universe limited with respect to area, race, and religion. The classification of populations into component parts is a basic procedure in social research. As information on the characteristics of populations is provided, or can be obtained, the student delineates patterns of composition to fit his particular interests. In this sense, the interests of demographers are similar to those of other social scientists. Demographic research has progressed in recent years by becoming more specific. This promotes more accurate, though more limited, generalizations.
Spengler deals with interrelations in the economic sphere between the changes in population components and changes in economic functions. I will merely add two incidental comments to his systematic treatment. In a recent conference in Washington called by Resources for the Future, Joseph Davis suggested that the incidence of recent increases of income in different segments of our population may have appreciably affected total consumption trends in this country, notably the rather surprising increase in the proportion of the national income spent for food. This suggests one aspect of the relation of behavior patterns to population components. Another approach takes account of such changes as the shift of population from scattered rural communities to metropolitan areas and the diminished force of rural-urban differentials in fertility. These demographic trends influence changes in total national income, and in distribution of the national income.
Demographers have special responsibility for investigating the influence of population changes on the characteristics of populations. This responsibility is recognized in the statutes of the Population Association

137

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

of America and in the statutes of the International Union for the Scientific Study of Population which refer to studies on the qualitative aspects of population. Statements about the qualitative aspects of population may have any of three rather different meanings, which may be roughly defined as "narrow," "broad," or "loose." The narrow usage refers to the relation of population changes to some particular kind of characteristics, as for example, genetic characteristics. The broad usage deals with the relation of population changes to all sorts of characteristics, including genetics, but also including the economic relations mentioned above, and various social, cultural, and personal characteristics. This is the sense in which the phrase has been used in Swedish population theory. It needs to be sharply distinguished from what may be called a "loose" usage, from the standpoint of demography, where one is concerned with various characteristics quite apart from their relation to population trends. This is a very proper interest, but it lies outside the field of demography.
Interest in the relation of population trends to genetic characteristics is the joint province of demographers and geneticists, as their studies bear on the special field of eugenics. This subject merits special emphasis because of its profound importance for the future of mankind, its elusive character, and the absence of support by any special interest groups.
All thoughtful people today are aware that we face the possibility of catastrophic changes in this sphere that might operate with a devastating rapidity of a quite different order from the possible gradual changes with which Galton was concerned. The possibility of large-scale genetic mutations due to the effects of radiation is a frightening prospect, but it is a subject on which there are wide differences of opinion among competent geneticists--and, in any case, it is a subject to which we as demographers can make no special contribution.
Much progress has been made by human

geneticists in recent years in identifying genetic factors in various diseases and disabilities--as well as in blood groups and one unique capacity for taste--and identification in some cases of the carriers of recessive genes for particular disabilities through indications of incomplete penetrance. For the most part, these findings call for individual attention by physicians and genetic consultants. They do not present problems of general concern to demographers. The most important effect of current population trends in the western world on the incidence of such diseases is probably to reduce their phenotypic frequency, in the case of diseases due to recessive genes. This follows from the breakup of isolated, inter-bred groups, due to increased residential and social mobility.
There seems to have been rather little advance in recent years in knowledge about genetic factors in intelligence and personality. It may be that progress in the analysis of factors in psychological performance, investigations of the physiological processes involved in such behavior, and studies on genetic factors affecting animal behavior are contributing background information that will make possible more rapid advances in this field in the near future. But until we have such knowledge, we must maintain an open mind to alternative hypotheses. Work of immediate importance of the qualitative aspects of population must now be framed chiefly with reference to social factors affecting health and personality.
The most important contribution in recent years to knowledge about the relation of differential reproduction to the distribution of intelligence has come from the extensive survey of eleven-year old children in Scotland in 1947, as a sequel to a comparable survey in 1932. The data from these surveys have been carefully analyzed by James Maxwell and other British psychologists. Relations between ratings on group tests and on individual tests, size of family, order of birth, occupational sta-

138 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

tus, residence, and migration have been taken critically into account. The interrelations o b s e r v e d among intelligence scores, size of family, and occupational status are similar to those generally reported from studies in this country. These relations lead to the inference that differential reproduction has exercised a depressing influence on the trend of the mean level of intelligence in Scottish children. On the contrary, the investigation shows that in 1947 the mean scores on group tests were somewhat higher, and on individual tests practically the same, as in 1932. This find' ing is somewhat reassuring on any reasonable interpretation. It proves that if the differential reproduction characteristic of Great Britain and the United States has exerted a depressing influence on national levels of intelligence, this influence has been offset by other tendencies toward a general rise in intelligence. The hypothesis that increased heterosis (genetic heterogeneity) has been a positive factor can not be wholly excluded; but evidence in support of this hypothesis is very inconclusive. A more plausible hypothesis may be that changes in general level of living, educational practices, parent-child relations, and the intellectual stimuli provided by urban life have favored improved performance on intelligence tests. A possible alternative interpretation would be that inferences concerning the depressing effect of differential reproduction on intelligence are false. One explanation sometimes advanced is that there may have been no significant relation between the intelligence of parents and the size of their families, but that the observed negative association between the test scores of children and size of family can be attributed wholly to the depressing effect of large family size, as such, especially at lower economic levels. These alternatives can, and should be, tested. My tentative judgment is that the last hypothesis in its extreme form is probably false, but it may well account for part of the observed associations--at least in some situations. I have

never interpreted the assumed depressing
effect of the usual differential reproduction
in purely genetic terms, but I have assumed
that it probably involves a genetic compo-
nent. This possibility is not excluded by
the findings of the Scottish surveys.
Mr. Maxwell's own conclusion, in his
paper at the World Population Conference
last year, is as follows:
The positive contribution of surveys such as the Scottish ones is to reveal the nature and extent of the problems rather than to find conclusive answers to them, and to provide a framework of reference for more limited but more intensive investigations. Such investigations could profitably be directed to the elaboration of more precise methods of handling sociological and genetic data, to the establishment in greater detail of the interaction of social and genetic factors in fertility and intelligence, and, as the Scottish Mental Survey is doing with the 1215 individually tested children, trying to ascertain the bearing of intelligence test score, family size and social conditions on the future lives of the children. The main need, however, is to establish a link between one generation and the next. Neither extensive surveys nor limited investigations are themselves alone sufficient, the two approaches are necessarily complementary to each other.
In the field of education, our institutions
today are confronted with a great influx
of entrants from homes with meager educa-
tional experience. This is indicative of
accelerated social mobility, and it provides
an opportunity for extending the benefits
of higher education; but it also creates
problems in educational policy. These
problems have been intensified by the nega-
tive association during previous decades
between educational attainment and fer-
tility. If liberal education has any positive
values its influence must affect child devel-
opment and personality formation, and its
effects may be cumulative through succes-
sive generations. This long-term influence
will obviously be more potent if the asso-
ciation of fertility with educational levels
is positive rather than negative.

139

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Another very interesting line of qualitative population study, developed mainly by Glick, is the analysis of changes in the life cycle of families. Demographers have long been interested in the influence of patterns of family life on population trends; the influence of changes in population on family living deserves more attention than it has received. There is need for more effective rapport in planning research between students of the family and students of population trends. Perhaps, as the trend toward voluntary parenthood becomes widespread, it may promote the transmission of cultural values associated with family life. No properly controlled data are now available on this subject, but it should receive attention in research on social and psychological factors in fertility.
It must be recognized that we are moving here toward very complex problems involving demography, sociology, and psychology --or, perhaps we had better say, in the broad field of social research. This includes the relation of population trends to attitude formation, values, and behavior--including special problems in political behavior, delinquency, and mental disease.
The most brilliant recent contribution to knowledge about the characteristics of the American people is not primarily concerned with the relation of these characteristics to demographic trends, but it does include some data on this subject. I refer to Stouffer's Communism, Conformity, and Civil

Liberties. This is indeed a rare product-- so competent in social theory and technique and so clearly and simply presented, so dispassionate and yet so imaginative. Stouffer takes great pains to emphasize the point that this study is concerned only with the measurement of tolerance with respect to a particular issue. But this issue by its nature involves large attitude constellations, and it is less immediately associated with the special interests of any large groups than such issues as labor relations or race relations. Relative tolerance as measured in this study shows a strong positive association with educational level and a strong negative relation with age, jointly and independently. Stouffer notes that the area distribution suggests a positive correlation between geographical mobility and tolerance in this field. The area distribution also suggests to me a negative correlation between fertility during the previous decades and tolerance in this field.
With respect to the United States, the qualitative aspects of population changes are now more important and more interesting, in my judgment, than questions relating to the trend of the total number. I conclude by expressing the hope that some of the younger members of our Association may approach elusive problems in this field with such imagination and skill as that employed by Stouffer and his associates in their treatment of another critical and elusive subject.

