Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Clinical implications of genetic susceptibility to diabetes mellitus
C. Nash Herndon M.D.
To cite this article: C. Nash Herndon M.D. (1955) Clinical implications of genetic susceptibility to diabetes mellitus, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:1, 31-32, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987217 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987217
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS OF GENETIC SUSCEPTIBILITY TO DIABETES MELLITUS

C. NASH HERNDON, M.D.
Department of Medical Genetics Bowman Gray School of Medicine

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

In the article on Heredity and Diabetes can control our environment to some ex-

on page 26, Arthur Steinberg has given an tent, however, and the prevention of dis-

excellent answer to the question, "How ability from diabetes must be based on the

likely am I to develop diabetes?" He has recognition and avoidance of the environ-

presented risk figures specifying the prob- mental stress factors. Unfortunately, our

ability that an individual may be geneti- knowledge of these factors and how they

cally susceptible to diabetes mellitus if he act is still far from complete. Yet it is still

has one or more relatives known to have of considerable advantage to a susceptible

had this disease. The next question that individual to take advantage of even in-

might be asked is, "If I am susceptible to complete knowledge concerning prevention.

diabetes, what can I do about it?"

The environmental factor which has the

Steinberg has pointed out that for every highest known correlation with clinical

known diabetic person under medical treat- diabetes is obesity. Many studies have

ment in the United States, there is another shown that persons who are overweight are

person who is clinically recognizable but much more likely to develop diabetes than

who has not yet been diagnosed by a physi- are persons of normal or subnormal weight.

cian, and three other persons who are It is also a well-known medical observation

genetically susceptible but who cannot be that the severity of clinical diabetes may be

recognized as prediabetic by present routine lessened by weight reduction in obese

methods of examination. Our present un- diabetics. A physician may often control a

derstanding of this disease indicates that mild obese diabetic for several years with-

two factors must be present before an indi- out the use of insulin by reducing the

vidual will become ill with clinically recog- diabetic's weight and controlling the diet.

nizable diabetes. First, the individual must Therefore, any individual with a family his-

be genetically susceptible, and about five tory of diabetes should make every effort to

per cent of our population are susceptible. control his weight and to avoid obesity.

Second, he must encounter certain environ- It seems apparent that infections also

mental factors which will precipitate clini- play some part in the development of

cal disease in a susceptible individual. This diabetes, but their role is not entirely clear.

implies that a person who is genetically Many diabetics are first recognized by the

susceptible may be permanently injured by physician when they appear for treatment

environmental factors that are quite innoc- of a boil, carbuncle, or other infection

uous to a non-susceptible individual. This which tends to spread or persist. It has also

concept may be summarized as follows, long been known that any infection in a

using Steinberg's designation of the sus- known diabetic is a medical emergency. In

ceptible genotype as 'dd':

the presence of infection the insulin re-

Susceptible , Environmental Clinical quirement of the body is increased, and a

Genotype --dd "" Stress

~~ Diabetes diabetic with an infection usually requires

As most of us do not have the privilege an increased dosage of insulin. The insulin

of choosing our ancestors, we cannot change requirement is reduced when the infection

our genotype or susceptibility status. We is eradicated. For these reasons, any person

31

32 Eugenics Quarterly

who is probably susceptible to diabetes should take every precaution to avoid infections, and should seek prompt and effective medical treatment if any infection should appear. The potential diabetic should also beware of chronic low-grade infections, such as abscessed teeth, recurring urinary tract infections and the like.
The possible role of the diet in precipitating diabetes in susceptible persons has been the subject of some disagreement among physicians. Some feel that a high fat intake may be a significant stress factor, while others feel that a high carbohydrate diet is potentially dangerous. All agree, however, that a susceptible person is safest with a well-balanced normal diet, and that he should avoid any sort of food fads.
The best possible preventive measure in

diabetes, as in many other diseases, is the periodic health examination by the family physician. A genetically susceptible person should place himself under the care of the physician of his choice, and inform the physician of the pertinent family history of diabetes. Physical examination, with examination of the urine for sugar, should be done at intervals recommended by the physician, usually every 6 to 12 months. The glucose tolerance test, which measures the ability of the body to utilize a specified amount of sugar, may be used by the physician when he finds it necessary. Even if diabetes cannot be completely prevented in a given individual, early diagnosis and prompt treatment can do much to prevent the more serious complications of the disease.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

