Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Types of advice given by heredity counselors
Franz J. Kallmann M.D.
To cite this article: Franz J. Kallmann M.D. (1958) Types of advice given by heredity counselors, Eugenics Quarterly, 5:1, 48-51, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1958.9987350 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1958.9987350
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

48 Eugenics Quarterly

CHAIRMAN GLASS: I'm certainly glad that this question of the support--the financial support--of heredity counseling and the question of fees is coming up. I hope that it will be discussed more fully.
I just want to say at the moment that, during the past year and a half, I would have had to

employ an extra secretary to keep up with the mail inquiries about the genetic hazards of various kinds of radiation which have piled up on my desk. And, in this regard, I also feel it's a nice little courtesy when the author encloses a self-addressed envelope with a threecent stamp on it, but I can't help feeling a little hurt when he encloses a dollar.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

CHAIRMAN GLASS: Our next paper is "Types of Advice Given by Heredity Counselors," to be given by Dr. Franz J. Kallmann. Dr. Kallmann is one who certainly needs no introduction to any audience like this. Let me just say that, in

my own opinion, one of the reasons -- and not the least of the reasons -- for the decline of human genetics in Germany and Austria during the 30's and 40's was brought about by Dr. Kallmann's transfer to this country.

TYPES OF ADVICE GIVEN BY HEREDITY COUNSELORS

FRANZ J. KALLMANN, M.D.
Department of Medical Genetics New York State Psychiatric Institute
Columbia University

l-AVING HAD THE PRIVILEGE OF KNOWING
the program chairman for many years, I am sure that his decision to save the least conformable topic of this interesting symposium for the very last, like fireworks, was an act of prudence rather than a reflection of hidden sentiments. He understands that with the types of advice given in heredity clinics depending primarily on the functional character of the clinic, the nature of the problems presented, and the professional qualifications of the counselors available, there can be no uniformity in this area. It is also clear that, while the unfolding of some inevitable differences of opinion may be both sparkling and noisy, the general effect of such fireworks is harmless and good fun.
In other words, even if I do not always see eye to eye with every member of this panel on some psychiatric issues, we are

still good friends dedicated to a common cause. More specifically, we are all agreed that heredity counseling is an important and rather exacting task which requires a high degree of proficiency and must be learned. In the last analysis, the type of advice given can never be better than the level of professional competence of the counselor who is giving it. It is therefore doubly regrettable, as has been stressed by Herndon (3) and others (6,8,14), that although counseling in medical genetics is part of a preventive public health scheme, our training programs have yet to prepare future heredity counselors for activity in this vital sector of public health work.
Under these circumstances, the simplest way of defining the kind of advice given by a heredity counselor would be to paraphrase Calvin Coolidge's account of a sermon on sin. Just as Coolidge's preacher

49

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

was agin it, so we might say that genetic presented concerns a clearly pathological

counseling should be free of it--at least as trait, it is essential to bear in mind that the

much as possible.

potential health risks connected with mar-

While there are major and minor sins in riage on the one hand, and with parent-

operating a unit for providing advice in hood, on the other, may differ so consider-

matters of human heredity, this distinction ably as to call for opposite decisions and

may vary according to whether a counselor's entirely different supportive reorientation

concern is with pre-marital, marital, pre- designs (4,5,6). Whatever the preferential

parenthood or pre-adoption problems. If pattern of conduct with respect to the two

the contact is directly with the persons issues may be, they are to be kept apart in

seeking counsel, rather than with their most areas of genetic guidance and should

regular physician or a public health agency, not be subject to biased value judgments on

the least pardonable sins in counseling the part of the counselor.

work are violations of one of the following 4. Persons requesting genetic advice can-

rules:

not always be presumed to be capable of

1. The responsibility of c o u n s e l i n g making a realistic decision as to the choice

should be delegated only to personnel who of a mate, or the advisability of parenthood,

are professionally competent, tactful, and without support in the form of directive

mature enough to empathize with persons guidance and encouragement. As is true

in need of guidance. Such workers will in recommending any restrictive regimen,

always be mindful of the fact that as mem- people coming to heredity clinics may have

bers of a health service team, they are ex- to be told how to adjust, for instance, to a

pected to understand the age-old medical childless marriage or a family deliberately

principle of nil nocere. People in whom limited in size.

fears of a crippling or fatal disease have It is undeniable that reality enforcement

been instilled or aggravated by thoughtless without guidance may create anxiety, con-

or strenuously realistic remarks of an in- flict and ill health (2,7,10) and, therefore,

experienced counselor are likely to mis- is inconsistent with accepted standards of

interpret even the most logical kind of ad- medical ethics as applied to the work of

vice and may become as distressed and de- related service professions in the field of

bilitated as if they were actually afflicted public health (14,15). Hence it would

with the disease they dread (2,7,15). It seem inappropriate to withhold tension-

makes little difference whether one has relieving support from indecisive and per-

cancer or is mortally afraid of it.

plexed people when it lies within our

2. Inasmuch as specific counseling prob- power to provide such help in a genetic

lems of clinical genetics require evaluation counseling situation. It is possible, of

in terms of the total health and adjustment course, that counseling problems of this

levels of a given family, they should never kind are particularly common in a genetics

be dealt with in an impersonal way. Mail department connected with a psychiatric

order methods may be profitable in other institute. It is safe to assume, however,

fields of endeavor but not in counseling that similar problems are encountered in

work. By correspondence it is difficult to heredity clinics specializing in other areas

form an opinion regarding the predictable of clinical genetics.

stability of the home which a young woman In line with the four rules for counseling

will share with her future husband, after without sin, every heredity counselor should

a psychotic episode, or into which a child be able to determine when he cannot re-

with a calculable morbidity risk will be frain from giving "directions as to what

born.

clients should do" or when he cannot rely

3. If the genetic counseling problem on the diagnosis presented to him (11,12,

50 Eugenics Quarterly

13). Even in those centers where genetic would like to have children after we are

counseling is merely regarded as "a type of married, but would rather adopt them than

social work carried out by the geneticist have any ourselves if they were likely to be

or family physician" (13), its main objec- as unfortunate as his brothers and sisters.

tives will not always be confined to promot- . . . Would you please let me know what

ing the happiness of married couples. Apart your opinion is in the near future, as we

from creating "sub-specialty barriers" with- are planning to be married soon and this

in an important discipline that has much problem is causing us a great deal of con-

need of teamwork and cooperation (2,15), cern. . . ."

such constructive formulations may cause Following our usual procedure, we ad-

us to lose sight of the over-all mission of vised the young lady that her problem was

medical genetics in the field of public too important to be dealt with by mail.

health.

Among other things, it was suggested that

To illustrate the willingness of guidance- she and her fiancé come to see us. Her

seeking people to cooperate with a person- reply speaks for itself: ". . . . We have

alized counseling program, I should like to decided to take your advice and postpone

quote from a rather typical exchange of any decision as to whether or not to have

correspondence. A few weeks ago, we re- children until we can consult with you.

ceived an airmail letter from a young wo- Circumstances prevent our being able to

man in Georgia, which read in part: "I come to NewYork at this time, but weare

am engaged to marry a young man who has hopeful that by the first of the year it may

a history of abnormality in his family. His be possible. We will contact you again at

parents are alcoholics, and of his four that time. Thank you for your courtesy"

brothers and sisters three are feebleminded --a closing sentiment which echoes my

and unable to care for themselves. . . . I own at this moment.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

REFERENCES

1. ANDERSON, O. W. and SEACAT, M. 1957. The
Behavioral Scientists and Research in the Health Field. Health Information Foundation, Research Series, New York.
2. BRACELAND, F. J. 1957. Psychiatry and the sci-
ence of man. Am. J. Psychiat. 114: 1-9. 3. HERNDON, C. N. 1955. Heredity counseling.
Eugen. Quart. 2 : 83-89.
4. KALLMANN, F. J. 1952. Human genetics as a science, as a profession, and as a social-minded trend of orientation. Am. J. Human Genet. 4 : 237-245.
5. . 1952. Psychiatric guidance in problems of marriage and parenthood. Eugen. News 3 7 : 55-59.
6. . 1953. Heredity in Health and Mental Disorder. W. W. Norton & Co.,New York.
7. . 1956. Psychiatric aspects of genet. counseling. Am. J. Human Genet. 8 : 97-101.
8. and FEINGOLD, L. 1949. Principles

of human genetics in relation to insurance medicine and public health. J. Insur. Med. 4 : 2-8.
9. LEMKAU, P. V. 1955. Why are we interested in mental health? Ment. Hyg. 3 9 : 353-364.
10. MASSERMAN, J. H. 1957. Evolution vs. "Revolution" in psychotherapy: A biodynamic integration. Behavioral Science 2 : 89-100.
11. NEEL, J. V. and SCHULL, W. J. 1954. Ch. 18,
Human Heredity. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
12. REED, S. 1955. Counseling in Medical Genetics. Saunders, Philadelphia.
13. . 1957. Counseling in medical genetics. Acta Genet. 7: 473-480.
14. RIDENOUR, N. 1955. Mental health in the training of related service professions. Ment. Hyg. 39: 476-482.
15. TRACY, E. J. 1957. The mission of preventive medicine. J.A.M.A. 165: 343-344.

CHAIRMAN GLASS: The second speaker on this same topic, "Types of Advice Given by Heredity Counselors," is Dr. Sheldon Reed. Like Dr. Fraser, Dr. Reed has shifted from mice to Drosophila to human genetics, without entirely forsaking the love for experimental work with which he began. I think his work in counseling at the Dight Institute, of which he has been head now for a number of years,

pays great tribute to his interest in problems of this field.
As many of you know, he has written a book in which he has dealt with problems of this kind and has endeavored to make clear to physicians with not a great deal of genetic background what approach might be taken in answer to many of the problems brought before them. So we will listen with great interest to Dr. Reed.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

TYPES OF ADVICE GIVEN BY HEREDITY COUNSELORS

SHELDON C. REED
The Dight Institute for Human Genetics University of Minnesota

D,'UR1NG THE PAST TEN YEARS D r . R a y C .
Anderson, Elving Anderson and I have recorded 1,778 counseling cases as of July 1, 1957. This number comes from the daily log which we keep and which affords a starting point for follow-up contacts to determine the results, if any, of the counseling. Such contacts have been made sporadically in the past. It would be valuable to make a careful, systematic study of the first 1,000 cases as they are now old enough to permit a correlation of the clients' statements with their reproductive behavior subsequent to the counseling.
This record of counseling represents a great many hours given freely to strangers for which you expect nothing in return except your own satisfaction that you have done your best to help them solve their problems.
It would be very gratifying if these cases had all been correctly handled and the counseling carried out under ideal conditions. Obviously, such could not have been the case, nor do I know of any center where genetic counseling is entirely satisfactory. The reasons for the less than perfect coun-

seling techniques are many and are responsible for the less than perfect performances in any area involving personal relationships and social work.
The large number of counseling cases mentioned above represents a general genetic counseling practice which could be expected to come to any person identified as being experienced in human genetics. Generally, the clients do not expect nor want very much beyond the genetic information, and. an understanding of it, for which they have been referred by their physician, frequently an obstetrician. Of course it would be highly desirable if the counselor could have had several years of practice in obstetrics, pediatrics, psychiatry and hematology, to name a few of the pertinent disciplines, in order to gain a solid background in all fields. Probably the best that can be hoped for, however, is that he might have an M.D., in addition to his Ph.D. in genetics. These fields are all important in counseling, and there are many other ones which would be equally useful, such as legal training and social work. I assure you that training in all these disci-

51

