Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Methodological lessons of the Indianapolis fertility study
Clyde V. Kiser
To cite this article: Clyde V. Kiser (1956) Methodological lessons of the Indianapolis fertility study, Eugenics Quarterly, 3:3, 152-156, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1956.9987285 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1956.9987285
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

METHODOLOGICAL LESSONS OF THE INDIANAPOLIS FERTILITY STUDY*

CLYDE V. KISER
Milbank Memorial Fund

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

A,. RECENT ISSUE of Eugenics Quarterly
contained a brief description of a contem-
plated new study of factors affecting fertility in urban areas of the United States.1
That article indicated that the interest in
a new study is "an outgrowth of the now
virtually completed Indianapolis Study."
Although it described the plans for the new
study, it gave little explicit attention to the
methodological lessons derived from the Indianapolis Study.2
*This paper was presented in substantially its present form at the World Population Conference, held in Rome in September, 1954.
1 Charles F. Westoff, Elliot G. Mishler, Robert G. Potter, Jr., and Clyde V. Kiser: A New Study of American Fertility. Eugenics Quarterly. Vol. 2, No. 4, December, 1955, pp. 229-233.
2 The Indianapolis Study has been in the hands of a Committee on Social and Psychological Factors Affecting Fertility consisting of the following: Lowell J. Reed (Chairman), Daniel Katz, K. Lowell Kelly, Clyde V. Kiser, Frank Lorimer, Frank W. Notestein, Frederick Osborn, S. A. Switzer, Warren S. Thompson, and P. K. Whelpton. Collaborators in the analysis of the data have consisted of Robert B. Reed, Ronald Freedman, Lee F. Herrera, Jeanne E. Clare, J. F. Kantner, Charles F. Westoff, Marianne DeGraff Swain, Nathalie Schacter, Ruth Riemer, Lois V. Pratt, Edgar F. Borgatta, Robert G. Potter, Jr., Erwin S. Solomon, and H. V. Muhsam.
The analytical reports on the Indianapolis Study have been published in the Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly. The following four volumes of reprints have been bound. (A fifth volume will complete the series):
P. K. Whelpton and Clyde V. Kiser (Editors): Social and Psychological Factors Affecting Fertility.
Vol. One: The Household Survey in Indianapolis (Parts I-III), 1946, pp. 1-138.
Vol. Two: The Intensive Study: Purpose, Scope, Methods and Partial Results (Parts IV-X), 1950, pp. 139-466.
Vol. Three: Further Reports on Hypotheses in the Indianapolis Study (Parts XI-XVII), 1952, pp. 467-800.
Vol. Four: Further Reports on Hypotheses and Other Data in The Indianapolis Study (Parts XVIII-XXIV), 1954, pp. 801-1086.

Actually the "lessons" of the Indianapolis Study have had considerable bearing on the shaping of plans for the new study and and also on studies of fertility in other areas. It therefore seems appropriate, and of possible value to students, to have a brief but systematic presentation of the methodological lessons of the Indianapolis Study. Four broad types of "lessons" are discussed: (a) those concerning the independent variables; (b) those concerning the dependent variables; (c) those concerning the size and character of the sample; and (d) those concerning the general design of the Study.
1. The Independent Variables: Social and Psychological Factors.
(a) In a study entitled "Social and Psychological Factors Affecting Fertility" the social and psychological factors were, in the nature of the case, assumed to be the independent variables and fertility behavior was considered to be the dependent variable. It was realized from the beginning, of course, that in social science there is an interaction of variables and this matter will be discussed later. For the present, the chief lesson to be emphasized concerns the generally closer relationship of fertility to socio-economic status than to the psychological factors. The relation of fertility and fertility-planning status to socio-economic status was rather consistently sharp for a variety of measures of socio-economic status. The observed relation of fertility behavior to most of the psychological characteristics considered was generally much less pronounced or less regular, especially when socio-economicstatus was held constant.

152

153

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

There was one outstanding exception. The relation of economic security to the size of completely planned families was conspicuous and quite independent of socioeconomic status. Nevertheless, the central implication here is the importance of securing a better understanding of the factors underlying differential fertility according to socio-economic status and especially the role of psychological factors.
(b) As indicated in previous critiques, the scope of the Indianapolis Study was too wide for adequate treatment. There were twenty-three hypotheses, each of which was concerned with the relation of a given social or psychological factor to effectiveness of contraceptive practice and size of planned family. Thus when we say that the scope of the Indianapolis Study was too broad we mean that too many social and psychological factors were included for investigation.
(c) A closely related criticism is that the twenty-three hypotheses of the Indianapolis Study were not bound together by an integrating theory or organizing principle. As indicated in a previous publication, the twenty-three hypotheses which form the basis of the Study are not systematically interrelated and little attempt was made to link the hypotheses to any basic social or psychological theory.3
(d) As a result of attempting to investigate too many hypotheses in one study, the variables were not always precisely defined or well conceptualized. An example of this was the variable "personal interest in children." The analysts correctly interpreted this variable as meaning "ego-centered interest in children" but the concept was incorporated in the hypotheses without any precise definition.
(e) A related consequence of attempting a study too broad in scope and of insufficient time devoted to conceptualization was
3 See Clyde V. Kiser: Exploration of Possibilities for New Studies of Factors Affecting Size of Family. A report on a Round Table held in connection with the 1952 Annual Conference of the Millbank Memorial Fund. The Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, xxxl. No. 4, October, 1953, p. 444.

that the variables in the hypotheses--especially the psychological variables--were not always measured. The time spent on field trials evoked the admiration of contemporaries, but insufficient attention was paid to tests of reliability and validity.
Preliminary experimentation with data relating to "economic tension" (difference between the actual and desired levels of living), might have sounded a warning about the selective factors in these particular data. "The selective factor consisted in an inverse relation of what we call 'economic tension' to socio-economic status. That is, couples of lowest socioeconomic status tended to exhibit the largest percentage difference between what they had and what they wanted."4
By way of extenuation it may be said that when the committee decided to attempt to test twenty-three hypotheses, they regarded their effort not as an attempt to get an adequate testing of each hypothesis but rather as a "dragnet" approach. It was hoped that the "dragnet" would serve to indicate which of the twenty-three hypotheses could be discarded and which ones deserved more intensive study in future investigations.
2. The Dependent Variables: Proportion of Couples Practicing Contraception Effectively and Size of Planned Families.
As stated in most of the hypotheses of the Indianapolis Study the two dependent variables were "proportion of couples practicing contraception effectively and size of the planned family." This design worked rather nicely in that the families classified as "practicing contraception effectively" were synonomous with those classified as "planned families." Both groups were composed of couples classified either as "number and spacing planned" or "number planned."
In a paper prepared for this World Population Conference (advance copy of which
4 Clyde V. Kiser: The Indianapolis Study--An example of Planned Observational Research. Public Opinion Quarterly, XVII, No. 4 Winter, 1953-54, p. 508.

154 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

was kindly sent to the present writer), Dr. Robert M. Dinkel questioned the adequacy of the classification by fertility-planning status that was used in the Indianapolis Study. It is true that in the analyses chief reliance has been placed upon single indices of fertility-planning status and fertility, i.e., classifications relating to the total period since marriage. More detailed indices were available (such as regularity of contraceptive practice at the time of each pregnancy), but the sample is too small to warrant use of the more detailed indices. Certainly, it would be well to have sufficient data to relate psychological characteristics to fertility-planning status during specific periods of married life or during specific interpregnancy intervals.
Likewise, although data were collected in the Indianapolis Study regarding specific births, the hypotheses themselves, as indicated above, related to total "size of planned families." The failure to secure closer relations between psychological factors and fertility suggested that such relationships may have been blurred by the use of total fertility rather than specific pregnancies or pregnancy intervals. The implication was that, at least as an experiment, a future study might focus on factors associated with the occurrence and timing of one or more specific pregnancies.
3. Size and Character of the Sample.
(a) The Indianapolis Study sample has frequently proved to be too small to afford good tests of the hypotheses considered. A reduction in scope of the study should make it possible to have not only better data but also larger samples.
The preceding discussion of studying both fertility-planning status and fertility is relevant here. If a study is concerned only with investigating the fertility of planned families, there is a greater opportunity to expand the sample with which one works.
(b) Despite the large number and diverse nature of the hypotheses in the In-

dianapolis Study, there was no variation, by hypothesis, in the basic eligibility requirements for couples in the Study. As a consequence, whereas the sampling scheme was admirably suited to some of the hypotheses, it was ill-suited to others. For example, one of the hypotheses is concerned with the relation of migration and ruralurban residence since marriage to fertility. Yet one of the requirements for eligibility in the Study was residence in a large city most of the time since marriage. The specific lessons to be learned here are that (1) the sampling scheme should be fitted to the hypotheses for study; (2) that the next efforts be directed toward several small studies rather than toward one large study; and (3) that the relevance of such factors as migration to fertility can be studied more effectively with census data than with studies of the Indianapolis type which are expensive and of necessity based upon small numbers.
(c) The Indianapolis Study was restricted to couples having the following characteristics: husband and wife native white, Protestant, with at least a complete grammar-school education; married during 1927-1929; wife under 30 and husband under 40 at marriage; neither spouse previously married; and residence in a large city (25,000+) most of the time (8+ years) since marriage.
There are both advantages and disadvantages in having a homogeneous group for study. The advantage is that homogeneity of the type secured prevents the necessity of splintering the analysis by such factors as color, nativity, rural-urban status, age, etc. The disadvantage is that the use of the homogeneous sample removes one from the actual conditions. It may be stated, however, that the use of the homogeneous sample is usually more justified in studies concerned with casual relationships than in studies designed to ascertain the frequency of given characteristics in the total population or in efforts to translate rates observed for the study sample to rates

155

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

for the total community.
Another disadvantage is that restriction to a homogeneous sample probably tends to narrow the range of variation of both the independent and dependent variables under consideration. This may be an important reason why the Indianapolis Study did not exhibit stronger relations between psychological variables and fertility. By restriction to a highly homogeneous group like that in the Indianapolis Study and then by making the sample further homogeneous by restriction to planned families and still more homogeneous by holding socio-economic status constant, one doubtless reduces very much the range of variations in both the psychological characteristics and the fertility of planned families. When one further considers that our measures of psychological characteristics probably were too crude to afford precise differentiations, it may be little wonder that the Study failed to indicate strong andconsistent relations of fertility behavior to psychological characteristics.
4. General Design of Study.
(a) Perhaps closely related to the methodological problems inherent in the homogeneous sample are those inherent in the atomistic approach, i.e., the separate analysis of the variable under each hypothesis. In a very real way this approach necessitates the assumption that all other factors are equal when groups are classified on the basis of only one variable at a time. The atomistic approach neglects the sociological and psychological axiom that motivations are multiple and complex. It is true that
5 Charles F. Westoff and Clyde V. Kiser: Social and Psychological Factors Affecting Fertility XXI. An Empirical Re-examination and Intercorrelation of Selected Hypothesis Factors. The Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, October, 1953, xxxl, No. 4, pp. 421-435. (Reprint pp. 953-967.)
Edgar F. Borgatta and Charles F. Westoff: Social and Psychological Factors Affecting Fertility XXV. The Prediction of Total Fertility. The Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, Vol. 22, No. 4, October, 1954, pp. 383-419. (Reprint pp. 1087-1124.)
Charles F. Westoff and Edgar F. Borgatta: Social and Psychological Factors Affecting Fertility XXVI. The Prediction of Planned Fertility. The Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, Vol. 23, No. 1, January, 1955, pp. 50-62. (Reprint pp. 1125-1137.)

some attempt has been made to investigate the simultaneous impact of several variables,5 but the Study was structured and the results were analyzed largely in terms of twenty-three separate hypotheses.
(b) The attempt to study social and psychological factors affecting fertility by the actual collection of data at only one point in the married life (12-15 years after marriage), raises a variety of problems. First of all is the question of memory. To what extent can the person remember the details regarding, say, contraceptive practice since marriage, attitudes toward successive pregnancies, and attitudes of the past 12-15 years about a variety of other things? In the second place, the dependence on retrospective or ex post facto data frequently makes it difficult to differentiate between cause and effect. This deficiency was illustrated particularly by the data regarding preferences as to the sex of children, by the relation of economic security to fertility among "excess fertility" couples, and by the data on "economic tension."
(c) An indicated lesson of the previous condition is the need for a study that will utilize changes in time as the functional units of classification. A longitudinal study of some type is rather clearly indicated. If a study can "catch" couples before they are married or before they have a child of a given order, it has a good chance to overcome some of the problems associated with the use of retrospective data.
It is recognized that the orthodox longitudinal study is expensive in money and time. It is also acknowledged that the study itself may exert an influence on the fertility behavior of some of the members of the panel under study. Furthermore, past investigations have indicated that the "dropouts", i.e., those withdrawing from the study, are a selected group.6
However, there are ways and means of
6Jean Downes: The Longitudinal Study of Families as a Method of Research. The Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, April, 1952, xxx, No. 2, pp. 101-118.

156 Eugenics Quarterly

at least partially overcoming some of the selective features of a longitudinal study. Students are experimenting with partially longitudinal studies in an effort to offset some of the objectionable features of the full-blown longitudinal study.
(5) Application of the Methodological Lessons. The methodological lessons of the Indianapolis Study are being applied, to an important extent, in the plans for the new study mentioned at the outset of this article. As described in an earlier issue of this journal, the contemplated study probably will be a partially longitudinal study. Its basic purpose will be to ascertain the social and psychological factors related to the occurrence and timing of third births among selected couples who recently had second births. Instead of being restricted to homogeneous couples in a single city the new study probably will be representa-

tive of native-white two-parity couples in a substantial segment of the urban population.
Finally, although the Indianapolis Study may be regarded as appropriate only for the low fertility countries, many of the questions asked in that Study have been used in fertility studies in Puerto Rico, India and other places. Although completely planned families are rare in such areas, it is becoming increasingly important to study the bearing of values, customs, and attitudes on practices regarding marriage and the family in agrarian societies. It is hoped that through a widening of experience and through an interchange of ideas at conferences such as the present one, studies of social and psychological factors affecting fertility might be substantially developed during the next twenty-five years.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

