Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Fertility trends in some types of mental defects
J. A. Böök M.D.
To cite this article: J. A. Böök M.D. (1959) Fertility trends in some types of mental defects, Eugenics Quarterly, 6:2, 113-116, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1959.9987401 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1959.9987401
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

FERTILITY TRENDS IN SOME TYPES OF MENTAL DEFECTS

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

J. A. BOOK, M.D.
Professor and Chairman Department of Medical Genetics
University of Uppsala, Sweden

D,'iFFERENTIAL FERTILITY IS ONE of the
most efficient mechanisms by which a change in the genetical composition of a population can be produced. Such an effect, of course, will materialize only if this differential is strongly correlated with a genetical trait. Furthermore, fertility must imply effective fertility or fitness, i.e., refer to the number of children who survive long enough to marry and produce a new generation. It should be observed that this biological fitness has very little to do with social fitness. In fact, many so-called socially unfit individuals enjoy a high biological fitness. The association between social fitness and biological fitness has turned out to be much more complicated than was anticipated in the past, especially in the older eugenic literature.
In medicine and public health a new field is gaining ground, i.e., the epidemiology of genetical diseases. The development in this area is based on an integration of ordinary methods of epidemiology and population genetics. In this context, the effective fertility of carriers a pathological mutations is one of the most important variables for the prediction of the future epidemiological situation of the population. Other wellestablished variables are migration, mutation and genetical drift.
There is much need for information on fertility trends for a large number of

individuals affected with genetical diseases and for healthy carriers of pathological genes. The data which are available at present are scanty and often unreliable. Furthermore, conclusions based on such data can hardly ever be generalized since fertility trends are greatly influenced by different social, political and public health conditions. One of the objects of this meeting should be to bring out the necessity of collecting and analyzing such data from various populations.
MENTAL DEFICIENCY
Substantial gaps in our knowledge about the causes of mental defects prohibit a more detailed interpretation of known fertility trends. Mental deficiency refers to a certain kind of human behavior which may have any number of causes. Some well-defined clinical entities which presumably are also genetical entities have been separated, such as microcephaly, amaurotic idiocy and phenylketonuria. Others, like mongolism, are relatively well-defined, but the cause is obscure. The large mass, however, must be considered to lack diagnoses, provided we want to maintain some sort of scientific pride in our diagnoses. Eventually this group will be broken down into distinct entities characterized by their main variation components, environmental, major gene and polygenic differences.

113

114 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

The well-defined types of mental retardation are characterized by distinctive neurologic signs, specific metabolic errors, or by both. On the whole, the fertility of such affected individuals is very low or nonexistent. Insofar as these conditions are determined by single gene differences, selection against them is pronounced. If their frequencies remain constant in a population, selection must be counteracted by new mutations or perhaps also by a higher effective fertility (selective advantage) of healthy carriers.
While the implications of the fertility trends of mental defectives without known specific symptomatology must be rather vague, some conclusions nevertheless seem justified. Data collected by Dahlberg (1951) from four counties in Sweden indicated a very low fertility for certified mental defectives, although no control data were presented (cf. Table 1). I have collected more rigorous data

TABLE 1

FERTILITY OF ALL CERTIFIED MENTAL DEFECTIVES OVER 1 9 YEARS OLD FROM 4 RURAL REGIONS (TOWNS EXCLUDED) IN SWEDEN.

Unmarried
MarriVrl

__ 1,258 18

No. children/ individual

from three smaller rural communities. Here all individuals with well-defined conditions and with evidence of a specific environmental or genetic origin have been excluded. The remaining group must frankly be called severe mental deficiency of unknown origin. There is evidence in this and other similar materials that a significant genetical component is involved in the variation. To what extent this component is of major gene or polygenic nature cannot be decided at the present time. Matched

with comparable control individuals, the mentally deficient had issued 0.7 children per individual and the controls 3.7. Some other details are seen in Table 2. With

TABLE 2

RELATIVE FERTILITY OF A COMPLETE SAMPLE OF MENTAL DEFECTIVES OF UNKNOWN ORIGIN FROM THREE SWEDISH RURAL COMMUNITIES

No. of No. of No. of children per individuals children individual

54 Mental defectives Extramatrimonial 54 Intramatrimonial 7

8 32

0.15 4.60

0.7

108 control individuals

Extramatrimonial 108

16 0.15

Intramatrimonial 85 384 4.50

the high standard and effective supervision of public health in Sweden, there is no reason to assume any substantial differences in mortality due to neglect between the two categories. Consequently this group of mental defectives must have had a relatively low effective fertility. In this material, as well as in Dahlberg's, there are a few mentally defective women with many children representing the category which always turned up in the biased examples of the old eugenical misanthropists.
While most people would agree that pronounced mental deficiency could not very well, for mental as well as for physical reasons, be associated with an unduly high fertility, some would still maintain that this is the case for individuals with mild intellectual defects.
In passing, I should like to mention a rather neglected study by Juda (1934) from Germany. She examined the fertility of a group of 97 individuals classified as intellectually inferior on the basis of their school records. They were compared with a group of 85 individuals with normal school records. The net fertility was 2.5 and 2.3 children per

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

individual, respectively. The children from the inferior group had a significantly higher mortality by the age of 5 years. There would be a lot to say about the detailed interpretation of a study of this sort, but, at any rate, it does not support the idea of a high effective fertility even for individuals with less severe intellectual defects.
Reliable data on fertility trends for individuals with mental defects seem to show that effective fertility decreases with decreasing intellectual capacity. From a statistical and genetical point of view, there is no evidence that this group is replacing itself at the expense of the rest of the population. However, there are many problems which need clarification before any reliable predictions about the future epidemiological trends in genetical mental defect can be made.
HUNTINGTON'S CHOREA
Because Huntington's chorea is a wellrecognized entity caused by a dominant gene mutation, fertility trends in this condition can be discussed in more detail. This problem has a particular interest because Reed and Palm (1951) claimed that affected individuals display an increased fertility. Their reported data do not allow a re-evaluation of the conclusions, which, for several reasons, seem doubtful. A comparison was made between the average number of children from affected individuals (6.07 ± 0.9) and from unaffected sibs (3.33 ± 0.5). It is, however, necessary to consider the fact that this disease has a relatively high age of onset. The data, therefore, will be biased in favor of older families with a relatively long marriage duration and a larger number of children. The control data must be adjusted in accordance with this.
I have tested the hypothesis of an in-

115
creased fertility on data from Sweden collected at this institute by Sjogren (1935). Sjogren does not deal with this particular problem in his report. In 28 families with an affected mother, there were 6.2 children per marriage, and in 26 families with an affected father, 6.1. In total, the 54 families averaged 6.1 children. The marriage rate in this condition does not deviate from the average rate in Sweden. To a great extent, this is probably due to the fact that the average age of onset was 41 years. The data were collected in two Swedish rural communities and represent a complete survey. The fertility data on the choreics have, as far as possible, been matched with data comparable with regard to time, geographical location, social class, duration of marriage and the age of the wife at the marriage. The figures given above refer to marriages in which the wife was 45 years old or over (one exception, where the wife was 42). Disregarding other factors which may influence the number of children, it is justified to compare the figures with a standard that was calculated from the official census of 1930 in Sweden. The result based on 11,944 families with 73,581 children was 6.2 children per family.
At an anthropological investigation carried out at this institute during 192224 and comprising about 47,000 conscripts aged 20-22, data were also obtained on the number of siblings. There were 1,372 conscripts from the same county in which Sjogren's survey took place. These individuals belonged to families with an average of 6.7 children. This slightly higher figure is explained by the fact that the duration of the marriages for this group is no less than about 20 years. With the same duration, the census data from the same region gave 6.9 children per family.

116 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

Consequently, the Swedish data on Huntington's chorea do not indicate an increased fertility forindividuals with this disease when their total marriage reproduction is taken into account. It is likely that their fertility was little affected under the environmental conditions prevailing in this particular population and at the time of the survey. These results agree with those of T. C. Reed (1958) onchoreics from Michigan, USA.
THE HEREDITARY ATAXIAS
The Swedish data on these conditions were also collected by Sjogren (1943). They represent what is probably a complete epidemiological survey of the whole country.
Friedreich's ataxia, with a lowage of onset (13 ± 0.7years) andvery likely a recessive type of inheritance, is associated with low fertility. Only 9 children were issued by83 patients.
Cerebellar ataxia (Pierre-Marie), with a higher age of onset (34 ± 1.9 years) and probably a dominant type of inheritance, is characterized by a slightly higher fertility than is the case in Friedreich's ataxia. In 53 families, a total of 33 children were born. All of these children belonged to 9 families, giving a fertility rate of 3.7 children in families producing at least one child. Only about 20 per cent of the patients were married. For both of these conditions, it should be safe to conclude that their fertility is below average.
In conclusion, the data from Sweden which I have had the opportunity to analyze do not indicate the existence of a selective advantage as measured by fertility for individuals affected with major intellectual or neurological de-

fects. While some of these conditions may in this respect be relatively neutral, most of them should be at a definite selective disadvantage. Epidemiological predictions are hampered by lack of information on many crucial details.
For future analyses of fertility data for genetical purposes, I would like to point out that themeasurements should be based on the number of years during which the individual has been exposed to the risk of having children. As this risk varies with different environmental conditions, the data must be broken down accordingly. A minimum requirement is to secure data for each individual on the age periods (not just number of years) spent as single, married or divorced, thenumber of children born and the occupation for each of these periods. Such data will in most countries make it possible to utilize the official vital statistics for fairly accurate estimates of differential fertility. Where suitable vital statistics data are not available, it is necessary tosecure ascontrols a groupof unrelated individuals matched asclosely as possible to theaffected group.
REFERENCES
DAHLBERG, G., 1951. Mental deficiency. Acta Genet. 2 : 15-29.
JUDA, A., 1934. Über Anzahl und psychische Beschaffenheit der Nachkommen von Schwachsinnigen und normalen Schülern. Z. Neur. 151: (2): 244-313.
REED, S. C., and PALM, J. D., 1951. Social fitness
versus reproductive fitness. Science 113: 294-296.
REED, T. C., 1958. Methods and problems in
estimating relative fitness in man. Examples from a study of Huntington's Chorea. Proc. X Internat. Congr. Genetics 2 : 230-231.
SJÖGREN, T., 1935.Vererbungsmedizinische Unter-
suchungen über Huntingtons Chorea in einer schwedischen Bauernpopulation. Z. KonstLehre 1 9 : (2):131-165.
1943. Klinische und erbbiologische Untersuchungen über die Heredoataxien. Acta Psych. Neur. Suppl. 2 7 :1-200.

