Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Results of unwanted conceptions: Some hypotheses up for adoption
Edward Pohlman
To cite this article: Edward Pohlman (1965) Results of unwanted conceptions: Some hypotheses up for adoption, Eugenics Quarterly, 12:1, 11-18, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1965.9987602 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1965.9987602
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles
Citing articles: 6 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

RESULTS OF UNWANTED CONCEPTIONS: SOME HYPOTHESES UP FOR ADOPTION*

EDWARD POHLMAN
University of the Pacific Stockton, California

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

There is a widespread conviction that unwanted conceptions have undesirable effects for parents and children. This conviction is based primarily on faith in expert opinion, which in turn is based primarily on case study evidence (e.g., Menninger, 1943; Chesser, n.d.). Controlled research on this question seems needed. Psychological variables have been widely studied by those researching fertility, but they have been studied as independent variables that may affect fertility (Flanagan, 1942; Whelpton and Riser, 1946-1958; Westoff, et al., 1961, 1963). This article is concerned with psychological variables as dependent variables, that may be affected by the "wanted" or "unwanted" status of the conception.
The general hypothesis that unwanted conceptions have "bad" effects is hardly new; it appears to be one of the beliefs that motivated Margaret Sanger and the Planned Parenthood movement (Lader, 1955). But a belief supported primarily by faith has little power to convince the skeptic. If research evidence were found to support the belief strongly, this would provide a powerful additional argument for the importance of family planning. Today, with population explosions in the headlines, threats of overpopulation provide a major incentive for interest in family planning. But perhaps
* Preparation of this article was supported by the Social Science Committee of the Planned Parenthood Federation of America and World Population Emergency Campaign.

the psychological effects of unwanted conceptions deserve more attention, as a problem quite distinct from the effects of overpopulation. Adam and Eve, with plenty to eat and plenty of room, might still be made miserable by having children they simply did not want.
Even a nation that seems economically able to handle its population growth may contain many families with unwanted conceptions. For example, millions of American families were estimated to have "excess fertility" on the basis of the 1955 Growth of American Families Study (Freedman, et al., 1959, p. 401). Thirteen per cent of all couples and 22 per cent of all couples married 15 or more years had "excess fertility" (p. 83). Preliminary reports of the 1960 GAF study (Whelpton, et al., 1965) show some increase in "excess fertility," although this may not be sustained in the United States. For one thing, oral contraceptives and other new procedures may be expected to reduce "excess fertility." Developing nations with imprecise contraception may have even more unwanted conceptions than the United States. On the other hand, to some extent parents who have never been given an inch may not expect an ell; not expecting precision in contraception, they may have less clear-cut ideas of how many they "want" and of whether they have "too many."
The Growth of American Families reports, with their usual scholarly restraint, do not display much emotion over the

11

12

Pohlman

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

frequency of "excess fertility" in the United States. But to a psychologist who believes that unwanted conceptions tend to have devastating effects in many lives, the spectacle of millions of unwanted conceptions seems to be a stupendous mental health problem for the nation, calling for drastic action with a voice as loud as that of any population explosion. This passionate heat must be translated into the coldness of systematic research. The remainder of this article is divided into three parts: (1) a list of hypotheses, (2) a statement of some of the assumptions underlying the hypotheses, and (3) a discussion of some of the problems of testing these hypotheses.
THE HYPOTHESES
These hypotheses are stated in general terms to suggest ideas with broad applicability. They are not testable as stated, although it should not be hard to translate the ideas into operational terms for a particular research design. The hypotheses give extensive but not exhaustive coverage and may suggest other, parallel questions. Many of the hypotheses are derived from psychoanalytic theory. They, like that theory, were developed within the limits of a Western culture, although they probably have wider applicability. Each hypothesis might be prefaced, "Within culture (or subculture) X, at a particular historical time . . .," and the control of other factors is assumed.
These hypotheses refer to "unwanting conceivers." This term may be defined as "Parents who, before a given pregnancy, condously hoped that the conception would never occur (neither then nor at any later time), as compared with control parents who felt otherwise before pregnancy." An "unwanting conceiver" is so in relation to the particular preg-

nancy in question, and not necessarily in relation to earlier pregnancies. (See Pohlman, Brief Report, page 19, where the complex definitional problems surrounding "wanting" and "unwanting" and related terms are considered.) In practice it may be convenient to compare extreme groups, parents who seem to be most "wanting" and those who seem to be most "unwanting."
Hypotheses about Conscious "Unwanting' Feelings
"Unwanting conceivers," as compared
with controls, are more likely to:
1. Wish consciously, during pregnancy, that the conception had never occurred.
2. Wish consciously that "something would happen" to the embryo or fetus to lead to spontaneous abortion.
3. Consider, consciously, taking steps to get rid of the pregnancy through induced abortion.
4. Wish consciously, during pregnancy, that the baby would be born dead.
5. Experience, during pregnancy, conscious angry feelings toward the anticipated child.
6. Wish consciously, after birth, that the conception had not occurred.
7. Wish consciously, after birth, that the child did not now exist.
8. Wish consciously that "something would happen" to take the life of the child.
9. Consider, consciously, taking steps to kill the child.
10. Experience conscious angry feelings toward the child.
(It is possible that if parents repress
their death wishes and their angry feel-
ings, as we suggest in the section on as-
sumptions, the conscious feelings of par-
ents with "wanted" and "unwanted"
conceptions would show little difference,
while the "unconscious" feelings would

Vol. 12, No. 1

Unwanted Conceptions

13

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

contain whatever differences were pres-
ent.)
Hypotheses about Parental Actions
"Unwanting conceivers," as compared
with controls, are more likely to:
1. Achieve induced abortion of the baby in question.
2. Achieve spontaneous abortion of the baby in question.
3. Kill the baby in question. 4. Have accidents involving harm to
the infant or child. 5. Punish the infant or child severely. 6. Be abusive and harsh in verbal
interaction with the child. 7. Neglect to care for the child's physi-
cal needs. 8. Neglect to give adequate love to
the child. 9. Withdraw themselves from inter-
action with the child or remove the child from interaction with them. 10. Express concern about harmful events which might occur to the child. 11. Go to extremes to protect the child from any harm ("over-protection" or "smothering"). 12. Indicate hostility toward the child in such media as humor, dreams, and projective stories. 13. Experience psychological upheavals during the period of pregnancy. 14. Experience psychological upheavals after the child's birth.
Hypotheses about the Effects of Parents'
"Unwanting' Feelings on Children
The "unwanted" children of "unwant-
ing conceivers," as compared with con-
trols, are more likely to:
1. Show damage from unsuccessful attempts to induce abortion.
2. Show effects of inferior intrauterine development, possibly related to maternal emotional stress during pregnancy.
3. Show physical injuries from accidents or deliberate physical mistreatment.

4. Show inferior physical health, possibly related to malnutrition and neglect.
5. Show maladjustment as indicated by such symptoms as enuresis, tantrums, and extreme withdrawal.
6. Show maladjustment as indicated by such criteria as delinquency, court records, and neuropsychiatric hospitalizations.
7. Show maladjustment as indicated by psychodiagnostic testing.
8. Show less desirable early psychological relations with parents and siblings.
ASSUMPTIONS
In these hypotheses the independent variable is the "wanting" versus "unwanting" status of conception. Three groups of dependent variables have been distinguished: (1) conscious feelings of parents, (2) observable behavior of parents, and (3) effects on children. These are all observable, potentially measurable variables. It may be well to emphasize that none of the second group of dependent variables is necessarily channelled through any of the first group of variables. In other words, some psychological theories permit us to believe that the behavior of parents following "unwanted" conceptions may be strikingly different from controls, even though the conscious feelings of parents following "unwanted" conceptions are not. This involves the postulation of some sort of "unconscious" processes. In some research contexts these hypothetical unconscious processes are treated as hypotheses for testing; in the present context they provide a framework of assumptions underlying the hypotheses which are the focus of interest. It may be well to spell out the assumptions.
These assumptions involve what we may call "unwanting feelings." This term includes all of the feelings suggested

14

Pohlman

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

in Hypotheses 1 through 10. In addition,
we shall define "unwanting feelings" to
include the memory of earlier feelings
and actions, such as:
Remembering that any of the feelings involved in Hypotheses 1 through 10 were present at an earlier date; Remembering that contraceptive efforts were being made to prevent this particular conception; Remembering any unsuccessful attempts to induce abortion; and Remembering hostile actions toward the child since his birth.
All of these "unwanting feelings" may
be perceived by the parent as having a
certain hostile component. In many cul-
tures it is not generally acceptable to
have hostile feelings toward one's own
offspring. There may be cultures which
rely more nearly on "shame" than "guilt"
as a means of keeping individuals in
line with society. But for at least some
cultures, our assumption is that "un-
wanting feelings":
Often produce a sense of guilt. Are often "repressed" from conscious awareness (the parent is no longer aware that he has the "unwanting feelings," but they remain "unconscious" in his personality). Are often "suppressed" (the parent does not deny that he has the "unwanting feelings," but he tries not to think about them, and tries to keep them from being expressed in his behavior). Are often the object of parents' attempts to conceal them from other people, including the children in question. Often find expression in actions involving the child, even though the parent has disguised them in some of the above ways, and is not consciously aware of them.
These assumptions would lead us to
predict that parents should tend to
change their minds toward more "want-
ing" feelings as pregnancy and child de-

velopment continues. To be sure, some parents will have "real" changes of feelings toward more "wanting" feelings, due to such factors as changes in family and personal circumstances, changes in perceptions of these circumstances, or surprising elements not anticipated as the pregnancy or child was contemplated before conception. But an equal number of people should be expected to change in the opposite direction, from more "wanting" to more "unwanting" feelings, in our opinion. For groups of people, the changes should cancel out over a long period of time, were it not for the hiding of true feelings (by repression, suppression, or deception of others). For a given parent we can never be sure, even in a longitudinal study, whether there is a "real" change of feeling or whether some hiding of true feelings has occurred. But if a substantially larger number change from "unwanting" to "wanting" than the reverse, this suggests that some members of the group are hiding their feelings.
One study of 379 mothers of kindergarten children (Sears, et al., 1957, p. 51) found "about a fourth" who reported having felt doubtful, when pregnancy occurred, as to whether that was the right time to have a new baby, but only 4% reported that it would have worked out better to wait, as they looked back on it some five years later. The Family Growth in Metropolitan America Study (Westoff, et al., 1963, p. 270) found some bias toward the reporting of pregnancies as planned in a 1960 interview which had been reported as unplanned in a 1957 interview. Since the pregnancies in question involved children who were already between six months and several years old in the 1957 interview, one would expect that much of the hiding of unwanting feeling which would take

Vol. 12, No. 1

Unwanted Conceptions

15

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

place had already taken place by that first interview. Hence differences found between that time and a later interview are all the more impressive.
Caplan (1960, p. 76) suggests that 85% of a group of lower-middle and upperlower class primiparae "show some initial rejection of the conception and are upset by feelings of grief and anger when they become pregnant." However, "By the end of the first trimester 85 to 90 per cent of women who initially rejected the pregnancy have accepted it." One might argue that some innate or instinctual factor makes women decide they want the pregnancy, or that the pleasant surprises outweigh the unpleasant surprises. However, our interpretation is that this is primarily an evidence of the hiding of feelings. Zemlick and Watson (1953) make a similar interpretation of their own data.
On the basis of such assumptions as those spelled out above, one may predict that the behavioral dependent variables of our hypotheses may show a relationship to "unwantedness," even though the conscious feelings do not. One illustrative fragment of evidence on this point is provided by Sears, et al. (1957, p. 51). These authors concluded that "very few" mothers in their sample gave evidence of having carried over their early doubts into the period after the child was born. Nevertheless, they found significant correlations between mothers' retrospective reports of how they felt when they discovered they were pregnant, and interview-based ratings of mothers' warmth in their treatment of the offspring resulting from these pregnancies, during infancy and also during later childhood (Sears, et al., 1957, p. 515). While there are several possible interpretations of this retrospective research, the most likely seems to be that "unwanting feelings,"

even though they are supposed to have been a thing of the past, may still be present to affect parent-child interaction.
DISCUSSION
Crucial to most of these hypotheses is the idea that there is some consistency in parental feelings from the time before conception to later points before and after birth. If conscious parental attitudes about wanting a child before pregnancy do not allow us to predict attitudes at later times by any means better than chance, then most of the hypotheses would almost certainly go unsupported.
For example, if Mrs. A., who consciously did not want the conception, has just as much chance of consciously or unconsciously wanting this child a month after birth as does Mrs. B., who did want her conception; and if Mrs. B. has just as much chance of not wanting her child a month after birth as Mrs. A., then some hypotheses are almost bound to fail. Not wanting a child at some time after birth might be found to have many "bad" effects; this would not prove that "bad" effects are more frequent if the conception is not wanted before it occurs.
A case study showing that a particular conception was not wanted and that later the mother or the child suffered some horrible consequences is of little value for testing these hypotheses. Indeed, the accumulation of hundreds of such case studies in itself still does not provide a test of hypotheses such as these. It may be worthwhile to illustrate one reason why this is so, since the primary evidence offered to prove that unwanted conceptions are "bad" consists of individual case reports. Suppose that, contrary to our hypotheses, 10% of the "unwanted" conceptions are followed by the later

16

Pohlman

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

conscious parental desire to kill the newborn child, but that 10% of the "wanted" conceptions are also followed by this desire. Under these imaginary circumstances, "unwanted" conceptions would really be in no worse light, as regards the desire to kill, than "wanted" ones. Yet the case study approach might notice some of the 10% of "unwanted" conceptions later associated with the desire to kill the child, describe them in lurid detail, disregard the other cases, and seem to prove that "unwanted" conceptions lead to the desire to kill.
One crucial factor to control is marital status of parents at the time of conception. Although the work of Christensen (1953) suggests that premarital conception is not uncommon in the United States, we assume that most premarital conceptions are not wanted in this culture. Hence our primary interest for the United States is in comparisons confined to in-wedlock conceptions. In a culture where premarital conception seems to be more of an accepted norm (Christensen, 1960), however, there might be an interest in applying these hypotheses to "unwanted" as versus "wanted" premarital conceptions. Also, it would be possible to adapt these hypotheses to compare in-wedlock conceptions as a whole with out-of-wedlock conceptions as a whole, if one wished to study this variable rather than hold it constant.
In view of the difficulties of defining "unwanted conception," the safest approach in the research testing of these hypotheses would seem to be to compare two extreme groups, conceptions very "wanted" and very "unwanted."
The predictor in most of these hypotheses is the conscious parental attitude about "wanting" or "not wanting" a conception before it occurs. This is the simplest and most practical predictor for

most people. Even if a given hypothesis goes unsupported when using this predictor, however, this does not prove that preconception prediction is impossible. Other and more complex predictors might be tried. The attitude, before marriage, about "wanting" or "not wanting" the marriage to occur does not predict later marital "success" perfectly, as divorces suggest. Attempts to improve on this simple predictor of marriage success are represented in various marriage prediction tests. Similarly, we might try to predict parents' later feelings toward a child by the use of tests or even factual data such as length of marriage, religious preference of parents, number of existing children, etc. The prediction that a marriage will not last may itself imply some prediction as to whether children will later be wanted. Such complex predictors would probably be of value to only a relatively sophisticated few, at best.
This writer is currently combing research literature in an attempt to find existing studies bearing on the hypotheses listed. References contributed by readers of this article would be welcome. Controlled longitudinal studies which provide direct tests of these hypotheses have not been found to date for most hypotheses, although there is some indirect evidence.
This writer is convinced that the hypotheses are "correct"; they make sense in terms of clinical experience and seem to fit in with other hypotheses widely held in psychology. However, such pious conviction, which is probably widely shared, is hardly scientific evidence.
There seems to be a need for controlled studies testing such hypotheses as these. Longitudinal studies would be particularly valuable. Such studies might well be made a part of more inclusive longitudinal research projects, perhaps

Vol. 12, No. 1

Unwanted Conceptions

17

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

in child development, such as the studies long continued at Berkeley. Both the 1957 and 1960 surveys of the longitudinal Family Growth in Metropolitan America Study (Westoff, et al., 1961, 1963) asked parents how many children they wanted. This question might provide the basis for unusually pure "unwanting" and "wanting" groups, where rationalization was minimized. "Unwanting" parents might be those who indicated a total desired family in an earlier interview (1957 or 1960) smaller than that which had actually been achieved in a reinterview (1960 or the projected resurvey) and who, in addition, stated in a reinterview that the latest pregnancy had occurred while contraception was being practiced to avoid conception. "Wanting" controls might be those who not only claimed in a reinterview that they had interrupted contraception or had not practiced contraception because they wished to achieve the latest pregnancy, but who also had stated in the preceding interview a desired family size at least as large as that achieved with the latest pregnancy. Parents in these two somewhat purified groups might then be interviewed on a number of areas related to the dependent variables in the hypotheses stated in this article.
Clear evidence in support of such hypotheses as these would provide powerful and well-founded additional arguments for the importance of family planning. However, it is not always possible to hold life's decisions in abeyance until the empirical evidence is all in. Thus, while research is sorely needed, leaders in the important practical business of family planning may find it profitable to continue to assume that unwanted conceptions are "bad" for parents and children. Even if this assumption is in error, avoiding conceptions unwanted at the

time of their possible occurrence will at the very least have the effect of reducing the total number of births, which may be all to the good in many countries today.
SUMMARY
In-wedlock conceptions which were not wanted before they occurred, as compared with other in-wedlock conceptions, may lead to a greater proportion of undesirable psychological effects for parents and children. This possibility has been widely assumed but has recieved little systematic study. This possibility has been broken down into a number of relatively specific hypotheses above. These hypotheses, and close relatives, are "up for adoption" into research designs; some of them would seem to deserve the wealthy homes provided by longitudinal studies.
REFERENCES
CAPLAN, G., I960. Emotional Implications of Pregnancy and Influences on Family Relationships. In: STUART, H. C, and D. G. PRUGH (eds.), The Healthy Child. Harvard University Press, Boston.
CHESSER, E., no date. Unwanted Child. Rich and Cowan, London.
CHRISTENSEN, H. T., 1953. Studies in Child Spacing: I. Premarital Pregnancy as Measured by the Spacing of the First Birth from Marriage. Amer. Sociol. Rev., 18: 53-59. , 1960. Cultural Relativism and Premarital Sex Norms. Amer. Sociol. Rev., 25: 31-39.
FLANAGAN, J. C., 1942. A Study of Factors Determining Family Size in a Selected Professional Group. Genetic Psychol. Monographs, 25: 3-99.
FREEDMAN, R., P. K. WHELPTON, and A. A. CAMP-
BELL, 1959. Family Planning, Sterility, and Population Growth. McGraw-Hill, New York. LADER, L., 1955. The Margaret Sanger Storyand the Fight for Birth Control. Doubleday, New York. MENNINGER, K., 1943. Psychiatric Aspects ofContraception. Bull. Menninger Clin., 7: 36-40. POHLMAN, E. W., 1965. "Wanted" and "Unwanted": Toward Less Ambiguous Definition (Brief Report). Eugen. Quart., 12: 19-27.

18

Pohlman

Eugen. Quart.

SEARS, R. R., E. E. MACCOBY, and H. LEVIN, 1957.
Patterns of Child Rearing. Row, Peterson and Co., Evanston, Ill.
WESTOFF, C. F., R. G. POTTER, JR., and P. C. SAGI,
1963. The Third Child. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
, , , and E. G. MISHLER, 1961.
Family Growth in Metropolitan America. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
WHELPTON, P. K., A. A. CAMPBELL, and J. PATTER-

SON, 1965. Fertility and Family Planning in the United States. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
, and C. V. RISER, eds., 1946-1958. Social and PsychologicalFactors Affecting Fertility, 5 vols. Milbank Memorial Fund, New York.
ZEMLICK, M. J., and R. I. WATSON, 1953. Ma-
ternal Attitudes of Acceptance and Rejection During and After Pregnancy. Amer. J. Orthopsychiat., 2 3 : 570-584.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

LIBRARIES--COMPLETE YOUR BACK FILES of EUGENICS QUARTERLY
Back issues available
Reduced Rate
for
Complete Back Order Volumes 1-9,1954-62
$7.00 per volume* Single back volumes $7.00*
Single back issues $2.00*
*plut postage order from
American Eugenics Society Business Office
1323 Greenwood Road Baltimore, Maryland 21208

