Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Types of advice given by heredity counselors
Sheldon C. Reed
To cite this article: Sheldon C. Reed (1958) Types of advice given by heredity counselors, Eugenics Quarterly, 5:1, 51-62, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1958.9987351 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1958.9987351
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

CHAIRMAN GLASS: The second speaker on this same topic, "Types of Advice Given by Heredity Counselors," is Dr. Sheldon Reed. Like Dr. Fraser, Dr. Reed has shifted from mice to Drosophila to human genetics, without entirely forsaking the love for experimental work with which he began. I think his work in counseling at the Dight Institute, of which he has been head now for a number of years,

pays great tribute to his interest in problems of this field.
As many of you know, he has written a book in which he has dealt with problems of this kind and has endeavored to make clear to physicians with not a great deal of genetic background what approach might be taken in answer to many of the problems brought before them. So we will listen with great interest to Dr. Reed.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

TYPES OF ADVICE GIVEN BY HEREDITY COUNSELORS

SHELDON C. REED
The Dight Institute for Human Genetics University of Minnesota

D,'UR1NG THE PAST TEN YEARS D r . R a y C .
Anderson, Elving Anderson and I have recorded 1,778 counseling cases as of July 1, 1957. This number comes from the daily log which we keep and which affords a starting point for follow-up contacts to determine the results, if any, of the counseling. Such contacts have been made sporadically in the past. It would be valuable to make a careful, systematic study of the first 1,000 cases as they are now old enough to permit a correlation of the clients' statements with their reproductive behavior subsequent to the counseling.
This record of counseling represents a great many hours given freely to strangers for which you expect nothing in return except your own satisfaction that you have done your best to help them solve their problems.
It would be very gratifying if these cases had all been correctly handled and the counseling carried out under ideal conditions. Obviously, such could not have been the case, nor do I know of any center where genetic counseling is entirely satisfactory. The reasons for the less than perfect coun-

seling techniques are many and are responsible for the less than perfect performances in any area involving personal relationships and social work.
The large number of counseling cases mentioned above represents a general genetic counseling practice which could be expected to come to any person identified as being experienced in human genetics. Generally, the clients do not expect nor want very much beyond the genetic information, and. an understanding of it, for which they have been referred by their physician, frequently an obstetrician. Of course it would be highly desirable if the counselor could have had several years of practice in obstetrics, pediatrics, psychiatry and hematology, to name a few of the pertinent disciplines, in order to gain a solid background in all fields. Probably the best that can be hoped for, however, is that he might have an M.D., in addition to his Ph.D. in genetics. These fields are all important in counseling, and there are many other ones which would be equally useful, such as legal training and social work. I assure you that training in all these disci-

51

52 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

plines and others would be most helpful in answering the questions posed in general genetic counseling. As no one could ever qualify as an expert in all these areas, genetic counseling will always be somewhat imperfect. Furthermore, if a person did qualify in all the most important areas, he would have reached a pinnacle of professionalism which would make him the world's worst genetic counselor. Professionalism leads to a kind of aloofness and austerity that expects automatic acceptance of the pronouncements given. As these expectations may exceed actualities, bitterness may result and the counseling has failed. As the old gag goes, "You can always tell a Harvard man but you can't tell him much."
What you can tell a person or couple depends upon the situation, which is practically always unique. If you say to the couple, as many physicians have said, "You must not have any more children," there is a good chance that the couple will resent the statement and look elsewhere for a less dogmatic presentation of the situation. Conversely, if you again rest upon authority and tell the couple that there is no danger of a repetition of an abnormality, they may doubt the statement with resulting frustration. It would seem clear from the whole of our cultural experience that people do not wish to be told how many children they can have. This is the reason that most genetic counselors emphasize that decisions regarding reproduction must be made by the couples themselves. Furthermore, I can assure you from both my personal and professional experience that the couple is not prepared to make their decision about subsequent reproductive intentions at the time they get the genetic counseling. They will take their time and think over what they have learned, or thought they learned.
There is a fundamental difference between psychiatric and genetic counseling. The psychiatrist can expect and demand a number of sessions with the patient. The genetic counselor cannot demand this and

usually expects to have only one meeting with the clients. If there are two or even three meetings with the couple it often means that a poor job of teaching was done at the first meeting. Genetic counseling is a one-shot proposition, most of the time. Subsequent to the birth of a child a couple may reappear for a further evaluation of the situation.
The experience at the Dight Institute is the same as what seems to have occurred in Denmark at Professor Kemp's Institute of Human Genetics. The proportion of personal contacts with the people involved is diminishing. The proportion of phone and mail contacts with the client's physician is increasing. Phone and mail contacts are not satisfactory methods of counseling and, knowing this, some of the physicians refer the couple to the counseling center, but some do not. It is clear that the main body of counseling in medical genetics in the future will be done by physicians not located at counseling centers. This should be obvious. There are many thousands of families who have questions about human genetics. They're not located anywhere near a counseling center and have never heard that such exist, and, naturally, they ask their family physician whatever question they have in mind. The eventual remedy, of course, for the difficulty here is better training for the physician in human genetics so that he can do adequately the bulk of the genetic counseling, which is coming to him already, and which in many cases he does not do adequately now.
The question is still before us as to what to tell the couples that do come to the Dight Institute for counseling. While we cannot order them to produce a particular number of children related to the gravity of their situation, we can guide them to some approximate understanding of what the risk actually is. This is a tough job in itself, as the clients do not usually have much comprehension of probability even in the simplest penny-tossing form. If the

53

risk picture can be satisfactorily transmitted to the clients, they will eventually try to fit their reproductive behavior to it. The means by which they do this will be influenced by the cultural and religious pattern in which they were reared. It is not likely that the genetic counselor can change these attitudes very greatly with the one shot he has. Furthermore, the clients in general know about the techniques, and only once in my experience has any client thought that I could personally fix her up with the changes that she wanted to take place. Most of them realize that this function obviously belongs to somebody else. Reproductive attitudes are established early in life and modified only over a long period of time. If the genetic counselor attempts to sell any particular reproductive attitude too vigorously, he will certainly be rebuffed. Even the obstetrician cannot explore his patient's mind on the subject of reproductive attitudes extensively at the first meeting.
In conclusion, it should be clear that to me the people who come for genetic counseling are clients and not patients. They

are just as normal as the clients of a lawyer or social worker, or perhaps more so because, in general, they are fairly literate, or they would not know about you or seek advice from you. They come for information which they hope will relieve their anxieties about the future. Fortunately, the information obtained almost always does seem to diminish their fears and stabilize their thinking. They very frequently ask: Is there a chance that I can have any normal children? The chances may be 97 per cent that the next child will be normal, using risk figures for some of these common indeterminate risks that Dr. Neel has mentioned. The presentation of genetic information is the primary function of the genetic counselor. The presentation must be compassionate, clear, relaxed, and without a sales pitch. You will know whether you have succeeded or not as a result of the completely voluntary messages that come in from the clients some years after the counseling. You learn that in many cases, at least, your efforts were not in vain.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

DISCUSSION

CHAIRMAN GLASS: If I understand Dr. Reed correctly, it seems that the genetic counselor is somewhere about midway in the spectrum between the radiologist and the psychoanalyst. When the radiologists approach the problem that has been before them more and more frequently in the last two or three years about the dangers of radiation, their answer to the person seeking advice is "Trust your doctor. Do what the doctor says is advisable. Just listen to him. He knows there's a risk, a calculated risk. You take the doctor's word."
At the other extreme, we have the psychoanalyst, who doesn't tell the patient anything but just listens to the patient while he reveals himself. And, in between, we have the genetic counselor, who is not going to be so extreme as the radiologist, who will try to present the

facts to the client but who is never going to admit a second interview, and certainly, by no means, to allow the client to recline on a couch while pouring out his trouble. Is that correct?
DR. REED: It's very imaginative, at any rate.
CHAIRMAN GLASS: We come now to the discussants, Clarence P. Oliver, of the Department of Zoology, University of Texas; Harold Falls, University Hospital, University of Michigan; and Dr. William J. Schull, of the Institute of Human Genetics, University of Michigan.
I just want to say, in introducing Dr. Oliver, that--well--I don't usually call him Dr. Oliver. I call him Pete. We were graduate students together, and I'll let you in on a little secret now.
My admiration for him knows no bounds.

54 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

As a younger student, I knew of times when he was working so late at night X-raying fruit flies and analyzing the results, in those days when we were just beginning to learn what radiation would do to genes, that he would stretch out on a lab table and go sound asleep night after night and be waked up by the night watchman on his rounds. I think maybe his back is still a little stiff from sleeping on those lab tables; I don't know. But that's the devotion to his work that has characterized him over all these years.
DR. CLARENCE P. OLIVER: In most of the statements that have been made by the speakers, there's very little controversial that we can take up, and they have done the job so well that I rather hesitate to make many comments. But I do want to be certain that some things have not been misunderstood, or will not be misunderstood, and I want to bring out, maybe, one other point that has not been discussed.
I'd like, first of all, to refer to Dr. Dice's paper in which he suggested that there be accurate diagnoses, including the diagnosis of normalcy for those who are reported to be normal. Actually, in studying human genetics, accuracy is extremely important. You will find, if you are working with a characteristic which is not present very early in life, that the proband will probabaly know more about her mother than about her sister, and certainly more about her sister than about some distant relative. It is also true that she will know more about her father than about her brother. You do find occasionally individuals who are classified as normal, not only by the proband with whom you begin your study, but also by other relatives. And yet when you go to the individual to verify or confirm this normalcy, you find that the individual is not normal.
I know one case of breast cancer in which a woman had had both breasts removed--mastectomy--and none of her sisters, none of her nieces, knew anything about this at all. She had kept it quiet from everyone, but she did give the information to us, and we were able to confirm this by going to the hospital records.
I would like to make a statement as well about a point in Dr. Neel's paper which does not differ from his, you understand, but it's something that I had wanted to say this morn-

ing and was not able to do so. That involves the impossibility of recognizing individuals who have a particular genotype and who thereby carry the potentiality to develop a particular phenotype in time.
It would seem obvious to most people who have worked with experimental genetics that you can get a mimic of a hereditary condition, the mimic resulting from some environmental factor, and the mimic will not necessarily be identical with the hereditary type. But the fact that you have some slight variation is not in itself evidence that you are dealing with something non-hereditary. Even when you induce mutations, that is, gene changes as we describe them, you will not necessarily get the same phenotype in the second mutation that you got in the first mutation. You may describe them as exactly the same, because your eye is accustomed to seeing some visible variants, and it's the first characteristic that you recognize.
Quite often you will find some new variation intermediate with respect to two hereditary traits, both recessively inherited, and both involving primarily a particular part of the body. This variability of traits is something that we need to find out more about in human genetics, if we want to make good use of family histories in working out the data for use in counseling.
I believe that the speakers today recognize the need of following up, or at least answering, letters that come to them, even though all of us recognize that these letters will not ordinarily give us sufficient information about the trait involved. You want to get accurate information when you can, but when you cannot, you still may want to--and you should-- give a tactful answer to the person who writes the letters.
I believe that should be done, because I feel that most of the people who write in for ininformation have a problem disturbing them. As one human being to another, if for no other reason, you should do the best you can to relieve them from the anguish, or tell them exactly what is known about the possibility of this trait developing.
There is something else, too. Sometimes a person writes to a counselor, that person living all the way across the country from the

55

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

counselor. The letter is sent for a particular neticists who could not learn to act as coun-

Teason, and I think an example will be the selors even though they know all of the sub-

best way for me to explain it to you.

ject matter in human genetics. There arephy-

One individual first wrote a letter and then, sicians, of course, who are accustomed to coun-

eventually, came in to talk about his problem. seling, but they may lack sufficient knowledge

After the discussion he was asked why he did of genetics, and many of them would not go

not to go to a geneticist living close to him, al- into genetic counseling. Possibly some of those

though not in the same city, to get his infor- could be trained to become genetic counselors.

mation. His answer was that if the people in You do need some means to train individuals

his home area found out about the complica- in genetics, if they do not know genetics, and

tion he was involved in, he would be socially to give them a broader knowledge in human

ostracized and economically ruined. Therefore, genetics if they already know basic genetics.

he did not dare go to someone who could an- That can be done only if certain schools

swer his question but who also lived close by, where individuals who can give this training

because there was a possibility that the news are located will develop a program of training

would leak out. So he spent considerable in human genetics. That means as well that

money to talk to someone at a distance.

the school ordinarily will have to get funds

I want to mention something about finances, too. I certainly am not going to plead for charging of fees. I don't believe in it. It's perfectly justifiable if you are a physician examin-

from the outside for that purpose. There are possible sources for those funds, but at present there would not be a large amount available for any one group.

ing the individual for medical data; but in so far as genetic counseling is concerned, I do not

CHAIRMAN GLASS: Dr. Falls, you're next.

believe in charging fees. I would not want to attack anybody else having a different belief.
That statement was answered once by someone who said that I preferred to be a gentleman rather than a worker, and that may be it. I don't know. Actually, I just feel that most of the people who come to us for information are not able to pay fees, and that if we in genetic counseling begin to charge fees many will look upon us more as professional individuals and not as human beings. I apologize to anyone to whom that may sound as if I'm saying they are not human because they are professional. I hope you will see what I mean; that it is essential that you treat these individuals as fellow men who have problems, for they want someone to whom they can turn in confidence to discuss the problems and to get some honest advice about the possibilities, even though you can't keep them from developing the trait because medical knowledge has not progressed that far.
There has been nothing said about training. It's doubtful that anyone could set up a program for training in genetic counseling. Some individuals might conceivably be able to do it, but most of us could not. It certainly is true that not everyone could be trained to become a genetic counselor. There are excellent ge-

DR. HAROLD FALLS: American medicine has
experienced cycles of specific interest andnow, after a rather long preoccupation with mechanical gadgets and instrumentation, has again turned to a consideration of the individual as a whole person. The physician, in such a consideration, must necessarily investigate the patient's economic status, social responsibilities, social attributes, level of education, reaction of the psyche to the illness and particularly the hereditary make-up. The patient and his disease must therefore, be carefully evaluated in light of the combined influence of that individual's environment and hereditary make-up. The human geneticist and/or counselor, perhaps better than any other discipline, needs to employ this careful consideration of the individual as a whole person. In order to give a satisfactory genetic prognosis, the counselor requires the following aids: (1) careful and accurate diagnosis, (2) meticulous study of the specific individual's family and (3) a thorough knowledge of the medical and hereditary literature dealing with the specific trait or traits being studied. It is not always possible to fulfill these requisites necessary to the giving of a genetic prognosis. The counselor, therefore should possess that most important attribute--honesty. The limita-

56 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

tions of available knowledge and difficulties of accurate diagnosis should be admitted freely and demonstrated to the inquiring individual. Recent attempts at classification of specific disease entities have uncovered the fact that the medical profession is just beginning to explore the field of the minutiae of differential diagnosis. The difficulty of accurately classifying the so-called achondroplasias was very well emphasized this morning in Dr. Warkany's excellent presentation. To further illustrate, the ophthalmologist has learned to consider the term retinitis pigmentosa as a clinical wastepaperbasket type of diagnosis since there are now recognized seven different known hereditary modes of transmission of this interesting ophthalmoscopic picture. Drs. Neel, Dice, and Herndon have called attention to the frequency of the so-called "carrier-states." This subject was also alluded to by Dr. Warkany when he spoke of "signs and symptoms" of the traits present in other siblings and relatives of his patients. In such "carrier-states" the individual heterozygous for a "recessive" gene may occasionally or even constantly exhibit minimal or mild effects of the gene in contrast to the more severe or extensive manifestations of the homozygous state of the gene. Such findings merely lend emphasis to the previously made statement that the genetic counselor must meticu lously study and individualize the entire family of the afflicted person before making any conclusions as to the mode of the gene transmission. It is to be admitted, however, that genetic prognosis can be made occasionally even though a definite diagnosis cannot be arrived at. This is particularly true if a careful pedigree is available. Before leaving the subject of diagnosis, I should like to digress a moment to speak of a fallacy and tendency exhibited by physicians in anticipating an all or none effect of a specific gene. These same physicians, however, do not expect a textbook picture in each of a hundred cases of measles but rather anticipate differences in the manifestations and the course of the disease. The geneticist must educate the physician to realize that no one gene acts alone but rather experiences a very complex interaction in the gene milieux of the affected individual. Since this gene composition varies greatly in every individual (except monozygous twins), significant variations in both ex-

pressivity and penetrance of the gene should be expected. The textbook picture expression of a gene effect therefore is seldom observed; rather variation becomes the rule. These differences in expression of many disease traits are perhaps further accentuated or brought about by differences in the environment of the affected individuals.
The most important requisite of any genetic counselor is the possession of a high degree of common sense or, to put it more bluntly, just plain "horse-sense." The effect of any specific trait on an individual's ability to become a useful member of society and in addition upon the mental status and social standing of that individual's family must be weighed carefully in giving genetic advice. The singular fact that such prospective parents actually seek genetic prognostication indicates a greater degree of intelligence, social and moral responsibility on their part than is true of a large proportion of our population. Such parents, perhaps, should actually be encouraged to have children (anticipating transmission of superior qualities) providing the gene to be transmitted does not impose too serious a handicap on the affected child.
In respect to lethal traits (Tay-Sachs disease, for example) the counselor, if convinced that the parents possess better than average intelligence and social responsibility and particularly if the prospective parents could tolerate the psychic, economic, and physical stress, may advise them to continue trying until they secure a normal child. This is in contra-distinction to their adopting a child of even greater unknown qualities. Such advice of course presupposes a most thorough insight into the mental and physical character of the parents seldom achieved by a counselor in the course of the usual interview.
To further emphasize the importance of considering the individual as a whole, it is mandatory that the counselor delve into a careful consideration of the influence of the maternal environment on the afflicted offspring. In this respect it is necessary that a careful history of the maternal health during the pregnancy be inquired into since it is well known that viral and other noxious environmental agents can effect changes in the fetus which closely simulate the product of a noxious gene action

57

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

(phenocopy). Several of the acute viral exanthemata may not manifest themselves in the pregnant female who has sufficient immunity to protect herself but not sufficient immunity to prevent the fetus from the deleterious action of the virus. Thus, the counselor must know the probability and time of exposure of the pregnant woman in order to evaluate the possibility of noxious intrauterine viral action on the child.
Maternal hereditary states, such as diabetes, RH factor, ABO factors, anatomical defects and others must also be carefully considered by the counselor. A diabetic mother may give birth to successive obese infants while an RH or ABO incompatibility may likewise lead to successive siblings exhibiting erythroblastosis. Breech deliveries have been known to occur more frequently in specific females and in particular families. Finally, mutation as an important cause of disease must always be kept uppermost in the mind of the counselor.
In conclusion I should like to say a few words about treatment of genetic disease states. I am quite optimistic and believe that we will be able to ameliorate and prevent the ravages of many of the metabolic entities which seem to plague our elderly individuals. Early recognition and diagnosis of such metabolic entities as hypertension, arteriosclerosis, diabetes, arthritis, etc., before they reach the clinical level through careful study of all members of known afflicted families and through better provocative tests is to be anticipated. The early detection of individuals destined to be afflicted with these disease states will make it possible for medicine to ameliorate and perhaps even control the disease.
DR.^FRASER: I'd like to raise a question about the eugenic aspects of counseling. Dr. Falls has said if the parents could take it, he would tell the parents of a child with a recessive lethal disease to go ahead and have their next child. I'd like to ask him what he thinks about the fact that our advice will act in the direction of increasing the frequency of the gene for that disease. We all do this, I suppose, when we tell the parents of a child with harelip or other condition with a partly genetic basis but low recurrence risk that the outlook for future children is not bad.

DR. FALLS: Dr. Müller has estimated that each of us carry at least eight rare hidden genes.
I am aware that in telling such parents to go ahead and have children (anticipating a clinically normal individual but possibly a heterozygote-genotypically) that they will further increase this pool of rare recessive genes in the general population. I cannot believe, however, that contrary advice, if followed, would materially lessen our recessive gene burden, particularly in the light of known constantly recurring mutation.
It has been my experience that many individuals after acquiring an understanding of the empiric risks through genetic counsel not infrequently decide to gamble on having their own child. Certainly no counselor has the legal right to say "thou shall not have a child."
DR. FRASER: I quite agree.
DR. FALLS: While speaking about legal responsibility, I should like to warn all counselors to keep written copies of their opinions on file. In giving genetic information through the mail, I believe it is legally expedient to quote genetic textbooks freely and to avoid personal opinions. I am not certain to what extent the counselor can be held legally responsible for a mistaken prognosis, but this possibility should be kept constantly in mind.
CHAIRMAN GLASS: Our third discussant is Dr. Schull, the co-author with Dr. Neel of a recently published book Human Heredity.
DR. WILLIAM J. SCHULL: The role of third discussant at a meeting such as this is an unhappy one, since the discussant is expected to have a measure of clairvoyance that I don't possess. One is expected to foresee manuscript changes which take a person from Texas to Georgia, and what previous discussants may elect to say. The easy way out in these circumstances is to tell jokes, but, unhappily, Joe Miller was not one of my ancestors. The net result was that in attempting to determine my contribution to this meeting I went through a series of mental peregrinations that would have done credit to Walter Mitty. One moment I had visions of myself in the role of devil's advocate, and the next moment I saw myself voicing unobjectionable platitudes. Only time will tell what the final casting was.

58 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

Dr. Oliver has mentioned fees, and, perhaps, our experience at Michigan will be enlightening. At Michigan we do charge for our genetic counseling. I should qualify this by saying that we charge, indirectly, for a portion of our genetic counseling. Individuals who seek guidance from us at the University of Michigan -- and this is personal interviews that I'm speaking of -- either come to us from within the hospital on a referred basis, in which case there is no charge for our services, or they can come to the out-patient clinics to be seen on the heredity service. In the latter instance they pay the entering fee that is charged every individual who seeks some sort of help through the outpatient clinic, so, in a sense, the individual is charged for our services. Personally, I do not find this especially reprehensible. It has been our experience that though the old adage goes that one should not look a gift horse in the mouth, most persons scrutinize the gift horse more carefully than something they have paid for. I sincerely believe we obtain a rapport with the patient who pays for counseling that one does not obtain when the patient is seen without charge.
The area that I thought I might address myself to, without challenge, was the estimation of empiric risks. The statistician is probably happiest, as you know, when he's the only statistician in a group. But I see in front of me Dr. Howard Levine, so I shall have to make my statements cautiously.
Almost without exception, the designs we have used--and I do injustice to the word "designs"--to obtain empiric risks are naive statistically. One does not see multistage sampling used nor any of the other recent advances in sampling theory. What is worse, one cannot generally characterize the population from which a sample, given in the literature, was presumably drawn. Now, we all know, and I think we all appreciate, that in empiric risks we are invariably sampling from a mixed population. The population contains matings with high risk, with low risk, and possibly others. We have no notion as to what proportions of the various classes are in this mixed population, but in many cases we do have sufficient information about concomitant variables so that these, at least, could be taken into account when we attempt to obtain useful empiric risks. As Dr.

Neel has said, empiric risks are a measure of our ignorance; but there are degrees of ignorance and I'm sure we can refine the empiric risk figures which we use by sharpening the definitions of the populations from which we are sampling, and by employing more informative sampling designs.
Before we can evaluate the importance of empiric risks or determine where greater emphasis should be placed in securing such figures, we should have some notion as to what these risks mean to the individual who is counseled. More specifically we should know when the individual who seeks guidance decides that a risk is too great. If we knew this, then we could and should place empnasis on securing the best possible figures when the risk falls within this decision-making area. At other levels the empiric risk could vary by an order or even two orders of magnitude and would be of no concern to the individual. Thus, I am sure that most people who seek genetic advice and who are presented, say, with an empiric risk of one in a hundred, would make the same decision on the basis of this risk as they would if their chances were two in a hundred. This difference, which is small in their eyes, although it represents actually a doubling of the risk, almost certainly plays no major role in the ultimate decision which they reach. But I do believe that by the time the risk approaches one in ten, then they begin to hesitate, and by the time the risk reaches one in two, they may decide not to have children. We should concentrate, therefore, on this area of transition where the empiric risk is taken into account in arriving at a decision. Within this critical zone we perform a disservice when we can not provide accurate figures.
I would like to comment just briefly on the type of advice which is given. Dr. Kallmann set down four rules that one should operate by, rules which I think are very well taken. There was one instance, however, where I, with Dr. Kallmann's permission, would like to make a small change. He said, if I recall correctly, that genetic counsel should never be given in an impersonal way. If he would permit me, I would like to change this to read: genetic advice should be given in a compassionate fashion. Impersonal means without reference to self, as I understand its use here, so that if

59

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

advice is not impersonal, it must be personal. If it's personal, it must be subjective, and I doubt that two counselors would proffer the same advice. Since many of the individuals who seek advice shop for it, they are apt to be led into an area of confusion because of differences of opinion, which makes it impossible for them to arrive at a decision.
One other comment--and this I owe to Dr. Warkany who said, "Do we actually need counseling centers in Bloody Creek, Kentucky?" As we are aware, genetic counseling has erupted with a vengeance in the last several years, and I often wonder if we are not being stampeded into attempting to establish many counseling centers when we don't have the personnel to man adequately the ones that we have. We should certainly guard lest in our efforts to make genetic advice too readily available we dilute the quality to the point where we are not achieving the ends we hope to achieve. Man has done fairly well for a good many thousands of years in the absence of genetic counseling, and I'm confident that he probably could forego our pearls of wisdom for another ten or twenty years, until we have the personnel that we need to do an adequate job.
There is a corollary to the problem posed by Dr. Warkany which has nothing to do with geography, and it is this: At a counseling center should we attempt to advise everyone who seeks our counsel? A categorical answer to this is clearly not possible because of the numerous "gray areas" which arise. Let me illustrate one such. Not infrequently, in cases that come to us on our service, we find that the pediatrician, say, if the proband is a child, has decided that the family needs guidance, and that they need the guidance now. Unfortunately, a firm diagnosis on the child has not been reached, but the diagnosis has been narrowed to two or three alternatives. We are strongly encouraged to attempt to give advice to the family. Yet, our advice, obviously, can only be of meaning if we know precisely what the diagnosis is. If one attempts to give advice under these circumstances, he generally tries to advise for all possible contingencies, which then means recognizing, as possible, any one of the diagnoses. The advice then lacks immediacy and is of dubious value to the family. Moreover, the attempt to advise can be very traumatic not only

to the genetic counselor but to the family and to the pediatrician, in this instance, as well. While it would seem obvious that one would give no advice in this situation, I know that I have been guilty and I would like to think my colleagues have also been lax in this respect. Perhaps, this is misplaced compassion.
Finally, in summarizing these meanderings, let me emphasize a point that previous speakers have made. Genetic counseling is certainly a very imperfect art even in the hands of the very best of us and is apt to remain so for some time to come. We should be tolerant, therefore, of other genetic counselors who are giving advice in situations which may seem somewhat less than favorable in our eyes.
DR. NEEL: I just want to clarify one point that Dr. Schull made, a point that I'm sure you will encounter if you are engaged in organizing a counseling service.
Our service, as Dr. Schull said, is within the framework of the Out-Patient Clinic of the University Hospital. We occupy space in an out-patient clinic. This is fine. It puts us next to our materials, so to speak. It puts us in a hospital atmosphere, which has many advantages. It also puts us in close proximity to the hospital administrator, and hospital administrators look at space as something which should bring in revenue.
We have worked out a compromise. Everyone who comes to University Hospital pays a registration fee of $5 to $7, in return for which, beyond simple registration, he has a chest film, hemoglobin determination, and serological test for syphilis. Persons registering on our service pay that fee, but they pay no fee for the services rendered by the clinic personnel. If they are referred to neurology or orthopedics, there is, of course, a second fee, the magnitude of which depends on what the service does. So, we have a compromise which satisfies our hospital administrator but certainly does not enrich the Department of Human Genetics.
CHAIRMAN GLASS: Would you like to say something about empiric risk calculations, Dr. Reed?
DR. REED: NO. I don't know that I have anything that I would like to say about that, but a setup in which there is an affected parent,

60 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

I do have something that has bothered me for a very long time which is concerned with genetic counseling. When the day comes when we have information about the hétérozygote, how are we going to answer these questions?
In any study in neurological diseases you know that the age of incidence is rather young, so you can expect that unless a person with a dominant gene has an automobile accident, or something like that, he will live to face the risk of 50 per cent that he will develop the disease.
Now, the day will come, I suspect, when the person carrying this gene--and here the people with the disease are hétérozygotes, of course, for the homozygote isn't known -- the day will come when it will be possible to predict that a certain individual is going to have this disease. We can also predict that three sisters are not going to have the disease, and one of their brothers, maybe, is. The problem of counseling here is: Can you benefit the people who are not going to have the disease by telling them that they are not? The whole sibship, without question, has anxiety about this. They are always perturbed that they may develop the disease. They may not do anything about it. They may have more children because of it-- I don't know--but at any rate it is a problem, because how are you going to tell the three individuals that are not going to get the disease and refuse to say anything to the one that is going to get it? Obviously, if you refuse to tell him anything and you tell his sister something, he would conclude that he is going to get the disease.
I have been exploring this for a long time with our Department of Psychiatry, and I have realized that this is a couch problem -- to see what they say, how they would go about this --and suppose we have a technique for distinguishing the hétérozygote right now, and we are ready to tell the individuals "Yes, you have the gene. You will get the disease unless you drop dead tomorrow."
What kind of counseling can you give them? Unfortunately, the Department of Psychiatry has not been helpful on this. "We don't have any idea so far," they say, and I realize there is a great deal which must be done in psychiatry to be ready to meet problems of this sort, which will be, really, the $64 questions because there

are plenty of families which have this sort of and there is a sibship or young people who are thinking about getting married.
The actualities of what they do are not always the same as what they propose, naturally, and in a family that we had some discussion with, one of the girls said she thought that if she had this gene she would certainly become a nun. Well, six months later she was married. She didn't become a nun, and she has had a couple of children.
In other words, she didn't know whether she was a carrier of the gene or not, but, on the other hand, she didn't consider the situation serious enough to become a nun, which she might have done if she had been certain that she had the gene for the disease.
Anyway, it's certainly a problem for psychiatry, and I suspect it will have to be faced up to before long.
CHAIRMAN GLASS: Dr. Kallmann, do you want to comment on that?
DR. KALLMANN: I don't want to comment on the activities or attitudes of the Department of Psychiatry at the University of Minnesota, but I would like to make a few general statements.
I think we should distinguish between plans for a genetic information center and those for a genetic counseling center. If someone from Arizona writes and wants to find out what is known about the genetic aspects of Tay-Sachs disease or some other disease, and if the given information is supplied by letter, I haven't done any counseling. I have provided information.
My concept of genetic counseling refers to requests for guidance in the presence of familial disease, and this kind of activity should, in my opinion, not be handled in an impersonal way. We have to know the people and their personalities and their family situations before we give counsel.
Nor do I think that genetic counseling is always a one-shot proposition. It may not be possible to give all the required guidance in one session. We have had no difficulty in getting people back after six months or a year. Sometimes we make regular appointments with them and have had little trouble in obtaining

61

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

the cooperation of the given families for this purpose.
There's only one other point I want to make. Medical genetics, to me is as important a specialty as radiology or psychoanalysis or any other professional service. It requires a highly specialized kind of knowledge and experience. I don't think that the majority of general practitioners can be expected to have the degree of specialized training which is necessary for counseling purposes. What they should know is where they can get competent advice as to the genetic aspects of a family's problem. Therefore, I question the advisability of leaving the bulk of genetic counseling to the family physician, unless he had some special training.
I think that there should be departments of medical genetics, preferably in every state or in several areas of a large state. Of course, the public, the public health agencies, other medical specialists, and the general practitioners in the state should know where they can obtain specialized advice in relation to genetic problems that are encountered in families under their care.
Often I offer advice as to inheritance problems in the frame of our departmental activities; I do not render it as a practicing psychiatrist. Although I have a couch in my office, it is not being used for counseling procedures, I give this kind of advice as a geneticist who also happens to be a qualified psychiatrist.
DR. MADGE MACKLIN: This morning there was discussion about traits which might have been induced by some environmental factor, and hence not genetically determined. As Dr. Falls has pointed out, some of these so-called environmental traits may arise only in those individuals whose genetic background permits of their appearance. Hence such traits might easily be repeated in the family, although outwardly conditioned by extraneous factors.
I want to speak for a moment about traits which may be conditioned wholly by environmental factors, but for which the specific environment producing them has not been identified. We are unable to point to any extraneous factor which might be responsible for the trait, but we are equally unable to state that this is genetically determined, so we assume that an environmental factor must be at fault.

Under such circumstances the onus of proof should rest just as heavily upon the person postulating extraneous factors as upon the person assuming a genetic basis. Since we are unable to identify the specific environment that was responsible for the defect, we cannot warn the parents against encountering the same environment during the next pregnancy. They unwittingly ran into it the first time; they are equally liable to run into it again. Hence, even environmentally induced traits may be repeated in subsequent children, and we should be wary of assuring them that the defect cannot happen again.
How should we advise parents who come with a child suffering from a condition which might be either environmental or genetic or both in origin? Here I want heartily to endorse what Dr. Falls has said. He has a very sane approach. We must take into consideration not only the trait but the parents and family of the child with the trait, their financial, intellectual, emotional and health status. What I would give as advice to emotionally stable, financially secure and intelligent parents of a child with a defect lethal shortly after birth would be very different from what I would give to parents of a similar child whose intelligence was low, who were unable to finance further unrewarding pregnancies, and whose emotional balance could not stand the strain of another defective child.
Even with an excellent family set-up, the advice will differ according to the trait. If the trait is lethal at birth or shortly after, the only ones to suffer are the parents, and they may be advised to continue until they have a normal child. If the trait is one which allows the child to live, a burden to himself as well as others, the parents should have these facts presented.
One more thing I should like to say. Dr. Kallmann has said that the fear of cancer is just as dangerous as cancer itself. I would like to ask him what are the mortality statistics on the number of people who have died of fear of cancer. I already have the mortality statistics for persons in the United States who have died of cancer.
DR. KALLMANN: I don't think one has to be a psychiatrist in order to know that fears may

62 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

cause a lot of misery, to the extent of crippling people and turning them into invalids. I did not say that the fear of cancer kills anybody. What I did say was that fear of cancer may be as bad as having cancer. So, I don't think I have to supply any statistics on the mortality of the fear of cancer.
MR. OSBORN: I'd like to supplement briefly what Dr. Falls said.
We are operating today in a society which is not eugenically oriented, and we are operating in a field in which the scientific pace is not sufficient. Even if everybody in every heredity center took the position that they were going to insist on the patient's following the advice which they thought most eugenic, the actual effect would be very, very small, of course--almost so small as to be of no importance whatever.
I have no doubt that the orientation of the public over time will be changed, just as it has been changed in regard to inoculation against contagious diseases. I have no doubt that the scientific base will be strengthened.
I think those who are interested in eugenics would be wise to be patient until both those things has come to pass. Otherwise, we would again do as eugenics did 30 or 40 years ago, espouse things which were not justified, and

would turn public opinion back against eugenics.
Since the President of the Eugenics Society, Dr. Harry L. Shapiro, had to leave, may I express our deep appreciation and enthusiasm for the interest and size of the audience, and for those who took part in the discussion. I think it's extraordinary that with the very numerous papers, which met a very crowded schedule, everybody kept exactly within his time limit. This augurs well for the intelligence of the counseling, and it's certainly a very fine thing.
CHAIRMAN GLASS: I'm sure we could continue for some time. I have several questions myself about why my experience of getting such hosts of questions about the dangers of radiation isn't reflected by the other members of the panel; and, again, whether there is any difference between the legal and the personal responsibilities involved when you get asked about the hazards of radiation by mail and when you get requests for counseling in regard to some possibly genetically caused disease.
However, I see we are just not going to have time for an extended discussion. So, regretfully, I think we'll have to call our discussion to a close and thank the members of the panel and the discussants for their part in it.

