Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Some effects of being able to control sex of offspring
Edward Pohlman
To cite this article: Edward Pohlman (1967) Some effects of being able to control sex of offspring , Eugenics Quarterly, 14:4, 274-281, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1967.9987737 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1967.9987737
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles Citing articles: 7 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:29

SOME EFFECTS OF BEING ABLE TO CONTROL SEX OF OFFSPRING *
EDWARD POHLMAN Central Family Planning Institute
New Dehli, India and
University of the Pacific Stockton, California

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

Crude control over the sex of offspring has long been accomplished in certain cultures by selective infanticide (Aptekar, 1931; Himes, 1936). To the extent that humans become able to predict accurately the sex of unborn children, selective abortion might also provide a crude control of sex of offspring. But the future may permit parents to govern the sex of the future child at the time of conception. Shettles (1961, 1968) claims to have found evidence that the sex ratio of conceptions is substantially affected by the time in the menstrual cycle when conception occurs. If so, parents might affect probabilities of conceiving a child of the desired sex by the timing of conception. Other methods of controlling sex of offspring are being discussed currently. This article is concerned with effects which might result if such control were generally available.
RESEARCH ON SEX PREFERENCES
Westoff et al. (1961, p. 295) found that when the first child was a boy the interval before a second child was conceived averaged three months longer than when the first was a girl. There was no support for the hypothesis that this might be because first boys created more problems for mothers (Westoff et al., 1963, pp. 193, 194), as Sears et al. (1957, pp. 39-41) had speculated in trying to account for

their similar data. Rather, sex preferences were probably responsible. Mothers' reports indicate differences in how pleased they are about pregnancy, and in warmth shown to children, according to the sex of previous children (Sears et al., 1957, pp. 39-41, 57, 58, 513, 514).
Freedman et al. (1960) report an analysis of data taken from the first study in the Growth of American Families series (Freedman et al., 1959). They found that parents whose children were all of the same sex had a greater tendency to say they expected, and actually to have, at least one additional child than did parents whose families included at least one child of each sex. This held true when several other factors were controlled, including parity. These authors cite a number of other studies with similar findings. A number of publications they do not cite also bear on the sex-of-child composition of families (Dinitz et al., 1954; Flanagan, 1942; Harper, 1936; Landis and Landis, 1963,451; McMahan, 1951; Rainwater, 1965, 131; Sheps, 1963; Weiler, 1959; Westoff et al., 1961, pp. 293-295; 1963, pp. 205-207; and Winston, 1932). In general, there seems to be some preference for "one of each," and for boys. Harper (1936) and Clare and Kiser (1951) found the former to be relatively much more important than the latter, in their American samples.

* Research on which this article is based was supported by grants from the Social Science Committee of Planned Parenthood--World Population.

Unpublished data show that among Indian males having vasectomies, the proportion with less than two daughters

274

Vol. 14, No. 4

Effects of Sex of Offspring

275

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

is significantly larger than the proportion with less than two sons.
It seems that many non-Western nations show strong preferences for male offspring. A common wish expressed to men in some Moslem countries is, "May you have 100 sons." Turks with no sons are more likely to want additional conceptions than Turks with at least one son (Population Council, 1964, p. 2). Sex preferences concerning children seem to play a definite role in human parents' feelings, parents' actions are influenced by these preferences, and the background is present for sex ratios to be influenced substantially by preferences if preferences were permitted to affect reality.
Clare and Kiser (1951) studied couples' ex post facto statements about the importance of sex preferences in their decision to have another child. At each parity, a small portion of the parents claimed that this was an important consideration. There was also a strong tendency for both mothers and fathers to claim that they would prefer to have the sex-of-child composition that they actually did have. In the opinion of the present writer, this constitutes some of the clearest evidence of rationalization available (Pohlman, 1967a, Tables 11-1, 11-2; 1967b), although other explanations are possible. Clare and Kiser (1951, p. 483) conclude that "this type of rationalization . . . points up the strong tendency for parents to be satisfied with sex of the children that they have." But the data do not necessarily demonstrate a tendency for parents "to be satisfied," but only to say that they are satisfied. The study did not check on whether there was congruence between what parents said and how they felt; a vast body of psychological publication warns us not to equate the two. Hence we find no basis

for the further conclusions drawn by the authors.
This tendency itself probably reduces the potential bearing of sex preferences in children on fertility . . . the data suggest that most couples tend to be satisfied with the sex of the children they have and that sex preference is an important determinant of fertility among relatively few couples.
The authors were addressing themselves to American data and were not drawing conclusions concerning other cultures, with their probably greater preference for male children. But it seems to us that even in Western nations, the extent of the influence of sex preferences has not yet been established and might be considerable.
Neither the causes nor the long-range effects of sex-of-child preferences have been well researched. As Freedman et al. (1960) point out, we know little for sure about the sociopsychological factors underlying sex preferences. We have discussed causes of sex preferences elsewhere (Pohlman, 1967a, Chap. 4, Sec. I); the concern in the balance of this paper is with the possible effects of being able to control sex of offspring. By implication this is also a discussion of some of the effects of the present predicament--not being able to control sex of children. Consideration is given to three areas: (1) Psychological effects, with euthenic implications; (2) effects on sex ratios; (3) effects on total births.
PSYCHOLOGICAL EFFECTS
A child of the "wrong" sex may be resented and rejected. Many parents are able to make a genuine adjustment to disappointments in this area. But in other cases acceptance is only apparent, is the result of repression of rejection, and involves after-the-fact rationalization of sex preferences. Many of the

276

Pohlman

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

problems hypothesized to be associated with conceptions unwanted before they occurred (Pohlman, 1965) may be hypothesized to exist for children of the "wrong" sex. Rejection, even if it is unconscious, can affect a child severely. Sloman (1948) provides case study examples that seem to support this interpretation. The child may have feelings of regret, worthlessness, and even irrational guilt for having disappointed the family by being of the wrong sex. Newspapers sometimes play up the plight of families with eight or ten girls who are expecting another arrival; one cannot but wonder about the psychological development of the existing children. Clare and Kiser (1951, p. 483) indicate that the proportion of both husbands and wives who said they had been "very much" or "much" encouraged to have their last child by "wanting a girl if they had only boys, or a boy if they had only girls" increased with the number of same-sex children in existence before the last child.
It is the belief of many psychotherapists that the birth of the "wrong sex" of child may lead to sex role confusion. Sex role confusion, in turn, is thought to lead to overt homosexuality in some cases and, in others, to psychological difficulties that do not come into the open as homosexual activity. Many psychotherapists believe that although sex role confusion can be produced in several ways, one way is for parents to respond, in substantial degree, to a boy as if he were a girl because they wish he were a girl, or vice versa. While this view is widely held and is based on thoughtful clinical observation, the view has not been tested adequately by controlled research.
Problems of having a child of the
"wrong" sex must be considered in the
context of the whole family constellation

(Färber and Blackman, 1956; Montagu, 1948; Rauf, 1958). In the somewhat parallel case of conceptions unwanted before they occurred, Lieberman (1964, p. 476) opined and Meier (1961, p. 149) found some evidence that the undesirable effects may fall on older (and probably wanted) siblings more heavily than on the new and unwanted arrivals. If the first two or three children are girls, resentment of girl-ness may be felt by parents not only toward the most recent arrival but toward even the first child. If a boy arrives later, he may be unduly preferred in comparison to the other children. The others may be jealous of him. Even though his arrival rounds out the "one of each" desired, this may not correct all the effects of the resentment felt toward the all-girl family before he arrived. Parents may be "forced" into having families larger than they otherwise would, and the capacity to provide an adequate emotional climate may be strained severely. This may have consequences for all family members, including parents and even those of the preferred sex who finally arrive.
Ability to control sex of children might have some psychological disadvantages. Parents might learn to take this power for granted. If plans failed, there might be greater disappointment over the sex of child than if the expectation of controlling sex of child had not been created. Westoff et al. (1961, p. 196) say much the same thing concerning control over the number of children, incidentally. Parents who had had the "wrong" sex of child shortly before new discoveries made control possible might be particularly unhappy with the contrast, although this would be a transitory matter. Couples who disagreed over which sex of child they wanted might fight over the matter, whereas at present "fate" determines the outcome.

Vol. 14, No. 4

Effects of Sex of Offspring

277

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

On balance, however, the psychological advantages would seem to outweigh the disadvantages. We have implied that ability to control sex of child might avoid undesirable psychological effects, including sex role confusion and homosexual activity. Ability to control sex of child would seem to hold definite advantages, and the euthenic effects would seem to be desirable. Parents' sex-of-child preferences may be built upon immature or pathological foundations; but it might nevertheless be psychologically advantageous, both for such parents and for their children, to be able to meet parental preferences. And when one family has three boys and their neighbors next door have three girls, there would seem to be nothing pathological about a wish that things might have been planned more "equitably."
EFFECTS ON SEX RATIOS.,
WITH SOCIAL CONSEQUENCES
Winston (1932) argued that, in a population with no control over sex of child, a preference for boys would lead to a greater proportion of males in the population. Weiler (1959) exploded Winston's reasoning and even argued for a very slight tendency in the opposite direction. But what if humans could control the sex of progeny? A government determined to keep the sex ratio in hand could do so by its control over the services and supplies making choice of sex of child possible.
Rainwater (1960) argues that in the area of family planning humans often have a deep-rooted faith in the "natural." The "natural" in sex ratio would seem to be about equal numbers of boys and girls. Most governments might see the "best" procedure as one which keeps the overall population ratio close to the "natural" balance, even though allowing

individual couples to determine the sex of their children. But what of governments that set out to produce, for example, a preponderance of males? As a hypothetical extreme, a generation of all males would have difficulty reproducing further its own nation. With world population growing as it is, even this hypothetical extreme in one nation would not seem to threaten the continued survival of the human race.
But a sharply changed sex ratio might have sweeping implications for personal, family, and societal life. Polygamy or polyandry might be introduced widely; having children without a marriage union might be increasingly approved. Widespread voluntary or enforced celibacy of the "majority sex" might come into vogue. If the "excess" of one sex were males, as part of a militaristic buildup, males might be increasingly regarded as cannon-fodder, whose very conception had been bound up with this purpose.
We have tried to glance at some of the worst developments that might come with a sharp change in the sex ratio of a nation. But nations which would espouse a policy of producing a preponderance of one sex would probably be an exceptional minority. A government determined to keep the sex ratio approximately equal or at some other level in keeping with sound population planning could do so.
Laws could stipulate, for example, that after a "chance" first birth, parents could come to a government-regulated agency to select the opposite sex of child as their second birth. Or the law could stipulate that after two births of the same sex, parents could interfere with natural processes in choosing the sex of a third. The idea of such bureaucratic control, with occasional scandals in the administration and a black market on

278

Pohlman

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

"boy-pills" or "girl-pills," may be disturbing. But increasing national and international direction of population trends will probably take place in the future anyway, with the mounting fears over population explosions (Pohlman, 1966).
EFFECTS ON TOTAL NUMBER OF BIRTHS
Flanagan (1942, pp. 73-75, Appendix B, Section E) asked several hundred military officers and their wives to imagine how their families would have been altered in size "If predetermination of sex of children were made possible by medical science" and everything else remained constant. Husbands' and wives' replies indicated a mean increase of 0.13 and 0.20 children per family, respectively. But this question was one of 24 having to do with hypothetical situations; 18 of these were answered in terms of leading to larger families. All but 2 or 3 of the 18 registered greater estimated increases in family size than those estimated concerning sex of child. Thus answers may have been given without too much thought, as part of answering a very long questionnaire, and the estimated increase in family size was not much.
Nevertheless 11 percent of the men and 17 percent of the wives thought control of sex of child would have led them to have larger families, and less than 1 percent of either husbands or wives thought it would have led to smaller families. Why? Possibly a couple who would have stopped having children because they were not sure that even another conception would lead to "one of each," or a child of the desired sex, might have had another conception if they could have been certain of having a child of the desired sex. Some in Flanagan's sample might have been thinking of this. Meanwhile they might have

needed to be blind to another possibility: that they might have settled for fewer children if they could have achieved "one of each," or had their boy (or girl), with fewer children. The data of Freedman et al. (1960) suggest such a pattern. But to be aware of this possibility might have required contemplating the non-existence of a child who had become a part of the family. Such a thought, tied in with death-wishes and un-parentlike thoughts, might have been generally repressed.
Therefore, despite the replies of Flanagan's sample, it is our impression that control of sex of child would result in smaller, not larger, families. This prediction can be based on the two kinds of sex preferences noted, (1) for children of a given sex, and (2) for "one of each." If most of the parents in a particular culture preferred children of one sex and it became possible for them to control sex of offspring, births of children of the non-preferred sex might be drastically reduced. This might reduce the total number of births. However, conceivably in a male-exalting culture parents would seize on the ability to have many sons without the risk of daughters, and would have even larger families than otherwise. Or parents might decide to have the same total number of children as otherwise, but to have them be of the "preferred" sex. This might leave the total births approximately the same, although the proportion of each sex would be changed. When these children grew up to become parents there might be a drastic imbalance between the sexes in the reproductive age groups, and possibly fewer reproductive unions and fewer resulting births. These and other factors are complex and conjectural. It is hard to predict the effects on total births of a culture-wide preference for a particular

Vol. 14, No. 4

Effects of Sex of Offspring

279

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

sex, granted the ability to control sex of
child.
The other kind of preference is for at least one of each sex. If parents tend to "keep on trying" until they have at least one child of each sex, they may be forced to have more children than they would otherwise have wanted and had. If, instead of having to have several boys (for example) before getting a girl to make "one of each," parents could proceed planfully to their goal, how much of a resulting reduction in number of births might be expected? Freedman et al. (1960, p. 144) found differences in the tendency to have another child, between those whose children were or were not all of the same sex, which were statistically significant but small. For example:
Among the 266 couples with three children, 55 percent had only boys or only girls among their first two, compared with 47 percent of the 203 couples stopping at two. Among the 102 couples with four children, 31 percent had children of only one sex among the first three, as compared with 23 percent among the 119 couples stopping at three.
Differences of "about the same" magnitude were found for a sub-sample who claimed to have wanted all their conceptions and had none that were accidental (p. 145).
The data just quoted should not be used as an estimate of the number of couples who are or are not disappointed with having all their children of the same sex. For example, of the two-child families, 47 percent contained children who were all of the same sex. Even though these parents did not go on to have another child, this does not mean they were all satisfied with the children they had.
Thus in this American sample, at least, sex preferences played a significant but

small role. Control of sex of child might be expected, using the rationale of preferences for "one of each," to lead to slightly fewer births. However, the amount of reduction in birth rates to be expected on the basis of this rationale would vary sharply with size of desired family. This may be illustrated by a hypothetical situation where the probability (p) of conceiving a boy is always equal to the probability (q) of conceiving a girl. Imagine a population of 1,000 couples who wanted to have only two children apiece if in so doing they could have a boy and a girl, but who would go on having children until they had "one of each." In such a group, control of sex of child would mean two children apiece or 2,000 children; but without such control, using our assumptions and with the expansion of the binomial (p = q - .50), the 1,000 couples would have 3,000 children. Now, if we change just one element in this model, to say instead that couples want three children, with control of sex the 1,000 couples would have 3,000 children; without it, 3,500. The comparable figures with a four-child assumption are 4,000 and 4,250.
In these models the inability of parents to control sex of offspring might be thought of as involving an excess, over what they would otherwise have, of 50 percent with a two-child family size desired, 16.7 percent with a three-child model, and 6.2 percent with a four-child model. The smaller the family size preference, the more chance there would be for control of sex of offspring to bring about reduction in total population. But the same factors that drive family-size preferences down (e.g., financial difficulties) would also tend to make it less likely that couples would go on indefinitely

280

Pohlman

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

having children merely for the luxury of having at least one of each sex.
The models just developed take no account of preferences for a particular sex, but only of preferences for "one of each." Also, the assumption of an equal probability of giving birth to a boy or girl is not quite correct. In a group, boy births are slightly more common than girl births (e.g., Geissler, 1889). Also, there is a very slight tendency for individual couples to have children of a particular sex (Geissler, 1889), so that a couple who has several boys (for example) is more likely to have another boy than if they had had all girls. But the tendencies noted in the last three sentences are small enough that they do not disturb the models seriously; quibbling over such precise accuracy is irrelevant because the preceding and following paragraphs point out sources of error which are so much greater.
In other ways the statistical models are more seriously out of touch with the reality of the present and probably of the foreseeable future. Couples do not stop having children after they have had all they want, as the work of Freedman et al. (1959) clearly demonstrates. Contraception is imprecise and probably will be for some time to come. Some couples are sterile or subfecund. Even though couples might like to have one of each sex, they do not go on trying forever. Human perceptions of "the chances" may be very different from mathematical probabilities, as gambling behavior suggests. Some couples seem to perceive their "luck" concerning sex of children in terms of some sort of personal fate which is dooming their efforts. Finally, sex preferences are only one of the many factors affecting a couple's decisions about family size.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Parents in a number of cultures show preferences for (1) at least one child of each sex, and/or (2) children of a particular sex, often boys. The direct psychological effects of being able to control sex of child in line with preferences would seem to be considerable, for both parents and children, and almost wholly positive. The conception of children of an undesired sex is often undesirable from a mental health standpoint.
It seems likely that ability to control sex of offspring would reduce birth rates somewhat, although the magnitude and even the existence of this predicted relationship is highly conjectural, since the prediction rests on so many different and unquantified variables. A general desire for sons (or daughters) in a particular culture might lead to a drastic imbalance in the sex ratio. This would have many social and psychological consequences. A generation later, such an imbalance might mean a shortage of marriage partners and a resulting reduction in births. But a government determined to keep the overall sex ratio within some "healthy" predetermined limits could do so, while permitting individual couples to have at least one child of each sex.
How the Roman Catholic Church and other religious, political, and other organizations would view control over sex of children is conjectural. Those who carry on research which may make it possible to choose sex of progeny would probably not be kept from their work by either religious authority or fears of undesirable consequences. Nuclear weapons were perfected despite a keen awareness among many researchers of the frightening implications of their work. Recriminations and atonement after the work was done, like much repentance, served more the function of easing the con-

Vol. 14,No. 4

Effects of Sexof Offspring

281

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

sciences of the penitent than of changing what had been done. Scientific curiosity, competition between scientists, and the like, will probably drive researchers on towards means of controlling sex of offspring, whatever the consequences. Perhaps onejob of the social scientist should be that of gazing into his crystal ball while thenatural scientist gazes into his test tube. In this article we have not foreseen a gloomy picture if man becomes able to decide thesexof hisnext child.
REFERENCES
APTEKAR, H., 1931. Anjea: Infanticide, Abortion and Contraception in Savage Society. Goodwin, NewYork.
CLARE, J. E., and C. V. KISER, 1951. Preference for children of given sex in relation tofertility. In P. K. Whelpton and C. V. Kiser (eds.), 1946-1958. Social and Psychological Factors Affecting Fertility. Milbank Memorial Fund, NewYork, pp. 621-673.
DINITZ, S., R. R. DYNES, and A. C. CLARKE, 1954.
Preferences for male or female children: traditional or affectional? Marriage Fam. Liv., 16: 128-130.
FARBER, B., and L. S. BLACKMAN, 1956. Marital
role tensions and number and sex of children. Amer. Sociol. Rev.,21: 596-601. FLANAGAN, J. C., 1942. A study of factors determining family size in a selected professional group. Genetic Psychol. Monographs, 25: 3-99.
FREEDMAN, D. S., R. FREEDMAN, and P. K. WHELP-
TON, 1960. Size of family and preference for children of each sex. Amer. J. Sociol., 66: 141-146.
FREEDMAN, R., P. K. WHELPTON, and A. A. CAMP-
BELL, 1959. Family Planning, Sterility, and Population Growth. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York. GEISSLER, A., 1889. Beiträge zur Frage des Geschlechtsverhältnisses der Geborenen. Zeitschr. K. Sachs. Statist. Bureaus, 35: 1-24. From C. Stern, 1950. Principles of Human Genetics. Freeman, San Francisco, pp. 389396. HARPER, M.,1936. Parental Preference with Respect to the Sex of Children. Master's thesis, Univ. of Chicago. Cited by Clare and Riser, 1951, p. 441. HIMES, N. E., 1936. Medical History of Contraception. Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore. Reprinted, 1963. Gamut, NewYork.

LANDIS, J. T., and M. G. LANDIS, 1963. Building
A Successful Marriage (4th ed.). PrenticeHall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J. LIEBERMAN, J. E., 1964. Preventive psychiatry and family planning. J. MarriageFam., 26: 471-477.
MCMAHAN, C. A., 1951. An empirical test of three hypotheses concerning the human sex ratio at birth in the United States, 19151948. Milbank Mem. Fund Quart., 29: 273293.
MEIER, G., 1961. The effect of unwanted pregnancies on a relief load: An exploratory study. Eugen. Quart., 8: 142-153.
MONTAGU, M. F.A., 1948. Sexorder of birth and personality. Amer. J. Orthopsychiat., 18: 351-353.
POHLMAN, E., 1965. Results of unwanted conceptions: Some hypotheses up for adoption. Eugen. Quart., 12: 11-18.
POHLMAN, E., 1966. Mobilizing social pressures toward small families. Eugen. Quart., 13: 122-127.
POHLMAN, E., 1967a. The Psychology of Birth Planning. Schenkman, Cambridge, Mass.
POHLMAN, E., 1967b. Statistical evidence of rationalization. Psychol. Reports, 20: 1180.
POPULATION COUNCIL, 1964. Turkey: National survey on population. Studies Fam. Planning, No. 5: 1-5.
RAINWATER, L., 1960. And the Poor Get Children. Quadrangle Books, Chicago, Ill.
RAINWATER, L., 1965. Family Design: Marital Sexuality, Family Size, and Family Planning. Aldine, Chicago, Ill.
RAUF, A., 1958. Psychological aspects of family planning. J. Fam. Welfare, 4 (March): 85-91.
SEARS, R. R., E. E. MACCOBY, and H. LEVIN,
1957. Patterns of Child Rearing. Row, Peterson, Evanston, Ill. SHEPS, M. C., 1963. Effects on family size and sex ratio of preferences regarding the sex of children. Population Studies, 17: 66-72. SHETTLES, L. B.,1961. Conception and birth sex ratios: Areview. Obstet. Gynec., 18: 122-130. SHETTLES, L. B., 1968. Time of conception in the menstrual cycle and the sex ratio. In E. Pohlman (ed.), Birth Timing and Spacing: Research and Recommendations. Unpublished manuscript. SLOMAN, S. S., 1948. Emotional problems in "planned for" children. Amer. J. Orthopsychiat., 18: 523-528. WEILER, H., 1959. Sex ratio and birth control. Amer. J.Sociol., 65: 298-299.
WESTOFF, C. F., R. G. POTTER, JR., P. C. SAGI, and
E. G. MISHLER, 1961. Family Growth in Metropolitan America. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton,N.J.
WESTOFF, C. F., R. G. POTTER, JR., and P. C. SAGI,
1963. The Third Child. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, N.J.
WINSTON, S., 1932. Birth control and the sexratio at birth. Amer. J. Sociol., 38: 225-231.

