Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Human biological variation as an adaptive response to the environment
Paul T. Baker
To cite this article: Paul T. Baker (1966) Human biological variation as an adaptive response to the environment, Eugenics Quarterly, 13:2, 81-91, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1966.9987651 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1966.9987651
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 12
View related articles Citing articles: 17 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:28

HUMAN BIOLOGICAL VARIATION AS AN ADAPTIVE RESPONSE TO THE ENVIRONMENT

PAUL T. BAKER
Department of Sociology and Anthropology The Pennsylvania State University

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

Man, as any other animal species that still survives, is adapted to his environment. This statement only signifies that at this point in time, as measured by numbers and energy exchange, man is a successful animal on this planet with no immediate prospects of extinction. Of course, the statement implies much more, since the parameters of the physical and biological environments within which we exist are greater than for any other animal; and if we logically add that distillate of human behavior called culture to the environmental parameters, then the varieties of environment to which groups of men are adapted is truly prodigious compared to other species.
When we inquire into the sources of the great adaptability of our species, two concepts are generally evoked--culture and race. Both of these represent gross generalizations in the semantic sense and consequently represent the poorest of scientific exploratory tools.
Culture can be a useful abstraction when employed for the broad categorization of nonbiologically transmitted human information, but it can never serve as a complete explanation for any unit of human behavior inasmuch as it is biological organisms that are behaving. Thus the accumulated information on how to sew an Eskimo parka is a product of Eskimo culture, but the adaptive value of the parka in arctic cold also depends on the motor skill of the maker and the physiological responses of the wearer.
Race is an equally unsatisfactory conceptual tool. I would not disagree with

Dobzhansky's contention that there exist conglomerates of morphological and genetic traits that permit a valid taxonomic subdivision of man (Dobzhansky, 1962).
Such a classification, however, has limited research use and is often badly abused when the results of a study on one small segment of a race is extrapolated to the whole group without a known basis in physiological functioning. To exemplify valid use and abuse of race as a research tool, cases from environmental physiology may be cited. It has been shown that because of more melanin in the skin of an American Negro, it absorbs more solar radiation than does white skin (Baker, 1958). Since in most classification systems "Negro" always means a high skin melanin, we may generalize that Negroes in a nude condition will absorb more heat from the sun than whites. On the other hand, to cite a possible abuse, it has been found by several investigators that the fingers of American Negro soldiers are, with all other conditions constant, "colder" in ice water than are the fingers of American white soldiers (Adams and Covino, 1958; Iampietro et al., 1959). This appears to be the result of lower warm blood circulation in the Negro hands; but since the causes of this circulatory difference are unknown and may be unrelated to the traits associated with race, it is pure speculation to say that most classificatory "Negroes" would have colder fingers in ice water. Also, since the mechanisms are unknown and no such studies have been performed on

Q 81

82

Baker

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

U.S. Negro females, it cannot even be stated with more than a low degree of probability that American Negro females would test lower than American white females.
From these considerations it appears to me that if we wish to understand how man has adapted to his varied environments and what role his biological variability has played in this adaptation, we must deal in specifics rather than in abstractions such as culture and race.
THE SOURCES OF MAN'S ADAPTATION TO
THE ENVIRONMENT
Man owes his adaptive structure to the evolutionary process, but in many ways it seems to have exceeded in complexity that of any other animal. He, as all other animals, may adapt to a new form of environmental stress by mutational change acted upon by selection with subsequent changes in gene frequency. Indeed, as recent studies have shown, this has probably been more common than had been assumed. However, the enormous range of adaptive mechanisms that man has available are primarily the consequence of the increasing somatic and behavioral plasticity that seems to have occurred throughout the mammalian evolutionary process, culminating at the moment in man.
One of the secular trends in mammalian evolution was the rise in adaptive phenotypic plasticity that increasingly allowed animals to vary their pattern of functioning and behavior in response to the information provided by the environment in which they developed. Man's culture-creating capacity might be considered the inevitable end product of this increasing plasticity. The most apparent aspect of increasing plasticity was the increasing ability to learn, and the most important single attribute for the

development of culture is man's enormous learning capacity. In biological terms this capacity might simply be conceived of as his great ability to pattern his behavior in response to environmental challenges. Of equal consequence for adaptation to diverse environments is man's functional and morphological adaptive plasticity. The functional and morphological plasticity of man is probably most familiar to us in its short-term manifestations. For example, temperature and altitude acclimatization are well-documented examples of modification in the functioning of man that increase his performance capability in the face of new environmental stress. Other examples would be the increase in muscle fibre size that accompanies exercise or the psychological process of accustomization that allows the organism to ignore distracting stimuli in the environment. Perhaps of similar import, but less well studied, are the long-term adaptive changes that occur in human beings when they develop under particular types of environmental stress. For example, children, when they must exist in a caloric deficient environment, can do so for prolonged periods of time by a cessation of growth which, if the deprivation period is not of excessive length, will later be recouped (McCance and Widdowson, 1951). In the same vein, man has the capacity to store calories in the form of fat when he has available "more than adequate" calories. Those stored calories can later be used during periods of short calorie supply. Other examples include the increased size of the lungs and the heart that occurs in individuals who grow up in a high-altitude environment with its low oxygen pressure (Monge, 1948).
Less is known of the possibilities of long-term improvements in physiological function, but possible examples include

Vol. 13, No. 2

Adaptive Response

83

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

the increased tolerance for certain drugs over long exposure.
Thus, if we look closely at the problem of studying human adaptability, we see that man has such a large variety of environmental stresses to which he adapts and such a large variety of mechanisms available to him for adaptation that we are probably dealing with a fairly unique set of interactions in each human population that is studied. More than with any other animal, we must take great care to identify properly the stresses to which a given human population has been exposed and to consider all of the parameters of adaptation man has available to solve the problem of survival in á given environment.
Given the uniqueness of each adaptive pattern, we may still believe that the limitations of the human germ plasm are such that similar partial solutions to adaptive needs will be found over broad population isolates. That such is indeed the case for cultural adaptation seems to be demonstrated by the independent inventions of such material culture items as house forms and agriculture. Biologically, the instances are even more impressive, since the existence of morphological and genetic traits that are clustered enough to permit racial classification indicates a common genetic response to selection. Even the fact that man conforms as well as any species to Allen and Bergman's rules suggests that he has responded to similar environmental stresses by similar adaptive responses (Harrison et al., I964).
In the remainder of this paper, we will overview some small part of the knowledge so far available on man's adaptive responses. Because our knowledge is more precise in this area, the discussion will be limited primarily to physical and biological environmental stresses; and since our primary goal is to examine the

role of man's biological variation in his adaptive structure, the discussion will also be strongly oriented to the biological responses even though these must always be considered in the cultural context.
While the sources of cultural adaptation to stresses remain obscure in the problems of understanding human learning and culture transmission, the sources of biological adaptation can be conceived even though we still do not have available the methods required to partition the biological components of adaptation precisely. As implied earlier in the paper, the sources of biological adaptation may be arbitrarily categorized into at least four interrelated types: psychological accommodation, physiological acclimatization, developmental acclimatization, and genetic adaptation. The functional differentiation between genetic and the other types of adaptation are apparent. However, the psychological accommodation, physical acclimatization, and developmental acclimatization are more arbitrary, since all are part of adaptive plasticity. The differentiation is based on the length of time involved and the discipline differences in perspective.
THEORIES OF GENETIC ADAPTATION
The problem of the relationship between the variability in the genetic structure of human populations and their adaptive significance may be approached from two perspectives: (1) the theoretical relationship established by genetic evolutionary theories, and (2) the demonstrable adaptive value of specific genetic variation in man. Until the end of the 1940's most anthropologists were concerned with the search for nonadaptive inherited traits even though they recognized that many traits might be functional. Indeed, the old goal was to

84

Baker

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

establish a taxonomy of man based on nonfunctional morphological variation so that migration and population admixture could be reconstructed much as the archaeologist reconstructs culture history from pottery designs.
Since this era the geneticist has forcefully pointed out that the body of evolutionary theory derived from genetic studies on other animals does not permit such an interpretation of human variation. Thus, studies of the way human genetic variability relates to human adaptation are essentially confined to the past 15 years.
As will be seen, the well-established relationships remain meager; and it is possible that if the accumulated genetic theories were less conclusive, a majority of human biologists might still hold the view that most genetic variation in man is and was without adaptive significance. Let us, therefore, examine first the nature and strength of this theoretical structure.
EVOLUTIONARY THEORY AND GENETIC
ADAPTATION
At the base lies the simple mathematical theorem generally referred to as the Hardy-Weinberg theorem that points out that the gene randomization process that occurs in bisexually reproducing higher animals will not within itself change the frequency of genes in a population. Of course, as Sewall Wright showed mathematically, the size of the population and the frequency of a gene in a finite population is related to the gene's chances of survival (Wright, 1943). Thus, in very small populations pure chance can lead to the loss of a gene with a fairly low frequency, while a gene with a very high frequency may completely replace its heterozygous partner. Since this is a purely statistical concept, the probability of these occurrences is strictly determined

by population numbers and gene frequencies.
Aside from these statistical models the only possibilities for modifying gene frequencies in a population are (1) mutation and chromosomal abberations; (2) gene flow (in or out of the population); and (3) selection (any nonchance phenomena that lead to the greater or lesser reproduction of a gene). Mutational and chromosomal abberations cannot be evoked as an explanation for the major part of genetic variation in human populations since they are at least similar in kind and frequency for all groups. Without selection or drift to fix variants, no population variation would develop.
Gene flow is meaningless in the overall problem since we are asking the question, "How did differentiation in genetic structure occur within our species?," which, by definition, is or was a breeding unit. Coon (1962) argues that modern man has a history of racial variation that precedes the sapiens form, but even if this proves true, there was genetic overlap. Furthermore, the reasons for the initial variation in genotype must fit into our scheme of genetic evolutionary theory.
Thus, only two explanations remain-- the Sewall Wright genetic drift explanation, or selection. Drift first presented an attractive explanation since man in his hunting and gathering days was a thinly spread animal in very small bands. If we assume that he was then endogamous, there existed a perfect situation for drift effects. Undoubtedly, drift did have some effect. It has been demonstrated, fairly conclusively, to be the cause for some of the variation in other species, and at least one example has been presented with strong evidence for man (Giles, 1965). However, drift is a very unsatisfactory explanation for the

Vol. 13, No. 2

Adaptive Response

85

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

major variations in human population genotypes. For one thing, if early man was endogamous, he should have rapidly formed different species as other endogamous animal populations did. More importantly, the genetic drift theory is a probability theory; so that while the probability of two populations' develop ing a difference in the frequency in one gene due to drift is fairly high, the statistical probability of developing multiple gene differences is progressively lower. Indeed, on the basis of this theorem, the probability of two populations' developing a high frequency difference in even 100 genes over the period of time that our species existed as hunters and gatherers is so low that it may be classified as bordering on the impossible. Even the few major morphological characteristics on which broad racial classifications are based seem to relate to quite a large number of genotype differences, so that one must at the present state of knowledge conclude that drift is an unsatisfactory explanation for most of the genetic differences between human populations.
By a process of elimination we are, therefore, left with the conclusion that most group differences in population genotypes are the result of selection. Since selection acts by increasing the frequency of those genes that improve adaptation while it decreases those which lower adaptation, one is further forced to the conclusion that genotypic differences in human populations represent adaptive responses to the environment.
This does not mean that the genotype of a group is adapted to the environment in which it is now found. Because of the long generation time for man and the rapid changes he has produced in some aspects of his environment through culture formation, a given present-day gene may not have had any adaptive value to

a population for even thousands of years. Once the environment to which a gene has adapted is modified, the persistence of that gene is governed purely by the intensity of selection against it and its dominance characteristics. The sicklemia gene found among U.S. Negroes is an excellent example. Although it is quite clearly maladaptive in the recent environment of the U.S. Negro, selection has not yet eliminated this gene, which was quite adaptive in the malarial environment from which many U.S. Negro genes were derived (Allison, 1955).
The conclusion that population differences in genotypes arose through selection also must not be viewed as proof that any given phenotypic characteristic of a group is or has been adaptive to an environment. As pointed out earlier, the phenotype is for man almost always subject to environmental patterning through the various forms of genetic plasticity. Equally important, most genes affect multiple phenotypic products, while most phenotypic characteristics have multiple gene determinants. Therefore, even when a close relationship exists between genetic inheritance and phenotypic characteristics, the adaptive value of the gene need not be related to any one aspect of the phenotype. As an example, eye color may be cited. The exact inheritance pattern is not known, but it appears to be quite closely related to the genes involved in skin color variation. In such a situation the variation in eye color and skin color may both have adaptive value, but it is equally possible that only variation in one provides adaptive value while the other tags along as a product of the pleiotropic effects of the gene.
The net product of the widely accepted theories that have been outlined is a scientific posture quite different from the two widely popular views. These

86

Baker

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

views assume either (1) that variation
in the genetic structure of human popu-
lations (race) is of prime importance to
a group's ability to function in modern
culture, or (2) that it has no significance
to man's ability to live in any given cul-
ture. Instead, we are inclined to accept
the following as a set of hypotheses to be
tested:
1. Population differences in genotype including gene frequency differences are the product of environmental adaptation (including culture as a part of the environment).
2. The longer a population has lived in a set environment, the greater the probability that their genotypic eccentricities are a product of adaptation to that environment. Sub hypothesis A. Ecologically stable populations will be more likely to show genetic adaptation than ecologically unstable units. B. Genetic differences are more likely to be related to the stable stresses of the environment such as climate and disease than to the more changeable stresses such as those produced by culture.
3. Many phenotypic variations in man are not the product of genetic adaptation.
EVIDENCE FOR GENETIC ADAPTATION
When we turn from theory to the
demonstrable evidence for population
differences in genetic adaptation, the
findings are thin. This does not neces-
sarily imply a poor theory. Instead, it
may at this time be attributed to (1) the
relatively small number of studies that
have been undertaken with the preced-
ing hypotheses, and (2) our lack of knowl-
edge concerning man's genetic system
and the degree to which it is involved
in man's enormous structural, functional,
and behavioral diversity.

Each year a considerable number of new genes are identified in man, and very often they are found to be unequally distributed in human populations. This immediately suggests that they have some adaptive value in those populations where a high frequency exists. Occasionally, such an assumption is supported by strong presumptive evidence, such as the sicklemia-malaria chain (Allison, 1955). In other instances, such as the many links between the abnormal hemoglobins and infectious disease, a direction for future research is indicated (Motulsky, 1960). However, for the majority of identified genes, even those such as the long-known genes underlying the ABO blood types, it has not been possible to even suggest an acceptable adaptive explanation for frequency differences. Perhaps the most striking fact is that biochemical investigators have demonstrated such a wide genetic diversity in man without more than lightly touching on the wide morphological diversity in human populations that was known to have some major genetic determinants before the biochemistry of blood was considered.
At the opposite side of the problem the newly rekindled interest in the sensory and physiological functioning of nonWestern groups is also demonstrating an increasingly large variety of differences in human populations. True, these differences are not of the magnitude that the 19th century scientist conceived or the 20th century "racist" imagines, but the number is great and the differences are often of significant adaptive value to populations in their present or recently past environments. For this increasing list of traits, one of the major problems is the differentiation between the responses related to genetic variation and those produced by adaptive plasticity. For example, it is quite clear that the

Vol. 13, No. 2

Adaptive Response

87

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

warmer temperatures of the Eskimo hand when exposed to cold enhanced his adaptation to the environment in which he lived (Coffee, 1955). On the other hand, the extent of genetic causation in the warmer hand temperatures is not clear. Despite a prodigious literature, the degree to which the different sources of biological adaptation are involved is not clear. It has been demonstrated that psychological accommodation to cold increases the temperature of the fingers when exposed to cold (Fox, 1963). Presumably, this is because anxiety is reduced by repeated exposures. It has also been shown that an acclimatization or training effect occurs, which further produces warmer hands by greater blood flow in most subjects (Egan, 1963). This still does not appear to account for most of the variation. Yoshimura's and Iida's work (1952) showed that northern and southern Japanese have a difference in response after training, so probably there is a developmental factor. It has also been suggested that there is a genetic factor, since U.S. Negro and white soldiers manifest vastly different responses even though they both came from the south (Iampietro et al., 1959). Also, Meehan (1955) showed a striking similarity in twins. Thus, one is inclined to assume a genetic component even though no specific genes have been identified.
It would be most surprising if any specific genes were found associated with the differences in hand temperature upon extreme cold exposures. From what is known of the mechanisms involved, gene action would be indirect, involving such links as hand size, the size of arterial anastomoses, forearm size and insulation, neural pathways, and even brain functions. When attempts at genetic analysis have been made on these possible intermediates, they have consistently yielded the same type of par-

tial genotype causation answer. This is easily explainable by the multiple genes involved in each of these phenotypic characteristics, plus, of course, all the levels of plasticity.
As the preceding discussion has emphasized, evidence for genetic adaptation has been emanating from two sources, but the two sources are at this point not making a great deal of contact. The geneticist wishing to test the hypothesis that genetic variation is the product of adaptation, must trace the known gene through the almost impossible chain that ties it to morphology, function, and behavior; while the psychophysiologist or environmental physiologist has the equally difficult task of tracking the behavior or function with demonstrable adaptive value through the chain of its environmental determinants to the genetic core. In these two lines of inquiry it is not surprising that the most conclusive cases have contained the simplest links. Thus, the adaptive nature of genotype and gene frequency variation have been best demonstrated between simply inherited hemoglobin types and the diseases that attack hemoglobin, and the best case for demonstrating a genetic component in adaptive behavior or function is where the function is closely associated with morphology, such as climate tolerance and body morphology (Hammel, 1964).
Probably the greatest danger to the understanding of human adaptation comes from the fact that these simple relationships are the easiest to establish and, therefore, lead to the conclusion that they are the most important ones. Indeed, this has happened with geneticists concentrating their efforts on the study of infectious disease while the environmental physiologist has concentrated on temperature. In such important environmental stress areas as nutrition,

88

Baker

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

culture, sensory and motor requirements, altitude and radiation very few attempts have been made to link adaptive behavior and function to genetic factors. Yet, there is no theoretical reason to doubt that selection due to these forms of stress was at least as significant in producing genetic variation as was temperature and infectious disease.
BEHAVIORAL AND SOMATIC PLASTICITY AS
ADAPTATION
It is surprising to find that despite an extensive literature on man's adaptative capacity in the presence of stress there does not exist a commonly accepted terminology that differentiates the nature or the types of adaptive responses. If for the moment we ignore the vast literature that deals with intelligence as an adaptive response and deal only with the more specific functions studied by the physiologist, we find that the areas of terminological agreement are still too few. If we use Prosser (1964) as a guide, physiologists would accept the concept of a stress and a response to it on the part of the organism. The responses that enhance the organism's functioning in the presence of stress are adaptive responses; these are divided into genetically determined adaptive variations and environmentally induced responses called acclimation, or acclimatization. The geneticists would also point out that acclimatization responses are built into the genetic structure; or, as Prosser states it, "the genotype determines the 'capacity' of an organism to adapt." To the physiologist the concept of acclimatization appears adequate to cover all of the non-genetic changes in man that enhance adaptation. However, the terminological problem may very well prevent the physiologist, psychologist, medical scientist, geneticist, anthropologist, etc. from

realizing that they often are involved in the study of very closely related facets of the same problem.
In the majority of psychological studies, for example, an improvement in the human organism's adaptation to the environment is called adjustment, accommodation, or perhaps adaptation. If the word "acclimatization" appears, it must be rare, indeed. In the field of human growth and development the language of the evolutionary geneticist or physiologist is even more alien. The studies of psychological development use the language of psychology, while in the area of physical growth the concept of growth as an adaptive process is so alien that almost no terminology exists. It was with the terminological confusion in mind that a three-way breakdown in adaptive phenotypic plasticity was suggested earlier in this paper.
It may be logically argued that there is no essential difference in the mechanisms that enhance adaptation through psychological accommodation, physiological acclimatization, and developmental acclimatization. All are based on the inherited plasticity of man; and all depend upon environmental stress, which feeds back through the human nervous system to enhance the functioning of the organism in the presence of a given stress, There is, perhaps, a time factor difference, since the three categories of adaptation require progressively longer developmental time. However, the major point is the reminder that whether one is studying the changes in pain threshold or the effect of altitude on the growth of human lungs, all may be viewed as part of man's enormous adaptive capacity and may be profitably considered within the framework of evolutionary adaptational theory.
Perhaps the most difficult aspect of studying phenotypic plasticity is the pro-

Vol. 13, No. 2

Adaptive Response

89

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

cess of distinguishing between adaptive and maladaptive responses to stress. In most cases the critical question is, "adaptive to what?" The physiologist often has no problem. If he has exposed individuals to a high heat stress, then any response that reduces the strain on the temperature regulation system and enhances work performance is adaptive. On the other hand, it is not so clear to the psychologist that a reduction in the pain sensation with chronic exposure represents a reduction of strain, and the situations in which it would enhance performance must be carefully defined.
For this reason, the psychologist has been quite sparing with the label "adaptive," and in sensory systems such as hearing a considerable difference of opinion is found on whether a given change in response to a sound should be called "masking," "fatigue," or "adaptation." Most of this problem is not meaningful when the researcher is considering adaptive responses in relation to a specific stress. For a hungry hunter in the woods, identification of the sounds of a food animal among the myriad sounds of the forest is adaptive and would be fixed by evolution whether it conforms to the psychologist's definition of fatigue, masking, or adaptation. Indeed, it appears that the precise reason why the terminology of adaptation is so confused is the lack of evolutionary and selection concepts in its usage by the psychophysiologist and even most other physiologists. Until very recent years, the search has always been for the universal changes that improved performance or function. Individual differences were ignored when encountered, and the testing of different human populations was seldom attempted. This contrasts strangely with the psychology of tests and measurements where consideration of the individual and group variation has been paramount, while the

hopes of establishing the underlying reasons for the variation were minimal.
POPULATION VARIATION IN ADAPTIVE
RESPONSES
As noted in the section on genetic adaptation, two methods are available for the discovery of population differences in adaptive capacity. The one involves relating known gene frequency variations to the adaptive requirements of the environment. The second involves the actual measurement and comparison of the functional capacities of human populations in the presence of a given stress. Once a population difference has been established in functional capacity, the difficult problem of sorting out the genetic from the different forms of plasticity sources-of-adaptation begins. But first there must be the test for functional differences. In those cases where functional differences have been investigated, the population differences have usually proven more substantial than anticipated. Thus, Motulsky (1960) showed that different populations show enormous differences in death rates from common infectious diseases. The environmental physiologist has also discovered a quite broad variation in population responses to physical environmental stresses such as temperature and altitude. Even in the area of nutrition it is now widely accepted that the nutritional needs of different human populations are not uniform (Grande, 1964).
Of course, knowledge in these areas is quite fragmentary, and often the adaptive significance of population variation is not apparent. Hopefully, the Human Adaptability Project of the International Biological Program will provide the stimulus for a rapid expansion of information in these areas. I would, therefore, like to end this brief overview with

90

Baker

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

a special emphasis on the study of population differences in sensory and motor capabilities. The historical and travel literature is replete with comments on the special sensory and motor skills of primitive popoulations. Yet, our scientific knowledge on the subject is negligible. The few studies that have been made have suggested that there may be dramatic differences in the visual (Mann, 1966) and auditory (Rosen et al., 1962) characteristics of different populations. We have essentially no knowledge about the possibilities of other sensory differences or motor skills. I would not presume at this time to suggest whether there exist population genetic differences, but I would be surprised if there did not exist significant population variations in most of the sensory and motor characteristics. Certainly, the testing of populations would be an important contribution to our knowledge of how human biological variability contributes to adaptation.
CONCLUSIONS
Many readers of this article may at this point feel that they have been exposed to a great deal of theory and generalities about how man's biological variation is related to his adaptive capacity but to very little firm data. The author is sympathetic to this view and refers the reader to The Biology of Human Adaptability (Baker and Weiner, 1966) for a survey of factual knowledge on this subject as viewed by geneticists and human biologists. The Handbook of Physiology section entitled "Adaptation to the Environment" (Dill et al., 1964) provides a comprehensive coverage from the viewpoint of physiology.
I have not attempted a summarization of this information for two major reasons: (1) the mass of material is too great

for an article of this length; and (2) the
information is too fragmentary to con-
struct an overall pattern at this time.
The purpose, therefore, has been, not
factual summary, but, instead, to provide
a progress report on the scientific pro-
ductivity of studying human biological
variability as the product of adaptation
in the evolutionary sense.
Viewed in terms of an interim report,
what conclusions can be reached? In my
opinion, the following seem justified.
1. The concept that most genotypic differences in human populations is the result of adaptation to differing environments has emerged as a dominant theory.
2. The phenotypic variation in the behavior, physiological function, and morphology of human populations may very often be "caused" by adaptation. Thus the search for the causes of racial variation, differences in the physiological and psychological functioning of groups, as well as cultural variations can be profitably pursued from the framework of evolutionary adaptation.
3. The phenotypic adaptations of man contain a high environmental patterning component. Thus, geneticists would do well to broaden the base from which they search for genetic adaptation, while psychophysiologists and environmental physiologists would profit in their understanding of the sources of human adaptability by the design of studies that would allow the demonstration of developmental acclimatization and genetic adaptation.
Finally, I must note that popular ques-
tions such as whether race differences in
intelligence exist, and if so, are they cul-
tural or genetic in origin, are not mean-
ingful questions at the present state of
adaptational theory or evidence. At this
time we cannot even state with certainty
the degree of genetic versus environ-
mental patterning involved in the pre-
sumably adaptive variation in hand tem-
perature; therefore, to debate seriously
the genetic versus environmental pattern-

Vol. 13,No. 2

Adaptive Response

91

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

ing involved in man's total adaptive be-
havioral capacity (a common definition
of intelligence) in a variety of environ-
mental settings is inappropriate as a
scientific endeavor.
REFERENCES
ADAMS, T., and B. G. COVINO, 1958. Racial variations to a standardized cold stress. J. Appl. Physiol., 12: 9-12.
ALLISON, A. C., 1955. Aspects ofpolymorphism in man. Cold Spring Harbor Symposium, Quant. Biol, 20:239-252.
BAKER, P. T., 1958. Racial differences in heat tolerance. Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop., 16: 287-305. and J. S. WEINER (eds.), 1966. The Biology of Human Adaptability. Oxford University Press, Oxford and New York.
COFFEE, M. F., 1955. "A Comparative Study of Young Eskimo and Indian Males withAcclimatized White Males." In Ferrer (ed.), Cold Injury. J. Macy Foundation, NewYork.
COON, C. S., 1962. The Origin of Races. Alfred A. Knopf, New York.
DILL, D. B., E. F. ADOLPH, and C. G. WILBUR
(eds.), 1964. Handbook ofPhysiology, Sect. 4, "Adaptation to the Environment." American Physiological Society, Washington, D.C. DOBZHANSKY, T. H., 1962. Mankind Evolving. Yale University Press, New Haven and London. EGAN, C.J., 1963. Local vascular adaptations to cold inman. Fed. Proc., 22:547-551. Fox, R. H., 1963. Comment following "Local vascular adaptations to cold in man" by C. J. Egan. Fed. Proc., 22: 952. GILES, EUGENE, 1965. Anthropological significance of recent New Guinea genetic studies. Amer. J.Phys. Anthrop., 23:326. GRANDE, FRANCISCO, 1964. "Man Under Caloric Deficiency." In D. B.Dill et al. (eds.), Handbook of Physiology, Sect. 4, "Adaptation to the Environment." American Physiological Society, Washington,D.C.

HAMMEL, T . H., 1964. "Terrestrial Animals in Cold: Recent Studies of PrimitiveMan." In D. B. Dill et al. (eds.), Handbook of Physiology, Sect. 4, "Adaptation to the Environment." American Physiological Society, Washington, D.C.
HARRISON, G. A., J. S. WEINER, J. M. TANNER, and
N. A. BARNICOT, 1964. Human Biology. Oxford University Press, New York and Oxford.
IAMPIETRO, P. F., R. F. GOLDMAN, E. R. BUSKIRK,
and D. E. BASS, 1959. Responses of Negro and white males to cold. J. Appl. Physiol., 14: 798-800. MANN, IDA, 1966. Culture, Race, Climateand Eye Disease. Charles C Thomas, Springfield, Ill.
MCCANCE, R. A., and W. M. B. WIDDOWSON,
1951. The German background studies of undernutrition, Wuppertal, 1946-49. Med. Res. Counc. Spec. Rep. (London) 275: 1-20. MEEHAN, J, P., 1955. Individual and racial variation in a vascular response to a cold stimulus. Milit.Med., 116: 330-334.
MONGE, CARLOS, 1948. Acclimatization in the
Andes: Historical Confirmation of "Climate Aggression" in the Development of Andean Man. Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore. MOTULSKY, A. G., 1960. "Metabolic Polymorphisms andtheRole of Infectious Diseases in Human Evolution." In G. W.Lasker (ed.), The Processes of Ongoing Human Evolution. Wayne State University Press, Detroit. PROSSER, C. L., 1964. "Perspectives of Adaptation: Theoretical Aspects." In Dill et al. (eds.), Handbook of Physiology, Sect. 4, "Adaptation to the Environment." American Physiological Society, Washington, D.C.
ROSEN, SAMUEL, M. BERCMAN, D. PLESTER, A.
EL. MOFTY, and M. H. SATTI, 1962. Presby-
cusis study of a relatively noise-free population in the Sudan. Ann.Otol., 71: 727-743.
WRIGHT, SEWALL, 1943. Isolation by distance. Genetics, 28: 114.
YOSHIMURA, H., and T. IIDA, 1952. Studies on the
reactivity of the skin vessels to extreme cold, Part 2: Factors governing individual reactivity on theresistance to frostbite. Jap. J. Physiol., 2: 177-185.

