Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Le pronostic génétique en medecine
P. Dodinval
To cite this article: P. Dodinval (1962) Le pronostic génétique en medecine, Eugenics Quarterly, 9:2, 91-94, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1962.9987509 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1962.9987509
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

Genetic Counseling

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

Le pronostic génétique en medecine*

In recent years a growing interest in human genetics has developed. The family studies of genetic diseases increase our knowledge of their modes of transmission and their pathogenesis.
Certainly the majority of afflictions seen each day have their pathology influenced by environmental factors or by life itself, taken in the broad sense. However, each of us knows of the frequent tragic cases of families affected by the birth of one or sometimes several children with malformations. Many of these cases are caused by unfavorable genetic conditions. People are less aware that 25% of the exemptions from military service in Belgium for medical reasons are due to mental defects. One doesn't appreciate that a good share of the patients in institutions for the mentally ill and for deafmutes bear the burden of an unfortunate heredity.
Our means of influencing the genetic illnesses in a direct manner are still very poor. However, if cures are frequently impossible and amelioration of the condition is difficult, it is all the more important to try to prevent the hereditary affliction by estimating the risks of the appearance of a physical, phychological, or biochemical abnormality and to dissuade, within reasonable limits, the marriage of nance's or the reproduction by married persons, if the danger of defective offspring is too high. The difficulty
*A translation and abstract of a paper entitled, "Le pronostic génétique en medecine" and published in vol. 16, pp 410-415, 1961 of the Revue Medicale de Liege. Translation by Richard and Meredith Hill, Dight Institute of Human Genetics, University of Minnesota.

of counseling where such emotional or moral problems exist in the midst of the family is obvious. It is necessary, therefore, to give the prognosis with circumspection and to study the genetic background of each case in detail.
The classical schemes of heredity (dominance, recessiveness, sex-linkage) are often easily recognized in the genealogies of certain families and the genetic prognosis is thus facilitated.
Very frequently, however, even after constructing the family tree, one will still be ignorant of the exact way in which an anomaly is transmitted in a particular family. We will, therefore, consider two situations.
1. The anomaly, for example, essential epilepsy, has a complex mechanism of transmission not yet clarified in the majority of cases, though it behaves in the "familial" fashion. In this case it is necessary to utilize empiric risk figures obtained from a large number of families. Thus according to von Vershueur (1959) the probability that the child of an epileptic will also be affected is between three and six per cent while the frequency is about half of one per cent for the general population. The actual risk in a particular family is unknown and could be higher or lower than the empiric risk figures obtained from family studies.
2. There may exist several modes of transmission of a given trait in different groups of families. Thus retinitis pigmentosa generally behaves as a recessive but sometimes also as a dominant or in other families it may be sex-linked. These

91

92 Genetic Counseling

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

different possibilities must be reviewed and one must calculate the risk for each of them. This will give the maximum and minimum risks and it will often be impossible to choose between them.
The difficulties of prognosis are increased by incomplete dominance, variable expressivity, and the existence of possible phenocopies which produce congenital malformations which are not hereditary.
Counseling at the Institute of Human Genetics at the University of Geneva is directed by Professor D. Klein. The number of consultations increases each year and had exceeded the sixtieth case at the end of 1960. Let us illustrate by some cases recently examined at this Institute.
FIRST EXAMPLE: FIRST COUSINS
A frequent request for counseling comes from related persons who wish to marry. Thus, a young lady of 19 and a young man of 25 were engaged and were afraid to marry because they were first cousins. They wanted to know the danger that faced their eventual descendants. They were both in good health and their genealog:"al tree did not indicate any defects in their family. The couple are children of twin sisters, probably dizygotic.
Because of the consanguinity of their future marriage, the risk of their children displaying maladies or genetic malformations is higher than for a marriage between unrelated persons. In effect, first cousins have relatively close common ancestors (usually two, the grandparents). There exists a larger probability than for an unrelated couple that they each possess at least one identical pathological gene, provided by one or the other of the ancestors, in common. Consequently, both can transmit this gene to their chil-

dren. If the trait is recessive, the coming together of these two identical pathologic genes will create the homozygous condition in their descendant with expression of the disease (theoretically 25% of the children).
An objection is frequently raised in such consultations with first cousins: is the risk really there if no genetic diseases have been present in the living or dead members of the family?
The answer is simple: You know that a trait may skip many generations while it is transmitted by the heterozygous carriers without any phenotypic manifestation.
One can easily calculate the theoretical increased risk that the descendants of consanguineous parents (here, first cousins) run.
Assume that a recessive trait is present in one person per thousand in the population. It can be calculated for this frequency that the risk for first cousins is 2.8 times that for nonrelatives. If the frequency of the disease in the population is only 1 in 10,000, the calculated risk for the cousins will be about six times greater than for nonrelatives.
Let us consider the general case. According to Reed (1955), one newborn in 65, about 1.5%, shows or develops during infancy an important anomaly; this figure is for the general population. For first cousins, the risk would be about three per cent if we agree with Muller (1950) that each person in the population carries at least eight morbid recessive genes. The average risk is thus doubled for first cousins.
In the case at hand should we advise against marriage? Certainly not, because the danger of mental trauma due to separation of the couple is much greater than the probability of having a child with a malformation.

Genetic Counseling

93

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

(Editor's note: If the twin sisters were monozygotic twins rather than dizygotic, the young man and young woman would be half brother and half sister, genetically.)
SECOND EXAMPLE: ESSENTIAL EPILEPSY
A family tree was constructed for a young lady 23 years old who suffered an attack of idiopathic epilepsy about every six months. The attacks began when she was about 12 years of age. She wished to marry a young man who was not related to her and whose family showed no defect. She was concerned about the danger of having an epileptic child.
Among her close relatives there wasan uncle and a first cousin on her father's side who had essential epilepsy. In this family the anomaly seemed to be transmitted as an irregular dominant.
In case of complete dominance, 50% of the children of the patient theoretically would be affected. As the penetrance is incomplete in about half of the persons involved, the risk of having an affected child is about 25%. This probability is high enough so that the marriage should be discouraged. It is clear that the risk of 25% is much higher than one would have given in the absence of the pedigree (three to six per cent previously mentioned).
THIRD EXAMPLE: MENTALRETARDATION
A couple has had three daughters of which the last, three years old, has pronounced mental retardation. The other two children have normal intelligence. The paternal grandmother suffers from severe epilepsy. There are no malformations in the family. What is the risk of a fourth child being mentally retarded?
No obstetrical or postnatal etiological factor was known. The mother had not had any infectious diseases such as ru-

bella during her pregnancy. Therefore, a genetic origin of the retardation should be considered. This opinion is reinforced by the fact that one frequently encounters cases of epileptic and mental retardation in the same family, as is seen here.
Due to our ignorance of the mode of heredity we can only utilize the empiric risk figure for a subsequent appearance of a retarded child which has been estimated to be about 15%,because neither parent is affected (Reed, 1955). This risk would be ± 4 0 % if one of the parents were affected and ± 90% if both parents were mentally deficient.
In this case, the risk of 15%appears to be high enough so that the parents, who already have three children of which two are normal, should avoid giving birth to a fourth child.
FOURTH EXAMPLE: DEAF-MUTISM
Miss Z, 17 years old, consults the Genetics Service to know what risk she has of giving birth to deaf-mute children. Her mother and a maternal aunt are affected with deaf-mutism. Another aunt as well as her grandfather on the maternal side are hard of hearing. Miss Z's father has been deaf since an attack of meningitis when she was one year and a half old. Finally, Miss Z's brother has a slight auditory deficit.
The trait seems to be transmitted as a recessive, as is the case for the majority of deaf-mutes. The girl's mother is therefore homozygous and her two children are certainly carriers of the trait. Miss Z has a normal audiogram but as we have seen, her brother is slightly deaf: this symptom might be interpreted as being a manifestation of heterozygosity.
Miss Z is engaged to a young manwho is not a relative and who shows no abnormalities.
This fellow would have the same prob-

94 Genetic Counseling

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

ability of being a carrier for the trait of deaf-mutism as the frequency of heterozygotes in the population. DeReynier (1956) has shown that the frequency of deaf-mutism in Switzerland is 0.1%. The frequency of the gene is the square root of 0.1%, about three per cent. Therefore, three per cent times two equals six per cent, the probability that the man is a heterozygote (calculations based on the Hardy-Weinberg law). Finally, the union of two heterozygotes should produce an affected child in one quarter of the cases. Thus, one quarter times six per cent gives 1.5% as the risk of an affected child, a risk of little importance. Miss Z can marry with excellent chances of having normal children.
The cases we have just considered are only a few examples chosen from situations of which some pose difficult problems for the geneticist. Often several different genetic possibilities must be considered and one must always consider the details of the expression of the trait in the pedigree. One must not consider the laws of heredity in a stereotyped fashion and their use must be adapted to each specific case.
Another important consideration is that of the psychology of the consultants. The genetic counselor can instruct an individual very quickly about the unchangeable character of a genetic trait with which he or his children are affected. The manner of accepting that which may be a verdict can have either beneficial or unfortunate consequences. Re-

garding this, we recall a family where
several members were affected with reti-
nitis pigmentosa beginning generally
during adolescence and ending with
blindness at about 40 to 50 years of age.
One of the members of this family, 34
years old, is a fitter and the progression
of the symptoms of the disease will soon
prevent him from doing this work. Ad-
vised of the situation, he has learned the
trade of a masseur while he can still see,
which will permit him to earn a living
later on when his visual acuity will be
greatly reduced.
In human genetics, like everywhere else in medicine, there is the problem of telling the truth about the disease to the patient. As Stern (1960) has written, it is not sufficient to tell the truth, it is necessary to tell it compassionately. To state the facts, so that the patient can accept them, is the difficult role of the physician. It is also the duty of the geneticist in counseling the patients.
P. DODINVAL
REFERENCES
DAHLBERG, G., 1948. Mathematical methods for population genetics. (Ed.) S. Karger, Bale, New York.
MULLER, H. J., 1950. Am. J. Human Genet., 2: 111-176.
REED, S. C., 1955. Counseling in Medical Genetics. (Ed.) W. B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia and London.
DEREYNIER, J. P., 1956. ConfiniaNeurol., 16: 223230.
STERN, C., 1960. Principles of Human Genetics. (Ed.) W. H. Freeman and Company, San Francisco and London. 2nd Edition.
VON VERSCHUER, O., 1959. Genetik des Menschen. (Ed.) Urban und Schwarzenberg, Munich, Berlin.

