Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Behavior measurement and population change
John G. Loehlin
To cite this article: John G. Loehlin (1966) Behavior measurement and population change, Eugenics Quarterly, 13:4, 302-305, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1966.9987683 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1966.9987683
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:29

BEHAVIOR MEASUREMENT AND POPULATION CHANGE*

JOHN G. LOEHLIN
University of Texas Austin, Texas

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

As a psychologist considering the general topic of research on population quality, I am led naturally to two questions: First, what can the psychologist contribute to such research? And second, what is his potential payoff from work in this area? These questions arise because the natural unit of study for most psychologists is the individual, not the population, and so population research tends to be of peripheral interest. However, a population is composed of individuals, and insofar as the behavior of these individuals is relevant to the variables being investigated, the psychologist should be of some use. And insofar as population research yields data relevant to psychological hypotheses, the psychologist should be able to benefit from his participation in it.
The first part of the title of my comments--behavior measurement--refers to that competence of the psychologist which seems to me most likely to be of use in research on populations. The second part of the title--population change--describes the kind of study which seems to me most likely to yield data of interest to the psychologist. Let me amplify each of these points briefly, beginning with behavior measurement.
Most psychologists are more interested in explaining behavior than measuring it, just as most physicists are more interested in their neutrons and protons than in the apparatuses they contrive for tracking their movements. But if either
*A paper presented at a symposium on Population Quality: Issues and Research, at the Population Association of America meetings, April 29, 1966.

physicist or psychologist is at all of an
empirical bent, he must spend an un-
conscionable amount of time with the
tools of his trade--the measurement
techniques, methods, and devices neces-
sary to pin down the behavior of his
elusive subject matter.
Thus for the last hundred years, more
or less, a wide variety of psychologists
for a wide variety of reasons have been
concerned with the measurement of
various aspects of behavior. It may be
instructive simply to list some of the
different areas in which psychologists
have been at work measuring away. (I'll
stick to work with humans, although
obviously many fascinating problems--
both of behavior measurement and pop-
ulation research--exist for other species.)
Here, then, are some of the things
psychologists have tried to measure:
1. Sensory capacities. Anywhere from five to a dozen senses (depending on your tastes in classification) with several measurable sensitivities in each--dozens in audition and vision. Plus preferences--for colors, tastes, smells, etc.
2. Perceptual abilities and preferences. The study of perception has been a bulwark of classical experimental psychology. The perception of space, time, and movement, optical illusions, color and brightness contrasts and constancies, patterning and grouping, afterimages and aftereffects, and many more--each with a number of measurable aspects.
3. Intellectual abilities. In addition to general intelligence, there are tests of a variety of broad abilities: verbal, numerical, spatial, induc-

302

Vol. 13, No. 4

Behavior Measurement

303

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

tive and deductive reasoning--plus dozens of specialized capacities from ideational fluency to mechanical comprehension. 4. Learning and remembering. Tests of individual differences in learning, memory, imagery, and association, plus tests for many specific kinds of information. 5. Motor skills and coordination. A range of measurable abilities, from whole-body strength and skill to the fine dexterities of hand, eye, and speech movements. 6. Motivation, emotion, and temperament. Clinical and personality psychologists have developed hundreds of personality questionnaires, rating scales, and projective tests in an effort to measure behavior dimensions ranging from needs, such as those for sex or achievement, to emotional dispositions like anxiety and hostility, to temperament traits like introversion, vigor, or impulsivity. 7. Interpersonal and social behavior. The whole range of behavior tendencies toward other persons and social groups: dominance, autonomy, leadership, conformity; cooperation and competition; sociability and shyness; imitation and identification. 8. Attitudes, interests, values. The direction of the individual toward particular aspects of his physical and social environment--ranging from broad value orientations like esthetic or religious to interests in specific occupations, hobbies, and recreations.
Thus, obviously, studies of popula-
tion quality need not focus exclusively
on one or two behavioral variables--
there are lots of possibilities.
Now to return to population change.
I would suggest that studies of this sort
are more likely than most demographic
studies to involve hypotheses concern-
ing the behavior of individuals, and
hence particularly likely to be of interest
to psychologists. The behavior of in-
dividuals may be of concern in such

studies in two rather different ways. First, some studies may examine behavior changes in a population for their own interest. A behavioral variable, such as intelligence, is measured in a population at two or more points in time. The interest may simply be in determining what changes are occurring--whether the average IQ is falling--or it may be in testing hypotheses about the effects on behavior of certain conditions in the population, such as increasing urbanization or a change in child-rearing theories.

The second, somewhat different way in which individual behavior may be of interest in a population study is where the behavior serves as independent rather than as dependent variable--where one looks at certain behaviors as possibly leading to population changes, rather than studying changes in the behaviors themselves. Mate selection, suicide, and attitudes toward large families are examples of behaviors that might be of interest for their effects on a population.

I don't propose to review the huge

literature on population change. Instead

I'll just cite a couple of examples in

order to raise a point or two for possible

later discussion.

i

The first will be in the first category-- studies in which changes in some aspect of behavior are measured over time. It is relatively easy in such studies to demonstrate that some sort of change has taken place--it tends to be a bit harder to interpret what has happened. I will take as illustration some data on Word Association Test norms recently reviewed by Jenkins and Palermo (Jenkins and Palermo, 1965). This is the familiar business where subjects are presented with a list of words, one at a time, and asked to respond to each with the first word that comes to mind. University of Minnesota sophomores are responding

304

Loehlin

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

differently now then they were in 1927. Actually the changes are not overwhelming--some 70 of the 100 words on the Kent-Rosanoff test had the same most popular associate in 1960 as they did in 1927--but the changes that have taken place are of a systematic nature. A few examples are shown in Table 1.
On the whole, as in these examples, the shifts seem to be towards the concrete and the specific: from superordinates (butterfly-insect) to fellow-members of a class (butterfly-moth). From synonyms (trouble-sorrow)to descriptive adjectives (trouble-bad). From the general (stoveheat) to the particular (stove-hot). Further, this appears not to be just a peculiarity of Minnesota sophomores. The authors review data from five other U.S. studies with this test conducted between 1910 and 1960, some with non-college groups, which appear to support such a trend.
Here then is a behavioral change-- how is it to be interpreted? And now, of course, we are confronted with the problem so characteristic of studies of this sort: in natural populations a great many variables tend to change together over time, and isolating the critical ones is difficult. In the present case, the authors speculate that the observed change in word associations may reflect a change in attitude toward test-taking in our society. It is known that response changes of the kind observed can be produced by requiring faster performance on the test. The same instructions were used in 1927 and 1960, but maybe subjects have come to react to them differently over the years. But since many

changes--in the mass communication media, in educational practices, in rolemodels--have also taken place over this period in this country, other hypotheses are obviously possible; and even the present one raises as many questions as it settles. (For example, if subjects are responding faster, is it because they are more highly motivated these days, or less?)
However, there is no need to worry the point. The same sort of comments could be made about most studies where the "same" behavior is measured in a population sample at different points in time. This tends to be only the start, not the end, of research.
Let me turn briefly to the second category of studies, where behavior is taken as independent variable rather than dependent; as cause rather than effect. Here let me take as my example research on assortative mating, the tendency of individuals to marry others who resemble them in various respects. The majority of studies in the U.S. population have obtained positive correlations between spouses on most variables measured (see, e.g., Spuhler, 1962): a few fairly representative correlations from the many reported in the literature are height, +.28; eyecolor, '+.26; years of education, +.40; IQ, '+.47; neurotic tendency, '+.20; attitude toward Communism, + .58. On some of these variables, e.g., attitudes or neurotic tendency, the similarity could in part be a result of marriage, rather than associated with mate selection, but there is some evidence suggesting that

TABLE 1

CHANGES IN RESPONSE TO WORD ASSOCIATION TEST, 1 9 2 7 - 1 9 6 0 .

The most popular response to baby changed from child in 1927 to cry in 1960

blue " color " sky

"

cabbage "

vegetable " lettuce "

comfort "

ease " soft

Vol. 13, No. 4

Behavior Measurement

305

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

this is probably not a seriously contaminating factor (Kelly, 1955).
Now if positive assortadve mating exists in a population, what consequences are likely? Some of the genetic consequences have been deduced by Fisher (1918), Wright (1921), and others. A number of variables need to be taken into account, e.g., the number of genes affecting the trait, the presence of dominance or interaction, the heritability of the trait, the degree to which selection is based on phenotype or genotype, the size of the correlation between mates, and so on. Let us assume that we are concerned with selection based on phenotype--the spouse's manifest qualities, not her family--and with multiple-gene traits, which most normal behavior traits are thought to be, and that genetic dominance and interaction are within reasonable limits. Under such conditions the principal genetic effect of assortative mating will be to increase the variance of the trait, while leaving its average value unchanged. With a trait of low heritability the effect on variance of a moderate marital correlation will be trifling. But with a trait of fairly high heritability and substantial marital correlation, like intelligence in the U.S. population, the genetic effect of assortative mating on variance will be appreciable. Fisher's or Wright's equations, entered with typical values of observed IQ correlations, suggest an increase in variance on the order of 20 or 30% over that expected under random mating.
What about possible environmental effects of assortative mating--of particular interest to a psychologist? Here theory is less explicit, but common sense suggests much the same expectation as for the genetic effects: no change in the average level, but an increase in variance as the leveling effect of parental differences diminishes.

If the genetic and environmental effects of assortative mating are indeed roughly parallel, then we can make the prediction of an increase in variance under assortative mating regardless of the heritability of a given trait. But by the same token, any observation we may make on the relation between population variance and degree of assortative mating will be entirely uninformative with respect to genetic versus environmental hypotheses. And this, of course, restates what we have said already: in natural situations the separation of variables is not easy.
To summarize, then: Yes, the interests of the population researcher and the psychologist may come to a common focus in population studies that involve hypotheses about individual behavior, whether the behavior is studied as a mediator of population change or as the change itself. But extensive data and powerful techniques of analysis will be needed to untangle the complex of variables occurring in natural situations sufficiently for the joint effort to be of much use to either party. Finally, I would like to re-emphasize the very great diversity in the measurable aspects of human behavior. The question, What is human quality? has a many-dimensioned answer, and it behooves us to remember this in our research.
REFERENCES
FISHER, R. A., 1918. The correlations between relatives on the supposition of Mendelian inheritance. Trans. Roy. Soc. (Edinburgh), 52: 399-433.
JENKINS, J. J., and D. S. PALERMO, 1965. Further
data on changes in word-association norms. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol., 1: 303-309. KELLY, E. L., 1955. Consistency of the adult personality. Amer. Psychologist, 10: 659-681. SPUHLER, J. _N., 1962. "Empirical studies on quantitative human genetics." In The Use of Vital and Health Statistics for Genetic and Radiation Studies. United Nations, New York, pp. 241-250. WRIGHT, S., 1921. Systems of mating. Genetics, 6: 111-178.

