Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Social mobility and family size in two highstatus populations
Richard F. Tomasson
To cite this article: Richard F. Tomasson (1966) Social mobility and family size in two highstatus populations, Eugenics Quarterly, 13:2, 113-121, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1966.9987654 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1966.9987654
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
View related articles
Citing articles: 5 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:28

SOCIAL MOBILITY AND FAMILY SIZE IN TWO HIGH-STATUS POPULATIONS

RICHARD F. TOMASSON
Department of Sociology University of Illinois, Urbana

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

This paper reports on the relation between social mobility and family size in two high-status populations. In the first sample--composed of University of Illinois faculty couples--the relationship between both career and generational mobility and completed family size is investigated. In a supplementary second sample--composed of members of the functional elite (occupational and community leaders) of the largest three cities in Illinois, excluding Chicago-- the relationship between generational mobility and present number of children is investigated.
In both of these samples the husbands with larger families are found to come from higher status backgrounds than those with smaller families. A similar finding was reported by Baltzell (1953) in a study of family size among the functional elite of Philadelphia around 1940. This may well be the only study in the American fertility literature to have heretofore dealt with the fertility of a high-status population in terms of its generational mobility (see, for example, bibliographic references in Goldberg, 1959, and Westoff et al., 1961).
One stimulus for the present study, in addition to Baltzell's study, was the lack of any clear relationships between the various measures of social mobility and desired family size reported in the two volumes of the Princeton study (Westoff et al., 1961, 1963). My general point of view is that fertility studies of homogeneous populations, even if the samples are small, are useful complements to

those using heterogeneous probability samples. Patterns might become apparent in such populations--as in the case with these two samples and the Baltzell study --that are missed in cross-sectional studies.1
THE ILLINOIS FACULTY SAMPLE
This sample consists of 126 non-Catholic Illinois faculty couples outside of the graduate professional schools (most of which are located in Chicago) and the College of Agriculture who were on the Urbana staff during the 1962 spring or fall terms and who had either four or more children or who believed they had completed their families with two children.2 Only couples were included in which the husband was born in 1919 or later and had an earned doctorate. One subsample consists of 68 couples with four or more children-- 56 have four, 10 have five, 1 has six, and 1 has seven.8 Throughout this paper this will be referred to as the large family group. It is my belief that these are all the couples who met the requirements for the large-family subsample on the Urbana campus in 1962.
1 Data on personality traits of husbands and wives in the Illinois faculty sample and their relationship to the fertility variables are being studied by Roland B. Westerlund of the Department of Sociology, University of Illinois.
2 In retrospect, there was not good reason for eliminating the College of Agriculture from the study.
3Twins are counted as a single child if they are the last born. There are no twins in the small-family subsample and one fourth-parity set in the large-family subsample.

113

114

Tomasson

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

The other subsample consists of 58 faculty couples who believed they had completed families of two children and who met several additional requirements:
1. First marriage for both husband and wife.
2. Wife under 30 at time of marriage. 3. Not more than one miscarriage or
stillbirth and that prior to the birth of the second child. 4. Neither child born by Caesarian section. 5. No serious difficulties in conceiving or bearing children.
While there was an attempt to obtain all faculty couples who met these specific requirements in addition to the general requirements, there was less success than with the large-family group. Some were missed because of a refusal to participate even to the extent of stating whether they met the requirements to be included. There is also a suspicion that a few couples who did, in fact, meet all of the requirements said they did not in order to avoid the embarrassment of refusing to participate. In addition, some twochild couples were away from the University, and it was not ascertained whether they met the specific requirements to be included. Between 200 and 300 faculty couples were contacted by letter and follow-up telephone call to get these 58 small-family couples. Nearly all of the large-family couples, on the other hand, proved to be eligible. The use of a list of Catholics on the faculty kept for the University Newman Club enabled most Catholics to be removed from the lists of potential respondents before letters were sent out.
There was a marked difference in the number of refusals in the two samples. Five of the 68 large-family couples refused compared with 12 of the 58 smallfamily couples. The rates of refusal are

7% and 21%, respectively.4 Some couples refused to participate out of general reticence (mostly on the part of wives) and some because they were "too busy" (mostly husbands). Fortunately, some data on all couples who refused to be interviewed were obtained from directories such as American Men of Science and the annual University of Illinois Staff Directory, and from other sources.
The husbands were interviewed by the writer, almost all of them in their offices. A female interviewer visited the wives in their homes.
Age was controlled because of the lower fertility of couples born in the first two decades of this century. Couples in which the husband did not have an earned doctorate were excluded to maximize the homogeneity of the sample and because the age at which this degree was obtained could be taken as the point at which the husband gained basic career security and a convenient point from which to measure career mobility. Catholics were eliminated because of the religious variables that affect their fertility. The observation that Catholic/nonCatholic differentials in family size are large among the upper educated is very much borne out by the Illinois faculty population. The faculty member who has kept the list of faculty members for the Newman Club for a number of years estimated that between 5% and 8% of the faculty was Catholic. Yet, Catholics accounted for a full quarter of younger Ph.D. faculty with four or more children and about two-fifths of those with five or more. Of the six couples with six or more children, four were Catholic. It is undoubtedly true, however, that Catholics are more numerous among the younger than among the older faculty. Jews and
4 In addition to their greater willingness to be interviewed, there was an impression of more positive cooperation from the large-family subsample.

Vol. 13, No. 2

Mobility and Family Size

115

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

those of Jewish background were not eliminated under the assumption that their fertility would not be affected by different variables than those of nonJewish background. In any case, as can be seen in Table 2, they are equally represented in both subsamples. No Negroes turned up in the sample.
A large section of the faculty was eliminated at the outset through the use of a deck of academic payroll cards that contained information on date of birth, department, and number of tax exemptions claimed. However, this did not prove useful for determining family size in most cases because so many husbands claimed fewer exemptions than they were entitled to. Departmental directories, departmental secretaries, department heads and their wives, and the respondents themselves all proved useful in determining who were potentially eligible.

Characteristics of the Two Subsamples
The small- and large-family subsamples are similar in a number of ways. Table 1 shows the distribution of the 126 husbands by department of major affiliation. Some discrepancies appear.

TABLE 1

DISTRIBUTION OF FACULTY HUSBANDS BY PRINCIPAL DEPARTMENTAL AFFILIATION IN THE TWO SUBSAMPLES.

Husbands

Departmental Affiliation

Smallfamily

Largefamily

English and foreign

languages

6

Social sciences, philosoj)hy,

and related fields

12

Education Psychology

53t

Mathematics Physics

5
6

Life sciences Chemistry and

4

biochemistry Engineering

4 13

5
13*
9 7
3 9 6
6 10

58 68

· Includes one husband in library science, f Includes one husband in music.

The most notable appear to be a higher proportion of large-family husbands in education and psychology and a somewhat lower proportion in engineering. The numbers are, however, not large enough to be regarded as more than random variation. In any case, the classification is somewhat arbitrary from the start because of the large proportion of faculty who hold joint appointments. Classification was generally made on the basis of where offices were located.
Table 2 gives data on several variables for the two faculty subsamples. The fact that the mean age of the large-family husbands is three years greater is a consequence of the way the sample was chosen. Younger husbands, say those born after 1930, who believed they had completed their families with two children were included, while those younger husbands who later will have four or more children were not. More significant is that there is a substantial difference in the median number of months elapsing between marriage and the birth of the first child and between the births of the first and second children in the two subsamples, 34 and 32 months for the small-family couples compared with

TABLE 2

CHARACTERISTICS OF THE TWO FACULTY SUBSAMPLES ACCORDING TO CERTAIN VARIABLES.
Small Large families families

Median age of husband in 1962 36

Mean age of husband in 1962 34.5

Median age of husband at

.. marriage

23

Median age of wife at marriage 22

Median number of months be-

tween marriage and first birth 34

Median number of months be-

tween first and second births 32

Mean number of moves be-

tween Ph.D. and 1962

1.09

Husbands of Jewish back-

ground

17%

Husbands born outside of

North America

12%

37.5 37.5
23 22
24.5
23
1.51
18%
10%

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

116

Tomasson

Eugen. Quart.

24.5 and 23 months for the large-family couples. That age at marriage is not a factor in this differential birth spacing is indicated by the observation that the median age at marriage for husbands and wives is the same in both subsamples, 23 and 22 years of age.
The small-family couples have not migrated as much as the large-family couples in the period between getting the Ph.D. and 1962, the mean averages being 1.09 and 1.51; at least part of this difference can be attributed to the greater age of the large-family husbands. The percentage of those who are Jewish or of Jewish background and the percentage of those born outside of North America are about the same in both subsamples. Only a few of the wives in either subsample work or have serious career interests.
Virtually all the husbands and wives interviewed in the small-family sample wanted to have another child prior to the conception of the second child; just one husband claimed that he was undecided at that time. Among the large-family couples, on the other hand, the situation is not nearly so simple. Among 49% of the large-family couples interviewed (31 of 63), at least one of the spouses answered that he or she was at least ambivalent or undecided about ever having another child prior to the conception of the fourth child. Among 32% of the couples (20 of 63), both spouses were at least ambivalent or undecided. Among

22% (14 of 63), both unequivocally did not want to have another child. What is striking here is that among half the couples there was some degree of ambivalence or indifference, disagreement or misunderstanding, or clear accident involved in the conception of the fourth child. Among the 14 children beyond the fourth, only 5 were wanted by both parents prior to conception. However, about 9 out of 10 of the large-family spouses (113 of 126) claimed to have definitely wanted another child prior to the conception of the third child. Thus, if we were to have classified our couples on the basis of "desired" family size as in the Princeton Study, rather than on the basis of accomplished fertility, a few large-family couples would have been classified with the small family couples.
Rapidity of Career Mobilty
Two clear-cut measures of the rapidity of career mobility are available from the data: age at which the husbands obtained the Ph.D. degree and number of years elapsing between the awarding of this degree and obtaining the rank of associate professor, the rank that gives tenure at the University of Illinois and at most universities. From Table 3 it will be seen that the mean age for obtaining the doctorate was 29.60 years for the small-family husbands and 29.99 years for the large-family husbands. However, this difference of .39 years shrinks

TABLE 3
MEAN ACE FOR OBTAINING THE PH.D. AND MEAN LENCTH OF TIME BETWEEN THIS DEGREE AND OBTAINING THE RANK OF ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR IN THE TWO FACULTY SUBSAMPÜS.

Small-family

Husbands Large-family

Difference

Mean age at Ph.D. for entire sample
Mean age at Ph.D. for those born 1919-1927 Mean number of years between Ph.D. and
associate professor

29.60 (58 cases) 30.69 (35 cases)
5.15 (30 cases)

29.99 (67 cases) 30.65 (52 cases)
5.04 (55 cases)

.39 years .04 years
.11 years

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

Vol. 13, No. 2

Mobility and Family Size

117

to negligible proportions when those born in the years 1919 through 1927 are compared. Here the mean age for obtaining the doctorate increases to 30.69 years for the small-family husbands and to 30.65 years for the large-family husbands, making for a completely insignificant difference of .04 years. It is only through eliminating the younger husbands that a valid comparison can be made. This is because of the greater proportion of younger husbands in the small-family sample and the earlier age at which the younger husbands in both subsamples obtained their Ph.D.'s.
A majority of the small-family husbands and most of the large-family husbands had become associate professors by the fall of 1962. There is little difference in the two subsamples in the length of time taken to reach this rank after taking the Ph.D., 5.15 years among the smallfamily husbands and 5.04 years among the large-family husbands. It should be pointed out that there is a marked variation in the length of time to achieve this rank; the range is from obtaining both simultaneously to 12 years (excluding one case where it was obtained four years prior to getting the Ph.D.), with a third taking four years or less and another third taking eight years or more. Nothing in the data on rapidity of career mobility indicated any relationship with family size.

Generational Mobility
To determine the extent of generational mobility in the two subsamples a three-category occupational prestige scale was used. High-status background was defined to include fathers who were professionals, upper-level managers, owners of substantial businesses (defined by value and number of employees), and owners of farms or ranches of 600 or more acres (unless, as in one case, the land was all of poor quality). Low-status background (or working class) was defined to include blue collar workers, with the exception of foremen in large enterprises, and farmers with 80 acres or less. Intermediate status was a residual category that included salesmen, high school teachers, small businessmen, white collar workers, foremen in large enterprises, and farmers with more than 80 but fewer than 600 acres (but including the exception mentioned above). A number of questions were asked to get specific data on the occupational status of fathers. Two persons classified the fathers of the husbands and wives independently with a very high degree of agreement.
From Table 4 it will be seen that the large-family husbands have fathers of higher occupational status than have the small-family husbands; 42% of the former and 27% of the latter had fathers with high occupational status. Twentyfive per cent of the large-family husbands

TABLE 4
PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION OF FATHERS OF HUSBANDS AND WIVES BY OCCUPATIONAL PRESTIGE STATUS IN THE TWO FACULTY SUBSAMPLES.

Occupational prestige status of father
High Intermediate Low

Husbands

Small-family (51 cases)
o/of

Large-family (64 cases) %

27 42 37 33 35 25

Wives

Small-family (44 cases)
of

Large-family (63 cases) %

41 41 40 18 22

118

Tomasson

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

compared with 35% of the small-family husbands had fathers with low occupational status. Putting this another way, we can say that 58% of the large-family husbands have undergone upward generational mobility compared with 73% of the small-family fathers and that the latter have, on the average, traveled farther.
No such pattern emerges when the occupational status of the fathers of the wives is related to family size. The occupational status distributions of the wives' fathers is about the same in the two subsamples. However, the smallfamily wives are, in the aggregate, of higher status background than their husbands; this is not the case among the large-family couples, where the differences appear negligible. Different status background combinations appears to be a promising variable for future research. Three-quarters of the cases (13 of 17 couples) where both husband and wife have high status backgrounds fall in the large-family group. In the nine cases where wives of high-status background are married to husbands of low status background, only two fall in the largefamily group.
No meaningful difference appears when the number of years of education of the fathers of the husbands and wives is related to family size. This is undoubtedly because number of years of formal education is not so closely related to occupational status for men born in

the 1880's and 1890's, when most of the fathers of these couples were born. A full half of the fathers had no education beyond high school.
Some observations from the data in the interviews tend to support further the view of the higher status backgrounds of the large-family couples. Of the 11 husbands who were graduated from private boarding or day schools, 9 are in the large-family sample. Of the 8 wives who were graduated from such schools, 6 are in the large family sample. There are 7 graduates of Harvard College in the sample, all of whom entered in 1944 or earlier before the social base was broadened by the G.I. Bill and higher admission standards. Six of these 7 are in the large-family group, and 3 of these 6 have five children.
Questions were asked about gifts, inheritances, and loans from parents and other family members. From Table 5 there appears to be no difference between the two subsamples in the percentage having received gifts or inheritances of different amounts. However, 45% of the large-family couples have borrowed $500 or more compared with 26% of the small-family couples. While this finding supports the view of the higher status background of the large-family couples, its importance is to some extent unknown. How much does it indicate a greater degree of financial well being on the part of the parents of the large-family spouses, and how much does it indicate

TABLE 5
PrRCENTACES OF COUPLES HAVING RECEIVED GIFTS AND INHERITANCES, AND LOANS PROM PARENTS AND OTHER RELATIVES VALUED AT LESS THAN OR MORE THAN $ 5 0 0 IN THE TWO FACULTY SUBSAMPLES.

Value
None, of little significance, or less than $500
In excess of $500

Gifts and inheritances Small families Large families (48 couples) (58 couples)
%%
46 47 54 53

Loans Small families Large families (46 couples) (57 couples)
%%
74 56 26 45

Vol. 13, No. 2

Mobility and Family Size

119

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

only a greater need on their part? A hint that the large-family couples do have more financially prosperous parents is the observation that nine of the largefamily couples have borrowed $5,000 or more compared with only three of the small-family couples.
THE FUNCTIONAL ELITE SAMPLE
This body of data on a nonacademic and somewhat more diverse sample of high occupational status shows the same relationship between generational mobility and family size as does the Illinois faculty sample. Unfortunately, the questions asked do not make it possible to make any comparable measure of the rapidity of career mobility. The Office of Community Development at the University of Illinois has collected personal history information, including number of children and father's occupation, from the functional elite of the largest three cities in Illinois outside of Chicago: Peoría, Springfield, and Rockford. The total sample consists of 457 cases, which represents a 54% return to a mail questionnaire. The sample is predominantly made up of doctors, lawyers, architects, other professionals, and businessmen. The median age of the group falls in the 46 to 50 age group as of 1962, with 95% being 31 years old or older, indicating that the number of children reported is close to completed fertility. The median annual income for the sample in 1961 was in the $18,000 to $22,000 category. Fifteen per cent of the sample is Catholic, 4% Jewish. The median number of years of education falls in the 17 to 18 years category, with 85% having been to college.
As in the Illinois faculty population, it is necessary to remove the Catholics who in this sample also show much higher fertility than the non-Catholics.

Forty per cent of the Catholics ,with children have four or more compared with 14% of the non-Catholics with children; 28% of these Catholics have five or more children compared with only 5% of the non-Catholics. In addition, 38% of the Catholics with children compared with 22% of the non-Catholics with children are 40 or under, suggesting that the final completed family size differentials will be even greater.
The staff of this study used the NorthHatt scale to rank the occupations of this elite group and their fathers. When the occupational status of the fathers of the 129 non-Catholic respondents with three or more children is compared with that of the 198 respondents with one or two children, it was found that 33% of the former and 24% of the latter had fathers with occupational statuses as high as theirs. As Table 6 shows, those with one child had fathers with an occupational status as high as theirs in 23% of the cases; those with two children, in 24% of the cases; those with three children, in 33% of the cases; and those with four or more children, in 34% of the cases. From this progression, it appears that the important distinction is between having two and having three children.

TABLE 6
PERCENTAGE OF NON-CATHOLIC FUNCTIONAL ELITE IN PEORÍA, SPRINGFIELD, AND ROCKFORD WITH FATHERS WITH NORTH-HATT OCCUPATIONAL PRESTIGE RANKINGS AS HIGH AS THEIRS, BY NUMBER OF CHILDREN.

Number of children

Percentage of husbands with fathers with North-Hatt
rankings as high as theirs ·

One Two Three Four or more

24 (68 cases) 25 (109 cases)

24 (177 cases)

33 (70 cases) 34 (50 cases)

33 (120 cases)

· Percentages were calculated without taking into consideration 30 cases for which data on fathers' occupation were not available.

120

Tomasson

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

BALTZELL'S PHILADELPHIA STUDY
This study of the fertility of the functional elite of Philadelphia around 1940 also finds this pattern. The149 husbands with children who were in both the functional elite (listed in the 1940 edition of Who's Who) and the upper class (had a social register affiliation) had higher fertility than the352 husbands who were in only the functional elite. The implication here is that those husbands with a social register affiliation come, in the main, from high-status backgrounds, while those listed only in Who's Who have, in a large proportion of cases, undergone upward generational mobility. The mean age of this sample was 61.6 years in 1940, and none were under 36. Thirty-five per cent of the husbands with both a Who's Who listing and social register affiliation had three or more children compared with 25% of those with one or two children. As Table 7 shows, those with one child had a social register affiliation in 22% of the cases; those with two children, in 26% of the cases; those with three children, in 38% of thecases; andthose with four or more children, in 33% of thecases. Thesame discontinuity between having twoand three children is found here as in the Illinois functional elite sample. These figures take on some added significance when it is noted that there was only 1 Catholic with a social register affiliation

TABLE 7
PERCENTAGE OF PHILADELPHIA HUSBANDS LISTED IN 1 9 4 0 WHO'S WHO WITH A SOCIAL REGISTER AFFILIATION, BY NUMBER OF CHILDREN

Number of children

Percentage with social register affiliation ·

One Two Three Four or more

22 26

(95 cases) (172 cases)

1

25

(267 cases)

38 32

(120 cases) ; (114 cases)

35

(234 cases)

· Percentages and number of cases calculated from Baltzell's data (1953, p.415).

but 30 without. Asin theIllinois faculty sample, Baltzeil also found private compared with public schooling, among other indications of high status, to be positively associated with fertility.
In a study of a sample of 3,388 biographies in the 1956-1957 edition of Who's Who, Kirk (1957) found the reporting of private school attendance to be strongly associated with fertility (2.3 compared with 1.9 children). In addition, he found those who reported attendance at Princeton, Yale or Harvard to have had higher fertility than those attending other universities, a further suggestion of a positive relation between high-status background and family size.
CONCLUSION
The three samples dealt with in this paper, combined with an absence of any contrary evidence, suggest that the fertility of non-Catholic couples with high occupational status is higher when the husbands have fathers with similar high status. In other words, there is a negative relation between upward generational mobility and family size here. And the important difference seems to be between having two andhaving three children. The findings of the Princeton Study and Goldberg of no overall relationship between generational mobility and family size do not contradict this generalization. They have used occupationally heterogeneous samples andhave measured generational mobility only in terms of blue collar/white collar categories. Their findings must not be interpreted to mean that relationships between generational mobility and family size do not exist in specific segments of the population.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by a grant from the Population Council, Inc.The

Vol. 13, No. 2

Mobility and Family Size

121

University of Illinois Research Board provided funds for an assistant, Roland B. Westerlund, whocoded and tabulated the data. Mrs. Louise Bindman interviewed the wives. James G. Coke and Nason E. Hall of the Office of Community Development of the University of Illinois kindly supplied the data on the functional elite of the three Illinois cities.
REFERENCES
BALTZELL, E. DIGBY, 1953. Social mobility and fertility within an elite group. Milbank Mem. Fund Quart., 3 1 : 411-420.

GOLDBERG, DAVID, 1959. The fertility of two-
generation urbanites. Population Stud., 12: 214-222.
KIRK, DUDLEY, 1957. "The Fertility of a Gifted Group: A Study of the Number of Children of Men in Who's Who." In The Nature and Transmission of the Genetic and Cultural Characteristicsof Human Populations. Milbank Memorial Fund, New York, pp. 78-98.
WESTOFF, CHARLES, ROBERT G. POTTER, JR.,
PHILIP C. SAGI, and ELIOT G. MISHLER, 1961.
Family Growth in Metropolitan America. Princeton University Press, Princeton, pp. 237-261.
WESTOFF, CHARLES, ROBERT G. POTTER, JR., and
PHILIP C. SAGI, 1963. The Third Child. Princeton University Press, Princeton, pp. 132-147.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

