Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Symposium summaries from cold spring harbor
Richard H. Post , Theodosius Dobzhansky , L. L. CavalliSforza , I. Barrai , A. W. F. Edwards , H. B. Newcombe , N. FreireMaia , J. Sutter , J.M. Goux , Yuichiro Hiraizumi , Herman Slatis , N. E. Morton , J. V. Neel , John A. Hostetler , F. M. Salzano , Janice A. Ezeland , Roswell Eldridge , E. Goldschmidt , A. C. Allison & E. R. Giblett
To cite this article: Richard H. Post , Theodosius Dobzhansky , L. L. CavalliSforza , I. Barrai , A. W. F. Edwards , H. B. Newcombe , N. FreireMaia , J. Sutter , J.M. Goux , Yuichiro Hiraizumi , Herman Slatis , N. E. Morton , J. V. Neel , John A. Hostetler , F. M. Salzano , Janice A. Ezeland , Roswell Eldridge , E. Goldschmidt , A. C. Allison & E. R. Giblett (1964) Symposium summaries from cold spring harbor, Eugenics Quarterly, 11:4, 234-248, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1964.9987596 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1964.9987596
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 5
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

Brief Report
SYMPOSIUM SUMMARIES FROM COLD SPRING HARBOR
The opening address and twelve of the first fourteen papers presented at the 29th Cold Spring Harbor Symposium on Quantitative Biology, "Human Genetics," June 5-11, 1964, are summarized below.
These fourteen papers, comprising the first of three sections of the Symposium, were presented June 5-7 and entitled "Population Studies." While the length of each summary is determined partly by its relevancy to eugenics, it is measured also by its content. Unfortunately, no figures could be included. Gratitude is expressed to each author for providing a copy of his or her contribution and for permission to have it summarized; also to Dr. John Cairns, Director of the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, for allowing Eugenics Quarterly to carry these summaries prior to the Laboratory's publication of the papers in full.
The summaries follow in the order of the presentation of the full papers at the Symposium.
RICHARD H. POST
Ann Arbor Michigan

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Human Genetics: An Outsider's View
Opening address of the Symposium, which included 43 scheduled papers and discussion.
THEODOSIUS DOBZHANSKY
The Rockefeller Institute New York, New York
The overall importance of human genetics and the rapidity of its growth provide the fullest justification for frequent review and stock-taking.
One approach to the subject is that of learning more about man as such; another approach is to utilize human material for the investigation of general problems of biology. A geneticist who regards medical science as an outsider, while warmly welcoming the increased appreciation of human genetic heterogeneity shown by clinical practitioners and the increased number of courses of genetics in medical schools, might never-

theless consider this "discovery" of his discipline as rather sudden and recent. Although the advantages of human material for genetic research can hardly be measured, it is obvious that no laboratory species is being investigated more extensively or in greater detail today than ours. One crude indication of man's importance is reflected by the number of genetic loci which have been described: these now may be estimated at 400, plus or minus some 100, adding hypothetical loci to those rather well established, in contrast to the total of 517 listed by Bridges and Brehme in 1944 for Drosophila melanogaster, man's closest competitor. While such figures are admittedly unreliable, they do give some indication of the ranking of our species as a source of genetic knowledge--in second place among perhaps two million other species of living things.
The utility of man as a field for investigation of general biological prob-

234

Vol. 11, No. 4

Symposium Summaries

235

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Iems does not, of course, imply that the genetic information obtained from other organisms is not relevant to human problems. The two approaches, in no sense mutually exclusive, are often complementary. Yet it is often dangerous to "extrapolate" a generalized conclusion from any one species to another without the exercise of critical judgment.
Since the greater part of hereditary variation within populations is polygenic, in man no less than in fruitflies, mice, or corn, it would seem that more knowledge might be expected in the future from polygenes than from single genes. Although the pioneer investigators in human heredity such as Galton labored almost exclusively with polygenic traits, recent progress with them has been slow. Studies of the effects of single gene differences have been more rewarding. But workers are now paying more attention to the hereditory basis of so-called "normal" variation, employing anthropométrie measurements, growth rates, reaction speeds, estimates of intelligence, and other psychic traits. Polygenic inheritance is believed to underlie much of the variation in our susceptibility to infectious disease, in our proneness to degenerative disease and breakdowns.
While some geneticists hesitate to investigate the effects of more than a few discrete genes at a time, others are combining polygenic hypotheses with their observations of simple Mendelian ratios --a point of view which promises more than occasional advantage. Illustration is furnished in studying the phenomenon of "concealed variability," principally in Drosophila. By the use of specially invented techniques for radically increasing the degree of inbreeding of certain flies, the variability among their offspring has been increased enormously. In addi-

tion to the "normal" amounts of genetic diversity, as previously observed and understood, such as might be called overt or expressed, a supplemental amount has been discovered through these breeding experiments, called covert or concealed. It dwarfs the normal variability and adds a new dimension to our grasp of hereditary variation. While no such type of experimental breeding can be practiced in man, evidence from cases of human inbreeding is steadily accumulating which indicates that the diversity open to observation is but a small part of the total genetic diversity of any population.
Concealment may be due in part to variation in environment, since certain genotypes are manifested only under particular environmental conditions. It is due also to genetic recombination, and to variation in genetic background. Our understanding of the mechanisms which produce and maintain genetic diversity in populatons is barely beginning. We have some conception of mutation, but very little idea of what happens to mutant genes once they have entered a population gene pool. We must investigate both the "income" and the "outgo" of mutations.
Geneticists agree that most mutations are harmful, that normalizing natural selection will eventually eliminate most of the more harmful mutations, and that prior to being eliminated they contribute substantially to the sum total of a population's genetic diversity. There is disagreement, however, on the question of the relative amount of this contribution, in comparison with the contribution from mutants which are maintained in the population by balanced selection of one form or another.
In man no less than in laboratory animals a large proportion of the better known mutants are so highly deleterious

236

Brief Report

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

that there is no question about the high rates of their elimination in any conceivable environment. But the less deleterious mutations are eliminated less rapidly, and so on. Among those which are least harmful--and their numbers are legion--it seems quite reasonable that some might be actually beneficial under different conditions of the environment. The great diversity of environmental or ecological niches occupied by such a species as ours must make a marked contribution to the obviously high degree of genetic diversity which characterizes us.
The broader the field of varying environments occupied by a species, the clearer it becomes that no single genotype can be called an "optimum genotype"; that single mutant or variant genes and clusters of genes such as might equip a certain individual very satisfactorily in one environment could conceivably prove less adequate in a neighboring environment, one in which a different alíele or group of alíeles might provide better adaptation. Thus the concept of an "optimum genotype" requires fairly precise definition before it can be accepted. Since at the present state of our knowledge any such definition must be rather arbitrary, the subject becomes quite thin ice for even the most thoughtful of skaters.
Since natural selection is notoriously inefficient in eliminating those mutants which are frankly deleterious in any environment, for one reason or another, therefore all populations tend to accumulate what is often called the "mutational genetic load." One of the most important problems of general genetics and particularly of human genetics is to investigate this load from every possible angle. A major dispute has arisen among geneticists regarding the origin of this

load, its magnitude (particularly in comparison with the magnitude of the genetic load due to balanced adaptive polymorphy, heterosis, overdominance, etc.), and the question of its tendency to increase in man as a result of the growth of culture, particularly of modern civilization. Such problems are obviously of the utmost importance in general, and particularly important to eugenics.
Analysis of Human Evolution Under Random Genetic Drift
L. L. CAVALLI-SFORZA, I. BARRAI,
AND A. W. F. EDWARDS
International Laboratory of Genetics and Biophysics
University of Pavia, Italy
Several mathematical models of evolution are presented, using gene frequencies of blood-group markers and employing computing machines. As a working hypothesis it is assumed that both random genetic drift and random variation of rates for "normalizing" selection (as contrasted with "directional" selection) have played important roles in the production of genetic diversity among modern populations. This and other necessary assumptions appear justifiable, from analyses which are made of modern Italian population data. However, some markers show less evidence of drift than others in the data, suggesting geographical variation in rates of "directional" selection.
One model projects fifteen populations through hundreds of thousands of years of evolutionary changes, in order to estimate the most likely series of splits in the lines or tree of descent. The model involves five marker loci for each of the fifteen population samples, all of which are of generous size, representing three widely separated ethnic groups of aborig-

Vol. 11, No. 4

Symposium Summaries

237

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

ines chosen from five continents. Gene frequencies fluctuate among the samples during this time for a number of reasons, including isolation, inter-population mixture (i.e., migration) and population size. Estimates of the timing of splits, gene frequencies at these points, etc., cannot reflect changes due to "directional" selection, of course.
Splits in the lines of descent are determined by maximum likelihood method, as to time and geographical location in the five continents. One of the additional assumptions necessary in this model is that of noninteraction; another, that all fifteen ethnic groups have the same rates of evolutionary change due to drift and to random changes in selection values. These assumptions may seem unjustified, but they are compensated in part by the large number of genes used in the model ( A ^ B O , MNS, Rh with 8 chromosomes, Fy and Di: a total of 20 alíeles).
Among the forces which affect evolutionary changes and differences among populations, four are specified: population size; the number of genes involved; variation in "stabilizing" selection, such as maintain polymorphy; variation in "directional" selection, due to ecological and many other factors which may affect one gene here and another there.
Direct evidence for stabilizing selection is found in the ABO and MN systems, but perhaps not too satisfactorily. It is suggested that in civilized populations today such selection may have changed, and in some cases even ceased.
Since demographic data on such an important factor as the effective breeding size of populations are almost completely lacking, studies were commenced some ten years ago in the upper Parma Valley, based on parish records dating from the mid-16th century. The area has received

almost no immigration since well before that time. Blood samples analyzed for ABO, MN, and Rh frequencies indicate that the variation between villages in the more densely populated part of the valley is not appreciable, but that heterogeneity increases progressively on ascending into the mountains as density decreases.
The distance between birthplaces of parents and offspring was studied as a measure of migration, using Sewall Wright's "continuous model" of population structure, in the area showing significant inter-village genetic variation, which contained some 15,000 persons in 66 villages. The geographic pattern was shown clearly to be intermediate between (1) the one-dimensional distribution, wherein the number of inhabitants living at a specific distance is independent of this distance, and (2) the two-dimensional distribution, wherein the number is proportional to the distance.
In this area the heterogeneity of the largest 34 villages was clearly significant with respect to nine genetic markers, excepting only A2. From the variances of these alíeles the average "neighborhood size" was estimated as 140 under (1) above, and 55 under (2). Such a "neighborhood size" might be slightly larger than a village. Over three-quarters of the inhabitants' parents were born in the same village, on the average. Correction for intervillage migration and other factors produced somewhat higher figures.
"Isolate sizes" were estimated by Dahlberg's method utilizing consanguineous marriage data, and correcting for age at marriage, migration, and certain sociological factors. The estimates were checked by demographic data from independent sources, which permitted elimination of some of the sociological factors, such as might either permit or bar cer-

238

Brief Report

Eugen. Quart,

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

tain types of consanguineous alliance. From the analysis of 1,607 such marriages (among a total of about 2,300) in 29 categories of consanguinity, a satisfactorily close fit was found between the numbers expected and observed. Effective breeding size was then estimated at 120. This figure compares favorably with those previously obtained from the variances of blood-group genes.
One of the principal indications of these studies is that drift has played an important role in determining diversity for polymorphic loci despite stabilizing selection and large effective population size.
Pedigrees for Population Studies: A Progress Report
H. B. NEWCOMBE
Atomic Energy of Canada Limited Chalk River, Ontario, Canada
The availability to scientific investigators of vast masses of vital statistics from a variety of files, both public and private, can be greatly facilitated by modern methods of filing and linking of records, with the utilization of efficient automatic electronic equipment.
Pedigree studies for a population of approximately 1.7 millions in British Columbia have been under way for several years. Information from records of births, marriages, and deaths are linked or combined on punch cards or tape with information, from various other sources, of traits of potential genetic interest. These may include such items as maternal age, stillbirths, cause of stillbirth, live births, gestation period, birth weight, birth injury, congenital malformation, deaths, autopsy, handicaps, and cause of handicap. Information of siblings can be linked together and linked with parents and other relatives as far as these are

contained in the records as desired by the investigator, all by automatic processes.
Names, births, and other vital events have been recorded on punch cards for indexing purposes as a matter of routine throughout Canada since 1946. Crossindex cards for marriages link the names of bride and groom. Deaths have been recorded similarly since 1961 in a form suitable for arrangement into family groups. The linkages of first cousin sibships can be established by automatic methods.
Methods are being developed for assembling vital statistics of members of families into groups with speed and accuracy and at low cost. Meanwhile, limited investigations are being made-- and have been made--of special problems in epidemiology, selection, mutation, and other fields.
In order that human geneticists may obtain maximum benefit with the least outlay of time and money from these rich sources of information, it is suggested that they collaborate closely and actively with trained personnel of departments of vital statistics. The best results can be obtained only through teamwork at the working, i.e., operational level.
On the Methods Available for Estimating the Load of Mutations Disclosed by Inbreeding
N. FREIRE-MAIA
University of Paraná Brazil
Investigation of the mechanisms which produce and maintain the remarkably high degrees of genetic variability characteristic of all sexually reproducing and cross-fertilizing populations is of very great importance, not only to pure sei-

Vol. 11, No. 4

Symposium Summaries

239

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

ence but also to applied fields, including eugenics. Two preliminary steps in such an investigation are making reliable estimates of the frequencies of deleterious traits in populations and summing these frequencies in order to estimate the overall or total amount of genetic damage which they impose.
Through the analysis of such estimates it is hoped that light may be cast on the question of the relative importance of what appear to be the two major components of a population's total genetic load, currently called the "mutational" and the "segregational" components.
The most useful source available for making these estimates in human populations has been found in vital statistics of the offspring of consanguineous and nonconsanguineous marriages. Since morbidity and mortality data are influenced by a wide variety of factors, some of which tend to augment while others tend to diminish the effects of inbreeding, the analyses must be refined. Furthermore, they should be guarded against the influences of other genetic loads. Techniques for investigating inbreeding effects in man have not yet been developed beyond the pioneering age.
Six methods for estimating the amount of the "mutational load" from such data are cited. Two of these are limited to morbidity data, require specific information on autosomal recessive genes, and do not permit the making of genetic equivalents, a most useful tool. Formulas for the other four methods are presented and discussed in some detail as far as they concern mortality data, without reference to morbidity. They are illustrated by simple models, also by actual human data.
Underlying all four methods is the assumption that the various causes of

death, regardless of the amounts of genetic or environmental contributions to causation, are independent (nonsynergistic) or almost so. Therefore the problem of genetic interaction (epistasis) is not considered. This assumption appears reasonable at the low levels of inbreeding found in human populations.
Estimates of genetic loads in model populations whose degrees of inbreeding and levels of mortality are kept arbitrarily rather low, such as found in most human populations living under "advanced" demographic conditions, are substantially similar, comparing one estimate with another as obtained from the four formulas. One of these formulas was developed by the author and Professor A. Freire-Maia (in press in Genetics); another is that of Morton, Crow, and Müller; the third and fourth are simplifications. All four are discussed. The simplified formulas tend to give decreasing underestimates of the "mutational load" with increasing mortality rates. They are also employed in estimating the genetic loads revealed by the offspring of consanguineous couples in actual samples of populations in Brazil.
Again the results from the Freire-Maia and the Morton-Crow-Muller formulas are substantially similar. Incidentally, in these samples the estimates of genetic load for Negroes appear to be significantly higher than those for whites.
In sum, the four approaches may employ data of both mortality and morbidity, but they do not require specific information on anomalies due to autosomal recessive genes., They permit the estimation of genetic equivalents. All four produce estimates of genetic load which are fairly similar one with another at low levels of inbreeding and of genetic damage.

240

Brief Report

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

Lethal Equivalents and Demographic Measure of Mortality
J. SUTTER ANDJ.-M. GOUX Institut National d'Etudes
Demographiques Paris, France
Consideration of methods of estimating the mutational and the segregational loads in human populations has produced wide discussion. Without entering the controversy, noteworthy comments are offered on current formulas involving the concept of lethal equivalents--more particularly, on what has been termed the "mortality effect" of environmental factors. In brief, the rates of environmentally produced deaths may show extremely wide variation. With higher mortalities, especially in areas and at times when epidemics are raging, the genetic death rate becomes relatively reduced. The significance of the so-called B/A ratio (hidden genetic damage, such as would be expressed were homozygosis complete divided by the damage in a population in random mating) as currently formularized will vary, it is believed, under differing demographic conditions.
A correction is proposed which it is believed would increase the significance of comparisons between regions under varying demographic conditions. In essence, it is suggested that (1) perinatal mortality and (2) the reproductive histories of individual mothers be employed in the computation of estimates of a population's genetic death rate.
It is noted that the rates of stillbirths have declined remarkably little in "advanced" countries and populations during recent decades. In Sweden, for example, stillbirths declined from 29.4 per 1,000 in 1880 to 25.2 in 1940, only 4.2 points, contrasted with infant mortality which declined from 94 to 28 during the

same 60 years, or 66 points. A similar contrast has been found in several other countries. The "resistance" of stillbirths to progress in medicine and public health is widely attributed to the important role of genetic factors.
Substantiation of this explanation is found in autopsy studies. In one of the most detailed of these, based on 19,500 births, of which 221 were stillborn (a very low rate), about 50% of the stillbirths are attributed to maternal origin and 50% to the constitution of the fetus. In detail, the percentage distribution is anoxia (premature placental separation, placenta previa, cord obstruction, etc.), 38.1%; intracranial or abdominal hemorrhage, 1.6%; malformations, 10.3%; erythroblastosis, 9.5%; pneumonia, 0.8%; syphilis, 0.8%; other, 0.8%; no abnormality, 38.1%). Data on stillbirths should be refined by autopsy data in order to estimate the components of biological or constitutional factors before making a final appraisal of genetic death rate.
Further substantiation of a high genetic component in stillbirths is seen in the large proportion of aborted fetuses showing chromosomal abnormalities, which in one study of 77 abortions constituted 20%.
A similar resistance to medical progress has been shown by infant mortality during the first month, although to a somewhat less degree than the resistance of stillbirths. A number of "advanced" countries have demonstrated markedly less decline in deaths during the first month contrasted with a dramatic decline during the second through twelfth months of life, from vital statistics over the past 50 or 60 years. This contrast is highly suggestive of a strong genetic component in deaths during the first month, which makes it reasonable to

Vol. 11, No. 4

Symposium Summaries

241

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

pool the figures with stillbirths. The combined rate is called perinatal mortality.
Consideration of the reproductive history of mothers presents more delicate problems. Since the loss of one fetus has been found to increase the risk of prenatal mortality with succeeding pregnancies, it is possible to estimate the contributions of genetic and environmental forces which refine the mortality figures. Allowance must be made for birth rank and mother's age. Conservative estimates of prenatal mortality even under the most favorable age conditions reach as high as 50 to 6O5& of conceptions in some recent studies.
Comparisons of vital statistics between consanguineous and nonconsanguineous families indicate that the former die proportionally at each age of the same causes, but at constantly higher rates. It appears that there may be a true correlation between mortality and the F coefficient of inbreeding, as has been found in France for perinatal mortality.
In summary it may be said that the best demographic data for the determination of lethal equivalents would appear to be stillbirths and its causes, followed by infant mortality during the first week of life. Some demographic areas are more favorable than others for gathering such data.
Prezygotic Selection as a Factor in the Maintenance of Variability
YUICHIRO HlRAIZUMI
National Institute of Genetics Misima, Sizuoka-ken, Japan
Natural selection may operate on gametes prior to fertilization as well as on zygotes. Prezygotic selection--more simply called "drive"--has been demonstrated in several organisms, including

maize, tobacco, fruitflies, mice, and even man. It contributes frequently to the genetic variability of populations. Under certain conditions drive may lower the average fitness of a population, increasing the frequency of mutant genes. In various organisms the genetic load attributable to drive has been estimated at levels from .07 to .18 and in one case (at the t-locus of mice) at .2 to .4. Under other conditions, but more rarely, fitness may be raised by drive. It has also been shown that a certain degree of inbreeding may raise the fitness of a population which was previously in equilibrium, when it contains a factor which produces drive.
A search for evidence of drive in man was made in the field of ABO blood groups. This system was chosen since the polymorphy of the three principal alíeles is balanced within relatively narrow limits throughout the world, suggestive of fairly constant selection rates among all populations, whether prezygotic or postzygotic, or both. Mathematical models are presented for estimating selection forces from family data, considering the gametes of single individuals but not of pooled gametes.
Preliminary analysis based on published data from 2,243 families with 5,336 children has suggested that prezygotic selection has been operating on O-bearing sperm from AO and BO fathers.
Original observations from over 3,000 couples with the wife's ages ranging from 30 to 40, including childless wives, were analyzed for as many offspring as possible, totaling about 6,000. No clear evidence was found of reduced viability of offspring due to ABO incompatibility--neither in the reproductive histories of the wives nor in the segregation frequencies among the offspring. However, there was an indication that prezygotic

242

Brief Report

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

selection was operating for O-bearing sperm from AO and BO fathers.
It is suggested that the stability of the ABO system of polymorphy may be maintained by a balance of selection forces operating on both gametes and zygotes. This suggestion is consistent with the theoretical point, that elements which are disadvantageous for both prezygotic and postzygotic selection would be expected to be eliminated from a population; those which are of advantage in both types of selection, to become fixed; while those elements which are advantageous in prezygotic selection and disadvantageous in postzygotic selection, or vice versa, should be found associated with a system of balanced polymorphy.
Polymorphism and Pleiotropy
HERMAN SLATIS
Michigan State University East Lansing, Michigan
The constantly lengthening list of "marker traits" or balanced adaptive polymorphies which are being discovered and of more frankly deleterious traits, added to the large number which may be conjectured as awaiting discovery, poses the problem of how the human species can survive in view of its relatively low reproductive rate. However low the selection rates may be against polymorphic and monomeric traits, the grand total of negative selection which we are sustaining might appear staggering. Yet man is proving to be a highly successful species.
Resolution of this apparent dilemma may be found, at least in part, in pleiotropy--a combination of several traits, some perhaps deleterious, controlled simultaneously by a single gene or perhaps due to the interaction of a small number of genes. Examples from pathology are

frequent, but only a few are known among the more common genes which contribute to man's polymorphy, viz. red hair and freckling.
Data are presented to substantiate two more cases of pleiotropy: chest hair, hair on the back, and baldness; hair on the pinna of the ear and on the nose. While pedigree studies which might reveal the genetics of these traits are still inconclusive, population data indicate nonrandom distributions of the component traits of both syndromes.
Several thousands of observations indicate that most young adult males who are bald have marked amounts of hair on the chest. The more extreme examples of early baldness and hairy body are found generally in the same man. This association declines progressively with age. Excessive hair of the upper back region is also found more frequently than would be expected by chance among young men with this syndrome.
Hair on the pinna of the ear was studied in association with several other traits--as hair on the nose, mid-digital hair, convergent eyebrows, and baldness. It was found to be associated only with hair on the nose. Men from a wide variety of European countries were found to have hairy pinna in frequencies progressive with age, from about 10% in the fourth decade of life to some 30% in the seventh. Similar frequencies were found among mentally retarded men and among Ashkenazi Jews investigated previously, in contrast with approximately half of these frequencies among American Negroes. A similar situation was found with respect to the presence of hair on the external surface of the nose. Association between the two traits was found to be almost twice as great as expected if distribution were random, Chi square (1 df) for heterogeneity being 8,

Vol. 11, No. 4

Symposium Summaries

243

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

which is highly significant. Since the association was far short of perfect-- only 28 of the 44 men with hair on the nose had hair also on the pinna--the "syndrome" is not attributed to a single gene difference.
These studies suggest that pleiotropy may play a larger role in man's genetic make-up than seems to be generally recognized.
In a somewhat parenthetical discussion of the question whether hairy ears may be controlled by a Y-chromosome gene, a noteworthy observation is made regarding sex chromosome frequencies in American Negro populations. Assuming that their white ancestry as estimated by autosomal markers approximates one quarter or one fifth, or, say, 22%, and that all the white ancestry was contributed by males, then the frequency of white X-chromosome genes in today's mixed population would be 22/150, or about 15%; that of white Y-chromosomes, 22/50 or 44%, contrasted with 22/100 for white autosomal genes.
Brazilian Studies
N. E. MORTON
University of Hawaii
This paper is a preliminary report from comprehensive observations on 6,864 persons comprising 1,068 families in a high-mortality population of northeastern Brazil. The primary purpose was to determine the contribution of antigenic incompatibility, hétérozygote advantage, meiotic drive and rare recessive genes to the genetic load as expressed by fetal and postnatal deaths. Secondary objectives were to determine the genetic effects of population structure, especially racial mixture and the contribution of remote consanguinity to the total inbreeding coefficient, and to pursue

problems in formal, medical, and population genetics incidental to the main objective.
Sampling was restricted to mothers of 50 years or less having the longest married time (without regard to the form or legality of marriage) in order to maximize reproductive experience, together with their consorts and children. All were subsistence farmers, examined while migrating from poverty-stricken areas of northeast Brazil into the interior. All were drawn from conditions of stress, such as have characterized man during most of his history--small, inbred groups under "high" mortality (arbitrarily defined as an infant death rate above 50 per 1,000 livebirths), high birth rate, poor nutrition, and high rates of infection with minimum medical care and sanitation.
The population was a triracial mixture, approximately half white, one-third Negro and one sixth part-Indian. Racial ancestry was appraised by conventional traits as a basis for estimating the frequencies of genetic markers. The average family size was 4.4 children examined per couple, additional children being frequently reported who were unavailable for the study. From this rich source of data a number of studies of formal genetics have already been published, involving the loci for ABO, Rh, Gm, Hp, Ld (lactic dehydrogenase) and Ap (alkaline phosphatase).
Several studies in medical genetics also have been published. The association between endemic nodular goiter and PTC nontasters has been confirmed, based on 46 cases among the 4,098 persons examined; but no significant association was found between any form of goiter and social level, literacy, inbreeding, or race. Strongly negative evidence was found against the alleged association be-

244

Brief Report

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

tween the ABO locus and resistance to smallpox, based upon studies of 87 cases scarred by smallpox and 1,407 vaccinated persons. The inbreeding effects of malformations, anthropométrie traits, and reproductive performance have been appraised.
Inbreeding studies are still being processed. One of their aims is to discriminate the two hypotheses offered in explanation of the phenomenon of increased morbidity and mortality associated with inbreeding. The "classical" explanation is that of major detrimental genes which are maintained by current mutation; the alternative hypothesis is of multiple homozygous phenodeviants, which are non-Mendelian. Under the former, one would expect relatively high correlation of detrimental effects between siblings in inbred families, contrasted with relatively more sporadic defects in inbred families under the latter hypothesis.
A second aim is to differentiate the effects of inbreeding from those of a distressing environment. It is believed that this may be studied more satisfactorily in the present Brazilian sample than in populations living in favored environments with lower mortalities, which are not in genetic equilibrium between mutation and selection.
Social factors included such variables as illiteracy, age at marriage, contraception practice, and marital distance. The absence of association encountered between race and "mutational load" is in contrast to that noted in the third summary.
A Prospectus for Genetic Studies on the American Indian
J. V. NEEL AND F. M. SALZANO
University of Michigan and Universidade do Rio Grande do Sul,
Brazil

This paper sketches the broadness of the interconnecting fields in which primitive populations may be studied, combining numerous techniques of anthropology, population genetics, medicine and other disciplines, each including several subdivisions. It demonstrates that the greatest breadth will maximize the contributions which any one field might make in clarifying the results from another. The advantages of comprehensive investigation are illustrated by recent experiences with an indigenous population in Brazil. The well-known moral emerges, that science is one.
American Indian populations offer a number of advantages for studies in human biology and evolution. Their relatively short history in the new world-- perhaps some 20 to 30 thousand years-- tends to define and standardize appraisals of evolutionary change. They appear more homogeneous in certain features than old world populations, as suggested by their uniformity in hair form and color. They occupy a wide variety of ecological niches--physical, biotic, and cultural. Perhaps the principal advantage is the presence of a few dozen isolated populations in a variety of niches whose genetic and cultural situations have not yet been influenced by modern "civilization" too much to warrant study. Thirty such are named in a minimum list. The imminence of their genetic disruption and cultural despoliation is noted.
Problems of particular importance to population genetics include those of selective adaptation to specialized environments, some of which might serve as ready-made models of microevolution; of other forces which produce genetic diversity here and uniformity there, such as drift, migration effect, polymorphy, relaxation of selection rates; of parallelism between certain populations in ap-

Vol. 11, No. 4

Symposium Summaries

245

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

parently comparable niches of the old and new worlds, and divergence between others. Any such studies should include as many traits with hereditary components as is practicable to handle simultaneously, both normal and abnormal, encompassing fields from gross anatomy and histology to immunology.
The same advantages would prove beneficial to studies of disease. The Brazilian isolate included a high proportion of individuals with antibodies to poliomyelitis. Difficult as it may be to explain this, the problem would be magnified under more complicated circumstances. A host of similar questions await fresh, frontal attack. Consider our ignorance of measles and tuberculosis, two of the worst killers of Indians in the past. Where lone epidemiologists have failed to disentangle the web of genetic, historicocultural and other forces, more progress may be expected from cooperative studies including geneticists, anthropologists, demographers, and so forth.
Some of the major gaps in our anthropological knowledge are mentioned, including such questions as the racial history of the American Indian and the numbers and dates of arrival of immigrants who arrived here.
While the apparent homogeneity of American populations is open to question, it is possible to list a number of distinctive genetic features which they share. These include uniformly high frequencies of blood groups O and M; fairly high Duffya, Diegoa, and Rhesus R2; very low frequencies of r and R°; and possible absence of K. While American populations are fairly homogeneous for a number of genetic markers (Io, IA, r, k, Lua, Jsa, HbA and cv+, as well as the frequencies of Lea positives), their population means show no uniformity in a number of others. Some fifteen are listed which show wide ranges. For example,

Rz frequencies vary from .064 among 141 Waica bloods from Venezuela to .630 among 100 bloods of the Tunebo in Columbia, a factor of almost ten. The highest population sample mean for the Duffy gene is about seven times as high as the lowest mean. A few genes suggest bimodal distribution of population sample means--IB, Rz, r and Hp1--viz. two clusters of means with relatively few means between them.
The many problems posed by such situations can be investigated best in populations living under simpler and more stable conditions, with respect to genetic structure and all aspects of environment. But they must be investigated promptly, in the face of rapidly multiplying changes.
The Distribution of Certain Genes in the Old Order Amish
VICTOR A. MCKUSICK,
JOHN A. HOSTETLER,
JANICE A. EZELAND, AND
ROSWELL ELDRIDGE
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine Baltimore, Maryland
The advantages offered by inbred and restricted populations for studies of human genetics are well known. The Amish sect of Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Indiana (where some 80% of the Amish now live) offer particular advantages because of almost complete isolation, due to their religion; uniformly high standard of living and of medical care, which minimizes environmental variation; extensiveness and reliability of genealogical and medical records; with uniformly large families. From a population estimated at 8,200 in 1905 they have increased to about 45,000 today, during which time the United States' population

246

Brief Report

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

has merely doubled, partly due to immigration.
Among some fifteen genetic disorders which have been investigated, two are dominants--spastic paraplegia and symphalangy--eight are fairly rare récessives, and five are récessives of sufficient frequency to warrant special genealogical and regional studies, viz. Ellis-van Creveld syndrome, pyruvenate kinase deficient hemolytic anemia, Christmas disease (hemophilia B), limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, and an apparently new entity, which has been tentatively called cartilage-hair hypoplasia.
The new syndrome includes shortlimbed dwarfism and sparce, fine hair. Biopsy at the growth line shows cartilage hypoplasia. Seventy cases have been ascertained in forty-eight sibships, 41 females and 29 males. A considerably larger number would be expected under the recessive hypothesis, which suggests reduced penetrance, to about 50%.
Geographical distribution of these five recessive disorders is described and explained in the light of migration patterns, founder effect, and isolation.
The unusual opportunities for investigation of rare récessives has encouraged a particularly thorough search for new phenotypes. Over 200 rare recessive genetic entities have been noted in the literature as a preliminary list of "guides." Three factors are particularly advantageous among the Amish: diagnostic facilities are available at neighboring medical centers; genealogical data are extensive and accurate; relatives keep contact with one another and with their ailments. Four rare entities believed to be autosomal récessives have been ascertained through these particular advantages: endocardial fibroelastosis, a form of pituitary dwarfism, a form of hydro-

cephalus, and a form of hydrometrocolpos.
A warning is sounded in the distinguishing of a trait's mode of inheritance. Models are presented for testing the polygenic hypothesis.
Estimating the Rate and Outcome of Interethnic Mixture Among the Communities of Israel
E. GOLDSCHMIDT
Hebrew University Jerusalem, Israel
The population of Israel approximated 700,000 in 1948, whereas it exceeded two million by 1962, of whom some 1,200,000 were born abroad. The latter comprise a series of genetically differing isolates which are now disintegrating through intermarriage, some more rapidly than others. They present unique opportunities for a variety of studies of human genetics and evolution. These include retrospective studies of population mixture which attempt to estimate the gene concentrations of the founder populations and their proportionate contributions to the common gene pool.
Marriage rates outside the isolates in recent years have varied from over 50% for small communities, as those from the Urfa area of Turkey, to 18%, as of the larger group from Kurdistan in Iraq. Comparisons in frequency rates of polymeric characters between inbred and outbred populations of similar stock are still possible. The frequency of the G-6-PD deficiency enzyme is estimated at over 70% among the former, over 30% among the latter.
Israeli isolates vary in many ways-- size of gene pool, degree of cousin marriage and of outmarriage, in some cases a unique aspect of environment prior to immigration ("ecological niche"). These

Vol. 11, No. 4

Symposium Summaries

247

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

and other factors are being, and still can be further investigated in association with the frequencies of specific genes, their segregation ratios, and their persistence and expressivity under conditions of new, i.e., different, genetic backgrounds and environment.
Polymorphism and Natural Selection in Human Populations
A. C. ALLISON
National Institute for Medical Research London, England
Evidence for selection in man is accumulating slowly, and rather unevenly. The most impressive illustration is that of the sickle-cell gene, followed by those of genes producing several other abnormal hemoglobins and the enzyme for G-6-PD deficiency. While one can be quite confident that selection operates also on blood groups, the sex ratio, and in certain other cases of balanced adapted polymorphy, the evidence is less clear, and little or nothing is known about the mechanisms or the magnitude of the rates of selection.
The case for the sickle-cell gene today is substantially as was presented at the Cold Spring Harbor Symposium of 1955, fortified subsequently by a considerable literature. Gene frequencies in all or almost all regions of the world where sickling occurs are higher than can be explained satisfactorily by recurrent mutation alone, considering the high selection rate constantly operating against homozygotes. This is close to lOOfo in Africa before adulthood. Gene frequencies of about 20fo are found over much of West Africa, occasionally approaching 40%.
The protection given the hétérozygote sickler against attack by falciparum malaria is shown clearly by figures compar-

ing gene frequencies with attack rates in various populations, chiefly in Africa and Southeastern Asia. Selection operates principally by increasing the resistance against malaria of sickle-cell trait hétérozygotes of both sexes at all ages, particularly through differential mortality in young children; also, but to lesser degrees, through differential fertility among pregnant women as a result of malarial infection of the placenta.
High frequencies of sickling are confined without exception to regions where falciparum malaria is now, or has been until recently, endemic; or to populations until recently inhabiting such a region.
In a number of Negro populations which have been living in nonmalarial regions in the Americas for several hundred years, sickle-cell gene frequencies are notably lower than in Africa--substantially lower than may be explained by their white ancestry. A more satisfactory explanation of the reduction is relaxed selection; i.e., the higher selection rates of normal homozygotes as contrasted with hétérozygote sicklers in the malarial habitat of the past is replaced by equal rates of the two genotypes in the nonmalarial habitat today, while the rate of elimination of homozygous abnormals is constant in relation to gene frequency in all habitats.
Studies of association between blood groups and disease have produced a constantly increasing number of illustrations of selection, but they are too numerous for the present review, the arguments are sometimes quite complicated, and the conclusions often open to challenge. In general, it seems apparent that selection is operating on a number of genes of the blood group systems and other genetic marker traits, although in many cases the rates may be very low, and al-

248

Brief Report

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

ways the whole picture with respect to any one gene must be complicated, since the selection in either direction resulting from one or more forces is countered and rather balanced by forces in the opposite direction.
Haptoglobin Phenotypes: Geographic Distribution and Variant Patterns
E. R. GIBLETT King County Blood Bank
Seattle, Washington
Haptoglobin is an alpha-2 globulin having the unique property of binding or firmly uniting with hemoglobin from hemolyzed erythrocytes, both in vitro and in vivo, to a far greater degree than has any other serum protein. It comprises about 1% of the protein in most normal human serum, but the quantity varies widely and in some cases cannot be detected. Three types have been distinguished from one another by their different patterns in starch gel electrophoresis--Hp 1-1, Hp 2-1, and Hp 2-2. They are controlled by two codominant alíeles, Hp1 and Hp2. The frequency of Hp-1 ranges in most samples of Europeans from .40 to .45; in African Negro samples, from .60 to .78.
By subjecting purified haptoglobin to electrophoresis in specialized media, Oliver Smithies and his colleagues have demonstrated that it consists of two kinds of polypeptide chains, called alpha and beta. The Hp-1 alpha polypeptide can be further resolved into two entities, a faster moving 1-F and a more slowly moving 1-S. Thus the Hp-1/Hp-1 phenotype consists of three alternative genotypes, 1-F/1-F, 1-F/ 1-S, and 1-S/1-S. Similarly, the Hp-2/Hp-l phenotype consists of either 2/1-F or 2/1-S. However, these cannot be distinguished in conventional starch gels.

A number of variant phenotypes have
been found in recent years. The most
common, called Hp 2-1 (mod.), has sev-
eral minor variations of pattern in elec-
trophoresis. It occurs in over 10% of
American Negro samples. Two hypothe-
ses have been offered to explain it--a third alíele, called Hp2<m«>-> or Hp211;
and the control of the structural genes Hp1 and Hp2 by control genes G1 and C2, whose products, called activators A1 and A2, respectively, act through the cyto-
plasm.
Estimates of gene frequencies among samples of three racial groups in Seattle have shown considerable differences. The frequency of Hp2 among American Negroes is 35% in addition to their Hp2M frequency of 10% totaling 45%; whites have considerably higher estimates of Hp2; Orientals (mostly Japanese), higher still, with 74%. While the frequency estimates of Hp1 show similar differences, being complementary to those of Hp2, the variant Hpis reveals no differences in the frequencies between the three racial groups, which are 25%, 29%, and 26%, respectively. In contrast, Hp1F occurs in 13% of the white sample, 26% of the Negroes, and virtually none of the Orientals.
A number of additional hétérozygote
variants are reported. One, resembling
the Hp-2/Hp-l (mod.) found in Negroes,
occurs not infrequently in the sample of
Orientals. Another, called Hp-2/Hp-l
(Hawaii), was found in a sample of over
1,000 bloods from Honolulu. These and
several other variants are observable.
While the rare patterns may be ex-
plained by hypothetical alíeles, it is im-
possible to clarify their genetic mecha-
nisms at present, in the absence of knowl-
edge of their biochemical structure.

