Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Heredity counseling: The Role of the Doctor
Sheldon C. Reed
To cite this article: Sheldon C. Reed (1956) Heredity counseling: The Role of the Doctor, Eugenics Quarterly, 3:2, 106-108, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1956.9987276 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1956.9987276
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

106 Eugenics Quarterly

of 1280 Cases of Mental Defect. Medical Re- fect. Sidgwick and Jackson Limited, London.

search Council. Special Report Series, No. 229. SONDEN, T. 1936. Die Inzestverbrechen in Schweden

His Majesty's Stationery Office, London.

und Ihre Ursachen. Acta Psychiatrica et Neuro-

PENROSE, L. S. 1949. The Biology of Mental De-

logica, 1 2 : Fase. 4, 379-401

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

HEREDITY COUNSELING The Role of the Doctor*

SHELDON C. REED
The Dight Institute University of Minnesota

M.. OST PHYSICIANS ARE CALLED UPON tO that concerns him? The fact that the pa-

give genetic counseling from time to time. tient wants the information is one good

The patient expects the answers he gets reason. In addition, it may make the dif-

regarding heredity in his family to be of ference between happiness or sorrow for a

the same high quality as the surgical or generation or more in the future.

other medical counseling which he receives. The physician may obtain assistance

Most physicians, however, have had little from the professional geneticist at the

training in medical genetics and may not heredity clinics throughout the country.

be able to give professional service in this But counseling in medical genetics at the

field. The reason that training in medical "grass-roots" level will have to be done by

genetics is still inadequate is that the sub- the family physician in the vast majority

ject is new, and space in the medical cur- of cases.

riculum has not yet been found for it in It is the physician whois likely to have

very many medical schools.

a hand in shaping the future evolution of

Where are the facts to be found which mankind because our reproduction is no

are needed for counseling in medical longer completely capricious. The desire

genetics? They are scattered throughout for a happy family of normal children is

scores of scientific publications, and some one of the strongest human motivations.

of the most useful of these are unavailable For the first time in history the physician

to the practitioner. There are a few texts which describe how heredity works for each one of the vast array of human anomalies. But there are expensive and cumbersome, and none of them gives the physician much help in the job of translating the science of human genetics to his patients.
Why should the doctor try to explain to the patient that a predictable percentage of his children will display the abnormality

is able to be of major assistance in achieving this highest of life's goals. If the couple are sterile, he mayhelp in bringing about fertility. If the couple find that the family is increasing beyond their fondest expectations, he canslow down the flood. In civilized countries responsible parents no longer leave reproduction to the vagaries of chance. The physician officiates at the birth of the child and is the authoritative source

Extracts from Counseling in Medical Genetics, by Sheldon C. Reed, W. B. Saunders, Philadelphia and London, 1955,286 pp. By permission of the author and publisher.

of scientific information about reproduction.
The physician of today not only helps

107

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

the couple to achieve a family size which is appropriate to their environment, but, by means of genetic counseling, he can assist them to approach the quality of children they desire. A couple who have had five boys, three doomed to die of progressive muscular dystrophy, succeeded in producing the quantity of children they wanted but they are most unhappy that three of their children will never become men. The physician of tomorrow will very probably be able to guarantee them five normal boys. At least, he will be able to tell a mother such as the one above whether or not she carries the sex-linked gene for progressive muscular dystrophy. This mother had lost a brother with the disease, and the physician of today could have told her that she had an even chance of carrying the abnormal gene. Most of the techniques for improving man's genotype are still in the future, but at no time in history have we been in the favorable position that we are in today. The fact that life expectancy has been doubled in a few generations is not due to the faith-healer and the quack but to the physician who is using his science with a sense of responsibility which it would be difficult to match. Today his responsibility includes helping the couple with their problems of heredity and reproduction.
The point which is being approached is this. In the United States today practically all fertile couples know that they can regulate their family size to a considerable degree by using either the rhythm method or contraceptives. A good proportion of them also know that something can be done to avoid the appearance of abnormal children, whether the abnormality be due to environmental or genetic factors, or both. Obviously, they are going to ask the physician for answers to their questions. The time has come when the physician can give correct answers to a large number of these serious pleas for knowledge.
Each of the questions is likely to be different from the others, and each is a dif-

ferent puzzle. The physician must put a number of pieces together in order to solve the problem. The best that the geneticist can do is to supply some of the pieces of the puzzle. In the last analysis, it is the physician who will have to fit the pieces together. In the puzzle will be pieces supplied by biochemistry, economics, religion, social class concepts, medicine, genetics, and most important of all, common sense.
The geneticist can supply the essential data, but he has no real rapport with the couple. He is not a part of the family and cannot decide whether or not the couple should try to have more or fewer children, depending upon the genetic problem which is being faced. The family physician is in a better position. He is the medical and biologic advisor to the family, and the members want him to help them in making their decisions regarding their own reproduction. How much assistance can be given depends upon the always slightly different pieces of the puzzle which have to be fitted together.
Life would be intellectually simpler if we could abolish all science. We could suppress nuclear physics as we once outlawed the crossbow. But as long as man has his brains, we can't completely stifle his curiosity about himself and the world around him. It looks as if science and the physician are here to stay. We have passed the point of no return.
The practice of medicine is often referred to as an art, but it is an art which must be restricted to scientists. The physician is the chief scientist with whom the ordinary family has personal contact. It may come as something of a shock to the physician to realize that man's future evolution rests upon the doctor's ability and judgment. Man's evolution depends upon changes in his heredity. There will be no appreciable change in the genotype of the species in one year, nor will one physician cause much variation of the genes. However, over the millenia there will be changes and they must come at the familv

108 Eugenics Quarterly

level, which is where the doctor functions. The discovery of insulin was dysgenic in
that it permitted those with the heredity for diabetes to live and increase the incidence of the deleterious gene over what it would have been had they died, as happened in the past. This type of evolution has occurred, and will become even more frequent as the genes for one disease after another are overruled by medical advances. We will eventually, as a species, be carrying a heavy load of defective heredity which we will patch up with false teeth and artificial organs of every description. This won't happen overnight. The speed at which it comes about will result in large part from the success of medical research

balanced by the quality of genetic counseling provided by the physician. It seems probable that our evolution in the future will be much more rapid than it has been in the past.
There isn't any question that our immediate social advances or calamities will depend upon other factors than gene changes. It is the gene changes over periods of thousands of years which will gradually become the responsibility of the medical profession. At present the physician's major responsibility is to learn how to ensure a family of happy, normal children for each couple. Even for this immediate obligation there is still much to learn.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

