Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Mental health statistics of the future
Morton Kramer
To cite this article: Morton Kramer (1966) Mental health statistics of the future, Eugenics Quarterly, 13:3, 186-204, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1966.9987667 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1966.9987667
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:28

MENTAL HEALTH STATISTICS OF THE FUTURE*

MORTON KRAMER 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

The purpose of this paper is to predict the nature and content of mental health statistics of the future and method required to collect them, from the point of view of the director of a Federal program, located in the National Institute of Mental Health, responsible for the collection and analysis of data on the mental health of the Nation. So that the reader will have some notion of factors to be used in the forecast, it is essential at the outset that he have some understanding of the current status of mental health statistics in the United States. It is also essential to have some understanding of the profound effect that the late President Kennedy's Message on Mental Health and Mental Retardation (House of Rep., Doc. 58, 1963) and recent legislation to implement it (PL 88-164, 1963; PL 89-105, 1965) will have on the future of mental health programs for the Nation, and thus, on the future of mental health statistics.
THE CURRENT STATE OF MENTAL
HEALTH STATISTICS
A major goal of the public health attack on the mental disorders is to re'duce the disability caused by these disorders. It is proposed to accomplish this by developing programs that will apply knowledge concerning (1) primary prevention of mental disorders (i.e., pre-
* Presented at a Panel Discussion arranged by the Committee on Social Statistics for the Annual Conference of the Eastern Sociological Society held April 10-11, 1965, at the Commodore Hotel, New York City.
 Chief, Office of Biometry, National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Public Health Service, Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Bethesda, Maryland.

venting mental disorders that can be prevented); (2) secondary prevention (i.e., terminating mental disorders that respond to specific treatment methods); and (3) tertiary prevention (i.e., rehabilitating persons with disorders that do not respond to specific treatment by the application of measures which lead to maximum achievement of the rehabilitation potential of affected persons). To facilitate planning, implementing, and evaluating programs for prevention and control of these disorders at the local, state, and national levels, methods are needed for determining in various segments of the population the incidence and prevalence of these disorders, the types of disabilities attributable to them, and their severity. It is also necessary to determine the reasons for increases, decreases, or no change in these indexes.
With few minor exceptions, adequate and practical case-finding techniques for carrying out surveys of the prevalence and incidence of specific types of mental disorders in the noninstitutionalized population do not exist. Consequently, no health agency has been able to develop a mechanism for the systematic collection of morbidity data on the mental disorders which can be used to provide reliable estimates of the incidence, prevalence and duration of specific disorders in the noninstitutionalized population from time to time and from place to place (APHA, 1962). Due to the urgent need for indexes to provide guidance in the development and subsequent evaluation of programs, a decision was made early in the development of the program of the Office of Biometry to concentrate on the analysis of systematic data,

186

Vol. 13, No. 3

Mental Health

187

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

collected periodically, on the characteristics of patients admitted to mental hospitals(particularly the state hospitals), outpatient psychiatric clinics, and other facilities such as general hospitals with psychiatric services. Since many state departments of mental health had already developed statistical reporting systems for gathering data on the characteristics of their large patient population, it seemed reasonable to use these organized data collection activities as a wedge for developing in each state a uniform body of statistical and epidemiological data concerning the mental disorders.
Although such medical care data provide information only on that portion of the universe of persons with mental disorders admitted to the facilities in question, the data, when properly used, can provide a firm starting point for planning and evaluating programs to control disability associated with such disorders. The facts so collected are of value in that they provide both crosssectional and trend data on the volume of treatment and rehabilitation facilities available to a community through these resources, the characteristics of persons utilizing them, the patterns of patient flow, and often some indication of the success or failure of the services provided.
To date these data have been an invaluable source of information for persons investigating time changes in the frequency of occurrence of mental disorders in different population groups (GAP, 1961). They will continue to be an important source of data for such studies until methods and procedures become available and projects are established for assessing periodic changes in the frequency of occurrence of these disorders in the general population. They also underscore knowledge that must be gained in order to assess the effective-

ness of programs of care, treatment, and

rehabilitation in controlling mental dis-

orders. I hasten to add that the limita-

tions of these data are fully appreciated.

Studies based on them must be supple-

mented by direct surveys of population

groups, field and community studies

(Mental Health Research Unit, 1960,

1961). More will be said about this

later.

'

SOME PERTINENT HISTORICAL EVENTS
Since the end of World War II Congress, state legislatures, and professional and lay leaders in the mental health field have done much to develop community based as well as intrainstitutional programs to improve conditions in the state mental hospitals, to stem their growth, and to decrease the numbers of patients under their care. Indeed, the 18 years since the passage of the National Mental Health Act (PL 487, 1946) have witnessed a number of highly significant events in the history of the mental health movement in the United States, among which are: the development of programs to counteract the dehumanizing effects of the large mental hospitals; the total push programs of the early 1950's; the widespread use of psychosurgery in the late 1940's and its sudden disappearance in the early 1950's; the introduction of the tranquilizers in the early 1950's and their increasing and continuing widespread use; the open hospital, group psychotherapy, the rapid increase in numbers of outpatient clinics and in general hospitals with psychiatric services, introduction of day and night care centers for the mentally ill; increased numbers of psychiatrists in private practice; and the gradual increase of the number of commercial insurance carriers providing coverage for mental illness.
All these developments plus many

188

Kramer

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

others led to the establishment of the Joint Commission on Mental Illness and Mental Health by the Congress in 1955 (PL 182, 1955). The report of this Commission, issued in 1961 (Joint Commission, 1961), led to further action in the Federal government and on the part of the professionals in the mental health field and the lay public which culminated in the Kennedy Message of 1963 and the Mental Retardation and Community Mental Health Centers Construction Act of October 1963, referred to earlier.
I will quote passages from the Kennedy Message since they further establish the background against which to make predictions of the future content of mental health statistics:
I propose a national mental health program to assist in the inauguration of a wholly new emphasis and approach to care for the mentally ill. This approach relies primarily upon the new knowledge and new drugs acquired and developed in recent years which make it posible for most of the mentally ill to be successfully and quickly treated in their own communities and returned to a useful place in society.
These breakthroughs have rendered obsolete the traditional methods of treatment which imposed upon the mentally ill a social quarantine, a prolonged or permanent confinement in huge, unhappy hospitals where they were out of sight and forgotten. I am not unappreciative of the efforts undertaken by many states to improve conditions in these hospitals, or the dedicated work of many hospital staff members. But their task has been staggering and the results too often dismal, as the comprehensive study by the Joint Commission on Mental Illness and Health pointed out in 1961. . . .
If we launch a broad new mental health program now, it will be possible within a decade or two to reduce the number of patients now under custodial care by 50 percent or more. Many more mentally ill can be helped

to remain in their own homes without hardship to themselves or their families. Those who are hospitalized can be helped to return to their own communities. All but a small proportion can be restored to useful life. We can spare them and their families much of the misery which mental illness now entails. We can save public funds and we can conserve our manpower resources. . . .
Central to these objectives is the establishment of a network of comprehensive community mental health center programs throughout the nation which provide and coordinate essential elements of comprehensive services at the local level so as to maintain the patient close to his own environment, and to protect his links with family and community. It is also hoped that these programs will result in sizeable reductions in the population of state mental hospitals both by preventing admissions to, as well as effecting more rapid turnover of patients in, such institutions. The intensified national program also includes a major program for improving care in state mental hospitals while the comprehensive centers develop and a series of programs for producing additional manpower for research and action programs. It is anticipated that by 1970 several hundred centers--between 300 and 600--will be in operation throughout the nation. By 1980 it is hoped there will be an equivalent of a center for every 100,000 population. These center programs, by their very nature, will provide extraordinary opportunities for research and evaluation activities. Against this background I will make my predictions.
PREDICTIONS
Cross-Sectional and Trend Data on Characteristics of Patients Utilizing
Specific Psychiatric Services
The current emphasis on establishing a network of comprehensive community

Vol. 13, No. 3

Mental Health

189

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

mental health centers throughout the nation to control mental disorders and to promote mental health will require the establishment of national, state, and local reporting and survey programs to provide data needed to describe patterns of utilization of all facilities specifically designated as psychiatric facilities1 as well as other mental health facilities2 and auxiliary facilitiess which play an important role in the care, treatment, and rehabilitation of the mentally ill (NIMH, 1965). As a result of emphasis on the reduction of the patient population in the state mental hospitals, data will continue to be needed on trends of resident patients, admissions, and population turnover specific for age, sex, diagnosis, length of stay, and other relevant variables.;
Data of the type shown in Figures 1 and 2 on trends of the number of patients in the resident populations in state mental hospitals and the age and sex, specific resident patient rates, and corresponding data on first admissions, further specified by diagnosis, will certainly be needed. They are essential for charting changes in the age, sex, diagnostic, and length-of-stay composition, for the planning of intrahospital and community-
1A psychiatric facility is defined as an organization that has as its primary concern the care, treatment, and rehabilitation of the mentally ill or retarded, and in which there are psychiatrists who assume medical responsibility for all patients with a primary diagnosis of mental disorder. A psychiatric facility may have one or more units.
2Other mental health facilities differ from psychiatric facilities, in many cases, only by the fact that they do not have psychiatrists who assume medical responsibility for all patients with a primary diagnosis of mental disorder. Included in any list of other mental health facilities would be: day-night facilities, halfway houses, outpatient mental health facilities, alcoholism clinics, narcotics clinics, clinics for the mentally retarded, psychological clinics, family service agencies, special psychological service programs in school systems, marital counseling service, and rehabilitation facilities for the mentally ill.
3Auxiliary facilities include such facilities as sheltered workshops, nursing homes, foster homes, and chronic disease hospitals.

action programs, and for delineating specific problems for community and hospital research on factors associated with the observed changes. They are of basic importance in estimating the future size of the populations of state mental hospitals.
The underlying assumptions on which the newly emerging community mental health programs are based will require time series on patterns of utilization of services by social, household, familial, and economic characteristics of individuals and by other pertinent characteristics that differentiate populations. To illustrate, it has long been known that marital status bears an important relationship to rates of first admission to and probability of stay in the state mental hospitals. Figures 3 and 4 show the associations between marital status and first admission rates and probability of release in the state mental hospitals of 13 states.4 Figure 5 shows the age specific resident patient rates by marital status for all mental hospitals--governmental and nongovernmental--as obtained from the institutional census carried out in conjunction with the twelfth decenial census of population in April 1960. The differential rates of admission, mortality, release, and readmission by marital status, operating over the years, have produced the situation portrayed in Figure 5. The excessively high proportion of the never married population resident in mental hospitals as compared to the other groups, particularly the married, is striking. It is especially marked among the males, among whom this proportion rises from 1,368 per 100,000 (1.4%) in
4These data are derived from a collaborative study of the Office of Biometry with 13 states of the model reporting area, yielding a combined total of 22,762 first admissions with a diagnosis of functional psychosis. The states included in the study are: Arkansas, California, Illinois, Ken. tucky, Louisiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania. Tennessee, Wisconsin.

190

Number of Patients 800.000
400.000

400.000

Kramer

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

200,000

Total Admissions

Net Releases

60.000

40,000

Deaths
Observed Numbers -- Trend Line (based on 1946-55 data)
Trend Line

20.000

1946 1948

1950 1952

1954 1956

1958 I960

1962

Year

Figure 1. Observed and actual numbers of resident patients, end of year, total admissions, net releases, and deaths in state and county mental hospitals. United States, 1946-1963. (Source: Patients in Mental Institutions, Part II, State and County Mental Hospitals, 1946-1963, U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Public Health Service.)

the age group 25--36 years, to 5,435 per 100,000 (5.4%) in the age group 45-54 years, to 6,105 per 100,000 (6.1%) in the age group 75 and over. The fact that time series on resident patient rates by age and marital status do not exist at the national, state, and local levels is a serious shortcoming and must be changed in the future.
The foregoing discussion has dealt

with the state hospitals. The only other facilities for which systematically collected data are available by age, sex, and diagnosis are the outpatient psychiatric clinics (Rosen et al,, 1964).
The number of terminations in these clinics has increased from 283,000 in 1959 to 453,000 in 1963, an increase of about 60%. Characteristically, the clinic population has been heavily weighted

Vol. 13, No. 3

Mental Health

191

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

1950 1952 1934 1956 1958 I960 1962 YEAR

1950 1952 1954 1956 1958 I960 1962 YEAR

Figure 2. Resident patient rates to state and county mental hospitals, by age and sex, United States, 1950-1963. (Source: Patients in Mental Institutions, Part II, State and County Mental Hospitals, 1946-196}, U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Public Health Service.)

with children under 18 years and with adults in the age groups 18-44 years. Currently, the former group accounts for 35% of the admissions and the latter, 49%. Relatively small proportions are in the age groups 45-64 years and 65 years and over. Despite these increases,

admissions to clinics in the age groups 45-64 years and 65 years and over constitute only 14% and 2%, respectively, of the total. In contrast, persons in these age groups constitute 21% and 29% of first admissions, respectively, to the public mental hospitals. Figure '6 shows

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

192

Kramer

Eugen. Quart.

MARITAL STATUS

100

160 80

140
60

100
§ 80
60 40 20

25-44 45-64 AGE

65+

Figure 3. First admission rates of patients with functional psychotic disorders to state and county mental hospitals by marital status and age, Model Reporting Area Cohort Study, 1960. (Source: Arkansas, California, Illinois, Kentucky, Louisiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Wisconsin.)

clearly the differences in the pattern and rates of utilization of mental hospitals and outpatient clinics by the different age groups of the population of the United States.
Similar kinds of cross-sectional and patient flow data will be needed for other types of psychiatric facilities, par-

5 40
20

Married -- · -- Pinned t Separated
Widowed
Never worried

1 0 3 6 9 12
MONTHS AFTER ADMISSION
Figure 4. Percent of first admissions with functional psychosis released from state and county mental hospitals, by marital status. Model Reporting Area Cohort Study, 1960. (Source: Arkansas, California, Illinois, Kentucky, Louisiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Wisconsin.)

ticularly general hospitals, comprehensive centers, and day care centers.
Data on marital status must be supplemented by data on the relationship of household and family composition to rates of admission to psychiatric facilities. This is essential because of increasing emphasis on the role of the family in the care, treatment, and rehabilitation of the mentally ill and on the need to maintain and protect patients' links with their families and communities. An example of the type of

i 6000

BOTH SEXES

2 4000

HALE

FEMALE
--- Single
Dimrtti Separated
Widowed 'Married

2000

60802040608020 AGE

40 60 80

Figure 5. Resident patient rates in all mental hospitals, by marital status, age, and sex, United States, 1960. (Source: US. Census of Population, Inmates of Institutions, Series PC (2)-8A, VS. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.)

Vol. 13, No. 3

Mental Health

850 1
BOTH SEXES
800

1

1

850 / - 800

700

-

-- ---

MentalHospitals Outpatient Psychiatric

Clinics

g 600

/ - 700
- 600

193

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

500 -

>
u
, 400 -

8

£300 _ / Terminations X

Q.
Id

200 -

/X //

Total \ Admissions \ ^

- 500 - 400 - 300 - 200

100 100

1 11 i
<25 25-34 35-44 45-54 55-64 65+ AGE
Figure 6. Admissions andresident patient rates in state and county mental hospitals and terminations of outpatient psychiatric clinics, United States, 1963. (Sources: Patients in Mental Institutions, Part 11,State and County Mental Hospitals, 1963,U.S. Department ofHealth, Education, and Welfare, Public Health Service; Annual Statistical Report, Data on Patients, Outpatient Psychiatric Clinics, 1963, U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Public Health Service.)

data that, I believe, will assume increasing importance in thefuture is shown in Table 1and Figure 7.
As a result of studies carried out by the Office of Biometry linking clinical records from psychiatric facilities in the States of Maryland and Louisiana with the records ofthe tenth decennial census of population, andby field studies to supplement these data, it has been possible todevelop distributions of persons admitted to a universe of psychiatricfacilities not only by various demographic factors, but also by whether the patients

lived in a family ornot,5 and by size of household, and to obtain corresponding rates of admission to these facilities specific for such factors (Pollack et al.,
6 As defined by theBureau of theCensus, a family consists of two or more persons in the same household who are related to each other by blood, marriage, or adoption; andall persons living together in one household whoare related toeach other are regarded as one family. A household consists of allthe persons who occupy a housing unit. Ahouse, anapartment,or other group of rooms, or a single room, is regarded asa housing unit when it is occupied or intended foroccupancy as separate living quarters. (See U.S. Census of Population, 1960, Final Report PC(2)-48, Persons by Family Characteristics, page ix.)

194

Kramer

Eugen. Quart.

TABLE 1
FIRST ADMISSIONS TO ALL PSYCHIATRIC FACILITIES BY RELATIONSHIP TO HOUSEHOLD HEAD, NUMBER OF RELATED PERSONS IN HOUSEHOLD, AND HOUSEHOLD SIZE, FOR PERSONS LIVING IN FAMILIES, MARYLAND 1 9 6 0 .

Relationship to

Number of First Admissions ·

]Number in Household

Total 2

4 or 6 and 3 5 over

Rates per 100,000

Number in Household

Total 2

4 or 35

6 and over

Total

7161 1223 1332 2775 1831 251.2 272.0 258.9 2415 248.5

Head of household

1932 549 379 635 369 252.9 244.0 220.9 242.4 350.0

Male

1684 461 305 589 329 243.7 239.9 198.5 238.6 3345

Female

248 88 74 46 40 340.1 268.1 412.1 303.2 573.6

Wife 1641 413 311 622 295 246.4 229.8 209.8 257.1 307.4

Child

2860 134 471 1310 945 237.6 544.3 297.5 228.1 211.7

Child under 18 years 2141 37 270 1070 764 206.1 357.2 230.0 208.9 191.5

Child 18 years and over 719 97 201 240 181 436.4 680.0 491.4 385.9 381.9

Other relative

728 127 171 208 222 335.8 623.6 469.5 293.2 249.2

* The distribution by relationship tohead and household size was estimated based on census records and a sample of first admissions.
Source: Population data were obtained from unpublished tabulations prepared bythe Bureau of the Census.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

NUMBER IN HOUSEHOLD

RELATIONSHIP TO HOUSEHOLD HEAD

200 400

Male Mead of Household Female Head of Household Wife of Head Son or Daughter under 18 Son or Daughter 18 8 over Other Relative of Head

88888888888885888883^

600 800 1,000

Male Head of Household Female Head of Household Wife of Head Son or Daughter under18 Son orDaughter 18 & over Other Relative of Head

4or5

Male Head of Household Female Head of Household Wife of Head Son or Daughter under18 Son orDaughter 18 8k over Other Relative of Head

6 8 over

Male Head of Household Female Head of Household Wife of Head Son or Daughter under 18 Son or Daughter 18 8 over Other Relative of Head

200

400

600

800

RATE PER 100,000 POPULATION

J
1,000

Figure 7. First admissions to allpsychiatric facilities by relationship to household head and number of related persons in household, forpersons living in families, Maryland, 1960. (Source: Population data were obtained from unpublished tabulations prepared by the Bureau ofthe Census.)

Vol. 13, No. 3

Mental Health

195

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

1964). The rates of admission to facilities in the State of Maryland for persons living in families, specific for relationship to head of household, are given in Figure 7.
The data indicate that first admission rates to psychiatric facilities are (1) higher for heads of large-sized families; (2) higher for female heads of families than male heads; (3) higher for wives of the heads of larger-sized families than for those of smaller families; and (4) higher for children under 18 years of age in two-person families (indicating the absence of at least one parent) than for children in larger families. Such findings will be useful for planning programs of psychiatric care at the community and household level, by singling out high risk groups that need special attention. They will also provide leads to further research on the etiology of mental disorders, role-functioning within the family, and the extent of social problems created by mental disorders.
Until now the relationships of marital status and of family composition to rates of admission to psychiatric facilities have been studied essentially as to their significance in the etiology of mental disorders. Certainly such research is essential and must continue. However, in the era of community care, these data must also be viewed as to their relevance and importance to programs providing care, treatment, and rehabilitation of the mentally ill at the family and community level and to the facilities that are involved in such programs.
As a result of the foregoing, I predict the increasing production of periodic and time series data on rates of utilization of psychiatric facilities specific for marital status and family composition and related household variables.

Development of Psychiatric Case Registers
Data obtained from separate investigations of utilization of specific kinds of psychiatric facilities emphasize the sizeable number of people in the United States under such care. It is estimated that during 1964, at least 1,000,000 persons, about 5 per 1,000 population, were admitted to psychiatric facilities in the U.S. However, the planning that each of the states has carried out in recent years as a basis for developing expanded programs of mental health services, and the emphasis now being placed in the National Mental Health Program on continuity of care and on the maintenance of relationships between the individual elements of the comprehensive services within a community, emphasize the need to coordinate in a systematic way essential pieces of information on characteristics of patients receiving services, the services they receive, and outcome.
The previously mentioned study of the Office of Biometry, carried out in conjunction with the 1960 census of population (Pollack et al., 1964), yielded some basic data for the States of Maryland and Louisiana on rates of first admission to a universe of psychiatric facilities--defined as all of the state, county, Veterans Administration, and private mental hospitals in these states, all psychiatric clinics, and all general hospitals with psychiatric services. The rates of first admissions by age and by the facility in which the first contact was made is shown in Figure 8. There is need to maintain these data on a continuing basis- so as to determine subsequent experience and fate of patients admitted to such facilities. To do this requires that systematic, longitudinal histories of psychiatric services a patient receives be

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

_ _ _ Outpatient Psychiatric | | Clinics
_ _ , General Hospitals with k \ 1 Psychiatric Facilities
«Privats Mental I Hospitals

, Veterans Administration [Hospitals .Public Mental | Hosprtals

Figure 8. First admission rates to psychiatric facilities by types of facilities, Louisiana and Maryland, 1960-61. (Source: Earl S. Pollack et al., Socioeconomic and family characteristics of patients admitted to psychiatric services, Amer. J. Public Health, 54: 506-518, March 1964.)

collected in a way appropriate for statistical analysis.
A psychiatric case register has been used to do this in several places in the United States. This procedure requires that routine case reports from all known outpatient and inpatient psychiatric fa-

cilities and, if possible, from private practitioners within an area be forwarded to a central agency, and that the report be identified by patient name and other identifying data for linkage into a single record of all episodes of treatment for an individual. The purposes to which

Vol. 13, No. 3

Mental Health

197

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

such a register can be put are several. Among these are the development of unduplicated counts of individuals receiving services for determination of rates of admission to psychiatric care on a person basis, specific for age, sex, color, residence, diagnosis, and other characteristics (Bahn et al, 1965; Gardner et al., 1963); charting the flow of persons from one facility to another; study of changes in diagnosis over time (Babigian et al., 1965); and determination of the probabilities of readmission to any psychiatric facility. Registers can also be used to guide activities related to follow-up services for patients and their families and to provide data useful in the evaluation of such programs. They can also be used as a basis for various types of epidemiologic and social science research on the mental disorders and related problems, such as suicide (Gardner et al., 1964).
Community registers are now in operation in the State of Maryland (Bahn et al., 1964), Monroe County, New York (Gardner et al., 1963), Hawaii, and a three-county area in North Carolina. The data for the Maryland Register has been processed in such a way that it can be programmed onto a computer for automatic record linkage and updating and for certain analytical operations from the stored data, such as computation of rates and life table analyses.
I predict that in the next 10 to 20 years there will be at least double the number of registers now established, located in strategically selected areas throughout the U.S., using comparable definitions and methods for data collection and analysis. I would not estimate more than this now. The difficulty in prediction relates to several factors that will determine the future course of these developments, such as simplified data collection methods; continuing financial

support; the availability of skilled dataprocessing personnel, statistical analysts, and supporting staff; and the degrees to which these registers achieve their potentiality for various studies in basic and applied research on etiology, on care, treatment, and rehabilitation of the mentally ill, and on related issues. Unless methods are developed to simplify the data-collection operation, it is difficult to see how many areas can establish these programs. In this regard, methods that would automate data collection, such as optical scanning devices, teletyping of carefully completed, well-designed basic records into a central data collection and analysis point, and related devices would be most useful in developing procedures that will tend to overcome the overwhelming obstacles now presented by certain kinds of data collection programs.
Development of CaseFinding Techniques
So far I have dealt with the data obtained from studies of utilization of psychiatric facilities. Due to the biases inherent in such medical care data, resulting from the many selective factors that determine who goes where for specific kinds of services, such studies must be supplemented by others on the frequency of occurrence of mental disorders in the noninstitutionalized population.
The problem here has been that of developing satisfactory case-finding techniques that can be generally applied. Those that have been utilized in such surveys as those done in Midtown (Srole et al., 1962) and in Stirling | County (Leighton et al., 1963) have relied on a psychiatrist's assessment of data collected by nonpsychiatric interviewers through surveys of the mental and physical health and community participation of the members of households in the noninstitutionalized population. The

198

Kramer

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

persons that constituted the universe of respondents in these surveys were not examined clinically by a psychiatrist. Thus the ratings of a respondent's mental health status and possible psychiatric classification were made entirely on the basis of a psychiatrist's assessment of the reported data, plus, in the case of the Stirling County Study, data obtained from key community informants such as general practitioners, social agencies, school teachers, and a community psychiatric clinic, and from a variety of institutional records.
Methods were developed in these studies which led to high reliability among psychiatrists in their utilization of data on the survey records to classify persons by types of psychiatric symptom patterns. However, the problem still remains of determining the validity of these symptom patterns--that is, their meaning and their possible relationships to psychiatric disorder. Careful followup studies of the groups that showed various symptom patterns are needed to determine the likelihood that a given pattern is the result of or is likely to result in mental disorder.
Another survey that was done in Baltimore utilized as a case finding technique, a preliminary screening of a probability sample of a noninstitutionalized population by a group of internists to determine, among other things, persons likely to have psychiatric disorders (suspected cases)(Pasamanick et al., 1957). The records of these suspects were then evaluated by a team of psychiatrists to determine those for whom the recorded data (including in some instances data from an actual psychiatric examination) supported a psychiatric diagnosis. In this instance, there is no objective way of determining the effectiveness of the way in which the physicians screened the original population

sample and of the way in which the reviewing team of psychiatrists determined the final classification of suspected cases. That is, it is not known how many of the persons the internists did not refer as suspects were indeed cases of psychiatric disorder, and how many of the suspects excluded by the psychiatric team were also such cases.
A missing link in each of the above surveys is an actual psychiatric clinical examination of the surveyed populations, carried out in a standardized fashion, to obtain that information which the psychiatric clinician needs to supplement demographic, household, and health history data obtained by nonpsychiatric interviewers, and medical and related data provided by nonpsychiatric physicians, in order to arrive at a diagnosis of mental disorder. The continuing need of operating agencies for objective and reliable data on the extent of need for clinical and rehabilitative services among the residents of population groups for which they provide services makes it mandatory that standard techniques and procedures be developed for carrying out psychiatric clinical examinations and for assessing psychiatric interviews in a manner that will yield relevant data on presence or absence of psychiatric disorder, the type of psychiatric disorder, degree of impairment, and types of services needed by the patient.
Review of the biochemical theories of schizophrenia indicate that no objective biological test for this disease is immediately on the horizon (Kety, 1959). To the best of my knowledge, objective biological or psychological tests that have practical application for finding cases of the other types of major mental disorders are also not available. Thus, for the immediate future much reliance will have to be placed on operational methods for case finding which will include

Vol. 13, No. 3

Mental Health

199

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

the psychiatric clinical examination as an essential element.
Since comparable data are needed from place to place and from time to time for comparison of epidemiological, biological, and psychological measures, methods and procedures for case finding must be developed and applied in a standardized fashion throughout the United States. I would predict that, to achieve this, methods will be developed for acquiring video-taped recordings of systematic, standardized clinical interviews carried out by psychiatrists in various community, as well as clinical, settings. This will make it possible to develop standardized visual records of interviews which can be observed and rated by teams of psychiatrists in a standardized way and would lead to the development of more precise and comparable methods of diagnosis and classification of patients.
Indeed, at this point in time, it is my opinion that the only way to solve problems related to collection and interpretation of cross-cultural psychiatric data obtained on populations in different countries is through the use of the video tape. Audiovisual recordings of actual clinical interviews, supplemented by other essential anamnestic and related data, all obtained in a standardized way, would make it possible to determine the extent of agreement and disagreement among psychiatrists within as well as between different countries on diagnoses placed on identical sets of patients, when identical data are used as the basis for the diagnostic assessment. The use of standardized audiovisual data collection and assessment methods would make it possible, then, to develop case finding procedures that would control and reduce observer variation. Even if nothing else were achieved, data would be available that would make it possible to deter-

mine what the results of a prevalence survey in Area A would be if assessed by psychiatrists from Area B and vice versa.
One additional point of this prediction! Little has been done in the way of assessing the extent of psychiatric disorders in child populations. I would predict that, because of the increasing demand for services for disturbed children and adolescents, as illustrated earlier in the charts for the mental hospitals and outpatient clinics, case finding procedures will become available for this age group.
Development of Instruments for Classification of Patients by such Additional Factors as Social and
Community Adjustment
The extensive development of programs for the control of mental disorders will require instruments that can be used to collect standardized data for classifying patients not only by diagnosis but also by a variety of other important characteristics in relation to activities of daily living, employment, economic well-being, family life, and community life (Barabee et al., 1955; Katz et al., 1963). For comparative purposes, it will become increasingly important to have identical measurements for assessing the social adjustment of persons who have disabling conditions other than mental disorders, and those who have no disabling conditions (Comm. Chronic Illness, 1957).
Determination of Incidence of Mental Disorders
Such surveys that have been carried out on the frequency of mental disorders in the noninstitutionalized population have been prevalence surveys. There is need for incidence data; that is, data on the rate at which new cases of mental

200

Kramer

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

disorder appear in a population group. Because of difficulties in establishing date of onset of mental disorder, incidence data are extraordinarily difficult to obtain. However, I predict that, before the turn of the century, standardized case-finding techniques will be available. This will make it possible to do repetitive surveys of the same population at stated intervals. Thus, it will be possible not only to measure changes in prevalence, but also to determine the rate at which new cases appear in persons found to be disease-free in prior surveys. Repetitive surveys are always plagued by migration factors, and persons are lost to follow-up for various reasons. However, it is hoped that before the year 2000 sufficiently good follow-up and person-tracing techniques will be available so that assessment can be made of the migrants and others "lost to follow-up" and these data linked to findings in the base population.
Linking Psychiatric Records with Records from the Census of
Population and those1of other Health and Social Agencies
It is particularly difficult to obtain certain types of data on social, economic, and cultural characteristics of members of our population. Accordingly, it becomes increasingly important to develop ways of linking to each other records obtained through the census of population; birth, death, and marriage registration; social security; schools, welfare, social, and correctional agencies. This is necessary in order to answer certain questions on the relationships of morbidity and disability to various social, economic, educational, and related factors. The availability of psychiatric case registers provides opportunity for linking various types of social records with those in the register to investigate a

broad variety of problems concerning the psychiatric experience of individuals.
Record linking depends on the ability to match records from at least two individual sources with a high degree of reliability. The use that can be made of the combined records depends on the accuracy and completeness of data on each and the relevancy of items recorded on the records to the purpose of investigation. I predict, therefore, that in the next decade there will be: (1) increasing communication between agencies engaged in large data collection operations so as to determine areas of common interest and to gather data appropriate to the needs of each of the collaborating agencies; (2) increasing use of the Social Security number as a basis for record linkage (Bahn et al., 1964), requiring that this number be included on all vital, health, welfare, and related records pertaining to an individual; (3) increasing use of computer techniques for linking relevant records; and (4) increasing research on development of appropriate models for maximizing the probability of achieving true matches, and on development of methods of analysis for data obtained through these matching procedures (Pollack, E. S., 1965).
Completeness of Enumeration of the Census of Population
Studies now under way which rely on the linkage of medical and vital records with the census of population are demonstrating that it is difficult, and in some cases impossible, to find census records of persons from groups in society which contribute greatly to the magnitude and complexity of many of our health, welfare, and social problems. For example, studies in the Office of Biometry, NIMH, have shown that it is unusually difficult to locate census schedules for persons

Vol. 13, No. 3

Mental Health

201

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

with mental disorders who are alcoholics, individuals living by themselves, divorced persons, or unemployed. While it may be difficult to obtain consistent information from such persons, this also suggests that it is difficult to obtain as high a degree of completeness of enumeration of such groups in the census as one can obtain for the more stable elements of society. Since census data for population groups of the type mentioned are used frequently as denominators for rates and ratios that describe health and social problems within these groups, it becomes increasingly important to have available estimates of the extent of census underenumeration of these subgroups. Rate comparisons between socioeconomic, deviant, and related groups could then be adjusted for possible underenumeration. As a result of the increasing number of health, social, educational and welfare programs being directed toward the solution of problems presented by these high-risk groups, I predict that the Census Bureau will intensify its current efforts to enumerate them more completely.
Development of Field Units
As a result of the nation's greatly expanded and intensified mental health program, the task of obtaining useful and pertinent epidemiological and biostatistical data on the mental disorders has become increasingly complex. Strengthening of state and local statistical services is essential to provide to workers in the mental health field information in more depth than that which can be obtained from statistical programs now operating at either the national or state level. It is becoming increasingly urgent that field units for epidemiologic and related community research be established in different places throughout the

nation to make possible the collection of descriptive and evaluative data essential to the planning and operation of mental health programs.
Programs for the control and prevention of mental disorders are based on the premise that certain mental disorders can be prevented; that others, although not preventable, can be treated successfully; and that others, although not curable, can be treated in such a way as to minimize their disabling effects and to maximize the rehabilitation potential of affected individuals. The officials responsible for coordinating the mental health program of a state, city, or county ideally should have data available that show the degree to which each of the above goals is being achieved. This requires a field team located in a community to study these phenomena in a way that makes it possible to determine at what rate specific types of disorders are occurring and why; the types of services required by the affected individuals; and the proportion of persons with disorders who are being treated and rehabilitated, and with what success. Another order of question is whether the combined effects of all elements of community programs will reduce progressively the total amount of disability from mental disorders among the residents of a defined geographic area.
The design and implementation of such studies requires a sophisticated field team located in an area where it is possible to study the power structure and demography of the community, to carry out epidemiological investigations and studies of effectiveness of treatment and rehabilitation techniques. I predict that in the next decade there will be at least five such units located in strategic places throughout the United States.

202

Kramer

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

Mortality Data
In the past decade social scientists carrying out epidemiologic research on the mental disorders have introduced an index that emphasizes the need for mortality data on persons who have had histories of mental disorders. This index, usually referred to as "lifetime prevalence," is defined as the proportion of a population alive as of a given date who have ever had a history of mental disorder (Eaton, 1955). It can be shown that this index is a function of the incidence of mental disorders, the mortality of persons who ever had such disorders, and the mortality of persons who never had such disorders. Meaningful comparisons of such an index within and between population groups requires knowledge of these three factors, since differences in "lifetime prevalence" can be produced by differences in any or all of them. Thus, data on mortality will be needed to supplement data on incidence discussed earlier.
An additional reason for the development of mortality data is the need to determine whether new methods of treatment and control of mental disorders will in any way affect the survivorship of persons with such disorders. Studies are available of mortality on the hospitalized population, but not on the total population of persons with these disorders (i.e., unhospitalized plus those who never entered a hospital).
I would predict, therefore, that life tables of persons with specific types of mental disorders will be available before too long. Such studies will be facilitated by the availability of psychiatric registers for different areas within the United States.
Data on Fertility and Reproductive Rates of the Mentally III
The increasing popularity of pro-

grams designed to keep the mentally ill close to home and family will require more knowledge about the reproductive life and fertility of persons with specific types of disorders and survival of their offspring. This is particularly important because of the evidence suggesting that such major mental disorders as schizophrenia have a strong genetic component in their etiology. Accordingly, there will be an increasing demand for data on the birth rates of married couples in which one or both members have a specific type of mental disorder. Here again, linking records from psychiatric case registers with the birth certificates of the inhabitants of a community will make it possible to carry out such studies.
Clinical Trial Type Data
Several studies have been completed in the past five years which have demonstrated the value of applying randomized clinical trial designs to test the efficacy of drugs in hospital and in community programs. An example of the former is the nine-hospital study carried out by the Psychopharmacology Service Center to determine the effectiveness of phenothiazines in acute schizophrenics (NIMH, 1964). An example of the latter type of study is that of Pasamanick and associates in which a randomized clinical trial was carried out to determine the efficacy of drugs in a program of family care for schizophrenics (Pasamanick et al., 1964). The large expenditures of money involved in the development of community mental health programs and the scarcity of well-trained manpower to provide the requisite services underscore the need for more precise information on the effectiveness of control programs. This will lead to an increased demand for more such studies.

Vol. 13, No. 3

Mental Health

203

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

Statistical Manpower
All the preceding predictions are predicated on the assumption that adequate numbers of well-trained manpower will be available for carrying out the biostatistical, epidemiologic, and social science research involved in obtaining the data and facts mentioned earlier. As a result of the expansion of action and research programs in mental health, child health and human development, chronic diseases, mental retardation, crime, delinquency, drug abuse and addiction, and medical care for the aged and the major national emphasis on social action programs dedicated toward the development of the Great Society, an unprecedented demand has already developed for scientists trained to carry out biostatistical, social science, and epidemiologic research. I predict that this demand will be reflected in the development by government and academic institutions of intensified programs to recruit for training in these specialities the most promising and gifted of our high school and college graduates. Such action will be necessary in order to provide the many well-trained scientific and ancillary personnel required to solve the complex health, social, welfare, and economic problems that beset our Nation.
SUMMARY
This paper has attempted to predict types of statistical data that will become available in the next 10 to 25 years in the mental health field. These predictions include specification of certain types of cross-sectional and trend data on characteristics of patients utilizing specific psychiatric services, the further development and establishment of psychiatric case registers, the availability of practical case-finding techniques, and of instruments for achieving greater stan-

dardization in the classification of patients by diagnosis and by such additional factors as social and community adjustment. This period will also witness determinations of incidence of specific mental disorders and the increasing use of techniques for linking psychiatric records with records from the census; for measuring duration of illness, that is, the interval between onset of disease and periods of remission; and for characterizing the patient's psychological status, degree of psychiatric disability, social and familial adjustment, and physical condition at various intervals following onset of disease. In addition, if hypotheses with respect to the effect of cultural characteristics of different populations on these indexes are to be tested, it is also essential that cultural characteristics be clearly defined and methods be developed for classifying and quantifying these characteristics of population in unambiguous and universally acceptable terms. The tools derived from such research will make it possible to determine the differential rates at which members of various population groups develop specific mental disorders, pass through various stages of disability, achieve various stages of recovery, or die. They will also facilitate assessing the effectiveness of the various programs on the prevention and control of the mental disorders.
Planning and implementing the various research and service activities required to make these predictions a reality require a considerable number of well-trained biostatisticians, epidemiologists, and social scientists. To provide for such manpower, government and our academic institutions will have to intensify efforts to recruit for training in these fields the outstanding students from our high schools and colleges. Such action will be necessary to provide the many imaginative and creative scien-

204

Kramer

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

tists required to solve the complex
health, social, welfare, and economic
problems that beset the Nation.
REFERENCES
AMERICAN PUBLIC HEALTH ASSOCIATION, Program
Area Committee on Mental Health, 1962. Mental disorders: A guide to control methods. New York, N. Y.
BABIGIAN, H.M., E.A. GARDNER, H.C. MILES, and
J. ROMANO, 1965. Diagnostic consistency and change in a follow-up study of 1215 patients. Amer. J. Psychiat., 121: 895-901.
BAHN, A.K., and R. BAHN, 1964. Considerations
in using social security numbers on birth certificates for research purposes. Public Health Rep., 7 9 : 937-938.
, K. GORWITZ, G.D. KLEE, M. KRAMER,
and I. TUERK, 1965. Services received by Maryland residents in facilities directed by a psychiatrist. Public Health Rep., 8 0 : 405416.
, and M. KRAMER, 1964. A cross-sectional picture of psychiatric care in an entire state. Psychiatric Studies and Projects, 2 : 1-8. Mental Hospital Service of the American Psychiatric Association, Washington, D.C. BARRABEE, P., E. L. BARRABEE, and J. E. FINESINGER, 1955. A normative social adjustment scale. Amer. J. Psychiat., 112:252-259. COMMISSION ON CHRONIC ILLNESS, 1957. Chronic Illness in the United States. Vol. IV. Chronic Illness in a large city--The Baltimore Study. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
EATON, J. W., and R. J. WEIL, 1955. Culture
and Mental disorders. Free Press, Glencoe, Ill.
GARDNER, E. A., A. K. BAHN, and M. MACK, 1964.
Suicide and psychiatric care in the aging. Arch. of General Psychiatry, 10: 547-553.
H. C. MILES, A. K. BAHN, and J. ROMANO,
1963. All psychiatric experience in a community. A cumulative survey: report of the first year's experience. Arch. Gen. Psychiat., 9 : 369-378.
GROUP FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF PSYCHIATRY,
Committee on Preventive Psychiatry, 1961. Report No. 50. Problems of Estimating Changes in Frequency of Mental Disorders. New York,N.Y.
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, Document No. 58.
88th Congr., 1st sess., Feb. 5, 1963. Message from the President of the United States Relative to Mental Illness and Mental Retardation.
JOINT COMMISSION ON MENTAL ILLNESS AND
HEALTH, 1961. Action for Mental Health. Final report of the Joint Commission on Mental Illness and Health. Basic Books, Inc., NewYork,N.Y.
KATZ, M. M., and S. B. LYERLY, 1963. Methods
for measuring adjustment and social behavior in the community: I. Rationale, description, discriminative validity and scale development. Psychol. Rep., 1 3 : 503-535, Monograph Supplement 4-Vi3.

KETY, S.S., 1959. Biochemical theories of schizophrenia. Part I of a two-part critical review of current theories and of the evidence used to support them. Science, 129:15281532. Part II of a two-part critical review of current theories and of theevidence used to support them. Science, 129: 1590-1596.
LEIGHTON, D. C., J. S. HARDING, D. B. MACKLIN,
A. M. MACMILLAN, and A. H. LEIGHTON,
1963. The Character of Danger--Psychiatric Symptoms in Selected Communities. Vol. III, The Stirling County Study of Psychiatric Disorder and Sociocultural Environment. Basic Books, Inc., New York, N.Y.
MENTAL HEALTH RESEARCH UNIT, New York
State Department of Mental Hygiene, 1960, 1961. A Mental Health Survey of Older People. State Hospitals Press, Utica, N.Y. NIMH--Guidelines for state plans, 1965. To be submitted under the Community Mental Health Centers Actof 1963. DHEW, PHS, NIH. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. NIMH--Psychopharmacology Service Center Collaborative Study Group, 1964. Phenothiazine treatment in acute schizophrenia-- Effectiveness. Arch. Gen. Psychiat., 10:246261.
PASAMANICK, B., D. W. ROBERTS, P. V. LEMKAU, and D. E. KRUEGER, 1957. A survey of
mental disease in an urban population. 1. Prevalence by age, sex, and severity of impairment. Amer. J. Public Health, 4 7 : 923-929.
, F. R. SCARPITTI, M. LEFTON, S. DINITZ,
J. J. WERNERT, and H. MCPHEETERS, 1964.
Home vs. hospital care for schizophrenics. J. A. M. A., 187: 177-181. POLLACK, E. S., 1965. Multi-factorial analysis of psychiatric admission rates. (Unpublished Sc.D. thesis, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston.
, R. W. REDICK, V. B. NORMAN, C. R.
WURSTER, and K. GORWITZ, 1964. Socioeco-
nomic and family characteristics of patients admitted to psychiatric services. Amer. J. Public Health, 5 4 :506-518. PUBLIC LAW 487, H.R. 4512. 79th Congr., chap. 538, 2d sess., July 3, 1946. The National Mental Health Act. PUBLIC LAW 182, H.J. Res. 256. 84th Congr., 1st sess., July 28, 1955. Mental Health Study Act of 1955. PUBLIC LAW 88-164, Senate 1576. 88th Congr., October 31, 1963. Mental Retardation Facilities andCommunity Mental Health Centers Construction Act of 1963. PUBLIC LAW 89-105, H.R. 2985. 89th Congr., August 4, 1965. Mental Retardation Facilities andCommunity Mental Health Centers Construction ActAmendments of1965.
ROSEN, B. M., A. K. BAHN, and M. Kramer,
1964. Demographic and diagnostic characteristics of psychiatric clinic outpatients in the U.S.A., 1961. Amer. J. Orthopsychiat., 34: 455-468.
SROLE, L., T. S. LANGNER, S. T. MICHEL, M. K.
OPLER, and THOMAS A. C. RENNIE, 1962.
Mental Health in the Metropolis: The Midtown Manhattan Study. Vol. I. McGrawHill, NewYork,N.Y.

