Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Research on alpine isolates in Switzerland
Jan K. MoorJankowski M.D. & H.J. Huser M. D.
To cite this article: Jan K. MoorJankowski M.D. & H.J. Huser M. D. (1959) Research on alpine isolates in Switzerland, Eugenics Quarterly, 6:1, 14-22, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1959.9987385 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1959.9987385
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

RESEARCH ON ALPINE ISOLATES IN SWITZERLAND
JAN K. MOOR-JANKOWSKI, M.D.
Columbia University
H. J. HUSER, M.D.
Department of Human Genetics, Geneva University Medical School

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

I. ADVANTAGEOUS POSSIBILITIES
FOR RESEARCH IN SWITZERLAND
T
JLHE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT AND THE
present demographic situation of Switzerland offer excellent possibilities for research in human genetics. Investigation both in medical and population genetics is greatly facilitated by the following facts: Stability of Population
The Swiss population has to a great extent been established in the same sites for the last ten centuries or even more. During this period there were no major wars or social upheavals accompanied by migrations and exogamy. Internal migrations were rare before the late nineteenth century and can be easily traced, as will be shown here.
The predominant political and social function of the village and town communities in Switzerland since late medieval times has resulted in an accumulation of archival material pertaining to common dtizens, such as is found in other countries only for members of high nobility.
Due to the relatively continuous peace

the archives have been preserved until today and allow us to trace back throughout the centuries the origins of examined individuals or even of entire population groups. The possibilities for extensive genealogical investigation are enhanced by certain characteristics of Swiss citizenship, mostly unknown in other countries, hence of value for presentation here.
All male and female Swiss are hereditary citizens of a commune, which need not coincide with their place of birth or residence. The citizenship is handed down in the male ancestors' line; when marrying, the wife assumes the citizenship of her husband; illegitimate children, who are not recognized by the father, receive citizenship of the mother; foreigners acquire first the citizenship of a commune; on the ground of this citizenship they become Swiss nationals. Thus their foreign origins can be found in the commune's register.
The Swiss citizenship has at all times bestowed certain advantages attached to the respective commune, such as--among other things--the right to be supported in case of need and shares and usufruct in the property of the commune, viz. forests, commons, and Alpine pastures.

14

15

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

Tradition, national pride, and the privileges which this unique institution implies account for the care with which all pertinent documents and deeds have been preserved throughout the centuries.
Continuous records of births, marriages, and deaths of all the citizens of the commune were kept in churchbooks which in most communes date back to about 1600 and have been preserved until today. Earlier, less complete data can be found in the archives of the communes. In the second half of the nineteenth century a special law was promulgated which replaced the churchbooks with Citizens Registers, and these took over the ancient records. They are kept with a high degree of accuracy and thus constitute, together with the old churchbooks and the archival records, a reliable source for genealogical studies and for investigations of the past demographic situation of the communities.
Heterogeneity of Endogamous Population Groups
The population of Switzerland is highly heterogeneous. This heterogeneity is enhanced by the four national languages and innumerable dialects, by different origins of the population such as Celts, Romans, Gaels and Germans, and by different religions. The language, origins, and religious beliefs may vary from village to village in the same valley, the villages themselves being rather homogeneous units. Because of this historical development there is only a very limited interdependence between the language spoken in a village, the origins of its population, and its creed. Thus the descendants of German settlers from the tenth century could, in the course of centuries, have taken the Romansh language from their neighbors by cultural influence rather than by intermarriages pre-

vented by feudal laws, and then become Protestants in the Reformation, whereas the neighboring Romansh villagers could have adopted the German language through the influence of a new feudal lord or of a neighboring town and remained Catholic. But the language, religion, and, to a certain extent, the different origins represented and still represent a marriage barrier, thus perpetuating the endogamy within and the heterogeneity between the relatively small groups of the Swiss population.
Finally, the geographic situation of the country has to be considered, with its innumerable large and small valleys, their population secluded by high mountain chains and, until recently, often completely isolated during the long winter months. This coexistence of numerous heterogeneous groups within the nation, which could have been concluded from a study of the history of the geographical configuration of the country, has been also proven by biometric investigations: we refer here to the basic work on Swiss anthropometry by Schlaginhaufen (1946) and to the study of the distribution of ABO blood groups in Swiss communes by Rosin (1956). Due to the few and clearly determined characteristics involved, this last study, unique because of its extent and methods applied, gives a particularly impressive picture of the heterogeneous mosaic of small population groups composing the whole country, with the exception of the average blood-group distribution in the few urban centers.
II. PROBLEMS OF RESEARCH
All these uniquely advantageous conditions for research in human genetics have been already most beneficial for studies in medical genetics in Switzerland. We refer here to the extensive in-

16 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

vestigations «f heredopathies in isolates by Hanhart and his school and to the wide scope of the research on hereditary diseases by Franceschetti, Klein, and coworkers in the Department of Human Genetics of the Geneva Medical School, where also a great part of our research on population genetics in Alpine isolates, to be described here, was carried out.
Studies in population genetics in Switzerland did not receive a real impetus until, in 1946, the first nationwide survey of blood-group distribution by Schuetz revealed an increased frequency of blood group O in Alpine communes inhabited by a population called Walsers. This observation, numerically too small to be significant, was later confirmed by investigations in some of the Walser communes (Knoll and Arendt-Knoll, 1949-1950; Moor - Jankowski, 1953), which also revealed villages with the highest known Rh-negative frequencies (Huser, 1953; Moor-Jankowski, 1954; Ikin et at, 1957). At this stage, in 1952, we decided to make an extensive investigation of all Walser communes in Switzerland, which was carried out, after some pilot studies and preparatory work, with the financial support of the Swiss National Fund for Scientific Research in the years 1954-1957.
III. DESCRIPTION OF EXAMINED
ALPINE ISOLATES
What has been said about the heterogeneity of endogamous population groups in Switzerland is especially characteristic of the canton of Grisons. The greatest part of the 7,114 square kilometers of this southeastern canton of Switzerland consists of high mountain chains and high Alpine valleys; the population of about 130,000 can be roughly divided into the German-dialect-speaking

population of the lower valleys in the North, Italian-speaking inhabitants of the lower valleys in the South, the three linguistically different Romansh populations in the higher Alpine territories, and the Walsers who dwell in the highest valleys and on mountain slopes often over the tree line and who, in turn, speak two different German dialects. For the purpose of our study we are mainly interested in the Walser and the Romansh populations.
Walsers
The people known as Walsers live in small communities in eastern and southern Switzerland, western Austria, and northern Italy; traces of their colonization can be found in Haute-Savoie, France. Their settlements resemble one another and are distinct from their neighbors culturally and linguistically. They migrated from Valais (southwestern Switzerland) in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, most probably from two great neighboring valleys as they can still be divided on linguistic grounds into two main groups, the eastern and the western; similar linguistic division has been found between the two valleys of their supposed origin (Hotzenkoecherle, 1944). They arrived as German-speaking free settlers, whereas the autochthonous population was Romansh-speaking and, for the most part, in feudal bondage. They were solely cattle breeders and owned their land on an individual basis, whereas the Romansh people raised their crops and shared their land in common, these differences existing until today. Moreover, the Walsers were intruders, and there are historical records of fighting and friction between them and the Romansh people, which further increased the marriage barrier maintained partly until today by mutual

17

Year
1253
1595 1683 1690 1690 1705 1716 1729 1741 1749 1753 1761 1761-1845 1845 1850 1858 1880 1900 1920 1940 1950

Population No.

POPULATION OF BOSCO-GUWN

16 male citizens of commune Bosco-Gurin, probably heads of families, mentioned in

the first existing deed

"Half the inhabitants died of plague"

291 (first existing census)

288

34 inhabitants killed by snow avalanche

216 187 185

1 Population decrease J productive age

as result of the death in the avalanche

of inhabitants of re-

219

41 inhabitants killed by snow avalanche 182 168

no data available 395 412 Beginning of massive emigration because of overpopulation 420 345 266 Decrease of massive emigration 231 200 165

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

tradition. No traces of cultural difference other than linguistic can be found today between the Eastern and the Western Walsers, neither are they recorded by tradition or history. However both groups colonized different regions, and, although there was an appreciable amount of intermarriage between both groups, the Eastern Walsers have in general mixed toa greater extent with neighboring people whereas the Western Walsers maintained a much stricter endogamy. Thus several of the Western Walser villages, but only a few of the Eastern Walser villages, can be considered today as isolates.
We have chosen the Western Walser village, Bosco-Gurin, to be presented here as a typical Walser isolate. It isthe only German-speaking community in an Italian-speaking region. The census of 1950 revealed 185 inhabitants. This means a steady decrease in population over the last 100 years, as may be observed also in other Walser isolates.
The diminution of the population size during the last 100 years is due, in addition to the effects of emigration, to the

decreased fertility observed in the most rural mountainous areas of Switzerland.
During the investigation in BoscoGurin there were about 150 inhabitants in the village; 128 of them were examined for ABOand 50 for the Rhfactor. Almost all the ancestors of thesepersons on the male and on the female side were inhabitants and citizens of BoscoGurin. The village, like all Walser isolates, shows a high degree of inbreeding, which may be illustrated by the following example: The sibs Maria Antonietta T. (born 1933), Beatrix Candida T. (born 1935) and Hedwig Myriam T. (born 1937) were chosen at random. Their name (paternal side) is not to be found in the archival records before 1574. (Some names are to be found already in the middle of the fifteenth century, which facilitates genealogical research. ) However, a complete ancestors' table of all ascending lines could have been established for ten generations. In the tenth generation the three sibs should have had 512 ancestors. For comparison purposes it may be mentioned that the most inbred known ancestors' table for

18 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

the European aristocracy, that of Alphonse XIII, King of Spain, shows 70 separate ancestors in the tenth generation (de Battaglia, 1948). The sibs T. from Bosco-Gurin, however, show in the tenth generation only 56, or even 52 ancestors (two ancestors could not be traced back from the ninth generation) . Furthermore, the eleventh ancestral generation of the sibs T. is twothirds complete and suggests an even greater degree of inbreeding.
No heredopathies were observed by us in Bosco-Gurin, nor are they retained by tradition or local history. In fact we have not met an increased frequency of hereditary diseases in any of the isolates examined, although family traditions, churchbooks, and commune archives allow a certain degree of insight even into the health conditions of past centuries: such was the case in our study of the hemophiliacs of Tenna, one of the Eastern Walser isolates, where the existing records transmit the diagnosis of hemophilia over 250 years, and enabled us to follow up over 3,000 descendants of an ancestral hemophilic parent-couple from the first half of the seventeenth century (Moor-Jankowski et ah, 1958).
Romansh Population
Our outline on the Romansh population follows the unpublished paper by the Romansh scholar Dr. A. Schorta, to appear soon in our monograph on Alpine isolates.
The Romansh people are considered to be the autochthonous population of Grisons, where the first traces of inhabitants date back to 2,000 B.C. but reveal no indication of their origins. The first inhabitants whose origins are hypothetically known were immigrants from northeast of Europa about 1,000 B.C. Later on, in the Middle Iron Age, the findings

indicate a close contact with the VenetoIllyric culture. Shortly before the beginning of the Christian era there must have been influence from nearby Celtic Helvetia and Cisalpine Gallia, still visible in Celtic names of localities and retained in certain words in the Romansh language.
At the time of the Roman conquest in the year 15 B.C., Grisons was inhabited by Raetier, a supposedly homogeneous population of long-time intermarried former autochthons and later intruders. During their rule of 550 years over this country the Romans in turn intermarried with the Raetier and developed the Raetoromansh language, the ancient form of today's Romansh dialects. The conquest of Grisons by the Franks in 536 did not interrupt this already well-advanced assimilation and did not bring the German language and colonization into Grison. This latter event in fact did not occur with full impact until the Walser immigration in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries to continue until now. However, in spite of German cultural influence and immigration furthered by the feudal lords and by the predominantly German towns, in the more remote parts of Grisons Romansh isolates still exist inhabited by strongly endogamous descendants of the mixed Raeto-Roman population, who may be considered autochthons as compared to the Walser colonists. The degree of endogamy in these Romansh isolates revealed by genealogical studies impressed us as even higher than in the Walser isolates: entire villages of 200 to 300 inhabitants consist often of people bearing one and the same or two family names, related to each other as multiple cousins even in the present generation, and they often can be traced back to a common ancestor in the male line three

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

or four centuries ago. If we have not succeeded in obtaining in a Romansh isolate such a complete ancestors' table as in the case of Bosco-Gurin, this is due to the fact that our investigation was concerned mainly with the Walser isolates examined for the purpose of comparison. As it happened, the local records were less complete than in most Walser localities, probably due as much to chance as to the differing former social structure of these villages. However, the three localities, Savognin, Tinizong, and Salouf, are considered as typical Romansh isolates of very remote origins: this is documented by the village histories, the archaic language spoken, by their pre-Roman names, and by findings of traces of pre-Roman settlement on their sites.
IV. SEROANTHROPOLOGICAL
INVESTIGATION OF A L L WALSER AND
SOME ROMANSH ISOLATES IN THE
SWISS ALPS
Postulates of the Investigation
The determination of blood groups ABO and of the factor Rh (D) in about 1,000 inhabitants of four Western Walser isolates, carried out by us in the years 1952 and 1953, provided the needed statistical evidence of the highly significant deviation of these isolates in blood-group distribution from the Swiss average. An incentive was hereby given to extend our studies to other isolates
The preliminary investigations showed the importance of the following factors:
The villages to be examined had to be carefully chosen, as there is a social prestige attached to Walser origins, and the claim to be a Walser does not always correspond with the fact. A Walser commune can be defined not merely by the local tradition but, and much more ex-

19
actly, by studies of the language, the form of the agriculture, and the archives containing deeds on local history.
Dependable determination of the degree of isolation of a village can be obtained only by genealogical research.
It was necessary to examine some Romansh isolates to obtain control material.
It seemed important to obtain, in addition to the blood-group data, anthropologic measurements and observations on the populations examined, and these data had to be secured by qualified anthropologists.
The blood-group determination itself is far more dependable if carried out in qualified laboratories and not in the field, as had been done in most of the previous studies.
All the above conditions were not fulfilled in the foregoing investigations, which thus had to be controlled or repeated.
Preliminary Studies
To carry out our program, we obtained the close cooperation of linguists, ethnologists, and historians in order to define the communes to be investigated.
The isolates among these communes and the extent of their isolation throughout the centuries were determined with the help of local historical data and by consulting the archival records, the churchbooks, and the Citizens Registers.
In such a way all the 21 Walser colonies in Switzerland populated until today by Walsers were included in our investigation, and the three Romansh isolates, Savoging, Tinizong, and Salouf, were added for examination for comparative purposes, in addition to some data obtained on the Romansh popula-

20 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

tion of the mixed Western Walser-Romansh village, Obersaxen.
During our investigation in 1952, cooperation was obtained from the author of authoritative studies on the physical anthropology of the Walser and Romansh people, Dr. K. Hagler, Director of the Natural Science Museum of Grisons. He continued his cooperation for the 1954 investigation, and we obtained additional assistance from Helena Kaufmann, Ph.D., assistant at the Anthropological Institute, Geneva University, and two other younger assistants. The blood samples were obtained by venepuncture by the authors of the present paper, aided by two medical students. The samples were sent by special dispatch to the Central Laboratory of the Swiss Red Cross in Berne (Director, Dr. A. Hassig), Laboratory of the Swiss Red Cross in Basle (Dr. L. P. Hollander), and to the Laboratory of Dr. J. Steinman in Geneva. The 1954 investigation was carried out mostly in the Eastern Walser and in three Romansh villages. The laboratory tests for the 1955 investigation in the Western Walser villages were performed by Dr. W. Ikin and Dr. A. E. Mourant, Blood Group Reference Laboratory, London, and by Dr. L. P. Hollander in the Swiss Red Cross Laboratory, Basle. (See Appendix for information recorded on examined persons.)
Scope of the Investigation
Blood groups were determined for about 4,500 persons altogether. This number also includes a group of individuals examined before 1954 where the results were proven to be correct by controls of large random samples. The population thus examined can be divided into approximately 1,600 Eastern Walsers, 2,300 Western Walsers, and 600 Romansh people.

The population examined represents about 80 per cent of the entire number chosen for examination in each village and varies from 50 to 100 per cent accordingly from village to village. The rest of the population chosen for examination but not actually examined consists of persons absent or gravely ill at the time of investigation; only about 5 per cent refused the examination. It must be added that the population chosen for the examination represented in most cases all the inhabitants of the village.
About 4,500 persons were examined: 1,100 individuals for ABO; 1,000 for ABO and Rh-standard (D); 2,400 for AjA2BO, Rh (C, c, D, E) and MN, among which 300 additionally for K and Fy»; 150 were tested for A ^ B O , Rh (C, Cw, c, D, D", E, e) MNS, Henshaw, P, Lua, K, Lea, and Fya.
Seroanthropological Situation of the Walser and Romansh Isolates
The earlier stages of the investigation of the Walser isolates have shown physical measurements and observations (Hagler, 1941 and 1954; Wettstein, 1910) and the serological tests (MoorJankowski, 1954) to bear out, on the whole, the evidence of history, culture, and language. It is, for instance, interesting to see the linguistic differentiation in the Eastern and the Western Walsers confirmed by the serological tests, although the different origins of these closely linked neighboring groups were not recorded by history, are forgotten by tradition, and cannot be detected in the common culture. Serological tests show the Western Walsers to stand out much more distinctly from their neighbors than do the Eastern Walsers. The Western Walsers also differ markedly from their neighbors in their anthropometric

21

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

characters, characters as yet insufficiently studied in the eastern group.
As a whole theisolates examined display an extreme and often highly significant variability of blood-group frequencies (Huser, Moor-Jankowski, Rosin, 1956). The common characteristic to be found in almost all Walser isolates is the low frequency or absence of A2.
The more endogamous Western Walsers show as a common serological characteristic high O frequency, in fact the highest ever found among thewhite population; this frequency was found in about 2,300 people examined in 15 villages. Inmost of the villages gene O was found in 75 to 81 percent or more of the individuals tested. The same population also shows a gene B frequency of less than 4 per cent in the more isolated villages.
The less endogamous Eastern Walsers show a great variability ofABO distribution, some villages with 80 per cent of their inhabitants having gene O and other villages displaying rather low O and high A frequencies,' one of them with 41 per cent of gene A. The frequency of B varies from one village to another.
Both the Eastern and the Western Walsers show highly significant differences in the Rh (D) factor distribution from onevillage to another, some villages with 30 per cent Rh-negative or more, which represents the highestknown frequencies, higher even than those of the Basques; on the other hand, in some other villages the Rh-negative frequency is lower than the Swiss average.
The computation of our results for
·For more complete results and comments the reader is referred to the authors' monograph on Alpine Isolates to be published this year.

other blood-group systems is not com-
pleted asyet, but sofar they seem to be
near to the general European figures.
The Romansh isolates correspond in
general for allblood-group systems with
the Swiss average*.
REFERENCES
BATTAGLIA, DE FORST OTTO, 1948. Wissenschaft-
liche Genealogie, A. Francke, AG, Bern, Switzerland.
HAGLER, K.,1941. Anthropologische Studie über die Bewohner des Tavetsch, eines alpinen Hochtals imKanton Graubünden (Schweiz). Arch. J. Klaus-Stiftung16:1.
, 1954. Zur Anthropologie der Walser von vals im Lugnez (Graubünden) mit einer Kurzen sero-anthropologischen Betrachtung. Bull. Schweiz. Ges. Anthrop. Ethnol. 30:15.
HOTZENKÖCHERLE, R., 1943. Bündnerische Verbalformengeographie. (Sache, Ort und Wort., Festband Jud). Romanica Helvetica 20: 486.
HUSER, H. J., 1953. Beitrag für die Bedeutung des morbus haemolyticus in der Entwicklung isolierter Bevölkerungen. Schweiz. Med. Wschr. 83:43, 1045.
IKIN, W . , MoURANT, A . E . ,KOPEC, ADA C , MOOR-
JANKOWSKI, J. K., and HUSER, H. J., 1957.
The blood groups of the Western Walsers. Vox Sang. 2:159.
KNOLL, W. and ARENDT-KNOLL, H., 1949-'50.
Blutgruppenbestimmungen beiden Waisern im Rheinwald und obern Avers. Bull. Schweiz. Ges. Anthrop. Ethnol.
MOOR-JANKOWSKI, J. K., 1954. La preponderance du groupe sanguin O et du facteur Rhesus negatif chez les Walsers de Suisse. J. Genet. Hum. 3:25. , Huser, H. J., Rosin, S., Truog, G., Schneeberger, M., Geiger, M., 1958. Haemophilia B, Genetics, Haematology and Clinical Aspects. Investigation on a Wide-spread Kindred ofHaemophiliacs. S. Karger, Basle.
ROSIN, S., 1956. DieVerteilung der ABO-Blutgruppen in der Schweiz. Arch. J. KlausStiftung 31:17.
SCHLAGINHAUFEN, O., 1946. Anthropologia Helvetica. I. die Anthropologie der Eidgenossechaft. A. Textbd., B. Atlas. Arch. J. Klaus-Stiftung. Addition to Vol. 21.
SCHUETZ, R., 1945. DasVorkommen der Blutgruppen in der Schweiz an Hand von 33964 Bestimmungen nach Bürgerot eingetragen. Archiv, der J. Klaus-Stiftung. 2 1 : 207-29.
WEITSTEIN, O., 1910. Anthropogeographie des Safientales. Thesis phil. II. Univ. of Zurich, Swtz. and Jb. Geograph-Ethnograph. Ges. Zurich 10.

22 Eugenics Quarterly APPENDIX
INFORMATION RECORDED ON EACH EXAMINED PERSON
The following data were recorded on each person examined, anthropometry being performed solely on persons 21 to 39 years old:

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

Provisional number
Final Number Location of investigation Date of investigation Place of residence Surname (and maiden name) First name Commune of origin of paternal
ancestor Commune of origin of mother's
paternal ancestor Profession Birth date Age
Photographed (yes or no) Observer Transcriber Spouse no. (if examined) Father's no. (if examined) Mother's no. (if examined) Sibs' no. (if examined) Children's nos. (if examined)

Body height Sitting height incl. bench height Sitting height
Length of legs
Maximum head length Maximum head breadth Maximum bizygomatic diameter Mento-nasion height Nose height Nose breadth Trunk/stature index Skelic index Facial index Nasal index Kin: relation and no.

Head hair color by Fischer-Sailer Scale Character of head hair (straight, wavy, or curly) Eye color
Nasal profile (straight, convex, or concave) Junction of eyebrows (marked, medium, or none) Profile of occiput (straight, protruding, or markedly protruding) Finger length (comparison of the II and IV finger) Handedness (left, both, or right) Ear lobe (free, half-free, or fused) Darwin's tubercle (tubercle, pointed tubercle, or none) Curling of the tongue (total, half, or none) Baldness (total, half, or none) Color blindness (total, partial, or none) PTC tasting ability (bitter, slightly bitter, or no taste) Genealogic division in: "Pure" Walser "Pure" Romansh
"Half" Walser "Half" Romansh
Blood groups Remarks

