Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Pakistan's new national family planning experiment
Warren C. Robinson
To cite this article: Warren C. Robinson (1966) Pakistan's new national family planning experiment, Eugenics Quarterly, 13:4, 316-325, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1966.9987685 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1966.9987685
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:29

PAKISTAN'S NEW NATIONAL FAMILY PLANNING EXPERIMENT
WARREN C. ROBINSON
Pennsylvania State University University Park, Pennsylvania

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

INTRODUCTION
Pakistan is the world's fifth or sixth largest nation, being exceeded in total population only by the U.S., The Soviet Union, China, India, and perhaps Indonesia. The country consists of two provinces, or "wings," separated from one another by nearly one thousand miles of foreign (Indian) territory. According to recent estimates, Pakistan has a population of about 115 million and this total is growing at a rate in excess of 3 percent a year. Population densities in West Pakistan are relatively low but much of the land is arid, barren, and unsuitable for any kind of agriculture. In East Pakistan the land is rich and agriculture flourishes but over-all density there is about 1,000 per square mile, among the highest in the world. Some districts have near urban densities of 2,000 or more per square mile in spite of the overwhelming rural nature of the economy (Pakistan, 1964).
Pakistan is a relatively poor country with per capita income of about $80 a year. Her past efforts at economic development planning have been reasonably successful and her economic prospects are good. By 1965 it had, however,
The author is Associate Professor of Economics, The Pennsylvania State University, and was formerly Research Advisor, Pakistan Institute of Development Economics, and Consultant-Advisor to the National Institute for Research in Family Planning, Government of Pakistan. He acknowledges helpful comments made on earlier drafts of this paper by Mr. W. Parker Mauldin, Dr. Rowland V. Rider, Dr. Mrs. Nafis Sadek, Miss Patience Lauriat, Dr. Sultan S. Hashmi, Mr. William Seltzer, and Dr. Jorgen Trier-Hansen.

become clear to the planners that population increase threatened to "defeat any attempts to raise per capita incomes by a significant amount" (Pakistan, 1965a). In consequence, a comprehensive and detailed family planning scheme was made an important part of the third five-year plan (1965-1970) and also the longer run perspective plan (1965-1985). This program must certainly rank as one of the largest scale and most ambitious national family planning schemes ever undertaken by any country. It constitutes an important experiment, the results of which will be most useful to other countries launching national programs. The present article describes the Pakistan family planning scheme and analyzes critically its socioeconomic assumptions and the logic of its organizational structure. Finally, we draw some conclusions about probable strengths and weaknesses of the scheme.
PREVIOUS FAMILY PLANNING EFFORTS
Some family planning activity has existed in Pakistan since 1952 when local volunteers established the first planned parenthood chapter in Karachi. Clinics have been operated by the Family Planning Association of Pakistan in the leading cities since about 1956. Small-scale research-cum-action programs have also been operated in Lahore, Dacca, and Comilla with foreign financial assistance. The first five-year plan (1955-1960) gave cautious approval to these efforts as well as some financial support, but the government undertook no direct action

316

Vol. 13, No. 4 Pakistan's Family Planning Experiment

317

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

(Pakistan, 1965a). The second five-year plan (1960-1965) took a much more forthright stand in favor of family planning and provided for a government program working through the health ministries which was to cost 30 million Rupees (Pakistan, 1960). Little will be accomplished by reviewing the shortcomings of this program. It will suffice to quote the official epitaph written in 1965:
The achievements of this programme have on the whole fallen below expectations. The allocation was too small to permit adequate supplies and proper distribution and the motivational barriers outlined earlier were not consciously tackled. Besides the programme was administered as a normal function of the existing health services with the result that doctors and other health personnel running these services were over-burdened with clinical work and could not give adequate attention to family planning (Pakistan, 1965a).
OUTLINES OF THE PRESENT SCHEME
The scheme is clear as to its objectives:
The principal objective of the new programme is to bring down the birth rate from 55 thousand to 45 thousand. To achieve this target, 20 million couples, who represent almost all the women in the reproductive ages in 1970, will be induced to practice family planning in one form or another. The scheme is to be launched in 36 districts of West Pakistan and 16 districts of East Pakistan during the Third Plan period. Two-thirds of the districts will be covered in the first two years and the remaining one-third in subsequent years (Pakistan, 1965b)
The scheme also makes clear that the philosophy involved is that family planning can be approached as an administrative function.
It should be recognized that family planning is essentially an administrative and not a clinical programme.

Large scale acceptance of conventional contraceptives depend on: (1) efficient distribution of supplies; and (2) motivation of the people; while technical services and supervision are needed for Tubeligation, Vasectomy and insertions of Intrauterine Device (called IUD or flexible coil). (Pakistan, 1965b).
A majority of the detail in the scheme
is administrative detail--who reports to
whom, what forms are to be used, and
so on. An elaborate administrative ap-
paratus is outlined.
There will be a Family Planning Council at the Centre and Family Planning Boards at the Provincial and district levels. AH the Union Councils in West Pakistan * and Thana Councils in East Pakistan will be associated with the programme. The family planning work at these levels will be looked after by a Family Planning Supervisor (one for 3 Union Councils) m West Pakistan and Thana Family Planning Officer (one for each Thana) in East Pakistan. At the bottom of the hierarchy will be the village dai. She will perform such functions as motivating the people and distributing contraceptives. At the national level the programme will be supervised by the Family Planning Commissioner who heads a new Division in the Ministry of Health, Labour and Social Welfare to be called the Family Planning Division.
The Administrative set-up at the Central, Provincial and District levels has been considerably strengthened. The scheme provides for 1,000 Family Planning Supervisors in West Pakistan who will work with the Union Council Secretaries. In East Pakistan 400 Thana Family Planning Officers have been provided. One general assistant, one female assistant and one male assistant will be attached to each Thana Family Planning Officer. A total of 50,000 village dais will be
1 The administrative hierarchy in Pakistan is Province, Division, District, Subdivision, Thana (Tehsil or Talukha), Union Council. The Thanas in East Pakistan tend to be larger than Tehsils in West Pakistan and have emerged as a more meaningful and important political unit.

318

Robinson

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

employed. 30,000 in East Pakistan and 20,000 in West Pakistan at the rate o£ one dai for two villages of 1600 population in East Pakistan and one dai for two villages in West Pakistan. About 2,400 part-time family planning doctors at the rate of 6 for each Tehsil in West Pakistan and 3 for each Thana in East Pakistan will be registered and appointed for the purpose of I.U.D. insertions and clinical sterilization (Pakistan, 1965b).
A high degree of decentralization in
the administration of the plan is called
for. The principal levels of authority
are: (a) Central Family Planning Coun-
cil "headed by the Health Minister, in-
stead of being an advisory body, should
exercise the functions of policy, coordina-
tion, assessment, and evaluation and be
generally responsible for the overall im-
plementation of the Scheme by the Prov-
ince and particularly for research"; the
Family Planning Commissioner is Secre-
tary and principal executive, (b) Pro-
vincial Family Planning Boards "Headed
by the Provincial Health Minister should
be responsible for the implementation
of the Scheme and administrative func-
tions cannot therewith, and in particular
for training programme in this connec-
tion . . . a whole-time administrator
. . . to be secretary and principal Ex-
ecutive." (c) District Family Planning
Board--"In each district, a District Fam-
ily Planning Board should be consti-
tuted, with the Deputy Commissioner as
Chairman and including the District
Health Officer, Medical Superintendent/
Civil Surgeon, Assistant Director of Basic
Democracies, Publicity-cum-Executive
Officer, and two ladies from public life
interested in this programme." (d)
Thana Councils (in East Pakistan) and
Union Councils (in West Pakistan)
"should perform such functions as may
be entrusted to them from time to time
by District Family Planning Board . ."
(Pakistan, 1965b).

The bulk of the work will actually be performed at the district level. Among the important jobs with the district board are: (1) establishment of the urban clinics, (2) supervision of the mobile units (one per district), (3) appointment of the "Family Planning Doctor" for the thana and tehsil part-time family planning clinics, (4) registration of the village dais, (5) ensuring distribution of conventional contraceptives to all local outlets, (6) undertake publicity of all types, (7) exercising general administrative and operational control over the program at the Thana/Union Council level in the district.
The Thana Council/Union Council level functions as the local distribution and financing agency. Their explicit duties include: (1) ensuring the registration of dais and their attendance at training sessions, (2) issuing conventional contraceptives to local outlets, (3) local publicity, (4) disbursing funds in reward for referrals and other services rendered, (5) submission of reports to the District Board on conventional contraceptives distributed, IUD insertions, and operations performed, (6) reporting on complaints from the public, (7) general supervision over the program in the area.
The key people in the program emerge as: (1) The Publicity-cum-Executive Officer at the district level. He will be equipped with a jeep and is designed to be the "trouble-shooter" for the program in his entire district. (2) The Thana Family Planning Officer (Family Planning Supervisor in the West) at the local level.' In the words of the scheme, he is to "tour in the villages, disseminate information and motivate the public on this programme, and guide, supervise and assist the village dais and agents in their work. He will follow up and document cases and collect data for bringing about improvements and advise

Vol. 13, No. 4 Pakistan's Family Planning Experiment

319

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

the higher Family Planning Authorities to the end" (Pakistan, 1965b). Only one jeep per tehsil in the West (one per two thanas in the East) is provided however. In the case of West Pakistan the Supervisors seem to report more directly to the District Board (although the Tehsil Development Officer is mentioned as the middle "tier" of supervision) while working with the Union Councils. In the case of East Pakistan, the officers are evidently more directly under the Thana Circle Officer for Development. In the latter case, due to the larger area covered, the Family Planning Officers are, as noted above, given three assistants, who are also whole-time.
Finally, the village dais are also key figures in the plan. Their duties under the plan are: (1) to motivate people to accept the program, (2) to supply conventional contraceptives, (3) referral of cases for IUD insertions.
At the local level possible outlets (other than the dais) for conventional contraceptives listed include: village shopkeepers, stores, pharmacies, medical houses, and all private, local bodies and government hospitals, and health centers, maternity centers and clinics, all retail dealers of whatever sort; and all chemists, factories, and workshops.
Within this rather elaborate apparatus, relatively few of the personnel are actually full-time salaried persons. At the Centre, the Research and Evaluations units are staffed by whole-time persons. In the Provinces whole-time personnel include the administrator attached to the Provincial Family Planning Board, the Publicity-cum-Executive Officer attached to each District Family Planning Board, the Family Planning Supervisors in the West and a Thana Family Planning Officer plus three whole-time assistants in the East. The Union Council secretaries in the West

will receive a small salary for working with the Family Planning Supervisor and also expense money. The selected village dais (at about the rate of one per two villages in both Provinces) will receive a small salary in addition to their referral fees. On the more purely "clinical side" (as the plan puts it) there is no wholetime staff outside the urban areas. The plan calls for three family planning "doctors" (a doctor, a lady health visitor, or a registered midwife) in West per thana or six per tehsil in East. These doctors are paid retainers of modest amounts in addition to the fees they may earn for operations or IUD insertions.
The scheme calls for the establishment of 37 whole-time clinics in urban areas, 16 in East Pakistan and 21 in West Pakistan, and 713 part-time clinics, 400 in East Pakistan and 318 in West Pakistan. The part-time clinics will be housed in existing health facilities--health centers, hospitals, and so on. The clinics, wholeand part-time will concentrate on IUD insertions and vasectomies/ligations. Of the urban areas the scheme notes:
Within Municipal, town committee and cantonment limits in West Pakistan the functions assigned to the Family Planning Supervisors and Union Council Secretaries will be performed by the District Family Planning Board through its whole-time staff and other personnel available already to Deputy Commissioners, Union Committees and the Civil Surgeon/Medical Superintendent . . . . In 16 cities of West Pakistan 21 urban clinics will have sufficient staff to cover the urban areas of those districts. Furthermore, the West Pakistan Family Planning Board may by reappropriation allocate up to 10% of the provision made for Family Planning Supervisors to rural areas to provide them for urban areas at the rate of one per population of 100,000 and at least one for every district headquarters . . . . So far as East Pakistan is concerned, the entire area (inclusive of Municipal, Two

320

Robinson

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

Committee and Cantonment Areas) will be covered by the Male and Female Assistants appointed there (Pakistan, 1965b).
Training procedures for all personnel are also spelled out. The Family Planing Officers (supervisors) were trained first in special courses operated by highlevel expert personnel assembled for this purpose. Training on the more purely clinical side will proceed in the same way with volunteer experts training 150 lady doctors, lady health visitors, and trained midwives in techniques and motivation. These trained medical people will then train other lady doctors and medical personnel in their respective thanas and tehsils. Similar courses will be conducted at the Thana and Union Council level for the dais by the Family Planning Officers (supervisors). The training is organized so that it is to be conducted in a series of stages, one following the other as quickly as possible so as to maintain the momentum of the program. This training was to be finished early in the first year of the program and only limited additional training would be required. Foreign training for selected employees in advanced techniques of health education, medicine, and statistics is anticipated, the program would not wait for such personnel to complete their training.
Perhaps the most important innovation in the scheme is the strong emphasis placed on monetary incentives to all the part-time or volunteer/personnel connected with the program.
For each vasectomy both the doctor/ lady health visitor/dai and the client will be paid Rs. 25. Insertions of LU.D.'s will be free for the client. For each insertion doctors will be paid Rs. 8 and trained nurses/midwives/dais Rs. 4 besides, dais will be paid Rs. 2.50 and others Rs. 2 for referring cases

leading to an insertion. Contraceptives will be sold at subsidized rates and 50 percent of the sales proceeds will go as commission to the sellers (Pakistan, 1965a).
Payment for IUD insertion performed by the "Family Planning doctors" (doctors, lady health visitors, trained midwives) will be from the District Health Officer (in the case of urban localities in both East and West, the payment will come from the civil surgeon/medical supervisor). Vasectomies/tubeligations performed will be paid for by the District Family Board directly. Payment to dais for either referrals or actual IUD insertions will be made by Union Council secretaries or Thana Council Vice Chairman.
Thus, to summarize briefly, the scheme operates through the existing political and administrative apparatus of government. It is a massive effort to make widely available supplies of conventional contraceptives and to motivate people to use them. IUD's play an important but minority role in the program. The scheme gives no special attention to urban areas and is not "clinic-oriented." The scheme is decentralized, and control over the day-to-day functioning of the scheme lies at the provincial and even district levels. Publicity is local in budget and control, research and training are shared by the provinces and the center, and only evaluation is an exclusively central function. At the grassroots level the key "motivators" and agents are the village midwives. These women and many of the other part-time workers in the scheme will, it is hoped, be interested in the program by the training they receive and also because of the generous fees they can receive for finding clients and customers.

Vol. 13, No. 4 Pakistan's Family Planning Experiment

it i

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

POSSIBLE STRUCTUAL FLAWS
The plan is clearly well-thought out
and, on the face of it, plausible. It ob-
viously aims at avoiding the mistakes
of the second plan and also tries to
build upon the experience of some of
the small-scale "demonstration" proj-
ects, particularly the family planning
action experiments conducted by the
Pakistan Academy for Rural Development at Comilla.2 However, there are
some organizational and structural weak-
nesses which may prove very trouble-
some.
1. The scheme operates through the existing political and administrative apparatus. Of the numerous officials involved only a handful are full-time; the other persons serve either for part-time pay, fees, or for no pay at all. The plan has thus avoided the second plan's difficulty (overloading the health ministry people) by resorting to an equally risky administrative device--assigning important administrative roles in the plan to equally overworked political leaders-- Union Council Secretaries, Deputy District Commissioners, Thana Development Officers, and so on. The degree of sympathy of these officials with the scheme is at least questionable (M. K. H. Khan, 1962).
2. The scheme is an ambitious one, which aims at large-scale distribution of contraceptive to the rural as well as the urban population. A considerable logistic effort is thus involved. Unfortunately the mechanics of distribution are not spelled out. Beyond the instructions that one months' supply must be kept on hand as a minimum and the note that supervisors (Officers) will order directly from the suppliers, nothing is said about the actual chain of supply. A supplies coordinator and expeditor will perhaps
2 In particular, the scheme seems to have drawn on the Comilla experience in concluding
that (1) village women can be motivated to family planning; (2) conventional contraceptives will bring about reduction in fertility; (3) the problem is, therefore, simply making conventional contraceptives widely and cheaply available and telling women about them (see Choldin, 1965; Khan, 1963).

prove an urgent requirement for both Provincial Boards at least, and probably for all District Boards as well.
3. The Centre has limited control over the operation of the scheme at the grass roots. The initial training appears to be its responsibility, as also are research (the operation of the National Research Institute in Family Planning and other similar functions) and evaluation. But the day-to-day operation of the plan is in the hands of the Provincial and District Boards. Evaluation of performance is a central function, but the exact measures by which performance will be judged are not spelled out nor are the means by which the center can force corrective action to be taken at the district level if the provinces do not.
4. Evaluations of the progress which are meaningful for the ultimate objective of the program are vital. Reports of the numbers of contraceptives distributed or the number of training courses held may be perfectly accurate and yet be misleading. It is essential that from the outset the program measures itself as successful in terms of fertility reduction, not in terms of living up to administrative discipline. The scheme wisely provides for an evaluation unit in each wing responsible to the center, but the budget and staff provided seems unrealistic. The exact responsibilities of these units are also rather too vague in the scheme and there is no mention of how "success" is to be measured month by month, year by year.
5. Publicity is deemed to be a "local" function, thus ignoring or at least giving insufficient weight to the role of such centralized publicity media as radio, newspaper, and cinemas. The budget for publicity is fragmented among the districts and a coordinated national or even provincial publicity program becomes difficult if not impossible. The desire to allow persons familiar: with local mores to have a veto over publicity used in local areas is understandable. But for each local area to plan, develop, reproduce, and distribute all of its own publicity will result in needless duplication of effort, unevenness and inconsistencies in the approaches followed, and also a much less skilled job technically.

322

Robinson

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

6. The key people at the local level are the dais. Not very much is known about their socioeconomic characteristics, their own attitudes towards family planning, or their own role and status in the local communities. Indeed, there is some doubt as to how to accurately and unambiguously define a dai.
A dai may be any woman with experience in child birth, through having attended at numerous deliveries including her own, those of her immediate family, her neighbors, or the village at large on a professional basis. In any case, the dais are nearly all illiterate, low-income women of mature years, with no formal training in obstetrics or the physiology of reproduction. The plan thus relies in very important degree on a group of semiliterate rural women with strong vested interest in the status quo, and with poor natural equipment to serve as agents of social change (Gardezi, 1965; Croley, 1966; Sweden Pakistan Family Welfare Project, 1965a and 1965b).
A NOTE ON THE SOCIOECONOMIC SETTING
The population problem has arisen in
various forms and with varying urgency
in many parts of the world in the last
several decades. Family planning pro-
grams have been undertaken in coun-
tries, districts, and cities scattered all
over the world. This makes possible an
interesting comparison of the impact of
the socioeconomic environment on the
operation of a family planning program
and in particular on success or failure.
This experience gained in other coun-
tries also makes it possible to judge the
probable impact of the socioeconomic
setting on the achievement of the goals
of the Pakistan scheme.
We will not attempt a country by re-
view of the status of public family plan-
ning scheme. This has been done by
many persons, most recently by Berelson (Berelson, 1965).3
3 Other more detailed descriptions of the leading family planning programs will be found in

Bogue, in summarizing the · reasons for having a cautious optimism over a "breakthrough to control" lists Taiwan, South Korea, Ceylon, and Puerto Rico as "successes" and also mentions smaller scale "successes" in study areas in India, Pakistan and elsewhere (Bogue, 1964). He could also have added Thailand, where great success in demonstrationtype projects in urban Bangkok and rural Protharam District have been achieved (Peng, 1965; Somboonsuk, 1965).
If one reviews this rather wide range of cases and experiences around the world, one is struck with the fact that a pattern does emerge. It is possible to find certain socioeconomic factors which seem to be present in nearly all the cases of successful family planning programs and absent in cases where programs have been less successful. One can talk therefore about socioeconomic factors which seem to be associated with a favorable "setting" for family planning, even if one is not sure of causation.
First, nearly all the "successes" of family planning, large (Taiwan, Korea, Puerto Rico) or small (Singur, Ceylon), have been in areas where considerable progress towards modernity had already occurred. Typically, death rates in these areas are low (10 percent or under), literacy high (50 percent or over) and education, occupational change, urbanization, and such other factors rather far advanced. The studies also indicate that not infrequently the populations concerned were already beginning to practice family planning and that their initial, pre-program fertility was already declining or was at least below national averages. The introduction of family planning as a policy seems then to have
the 1964 Johns Hopkins Conference (Muramatsu and Harper, 1964), and in various issues of the Population Council's Studies in Family Planning.

Vol. 13, No. 4 Pakistan's Family Planning Experiment

323

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

reinforced and accelerated trends already in existence (Freedman, 1963; Bong et at, 1965; Keeney, 1965; Kinch, 1963; Koppel, 1965; Mather, 1962; Zalduonda, 1963).
Second, there is evidence that in the case of large scale, national family planning programs conventional contraceptives have not proved the answer. In Taiwan the "cafeteria approach" (as Freedman calls it) quickly leads to the realization that the IUD's were the most favored method. In Korea an early decision to emphasize the IUD has paid dividends. In Puerto Rico clinical methods have played a very important role. Where the socioeconomic factors are not favorable there appears a danger in expecting too high a degree of motivations and persistence on the part of the population. And where motivation is strong, the IUD or other clinical methods are likely to be preferred from the very outset. The more or less extrapersonal semipermanent methods have much to say for them in both contexts.
Third, in rural areas lacking any vestige of modernity, the degree of success has been limited. Expression of interest and willingness to accept supplies cannot be taken as the same thing as a firm determination to practice birth control. India's population is, according to nearly all surveys, "ready" for family planning, yet only in urban areas has the program become a reality (Raina, 1964; Dandekar, 1964).
SUMMARY AND CONDITIONS
Bringing together the several threads of the argument which have been advanced in the earlier sections, it must be admitted that the "setting" for family planning in Pakistan is mostly negative (Sadek, 1964; Inayatullah, 1963). Mortality according to the Third Plan is still at 29 per thousand and, even if this be

considered a high estimate, it seems clear

that it is not below 20 per thousand

(Pakistan, 1965a). This probably means

an infant mortality rate of 100 to 125

per 1,000 live births and that 25 percent

of children born will still die before

the age of 10. At least some of "benefits"

of (or need for) high fertility is unfor-

tunately still present. Similarly, educa-

tion has evidently done little except keep

up with population growth in the last 10

to 15 years. Urbanization has proceeded

at a relatively rapid rate, but the country

(and population covered by the plan)

is still overwhelmingly rural (Hashmi,

1963). Thus, one might say that the

family planning scheme in Pakistan rep-

resents a good test of whether family

planning can take hold in a situation

in which the setting is basically adverse.

One should add of course that govern-

ment policy in favor of family planning

in Pakistan is one very positive setting

factor, and one not present in many

other countries.

|

It can be argued that the scheme is excessively ambitious. It will require a massive administrative apparatus and must have the active cooperation of a host of public servants at the District, Thana (Tehsil), and Union Council levels. The number of whole-time trained employees is small and they will be spread thin. The part-time people, including the dais, will have little, if any, supervision. One can argue that given the limited resources, not only in terms of money but also trained people, the scheme would have been better advised to concentrate on the urban areas where densities make the people more easily available, where transport problems do not exist, where trained personnel can be shifted easily from one location to another, and where the setting is more favorable. Indeed, given the well-known "capillary" effect which social change in

324

Robinson

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

the cities has on the countryside, it is possible that a successful "crash" program in the large cities would have more effect ultimately on the rural birth rates than a nationwide program spread so thin that it makes no striking progress anywhere.
The emphasis in the scheme on "nonclinical" methods--conventional contraceptives rather than IUD's--is also discouraging. The national programs which have had the greatest success have been ones in which clinical methods came to play the key role in fertility reduction. In fact, except in the relatively small scale operations in Ceylon, Singur, and one or two other places, real reductions in fertility through the use of conventional methods have been shown time and time again to be very difficult. At least one major national program (India) has been trying for 10 years and has virtually no success to show for it yet. The Pakistan scheme does provide for IUD insertions and it is possible that, like the Taiwan case, the demand for IUD's will force a change in the emphasis of the program as it develops. The IUD's will at least be produced and publicized and, should they "catch on," greater effort can be placed into this aspect of the scheme. The program should for this as well as for other reasons remain flexible, self-critical, and willing to learn from its experience.
The Pakistan scheme may well prove the first major family planning "success" in a basically backward unfavorable setting. It may also find that its original targets are not within reach after the first two to three years of the plan period. In this latter case, the planners would be well advised to think in terms of a reduced scale program concentrating on the larger urban areas (cities of 100,000 and over), relying more on trained professionals as the agents, and also placing

greater emphasis on the IUD and other clinical means. In any event, the Pakistan experiment in family planning will be an interesting one to watch.
REFERENCES
ADIL, E., 1965. "The Use of Statistical Guides and Measures of Effectiveness in Determining Government Policy for Influencing Fertility--Pakistan." Paper delivered at United Nations World Population Conference, 1965 (A I/I/E/416).
BERELSON, B., 1965. "A Review of Major Government Programmes." Paper delivered at United Nations World Population Conference, 1965 (B 13/I/E/217).
BOGUE, D. J., 1964. The demographic breakthrough: From projection to control. Population Ind. 30(4): 449-454.
BONG, S., M. H. KIM, and M. G. LEE, 1965. Fer-
tility and family planning in rural Korea. Population Stud., 18 (March): 237-250. CHOLDIN, H. M., 1965. Comilla Pilot Project in Family Planning. Third Progress Report, June 1963 through May 1965, Pakistan Academy for Rural Development, Comilla, East Pakistan. CROLEY, H. T., 1966. "Characteristics and Utilization of Midwives in a Selected Rural Area of East Pakistan." Paper delivered at Comilla Academy Conference on Family Planning, (January). DANDEKAR, K., 1964. Vital rates and efforts at family planning in various states of India. Arth. Vijn., 6: 290-300. FREEDMAN, R., 1965. Family planning programmes today. Studies in Family Planning, 8 (Supplement): 1-7.
FREEDMAN, R., C. L. CHEN, and Y. TAKESHITA,
1963. Fertility trends in Taiwan: Tradition and change. Population Stud., 16 (March): 219-236. GARDEZI, H. N., 1965. "Midwife as a Local Functionary and her Role in Family Planning." Unpublished paper. HASHMI, S. S., 1963'. Main Features of the Demographic Conditions in Pakistan. Country Background Paper presented to Asian Population Conference, New Delhi, December 1020, 1963, Central Statistical Office, Karachi.
HAWLEY, A. H., and V. PRACHUABMOH, 1965.
"Family Growth and Family Planning: Response to a Family Planning Action Programme in a Rural District of Thailand." Unpublished Report of the National Research Council, Bangkok, Thailand (NRCSSD, PS No. 6) INAYATULLAH, A., 1963. Impact of culture on fertility in Pakistan. International Congress Series, Proceedings of the Conference of International Planned Parenthood Federation, Singapore. Excepta Medica, 72: 111-115. KEENY, S. M., 1965. Korea and Taiwan: Two national programmes. Studies in Family Planning, 6: 1-6. KHAN, A. M., 1963. Pilot Project in Family Planning. Progress Report to May 1963,

Vol. 13,No. 4 Pakistan's Family Planning Experiment

325

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

Pakistan Academy for Rural Development, Comilla, East Pakistan.
KHAN, M. K. H., 1962. Attitudes of the Union
Councillors towards adoption of Family Planning Programme as a National Policy. A survey conducted by Social Sciences Research Center, University of the Panjab, and sponsored by Family Planning Association of Pakistan.
KINCH, A., 1963. Ceylon: The Sweden-Ceylon
family planning pilot project. Studies in Family Planning, 2: 9-12. KOPPEL, K. S., 1965. "Hooghly Plan for Family Welfare." Sunday Hindusthan Standard, November 7th, 1965.
MATHER, K. K., 1962. "Preliminary Lessons
Learned from theRural Population Control Study of Singur," In C. V. Kiser (ed.), Research in Family Planning, Princeton University Press, pp. 33-50.
MURAMATSU, M., and P. A. HARPER, 1964. Popu-
lation Dynamics, International Action and Training Programmes. Proceedings of the International Conference on Population, May 1964, The Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health, Baltimore.
PAKISTAN, GOVERNMENT OF, 1960. The Second
Five Year Plan (1960-65). Planning Commission (June).
PAKISTAN, GOVERNMENT OF, 1964. Census of
Pakistan Population, 1961, Volume 2. Ministry of Home and Kashmir Affairs, Home Affairs Division, East Pakistan.
PAKISTAN, GOVERNMENT OF, 1965a. The Third
Five Year Plan (1965-70). Planning Com-
mission (May).
PAKISTAN, GOVERNMENT OF, 1965b. Family plan-
ning Scheme for Pakistan during the Third

Five Year Plan period, 1965-1970. Ministry of Health Labour and Social Welfare, Rawalpindi.
PENG, J. Y., 1965. Thailand: Family growth in Protharam District. Studies in Family Planning, 8: 1-6.
RAINA, B. L. 1964. The family planning pro-
gramme in India. Studies in Family Planning, 3:4-8. RAINA, B. L., 1965. "Possible Effects of Public Policy Measures onFertility in India." Paper delivered at United Nations World Population Conference, 1965 (A1/I/E/466). SADEK, N., 1964. "Population Problems in Pakistan: Policies and Programmes." In M. Muramatsu andP. A. Harper (eds.), Population Dynamics, International Action and Training Programs. Proceedings of the International Conference on Population, May 1964, The Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health, Baltimore, pp.27-34.
SOMBOONSUK, A., et al., 1965. "Chulalongkorn
Hospital Family Clinic." A report on the first eight months of an IUD Service in an Urban Hospital in Thailand. Paper presented at the Second National Seminar on Population of Thailand, Bangkok, October 11-14, 1965.
SWEDEN PAKISTAN FAMILY WELFARE, 1965a. "The
Report of the Dai Training Carried outin Tando Jam Health Center as a Trial." Cyclostyled, n. d.
SWEDEN PAKISTAN FAMILY WELFARE PROJECT,
1965b. "Interview with 100 Dais, JulyAugust-September 1965." Cyclostyled, n. d. ZALDUONDA, C., 1963. Puerto Rico: The EmkoProgramme. Studies in Family Planning, 1: 7-9.

