Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The meaning of empiric risk figures for disease or defect
James V. Neel M.D.
To cite this article: James V. Neel M.D. (1958) The meaning of empiric risk figures for disease or defect, Eugenics Quarterly, 5:1, 41-43, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1958.9987347 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1958.9987347
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

THE MEANING OF EMPIRIC RISK FIGURES FOR DISEASE OR DEFECT

JAMES V. NEEL, M.D.
Department of Human Genetics University of Michigan Medical School

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

IN GENETIC COUNSELING extensive recourse
is had to "empiric risk figures." In general, such figures are statements, based on experience rather than an understanding of etiological mechanisms, of the likelihood that a particular condition will be present or develop in a particular individual under a particular set of circumstances. For example, we have empiric risk figures for the likelihood of the recurrence of a child with a harelip, once such a child has been born to parents normal in this respect, whose antecedents were likewise without the trait. Or, using the same trait as an example, we have empiric risk figures for the likelihood that when an individual with a harelip marries a normal individual, the children of this union may be expected to exhibit this trait.
Empiric risk figures are usually assembled as follows: an investigator interested in a particular trait, say harelip, takes a careful family history each time he examines an affected individual. Let us say that he finds that 100 such individuals, all born of normal parents, have 300 siblings, of whom 15 exhibit a harelip. The empiric risk of encountering this trait among the siblings of an affected individual is thus 5 per cent, and this risk could then be applied to the probability of any future siblings of such an individual exhibiting the defect.
A question which often arises in the derivation of risk figures is whether all the siblings of an affected individual should enter into the derivation of the risk figures, or only those born subsequent to the affected propositus. Many of the empiric risk figures in the medical literature have made use of all siblings. In so doing, there is the

tacit assumption that the risk remains constant with parental age and parity. With respect to congenital malformations, a class of defects for which empiric risk figures are commonly used, this is not a correct assumption, the frequency of congenital defect rising significantly among the children born to older mothers. Thus, in the Japanese material described by Dr. Schull and myself (1956), congenital defects are two to three times as frequent among the children of mothers over 40 than the children of younger mothers; and this increase has not as yet been shown to be associated with any particular defect or group of defects. In the case of congenital defect, then, truly accurate empiric risk figures should probably be based only on children born subsequent to the birth of the first affected, although the actual correction so introduced will not usually be large.
In the case of Mongolism, one of the most frequently encountered congenital defects, this age effect is especially striking. Thus, among all the siblings of children with Mongolism, the frequency of Mongolism is about 1 per cent. However, among children born subsequent to the birth of a Mongol, the frequency of the condition is about 4 per cent. The latter is the correct empiric risk figure, since it is the subsequent children whom the parents are inquiring about (Book and Reed, 1950).
An empiric risk figure carries no implications concerning etiology and is, in fact, an expression of ignorance concerning etiology. Where the genesis of a particular trait is understood, one need not rely on empiric risk figures. For instance, consider a very rare, recessively inherited syndrome. As material on this condition accumulates, it

41

42 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

will first become apparent that there is an appreciable recurrence risk. It will also become apparent that there is more consanguineous marriage among the parents of affected individuals than in the population at large. In time, the recurrence risk will be shown to approximate 25 per cent and the data will justify the conclusion that this is a recessively inherited trait. At this point, one can base one's predictions on a specific genetic mechanism.
An important corollary of the fact that empiric risk figures reflect our ignorance as to precise etiology is the conclusion that the application of such figures to the individual case may in reality be quite misleading. Thus, current thought concerning the etiology of congential defect clearly emphasizes the concept of multiple causative factors. Some individuals with such a trait as harelip may owe the condition to a transient disturbance of maternal metabolism during pregnancy or to a pure accident in the complex machinery of development, an accident which has no increased probability of repeating itself. Other such individuals may owe their condition primarily to their genetic constitution. Finally-- and I suspect this is the largest group--the trait in some individuals may result from an interaction between features of the intra-uterine environment and the individual's genetic constitution, i.e., the combination of "environmental" factors with a prepared soil. One overall risk figure applied to all these cases will in some instances overestimate the risk, and in other instances underestimate it. One of the really pressing needs in genetic counseling is the development of methods which will permit us to distinguish between these possibilities. Considerable progress has been made towards detecting individuals who are the genetic carriers of various inherited traits (reviews in Neel, 1953; Neel and Schull, 1954; Hsia, 1957). An extension of this

same approach to the field of congenital defect may be fruitful, in that some parents might be found to exhibit on close scrutiny sub-clinical findings which would indicate they were the carriers of certain genes responsible for hereditary defect, while other individuals would not exhibit these findings.
The empiric risk figure employed in a genetic counseling problem is at best a tentative figure, subject to revision in the light of future experience. Thus, we have on several occasions been consulted by parents whose first-born has exhibited a very rare constellation of congenital abnormalities. Since empiric risk figures on this specific constellation were lacking, we fell back on the rule of thumb that there is in the neigh* borhood of a 3 to 5 per cent recurrencerisk for most of the carefully studied congenital defects. This general figure, together with other pertinent information, was given the parents as a guide for their thinking. However, it was always emphasized that simple recessive inheritance could not be ruled out, and if they should have the misfortune to have a second child with the same combination of defects, then a revision of the recurrence risk may be in order.
Finally, to round out this presentation, I should state the obvious, that empiric risk figures are no substitute for a careful family history. Such a history will sometimes delineate high risk families, to whom the ordinary figures do not apply.
In summary, then, empiric risk figures are essentially pragmatic probability statements based on accumulated medical statistics. The figure employed for any specific defect undoubtedly encompasses a number of different etiologies. A task confronting human genetics is to learn to distinguish between these etiologies, a development which will put genetic counseling on a sounder basis.

43

REFERENCES

BÖÖK, J. A. and REED, S. C. 1950. Empiric risk
figures in Mongolism. J.A.M.A., 143: 730-732.
HSIA, D. Y. 1957. The laboratory detection of heterozygotes. Am.J. Human Genet. 9 : 98-116.
NEEL, J. V. 1953. The detection of the genetic carriers of inherited disease. In: ClinicalGenetics (A. Sorsby, ed.). St. Louis: C. V.

Mosby, pp. 27-34.
, and SCHULL, W. J. 1954. Human
Heredity. Chicago: University o£Chicago Press, pp. 361.
. 1956. The Effect of Exposure to the
Atomic Bombs on Pregnancy Termination in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Nat. Acad. Sci.-Nat. Res. Coun., Publ. No. 461, pp. xvi and241.

CHAIRMAN GLASS: The next speaker on the it is tact and good judgment, and I don't panel is one who, so far as I know, didnot know anyone who exhibits continually greater start his work in the field of genetics by work- tact and hasa greater flair for catching up the ing on the lower animals, but he has certain ideas that have been bandied back and forth other qualifications that render him almost in a discussion and putting them in a nutshell ideal in his position on this panel. If there is than Nash Herndon. Hedid it excellently this anything a heredity counselor needs, I suppose morning, and we will hear from him again.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

PROCEDURES FOR REFERRAL TO HEREDITY COUNSELORS

C. NASH HERNDON, M.D.
Bowman Gray School of Medicine

T

A HETERM REFERRAL SHOULD BE interpret- service. This material can be readily util-

ed broadly to include all mechanisms ized by making arrangements forthe heredi-

whereby the heredity counselor and the ty counselor to attend ward rounds and

patient, or members of his family, come staff conferences normally held on these

into contact. It may be useful to consider services. Conferences with the students

referral procedures in relation to the pri- and house officers assigned to patients of

mary functions of a medical center. Gen- genetic interest can be used to guide the

erally speaking, a medical center has three student in collecting suitable pedigreema-

major functions. These are, first, teaching; terial and in outlining suitable advice to

second, research; third, patient care. Many the patient or his family. This function

medical educators rank these functions in is particularly valuable in increasing the

importance in theorder given.

number of physicians in the community

A teaching service requires a well-bal- who are able to handle many counseling

anced variety of problems to provide a flow problems directly, and whowill refer the

of suitable material for the purpose of more difficult problems to the specialist in

training students and house officers. Most genetics.

of the material needed for teaching can Establishing contact with patients needed

be provided by thenormal flow of patients for research projects can be done in a

found on anyactive pédiatrie and medical variety of ways. Usually a method isre-

