Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Changing attitudes toward human genetics and eugenics
Amram Scheinfeld
To cite this article: Amram Scheinfeld (1958) Changing attitudes toward human genetics and eugenics, Eugenics Quarterly, 5:3, 145-153, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1958.9987365 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1958.9987365
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 6
View related articles Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

CHANGING ATTITUDES TOWARD HUMAN GENETICS AND EUGENICS*

AMRAM SCHEINFELD

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

IF THE GOOD Abbe Mendel were alive
today, he might look over to the human geneticist and ask, "How does your garden grow?"
For those who have been taking periodic inventory of the science of human genetics, (as I have been doing for many years), the answer to how it was flourishing and what it had produced might have to be a so-so one: "Well, pretty good, but not good enough/' By way of explanation we could go into the facts to be presented in this article.
First, then, it may not be a new observation that every science is subject to the "nature-nurture" principle. A science does not grow in a vacuum, but like an organism, is governed in its development by both its inherent potentialities and its external environment. For a science, the environment must include, among other things, the needs, interests and attitudes of the people of its time; and this applies to no science more strongly than to human genetics, which, because it deals so directly and intimately with human beings, has been most peculiarly sensitive to their reactions.
The "ivory tower" geneticist might of course resent the inference that his own work is to any major extent dependent on what the public thinks of it. Yet one has only to note how public demands and in-
*Adapted and expanded from a paper, "The Public and Human Genetics," given by the author at the First International Congress of Human Genetics, Copenhagen, 1956.

terests, and huge financing by government and industry, have enormously stimulated the growth and output of the physical sciences, as well as many other sciences, in the past few decades. What has been the story of human genetics in the same period?
Not long ago a brilliant pre-medical student, who had been planning to go into psychiatry, told me he would consider changing to human genetics as a career "if (I quote him), "there was any substantial future in it." He wanted my honest opinion. I told him it all depended on whether he was thinking of the immediate future, or the future future. In other words, looking far enough ahead, human genetics as a profession may hold exceptional possibilities. But for the immediate present the cold fact must be faced that in practical terms of job opportunities, financial rewards and available research funds and facilities, it offers much less for the amount of training required than does almost any other profession.
To throw some light on the status of human genetics in the United States today, here are a few facts about the opportunities for study and teaching: Hardly 1 in 100 of all the colleges and universities in the country, and only about 1 in 10 of the accredited medical colleges, offer as much as a single semester course in human genetics. In the entire area in and around New York City, with dozens of colleges and hundreds of thousands of students, not a single insti-

145

146 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

tution at this writing has a regular course in the subject or employs a full-time human genetics instructor. (For a few years Columbia University offered a graduate course in the science through its Institute of Human Variation, but the Institute became a casualty at the end of 1957.)
In the country at large there probably are no more than a dozen full-time human geneticists--i.e., those who make their living primarily in the profession,--and perhaps no more than two or three graduate students a year receiving Ph.Ds in this specialty. For the most part, those active in the field are part-time workers, usually not specifically trained as human geneticists, and including mainly medical men, general geneticists and some social scientists. But the great majority of American professional people whom one would expect to be actively interested in human genetics have little contact with it, and do little or nothing to encourage its teaching or research.1
Why is all this so? The answer cannot be simply that "human genetics is a new science." Actually, it is more than fifty years old--as old, if not older, than many other modern sciences which have made vastly more progress. Nor can one say that it is too theoretical, or indefinite, or of no practical value, for the useful application of its findings can be and is now being demonstrated in innumerable ways, as we shall show later. Nor, again, can one argue that it is lacking in popular interest, for it deals with the very essence of human lives and relationships. Indeed, this latter fact may hold the explanation we seek. For it is precisely because human genetics touches such sensitive spots in human lives that, far from having been met merely by indifference, it has incited a host of adverse reactions, such as perhaps no other science has encountered. And here we find the fate of
1 The situation is not much different in other countries, except for Denmark, Norway and Sweden, where there has been much public and professional support for human genetics projects.

human genetics interwoven with that of eugenics, which had preceded it by several decades and in some ways, as many see it, was at first the wicked stepmother in its story.
Specifically, a primary bias against human genetics arose from the fact that almost immediately after its entrance into the world, it was seized upon by the extremists of the early eugenics movement to support their theories regarding genetically superior and inferior classes, peoples and races, and their ideas for rigidly suppressing the breeding of all those whom they considered "unfit." Moreover, since some of the pioneer human geneticists were also leaders in the early eugenics movement and espoused its theories, human genetics and eugenics were for a long time looked on as synonymous in many eyes, and as equally questionable.
One can readily account for the extremist views of the old-line eugenists. In the first flush of the discovery (or rediscovery) of the Mendelian principles, almost every trait in any plant or animal was thought of as inherited through some simple genetic mechanism. With a quick jump from lower organisms to human beings, it was then assumed that virtually all human physical traits, including all defects and abnormalities not obviously due to accident, were also inherited through simple recessive, dominant or sex-linked genes: and that this simple unitary inheritance, applied equally to good and bad behavior traits of every description, including intelligence, genius, honesty, decency, sobriety, etc., in contrast to stupidity, shiftlessness, depravity, criminality, etc. A number of studies of "horrible example" families, such as that of the "Kallikaks" (1912) went so far as to regard feeblemindedness, degeneracy, alcoholism, pauperism and criminality as the combined effects of a simple unitary genetic syndrome, which could be handed down for generations. (1) A 1915 monograph described "nomadism"

147

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

(or the wanderlust) as a simple sex-linked trait. A 1917 book listed as simple recessive conditions "hereditary alcoholism, hereditary criminality and hereditary hysteria." And another book reported "religious zeal" and "good taste in dress" among simple inborn traits. (We must remember that this was in the toddling days of human genetics, that workers in the field were groping their way, and that heredity as a whole seemed much less complex than we now know it to be. We must also, in all fairness, remember that many of the pioneer geneticists-eugenists blazed important trails in research, helped to develop useful techniques, and otherwise contributed importantly to the science of human genetics.)
At any rate, the foregoing easy views of human heredity also made possible the conclusion that the current world was divided between a minority of "fit" people, who had a corner on the "superior" genes, and a large majority of "unfit" people, who were chockful of "inferior" genes; and that humanity's fate and its chief hopes for betterment depended mainly on a drastic and immediate selective breeding program which would step up reproduction among the "fit" groups and radically reduce it among the "unfit,--one method to be by widespread sterilization which, it was thought, would get rid of most of the bad genes in a generation. Apart from the thinking in terms of groups rather than of individuals, and of ignoring the possibility that environment could account for many of-the group differences, a not inconsiderable weakness of the old eugenists was the tendency to identify the "fit" people as belonging mainly (by no coincidence) to their own race and ethnic groups--primarily White Nordics of old-line American or English stocks--and the "unfit" peoples as members of other races and ethnic groups.
But almost at once, and gathering force as time went on, strong opposing voices were heard from most of the leading ge-

neticists--Thomas Hunt Morgan, H. J. Muller, L. C. Dunn, Laurence H. Snyder, etc.--who pointed to innumerable scientific flaws in the extreme eugenic theories. What was also noted with concern was the damage the promulgation of these theories had done. Thus, Bentley Glass has written of the "fanatic views of the eugenists which ran [human genetics] into the ground." and Clarence P. Oliver tells of the long period when "the general public misunderstood the purpose and significance of human genetics, and many believed it was merely another term for sterilization or controlled breeding." (It is hardly necessary in this journal to point out that the new, and present, eugenics organization which subsequently came into being in the United States, bears little resemblance to the old one in its program or type of leadership, and is now looked on by most human geneticists as a constructive force in the development of their science.)
However, any harmful influence of the old eugenics movement was only one of the factors responsible for the antagonism and suspicion--or, at least, the indifference-- toward human genetics. One of the most important reasons for the negative feeling about the science of human heredity was and still is the remarkable rise and growth of "environmentalism" everywhere in the world in recent decades. In this respect we might almost say that human genetics was born at the wrong time. For this has been the age of psychoanalysis, psychology and psychosomatic medicine, with sweeping emphasis on the effects of environment in every phase of human thinking, behavior and functioning. It also has been the age of political and social environmentalism, with widespread assaults on hereditary class structures. And throughout the world, the tremendous advances in health, learning and achievements, resulting solely from rapid changes in environment, have dwarfed in many eyes the importance of hereditary factors. Why bother about pos-

148 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

sible hereditary differences of a few years in longevity among families, when environment was suddenly adding decades to life spans of all people? How ominous were hereditary threats in the light of what recent wars had done to human beings and what another war could do?--or the defects and deaths that could be averted by preventing further wars? Why speculate about genetic differences in mental capacities when, merely by training, whole masses of once backward peoples were suddenly emerging as masters of science and technology? And why take note of "distinguished pedigrees" when most great leaders everywhere were springing from common stock?
One could give good answers to all of these questions. Nonetheless, with everything else there has been a tendency in intellectual and academic circles to regard any stress on inherited human differences as "undemocratic" and "reactionary." This attitude was given special impetus during the period when Lysenkoism was at its height, and the barrage of attacks on "Morgan-Mendelian-capitalist genetics" left enough imprint on many minds to create doubts about the whole science of human genetics--doubts which persist even though Lysenko's theories have long been discredited. An additional bad influence, from quite another direction, was the perversion of genetic theories during the Nazi reign, when the promulgation of fantastic racist doctrines, and the sterilization and extermination orgies for the alleged purpose of "race improvement," increased suspicion regarding the ultimate objectives of both eugenics and human genetics.
But biases against human genetics have by no means arisen solely through outside influences. An important negative factor, I believe, has been the continued disproportionate preoccupation of the science with the pathological and abnormal. This might be explained by a number of facts: That the medical profession had a big head

start in studying and recording the hereditary transmission of pathological traits long before there was any science of genetics; that the large majority of active researchers in human genetics are medical men or connected with medical institutions; that most of the research funds have come through medical sources; and that, for the time being, the most practical and immediate applications of human genetics have been in the field of medicine.
Be that as it may, for the general public human genetics still tends to conjure up gruesome thoughts of idiots and imbeciles, and mentally diseased, physically warped and other abnormal individuals; and in families in whom these occur, it incites fear and shame. Some of this feeling arises from old notions that hereditary afflictions are punishments for ancestral sins, or that excesses and bad habits of various kinds could taint a family's germ plasm. Fears also have been increased by the widespread fallacy that if a condition is hereditary nothing can be done about it, except to stop those affected from having children.
One result is that in the many present fund-raising drives and publicity campaigns in the United States to combat mental diseases and defects, heart ailments, muscular disorders, epilepsy and other conditions, the role of heredity, wherever or to whatever extent it is involved, is generally either ignored or played down as much as possible. On the whole, also, the large popular magazines generally show an aversion to publishing articles about disease inheritance unless some constructive angle is heavily stressed, or unless cures for the condition have been reported (correctly or not). Thus, extensive publicity was given some years ago to the dubious--and presently discredited--claims that feeblemindedness, whatever its cause, could be cured by glutamic acid treatments, or that IQs of idiots could be raised 50 points by special educational methods. Again, in the two most popular movies about mental disease,

149

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

"The Snake Pit" and "The Three Faces of Eve," psychoses were made to appear as virtually all due to emotional disturbances in childhood, and fairly easy to cure by sympathetic insights and sessions on an analyst's couch.2
It is hardly surprising that the public is most receptive to findings which carry a hopeful note. As the best example, the "Rh" discoveries attracted such widespread favorable attention from both the public and the medical profession (perhaps more than any other genetic finding on record) because they could be applied at once toward saving the lives of thousands of babies yearly. Most recently, new hope for treatment of mental diseases and defects through drugs has made psychiatrists and the public far more sympathetic to theories of inherited biological factors in these conditions. Of special interest here is the attention stirred by findings of a remedial chemical treatment for phenylketonuria-- the first instance of success in treating (and possibly preventing) an hereditary mental defect. This has spurred the search for causes and treatments of other mental deficiencies, as well as other "molecular diseases," including sickle-cell anemia. (One project toward this end, directed by Dr. Linus Pauling of the California Institute of Technology, has been aided by a $450,000 grant from the Ford Foundation.) Also giving support to human genetics has been the increasing awareness of how knowledge of inheritance of various diseases (diabetes, for example) can aid in detection and diagnosis of early symptoms in persons with afflicted relatives, and make possible preventive measures.
2 The sidestepping of possible hereditary or other organic influences in the psychoses is not confined to the popular media. As one example, a psychological journal recently published a paper dealing with schizophrenia in a pair of identical twin adults, and treated this as a rare example of "folié à deux" (i.e., of one individual "catching" the disease from another). There was no mention of the possibility that the concordance might have been genetic, or of the studies by Kallmann and others who have reported scores of such cases.

Many of the biases against human genetics might be lessened or overcome by promoting a clearer understanding of the facts. For example, psychologists who take a strongly anti-hereditarian attitude--and there are many such--often fail to realize that in crediting or blaming environment and early conditioning for almost everything that children are or turn out to be, and not recognizing possible inborn influences, they may be saddling parents and society with an unjust and unsupportable burden of responsibility. And it is precisely within the supposedly most enlightened and sophisticated circles, where environmentalism has had its strongest hold, that parents are driven frantic by guilt feeling when anything goes wrong with a child. (One may question whether any fears or guilt feelings engendered in the past with respect to transmission of hereditary defects were as emotionally traumatic to parents as are the thoughts of what they did or could do to a child by "inadequate love," "rejection," lack of breast feeding, improper toilet training, or what not.) Undoubtedly, a better understanding of the interacting roles of heredity and environment in shaping human lives can help people to recognize more clearly both their potentialities and limitations, and enable parents to rear their children with more wisdom and peace of mind.
Again, among many social scientists there has been antagonism toward bringing out facts about hereditary differences among races or ethnic groups. This, of course, is because such facts have so often been twisted to support race prejudices (as in the case of the early eugenists, later the Nazis, and currently racist agitators in the United States). What might be stressed, then, is that the science of human genetics, far from abetting intolerance, has been one of the most important forces of our time in undermining harmful myths of race. The science has shown that all human beings have a common origin, that there

150 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

are no "pure" races, that genes of all kinds and qualities are distributed among all peoples, and that major racial and ethnic differences in behavior and achievement are probably due mainly to environments. All of this, properly interpreted, can hardly offer comfort to those who argue for the innate biological superiority of any one large group of human beings (invariably their own) over others.
Now I should like to come back to my belief that there would be more public interest in and support for human genetics if it were not so heavily slanted toward the pathological and abnormal. I in no sense imply that there should be less activity in medical genetics, or that it should not be pursued to the fullest extent possible. What I do believe is that this research should be supplemented by much more research with respect to "normal" non-pathological traits in which the general public, as well as members of professions other than genetics or medicine, are profoundly interested. For instance, knowledge regarding the inheritance of normal facial details, stature and body form, and pigmentation of hair, eyes and skin, has been advanced little beyond what was brought out almost three decades ago. Such research can help to do much more than answer the question, "What will my baby look like?" Everything added to the knowledge of genetics of easily identifiable human surface traits may prove of immense value in linkage studies, in tagging hidden defective genes, in anthropological research, in revealing genetic effects of atomic radiation, in increasing exclusion chances in doubtful paternity cases, and in various other ways.
There also has been far too little genetic study of normal mental and behavioral differences, and of genius, talents and capacities of many kinds. In the current emphasis on the education of gifted individuals and the training of specialists of many kinds, it would be helpful to know which

capacities are governed or influenced by innate factors, and how to identify them at early ages. Similarly, with full awareness of the great influences of environment in delinquency, crime and behavioral aberrations of various types, the possibilities of some genetic predispositions warrant study, and if these are found, the knowledge would aid considerably toward corrective measures.
A particularly challenging area for research is that of genetic differences between human males and females. There is mounting evidence that these differences go much deeper than was previously thought and affect virtually every aspect of human biological make-up and functioning. Thus, exclusive of directly sex-linked traits, there are strong indications of some over-all genetic factors, arising at the cellular level, which cause virtually every major disease to act differently in the two sexes, irrespective of environmental influences, and with the inherent advantages today usually and largely in favor of females. (2) But what are these over-all "sex factors" which are set in motion by the initial XX and XY chromosome differentials? Are they produced in different strengths and degrees, so that one could grade individual males and females accordingly, and estimate their relative chances of susceptibility or resistance to specific ailments and mortality threats? And do these pervasive biochemical factors in any way contribute to sex differences in normal mental functioning, behavior or achievements? The answers could prove important in many ways.
True, it is no easy matter to explore the complex behavioral traits, nor can the conventionally trained human geneticist be expected to carry on such exploration on his own. Much of this behavioral research would require collaboration with other specialists, such as psychiatrists, psychologists, sociologists and anthropologists. In fact, there has been growing realization

151

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

among geneticists themselves that the science has passed well beyond the stage where a presumably satisfying study could be made by observing some eccentric type of finger, ear lobe or hair quirk in a student, and getting a Mendelian pedigree of his near relatives. As Dr. Laurence Snyder pointed out a few years ago, "If human genetics is to progress along fresh pathways, the traditional atomistic approach must be supplemented by new methods which will provide information on multifactorial inheritance. . . . The human genetic studies of the future must be cooperative efforts. Only by teamwork involving scientists from many areas can the understanding of the genetics of man be expected to advance appreciably." (3)
The need for more teamwork has also become apparent in the area of genetic counseling. Here, too, there has been increasing awareness of the complexities of the science, and that advice on genetic problems cannot be given as simply and dogmatically as in the old days, and purely on the basis of eugenic considerations. Thus, it was significant that at the Heredity Counseling Symposium conducted by the American Eugenics Society in 1957, the subject was viewed almost entirely from the standpoint of the immediate interests and happiness of the individual parents and their children, and the broader eugenic aspects were almost lost sight of. (4) (In fact, if I am correct, there was only a single reference to eugenics proper and society's interests in not having defective genes propagated, and this only in the form of a question by a discussant.) What was stressed by a number of participants was that genetic counseling must go well beyond the mere estimating and reporting of genetic risks, and into various social, psychological and medical aspects of individual cases. Since few, if any, human geneticists are fully equipped for all this, it was pointed out that effective genetic counsel-

ing, like human genetic research itself,
might best be a group undertaking in
which specialists from a number of other
areas would participate.
But this circles us back to the fact that
to enlist the cooperation of other scientists
requires both a breaking down of biases
against human genetics and a stimulation
of general interest in the science. For-
tunately, there are indications that these
favorable developments are under way.
Here are some of the reasons for optimism:
1. Medical science, as previously noted, is giving increasing attention to genetic factors in diseases, particularly in the psychoses and in metabolic disorders, and one can look for more and more medical colleges to institute courses in medical genetics. A forecast of this was given at the conference of representatives of about seventy medical colleges, held early in 1958 at the University of Wisconsin, which itself had established a medicalgenetics course not long before. (A report on this conference is scheduled to appear shortly in The American Journal of Human Genetics.)
2. Psychologists are taking note of the growing attention given by psychiatrists to biochemical factors in mental diseases and emotional disorders, and one can look for active exploration into the possibilities of genetic influences in various functional and behavioral conditions such as speech difficulties, delinquency, sexual aberrations, alcoholism, etc., as well as in "normal" behavior traits.
3. Findings of differential blood-type distributions in racial and ethnic groups have provided anthropologists with some of their most important new research tools, and have greatly stimulated their interest in other aspects of human genetics.
4. Sociologists must inevitably recognize the importance of human genetics in many fields of study, such as of race mixture, population growths and changes, group differentials in diseases and longevity, sexual problems, adoptions, etc.
5. The acute and universal concern about genetic effects of atomic radiation, which will grow with increased use of

152 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

atomic energy whether for peacetime purposes or war, is certain to create more demand for the services of human geneticists. 6. The American public is steadily becoming better educated with respect to heredity and how it works. A generation ago relatively few people knew what the words "genes" and "chromosomes" meant, and these terms almost never appeared in newspapers or popular magazines. Today these same terms have become household words, and millions of students have learned or are learning at least something about human genetics in high schools and colleges.
Finally, although we have stressed how great environmental changes have seemingly dwarfed the importance of human genetics, another side to the picture is developing: The same changes, in equalizing environments and greatly reducing the major acquired disparities among human beings, are also making it possible for genetic differences to assert themselves more and to become more significant. The trend in this direction already is apparent in the United States and other advanced countries. We can see this, for example, with respect to diseases. Formerly the environmental afflictions, such as infectious diseases and those resulting from improper or inadequate diet, hygiene and medical care--topped the causes of death and accounted for the greatest differences in morbidity and mortality among human beings (as is still true within backward countries, and in these countries as compared with advanced countries). But as the environmental diseases have been pushed ever farther down in rank, the organic conditions -- heart, cancer, kidney, pancreas, glands, etc.--have loomed ever larger in the picture; differences in disease incidences among various socio-economic, racial and ethnic groups have narrowed down; and individual differences in reaction to disease --much influenced by hereditary factorshave assumed greater importance. There

is every reason to believe, then, that as environments become further equalized, hereditary differences will play increasingly more prominent roles in the determination of human life expectancies.
Similarly, hereditary differences in mental performances, behavior and personality, largely obscured in highly unequal environments, can be expected to become more apparent, and to demand more attention, as great social changes now in progress go on to reduce the differences among human beings in training, education and opportunities. Thus, one of the major arguments now offered against the validity of intelligence and aptitude tests as measurements of basic capacities is that the results are strongly influenced by conditioned factors. But as both social and academic environments become more uniform for all, performances on these tests will be increasingly indicative of inborn differences. In turn, genetic studies of mental capacities and behavior traits will be far easier to make and will have more meaning than is now the case.
For many reasons, then, one can foresee that the horizons of human genetics are almost certain to become broader, and the prospects for the science as a whole, and for the individual wishing to specialize in it, are bound to become greater. But going with this, the role of the human geneticist, and the training for the profession, will also have to broaden much beyond the present confines of the genetics and medical laboratories. For if human genetics is to go as far as it can and should, it must turn away from any lingering tendencies to view human beings as merely biological specimens. The complexities of human inheritance cannot be studied, nor the knowledge properly applied, without full attention to all the manifold elements in human environments, and an understanding of people's thoughts, feelings, desires and hopes. In sum, to render its greatest service, to

153

eliminate such biases as may exist against it, to enlist the maximum support of the public and of members of other professions, and to realize its fullest potentialities, human genetics as a science must be made as human as possible.

REFERENCES
1. SCHEINFELD, AMRAM, 1944. The Kallikaks after thirty years. J. Hered. 3 5 : 259-264.
2. , 1958. The mortality of men and women. Scientif. Am. 198: 22-27.
3. SNYDER, LAURENCE H., 1951. Old and new
pathways in human genetics. Am. J. Human Gen. 3 : 1-16. 4. 1958. Proceedings of the Heredity Counseling Symposium. Eug. Quart. 5 : 3-62.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

Vol. XI No. 3

POPULATION STUDIES
A JOURNAL OF DEMOGRAPHY
Edited by D. V. GLASS and E. GREBENIK

March 1958

CONTENTS G. Rowntree and N. H. Carrier. The Resort to Divorce in England and Wales, 1858-1957.

C. T. E. Quensel.

The Interrelations of Marital Status, Fertility, Family Size and Intelligence Test Scores.

Wolf Scott.

Fertility and Social Mobility Among Teachers.

B. Benjamin.

Inter-Generation Differences in Occupation.

Book Reviews: List of Books and Publications Received.

Subscription Price per volume: £2. 2s. Od. (U.S. $6.75, post free). Price per part: £ l . Os. Od., plus postage (U.S. $3.25, post free). Published by the Population Investigation Committee, at the London School of Economics and Political Science, 15 Houghton Street, London, W.C.2.

