Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Perspectives: The first international congress of human genetics
Helen G. Hammons
To cite this article: Helen G. Hammons (1956) Perspectives: The first international congress of human genetics, Eugenics Quarterly, 3:4, 195-200, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1956.9987293 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1956.9987293
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

Eugenics QuarterlyVol. 3, No.4, December, 1956
COMMENT

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

PERSPECTIVES: The First In- News interest was highest in the reports

ternational Congress of Human on the genetic effects of radiation and mu-

Genetics

tation in man. The Congress went on rec-

ord as acknowledging the genetic danger

The tremendous range of the still young science of human genetics was vividlydem-

of radiation for mankind. The following resolution was unanimously passed.

onstrated by the First International Congress of Human Genetics in Copenhagen

"The damage produced by ionizing radiation on the hereditary material is real and should be taken seriously into con-

during the first week in August of this year. sideration in both the peaceful and mili-

Topics ranged from very specialized tary uses of nuclear energy as well as in

subjects such as hereditary optic atrophy and defects in tooth enamel and dentin to the broad problems of the effect of radiation on human populations and the place of human genetics in medicine.

all medical, commercial and industrial practices in which X-rays or other ionizing radiation is emitted. It is recommended that the investigation of the amount and type of damage and of related genetic questions be greatly extend-

The Congress effectively illustrated not ed and intensified with a view to safe-

only the importance of highly specialized studies but also the necessity for evaluating the implications of genetic findings. It indicated the very great distance which the study of man's heredity has to travel

guarding the well-being of future generations." (August 6, 1956) This resolution was a response to a request by Dr. Eve of WHO for an expression of the viewpoint of congress members on this subject.

before it can have very much to say about such fundamental questions as the role of heredity in normal characteristics like intelligence and personality and in widespread diseases like cancer and heart ailments; but at the same time it highlighted the advances in human genetics since World War II. Human genetics was seen as in no sense an isolated discipline but one which cuts across many fields: medicine, chemistry, biology, sociology, psy-

A report was made by James V. Neel and William J. Schull of the United States on the Atomic Bomb Casualty Commission's (ABCC) study of possible delayed biological effects of exposure to atomic bombing at Hiroshima andNagasaki.
There is no really clear indication that the radiation history of the parents, one or both of whom were exposed to the effects of atomic bombing, affected characteristics

chology, anthropology, eugenics, and so of their children during the first year of

on. The presence of a large number of life, according to Dr.Neel.

medical men--as much as one-fourth of However, "smallness" of radiation effects

the registrants--attested to the increasing was expected and overshadowing "large-

role that human genetics is playing in ness" of other sources of variation, he

medicine.

stated.

195

196 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Possible observable effects of irradiation nate one person in five before reproduction

upon the first generation born after an or to depress average fitness by one-fifth,

atomic bombing are many and varied, in- Dr. Muller concluded.

cluding changes in sex ratio, frequency of stillbirths and congenital malformations, and infant mortality. But each of these indicators of genetic damage is also influenced by a number of other factors.
In association with the Japanese postwar rationing system for pregnant women,

Using consanguinity data, Morton, Crow and Muller have reached similar estimates. Among offspring of first-cousin marriages, one-sixteenth of detrimental recessives should find full expression. If this is assumed to be on the average 20 times as great as heterozygous expression, the extra

data were obtained by the Commission be- handicap of such offspring represents about

tween 1946 and 1953 for 93 per cent of the 20 times 1/16 the impairment carried in

births in Hiroshima and even more in one gamete. An excess mortality of 6 per

Nagasaki.

cent has been reported for the first 20 years

The basic question, Dr. Neel declared, of life in children of cousins, and the total

was: Is there a difference between outcome impairment is probably twice this, or 0.12.

of pregnancy in irradiated and non-irra- When 0.12 is divided by 20/16, the result

diated parents? Statistical adjustment was is just about 0.1, in agreement with the

made for consanguinity, maternal age, and estimated mutation rate.

parity because they seemed to introduce potential bias of some magnitude.
However, most of the analyses failed to reveal a significant relationship between indicators of genetic damage and parental radiation history.
We are left in an unsatisfactory situation in respect to firm conclusions concerning radiation-induced genetic changes in human populations, concluded Dr. Neel.
Further studies bearing on the load of mutations in man were discussed by H. J. Muller of the United States.
Recent evidence from man and further studies on animals bear out the estimate of 0.1 as the minimum spontaneous mutation rate in man, according to Dr. Muller.

Dr. Muller pointed out that further consanguinity studies should throw light on such questions as the following:
1. The extent to which differences in mortality, infecundity, etc., are in general genetic, that is, selectable.
2. The extent to which our modern civilization is decreasing genetic elimination below the equilibrium level, evidenced by differences in mortality, infecundity, etc., resulting from inbreeding, between populations subjected to different present standards of living and medical care. Here it is imperative that data be obtained from populations still living under primitive conditions of selection before it is too late.

(This means one newly mutated gene in 3. The increase in mutation rate that

every ten gametes--sperms and eggs--or a population under given conditions of

one in every five persons.)

living can tolerate without serious deterio-

Growing doubts about the discreteness ration.

or indivisibility of the gene do not affect In this connection Dr. Muller noted that

this conclusion. Support is also increasing knowledge of the total spontaneous muta-

for the belief that in man most detrimental tion rate and load is an invaluable means

"recessive" traits damage chiefly heterozy- of assessing the total effect produced by a

gous carriers where about one-twentieth of given amount of radiation or other muta-

their full effect may be expressed. Most genic agent (if the index of a mutagen's

mutations can therefore be regarded as effectiveness has been obtained by data on

detrimental dominants, and their effect, ac- mutations at specific loci or of some other-

cording to the above estimate, is to elimi- wise specified category).

197

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

The first task facing human geneticists is to obtain detailed knowledge of the genetic mechanism underlying illnesses so that estimates of the dysgenic effect of a mutation rate increase can be made, said T. C. Carter of Great Britain.
The outcome of calculations of the longterm genetic hazard to man from ionizing radiation depends upon the assumptions about the underlying genetic mechanism. Most calculations have assumed that all mutant alleles are unconditionally detrimental and must be eliminated by natural selection, but this may be invalid under certain circumstances, according to Dr. Carter.
The inheritance of the blood groups forms one of the most precise areas of our genetic knowledge. This section of the Congress demonstrated that discovery of the mode of inheritance of a very specialized characteristic such as blood groups can form the foundation for further discoveries with the broadest implications, going far beyond the limited nature of the original findings. Some very significant directions for genetic research were indicated here.
The rich potential of the blood groups for the whole area of health and disease was revealed in a report by J. A. Fraser Roberts of England on associations between blood groups and disease.
Persons of blood group A have a much greater risk of cancer of the stomach than those of the other groups. Duodenal ulcer and, to a lesser extent, gastric ulcer are commoner in people in group O. Group B so far appears to be favored.
The solid work of many people on the blood groups forms the basis of this report, stated Dr. Fraser Roberts. The crux of the whole problem is numbers. To detect associations, series are needed amounting to thousands rather than hundreds, and a really large number for a single disease --over 3,000--was collected only three years ago.
The incidence of cancer of the stomach at 10 centers is 1.23 times as great in per-

sons of group A compared with other groups.
The incidence of duodenal ulcer in group O individuals is 140 as against 100 in persons of A, B, and AB. Here data were collected from 7,000 cases in 8 centers. All the areas studied from Oslo to Iowa show increased incidence, Dr. Fraser Roberts said, but highly significant heterogeneity was noted very recently in the Glasgow area in the largest sample so far from a single center where the relative incidence was down to 1.17. An immediate explanation for this low figure is not apparent, but when more series are collected, perhaps heterogeneity should be expected.
At the same 8 centers, the relative incidence of gastric ulcer in persons of group O is 1.23 times that in persons belonging to the other groups.
There is also quite good evidence that diabetes is commoner in those of blood group A, but many more figures are needed here, Dr. Fraser Roberts believes. Another study also shows association between group A and pernicious anemia.
There is overwhelming evidence for association between the blood groups and three diseases, cancer of the stomach, duodenal ulcer, and gastric ulcer, and quite strong evidence for diabetes mellitus and pernicious anemia, Dr. Fraser Roberts concluded. In two of these diseases persons of group O are at a disadvantage, in three, persons of group A. In all five diseases persons of blood group B are favored. There is no satisfactory evidence for associations between Rhesus and disease, other than hemolytic disease of the newborn, in his opinion.
Everything favors a rapid increase of knowledge in this field, Dr. Fraser Roberts predicted.
New horizons for research on the heredity of "normal" characteristics, so badly neglected thus far and of such great interest to eugenics, were opened up by several papers.
There are enormous individual differ-

198 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ences in people which must be in large part genetically determined, declared Roger J. Williams of the United States in a discussion of the human implications of biochemical genetics. But investigations of the metabolism of normal people are still in their infancy.
People vary greatly, said Dr. Williams, as to enzymatic efficiency, distinctive excretion patterns, etc. There are big differences in the amounts of pepsin in our digestive juices, taste responses, blood composition and reaction to drugs. Some people can drink ten times as much alcohol as others, Dr. Williams pointed out, and reactions to such drugs as morphine vary widely.
We are certain that genetic factors are involved in many of these things and that there are real biochemical differences, Dr. Williams declared. Here we have a key to understanding disease, he believes. Some diseases, for example, may actually be caused by a high nutritional demand. Because of distinctive metabolic patterns in people, there are corresponding distinctive patterns of nutritional needs among "normal" individuals. These call for extensive research.
Scholars in all fields need to divest themselves both of environmentalism and hereditarianism, Dr. Williams stated, and adopt the only view that will stand up biologically: that of a "genocotarian," who fully recognizes the interplay of genie and ecologic factors. Expertness must be developed in adjusting the environment (including nutrition) to meet the genetically determined needs of people. And here human geneticists must be involved, Dr. Williams feels. In the field of the social sciences little consideration is given to genetic differences and human problems. Adoption of the genocotarian viewpoint will lead to recognition that human genetics as a discipline is far more important than most geneticists have realized.
The implications of human biochemical genetics are extremely broad, Dr. Wil-

liams concluded, and encompass such diverse topics as dental caries, obesity, alcoholism, mental disease, juvenile delinquency, divorce, race relations, and certainly politics and philosophy.
New directions for study of human behavior and growth were outlined by L. W. Sontag of the United States, reporting in collaboration with S. M. Garn on the Fels Research Institute studies of 200 families.
The autonomic nervous system and its behavior during stress offer a very fruitful approach to the genetics of behavior, Dr. Sontag indicated. The pattern of autonomic response is characteristic of the individual and fixed over a fairly long period of time. Here is an indication that many psychosomatic diseases stem not just from a particular kind of stress or parent-child relationship but from an inherent and (presumably) gene-determined tendency to over-react in one branch or another of the autonomic nervous system. The tendency for particular disordres (ulcers, hypertension, anxiety neurosis) to recur in families, Dr. Sontag suggested, may be due to this underlying pattern of autonomic response.
There is also much evidence concerning the genie control of growth, according to the Fels studies. A new marker gene, a characteristic of the skeleton, has been located which appears to be fairly common.
Experiments in behavioral genetics in animals also indicate that genetic effects upon behavior are widespread rather than exceptional, reported J. L. Fuller of the United States for the Jackson Memorial Laboratory. The organic basis of genetic effects upon behavior has in different instances been related to quantitative variation in enzyme activity in the brain, relative rates of recruitment and inhibition of neural circuits, somatic response to steriod hormones, and integrative functions in local brain areas.
Studies in the heredity of some of the commoner diseases such as cancer, hypertension, arthritis, and diabetes were pre-

199

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

sented in various sections of the Congress. This material of course is of great immediate interest, unlike some of the studies on rare conditions. Dr. Fraser Roberts reported that the following hypothesis on hypertension has been strengthened by reexamination of figures based on work done by Miall, Oldham, Pickering, Sowry, and Hamilton:
The genetic element in hypertension is no more than the tendency for relatives to resemble each other in patterns of arterial pressure, a tendency which is quantitatively the same at all levels from highest to lowest. Essential hypertension is no more than the positive end of the normal. Research was reported on uterine cancer, childhood cancer, and cancer among twins in Denmark. Papers were given on diabetes mellitus in women and on the children of young diabetic mothers. The heredity of arthritis and rheumatic diseases was discussed as was muscular dystrophy.
A new theory of inheritance was proposed for a rare disorder, alcaptonuria, which is apparently the only known hereditary disorder which practically always leads to arthritis. Robert A. Milch and Henry Milch of the United States suggested that the disease is not genetically determined by a single recessive autosomal recessive gene. It may be determined by an incompletely penetrant dominant gene that coexists with at least one other pair of modifying gene factors.
A number of twin studies were reported in various sections. These isolated studies point up the desirability of larger and more coordinated twin research.
Several papers on various aspects of consanguinity were presented. In a study of isolates Jean Sutter and Le"on Tabah of France pointed out that consanguineous marriages have been decreasing for some time in all French districts because the trend of population segments is to fuse more and more with each other.
Dr. Sutter proposed a new approach for studying isolates which would take into

account the changing cultural and social milieu. He stated that theoretically (Sewall Wright) it is now possible to study the evolution of an isolate by measuring the distance that separates the birthplace of the children from the place the parents originated. Unfortunately the administrative documents cannot furnish any useful data for this purpose. When research is done on a large scale, one can only make use of the distance between the places of residence of the spouses, these data being easy to obtain. Analysis of variance of\ this distance in the course of time should provide highly useful information on the transformation of isolates.
His own studies of isolates have shown that their boundary lines today tend to fan out with the result that as an isolate grows in size second-cousin marriages among its members becomes less and less frequent.
First-cousin marriages have been the accepted test of the degree of consanguinity within a given isolate, but with the proposed new method ethnic groups can be studied on the basis of consanguinity as conditioned by location.
In another study of isolates a high prevalence of genetically determined disease was indicated. This was reported by C. J. Witkop of the United States from a preliminary study of 26 tri-racial isolates in the eastern United States, which are mixtures of Caucasian, Negro, and American Indian races. One of these groups being studied by the National Institutes of Health has in-married for nearly 400 years. These groups were first isolated from the rest of the community on a racial basis, but they are now isolated on a genetic basis as members of the community have stated they would not marry into these groups because of their numerous genetic defects.
About 18 per cent of the institutional inmates produced by first-cousin marriages seem to have the mental endowment of their parents in a study reported by Carl A. Larson of Sweden on kin matings be-

200 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

tween parents of mental defectives born and institutionalized in a Swedish region of about 3.4 million population. In this respect these inmates agreed with probands of unrelated parentage, declared Dr. Larson. Thus the observation of mental deficiencyin children of first cousins permits no immediate conclusions about the mode of inheritance.
Total genetic morbid risk for the children of first-cousin marriages was considerably increased--about 16 per cent against about 4 per cent for the control children --in a study of 34 cousin marriages in a north Swedish geographical isolate, according to a report by Jan A. Book of Sweden. Dr. Book warned, however, that these results refer to a specific population and should not be generalized uncritically.
The present view that the number of chromosomes in normal human cells is 48 was challenged by a report in the cytology and radiation section by C. E. Ford and J. C. Hamerton of England (supplementing Tijo's and Levan's recent work).
"The chromosome number of man is 2n = 46, not 2n = 48 as generally believed," they declared.
In this same section it was stated that it is now possible to detect some sex-linked hereditary diseases at a state of pregnancy where interruption is still possible. This material was presented by F. Fuchs, E. Freiesleben, E. E. Knudsen, and P. Riis of Denmark.
In all some 200 papers were presented at the Congress, and it has been possible here to mention only a fraction of them. The

sectional meetings covered the following: internal medicine; psychiatry, mental deficiency and psychology; population genetics, anthropology, and blood groups; neurology; cytology and radiation genetics; ophthalmology; genetical and statistical analysis. The proceedings are to be published in the near future by the Congress.
Broad in scope as the Congress was, however, the lack of emphasis upon population was deplored by Dr. Sutter of France in the closing session. He recalled that at the World Population Conference in Rome in 1954 emphasis was placed upon human genetics. He felt that a human genetics congress likewise should emphasize population problems.
The First International Congress of Human Genetics formed a real meeting ground for the exchange of information and opinion. National committees sponsoring the Congress represented fourteen countries, and delegates from thirteen other countries participated. Nearly six hundred people were registered either as full members or associates. The American Eugenics Society was one of the sponsors of the Congress from the United States.
At the close of the Congress the*members paid tribute to the chairman, Tage Kemp of Denmark, to the Danish Organizing Committee, and to the people of Copenhagen for the exceptionally effective organizational work and unusual hospitality. A committee was set up to consider proposals for a second congress.
HELEN G. HAMMONS
American Eugenics Society

