Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Colloquium on the x chromosome and its genetical markers Basel, April 8­10, 1963
Anna Mannini
To cite this article: Anna Mannini (1963) Colloquium on the x chromosome and its genetical markers Basel, April 8­10, 1963, Eugenics Quarterly, 10:3, 131-134, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1963.9987556 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1963.9987556
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

Brief Reports

COLLOQUIUM ON THE X CHROMOSOME AND ITS GENETICAL MARKERS BASEL, APRIL 8-10, 1963

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

ANNA MANNINI
Euratom Unit for Human Radiation and Cytogenetics
University of Pavia, Italy

This Colloquium, the second of its kind to be held at the Department of Anatomy of the University of Basel, was under the kind hospitality of Prof. G. Wolf-Heidegger and organized by Dr. H. P. Klinger and Dr. M. Fraccaro, who also alternated in the chair. Some 45 participants, all but a few from Europe, took part.
The Colloquium was so organized that no formal papers were presented, but selected speakers briefly introduced the various topics, reviewing available facts and indicating controversial points for general discussion.
The following subjects were discussed; names of the participants who introduced them are in parentheses: 1) "The mammalian sex chromosomes: morphology and behavior at meiosis" (S. Ohno), 2) "Xga A sex-linked blood group in man. A summary of the evidence" (Ruth Sänger), 3) "The use of Xg« in the cartography of the human X chromosome" (R.R. Race), 4) "G6PD deficiency and related problems" (M. Siniscalco),
5) "Structural chromosomal abnormalities and sex-linked genes" (M. Fraccaro),
6) "The use of sex-linked genes for interpreting the origin of sex chromosome abnormalities" (J.H. Edwards), 7) "Function and behavior of the X chromosome; the comparative evidence in man and the mouse" (Mary Lyon ) , 8) "Induced

sex-linked lethals in mice" (L. L. CavalliSforza).
It is impossible to give a detailed report of the extensive discussion, lively exchange of factual information, and speculations which occupied the three days of the meeting.
Before the actual program started, Professor E. Witschi of the Ford Foundation, a well-known pioneer in the field of sexual development, addressed the assembly, pleading for a balanced approach to the problem of sex determination and development. This should take into account not only genetical evidence but also facts and theories from experimental embryology.
The colloquium then started with a description by Dr. Ohno of the morphology and behavior of the X and Y chromosomes at meiosis. The question of chiasmata and pseudochiasmata formation between X and Y received particular attention. The different kinetics of the meiotic process in various mammals was described: equational separation of X and Y in the Chinese hamster, both equational and reductional in the African rat. Professor R. Matthey pointed out that within the Muridae the behavior of the sex chromosomes varies according to their length and shape: only in species with particularly large sex chromosomes do chiasmata form be-

131

132 Brief Reports

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

tween X and Y . The strict relationship between location of chiasma and type of segregation of the sex chromosomes was discussed by Dr. C. E. Ford: if a chiasma is formed solely at one side of the centromere, only reductional separation can occur. If it occurs on both sides of the centromere, both reductional and equational separation can follow.
According to Dr. Melander pseudochiasmata formation between the two long arms of the X chromosomes is responsible for the anaphase lagging of two homologous chromosomes. In the rabbit he was able to observe this phenomenon and it led him to formulate a theory of anaphase tension which would explain the origin of the sex chromatin. Anaphase tension of the chromatids of the longer arm of one ol the X chromosomes causes a cycle of different spiralization, inducing heteropyknosis and transformation of the long arm into sex chromatin, while the short arm despiralizes and forms a nucleolus.
This hypothesis stimulated a good deal of general discussion on the problem of the origin of sex chromatin, with particular regard to the importance of the cell cycle in its expression.
A description of the morphology and behavior of the sex chromosomes in the female cell followed, and Dr. Ohno described the mechanism of elimination of the heterochromatic X in the formation of oogonia from germinal epithelium.
The afternoon of the first day was devoted to the newly discovered blood group antigen Xga. Dr. Ruth Sänger reviewed the circumstances which led to its discovery, the evidence of its being sex linked, and its serological properties. Dr. Race presented pedigree studies which led to the location of the gene responsible for the new antigen and provided evidence that it may be located

on the short arm of the X chromosome. This evidence is based on analysis of
two families, each with a female patient with presumptive isochromosome and Xga~, with parents all Xg*+. If the abnormal chromosome found in the Xga~ daughters consists of the two long arms of the X chromosome from the Xga+ fathers, then these arms do not contain the Xg locus, which should therefore be located on the short arm. Discussion of the possibilities which could upset this argument were postponed to the next day's discussion. Dr. Race then presented a map of the human X chromosome as it is emerging from the study of known sex-linked genes in relation to Xga. The order of the genes seems to be Xg-G6PD-Deutan colorblindness-haemophilia A. The map distance between the Xga and the G6PD loci is estimated at 29 units, while G6PD and deutan colorblindness are closely located at 5 units distance. An estimate of 12 map units was obtained for the distances between deutan colorblindness and haemophilia A. Pedigree studies of families with Christmas disease, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, hypogammaglobulinemia, hypophosphatemia, renal diabetes, ectodermal dysplasia and keratosis follicularis were also reported.
Dr. Siniscalco spoke on problems related to glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. He presented and illustrated an ample body of data on the population genetics of the enzyme deficiency in Sardinia and also discussed pedigrees providing information for the mapping of the responsible gene in relation to the loci for colorblindness and Xga.
For the rest of the day discussion was lively and touched upon several topics, including chiasma formation, factors influencing frequency of recombination, and relation between malaria and G6PD

X Chromosome

133

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

deficiency. Professor Franceschetti discussed important points on the diagnostic and genetical problems connected with color vision.
The second day's session reverted to structural abnormalities of the X chromosome. Dr. Fraccaro described the presumptive isochromosomes for the long arm of X in man. A homogeneous group of 12 female individuals with this chromosome abnormality collected by Dr. Lindsten provided the basis for the formal description of the condition. All are sex chromatin positive and have a similar phenotypic appearance very much like that of Turner's syndrome.
Different hypotheses for the mechanisms of isochromosome formation were put forward: misdivision of the centromere, translocation and pericentric inversion including the centromere. The merits and faults of each interpretation were discussed: misdivision of the centromere seems probable because of the similarity of the process in plants and the fact that an apparently similar isochromosome is found in several individuals with the same phenotype. This suggests a similar and repeatable mechanism of formation, while other hypotheses require the postulation of preferential points of breakage in the X chromosomes. As an approach to the understanding of the X isochromosome nature, DNA measurements of the Barr body and autoradiographic studies were presented. Dr. Klinger provided data on the DNA content of Barr bodies of isochromosome-X cells and of cells with different numbers of X chromosomes. He showed that, on the average, the sex chromatin of cells with an X isochromosome contains more DNA than that of normal female cells and of cells with multiple X's. This indicates that the presumptive isochromosome X is the one which forms the sex chromatin body. At this point Dr.

Muldal reviewed the evidence on the differential labeling of the two X chromosomes in normal female cells and presented data showing symmetrical incorporation of tritiated thymidine into the two arms of the isochromosome X. This evidence, which was also independently obtained by Dr. Gianelli, was taken as further support of the isochromosome hypothesis.
The afternoon session was devoted to discussion of sex-linked genes as markers for interpreting the origin of sex chromosome abnormalities. Dr. J. H. Edwards pointed out that there are three possible stages at which the error leading to such abnormalities can arise: nondisjunction and nonsegregation during the mitotic or the meiotic stage in the parents, nondisjunction during mitosis in the zygote. Colorblindness and Xga were discussed as far as their suitability for pinpointing the stage at which the error occurred is concerned. Xga was studied in a sample of informative families which contained one case of XO. This did not give definite information as to the origin of the single X in these individuals but showed that it can be of either paternal or maternal origin.
The last day of the colloquium was initiated with Dr. Lyon's presentation of the X inactivation hypothesis in female mammals. As example of evidence in favor of such a hypothesis, a dosage compensation experiment in mice was reviewed in detail. In order to explain the results of Cattanach's experiments, which do not agree with the inactivation theory. Dr. Lyon postulated that the process of inactivation in the X does not travel the entire length of the chromosome, and that the autosomal pieces translocated onto it remain active (activating effect of an autosomal piece). An alternative explanation was that the autosomal piece contains some genes not susceptible to

134 Brief Reports

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

the inactivating mechanism. Evidence in favor of or against the Lyon hypothesis both in man and the mouse was then brought into the discussion by several participants. Professor Harris reviewed the present evidence and stressed the numerous difficulties which are encountered, some technical, in trying to test the Lyon hypothesis in man. The conclusion was reached that until two populations of female cells heterozygous for genes located on the X chromosomes are found the hypothesis cannot be accepted in the case of man.
The last session of the colloquium referred to the study of sex-linked lethals in man and the mouse. Professor CavalliSforza emphasized the difficulties involved in the study of such lethals in man, and suggested that an approach to the problem could use the sex ratio as a marker. This ratio could be correlated with the age of the maternal grandfather. In progeny of older individuals in whom

mutation had time to accumulate, one would expect a 2:1 sex ratio. Other significant information could be obtained from a correlation of paternal age and sterility in women. Dr. A. W. F. Edwards discussed statistical problems involved.
Variation in the sex ratio was also used by Dr. Searle as a parameter to measure the production of sex-linked lethals in mice following irradiation. Irradiation of male mice did not produce any effect in the immediate progeny, but the progeny of females mated to irradiated males showed a 10% decrease in the male population. Professor Liming studied the effect of systematic irradiation of males at successive generations. No changes were observed in the progeny of irradiated males mated to normal females.
On the whole it was felt that the participants, drawn from different fields of interest, had profited a great deal from the three days of discussion.

