Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Treatment in hereditary diseases
Bertha M. Aschner M.D.
To cite this article: Bertha M. Aschner M.D. (1956) Treatment in hereditary diseases, Eugenics Quarterly, 3:1, 16-21, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1956.9987260 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1956.9987260
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

TREATMENT IN HEREDITARY DISEASES

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

BERTHA M. ASCHNER, M.D.

SUCCESSFUL THERAPY AND PREVENTION of
diseases are the final and highest goals of all medical science. Eugenic considerations aim mostly at prevention, partly for larger groups as in the problem of sterilization in certain mental diseases, and partly for individuals as in eugenic marriage counseling. This stress on prevention in spite of all its difficulties is due to the unfortunate fact that many hereditary anomalies do not yield to any of our present therapeutic measures. We have no means to improve most genetic forms of mental deficiency, certain kinds of congenital blindness, dwarfism and grave skeletal anomalies, malformations of the kidneys, inborn errors of metabolism which may cause very serious diseases, and many other genetic disorders.
Not infrequently we meet with the opinion that hereditary defects by their very nature are incurable. It must be admitted that the fertilized ovum already contains the pathologic genes which find expression later--during the fetal period, at birth, or during postnatal life--and' that it is not possible to change the structure of the chromosomes or to transform pathologic factors into normal ones. In this sense a strictly causal therapy of genetically determined anomalies or diseases is not feasible. Causal therapy cures a disease by abolishing the primary cause and is illustrated by the use of antibiotics to kill invading bacteria and thereby to relieve symptoms of infection.
Because such an ideal form of treatment is not possible for hereditary diseases, two equally erroneous though very divergent attitudes may arise. One is therapeutic nihilism which gives up any attempt at correction where the damage is caused by genetic factors. On the other hand, thera-

peutic enthusiasts, e.g. in psychiatry, are inclined to overlook what in certain diseases are established facts of inheritance and even to deny altogether that genetic factors play a role, reasoning that a disorder which responds at all to therapeutic measures cannot be caused by genetic factors.
Actually, the error of both these extreme points of view can be illustrated for any field of medicine. In the following paragraphs only such pathologic conditions will be discussed in whose etiology, according to our present-day knowledge, genetic factors play a role. To establish the presence of such factors, the human geneticist who naturally cannot make use of experiments for his studies has three main methods at his disposal: the study of pedigrees, the statistical evaluation of observations on familial occurrences of certain traits, and the twin method. The last method compares the frequency of concordance of the character in question in one-egg and twoegg twin pairs. Since the partners of oneegg pairs are genetically identical and those of two-egg pairs genetically different, a significantly higher concordance rate among one-egg twin partners speaks in favor of a genetic influence upon the trait under study. In certain conditions the etiologic role of genetic factors is of major importance inasmuch as almost all cases are genetically determined and environmental factors play only a very minor role, if any. In particular, in many rare anomalies which typically run in families, pedigree studies are sufficient to delineate the underlying genetic factors. In other conditions hereditary factors may be operative only in a part of the cases or a hereditary disposition may be only one of several factors

16

17

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

whose cooperation leads to the actual manifestation of the anomaly or disease. The genetic study of such conditions, in particular if they are not infrequent in the general population, requires systematic family and/ or twin studies with statistical evaluation of the results. Here we cannot go into details concerning the pertinent observations for each example discussed. As stated above, our discussion will be confined to conditions for which sufficient material has been collected to reveal the causal role of genetic factors.*
FORMS OF THERAPY
I. Anatomical Correction
We have already stated that a strictly causal therapy for genetic disorders is not possible. However, effective anatomical correction by surgery is almost as good as causal therapy for the affected individual. Many congenital malformations belong to this category, such as clubfoot, congenital dislocation of joints (chiefly of the hip), harelip and cleft palate, polydactyly (supernumerary fingers and/or toes), syndactylism (fusion of fingers). All these congenital deformities can be corrected almost completely by modern plastic and orthopedic surgery.
More serious malformations, frequently fatal in early life, can be corrected only by major operations. In congenital pyloric stenosis (narrowing of the lower end of the stomach) the ring-like muscle which controls the passage of food from the stomach to the intestines is overdeveloped. Instead of controlling, it obstructs the food passage. In severe cases such children would be doomed to early death without treatment. A comparatively simple operative method, however, provides a complete and permanent cure. In another congenital malformation of the digestive tract, the socalled megacolon or Hirschsprung's disease, the terminal large bowel is dilated, some-
·The literature numbers given in the text refer only to a few of the more important genetic studies on the pathologic conditions discussed.

times to an enormous degree. This anomaly is not fatal, but it causes an excessive constipation which does not respond to the usual therapeutic measures. Two surgeons (Swenson and Bill) perfected a technique for removal of the dilated part of the bowel which promptly relieves the constipation and all its consequences.
Still graver are the congenital malformations of the heart and great vessels. (1) One example is persistence of the arterial duct which during pre-natal life bypasses the non-functioning lungs, and which normally closes after birth. Its persistence during postnatal life causes an insufficient arterial blood supply to the cells of the body and an additional strain on the heart which may lead to heart failure. Surgical ligation and division of the duct relieves this strain and provides sufficient oxygen supply to the tissues of the whole body. In another complicated malformation of the heart, the so-called tetralogy of Fallot, the anomaly consists chiefly in a displacement of the origin of the aorta. This vessel which normally originates from the left heart chamber alone is displaced in such a manner that some blood from the right heart chamber also enters it. The right heart chamber, however, contains unoxygenated blood; when such blood reaches the aorta and the general circulation, this is readily recognized by the intense blueish discoloration of the cheeks, lips, ears, fingers, and toes, and justifies for these patients the term "blue babies." These children suffer from severe shortness of breath and cannot develop in a normal way. By the ingenious operative method of Blalock and Taussig, however, surgeons are able to correct to a large extent the abnormal circulatory conditions and to relieve the strain on the heart.
In discussing the possibilities of anatomical correction, we must not forget the good results of orthodontic measures. Abnormal position of teeth and malocclusion can be corrected. Dental caries and decay, even when on a hereditary basis, (2) can be sue-

18 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

cessfully treated by conservative methods. 2. Medical Replacement Therapy. Another form of treatment which in its favorable effects almost equals causal therapy is the medical replacement of physiologic agents, especially hormones where these are deficient. The outstanding example in this connection is the treatment of diabetes mellitus. (3) In this metabolic disorder the utilization and oxygenation of sugar by the tissues and sugar storage in the liver are disturbed. Consequently the sugar level in the blood rises; sugar passes through the filter of the kidney and is eliminated in the urine. Aside from the infrequent cases of "symptomatic diabetes" appearing in certain disorders of various endocrine glands, the great majority of diabetics belongs to the so-called pancreatic diabetes. The normal pancreas produces the hormone, insulin, which has a profound influence on sugar metabolism, promoting the utilization of sugar by the tissues, increasing its storage in the liver, and lowering the blood sugar. Removal of the pancreas in the animal or deficient output of insulin in man causes diabetes. Although according to modern concepts a more complex disorder of sugar metabolism is present in such patients, it is enough to say that they are suffering from an insulin insufficiency. This lack of insulin can be controlled very successfully in the vast majority of cases by insulin treatment. In the pre-insulin era the most dreaded complication was the socalled diabetic coma. This is a state of unconsciousness with forced breathing, grave disorder of the electrolyte (acid-base) balance, and high blood sugar which usually ended fatally before insulin was available. This and other complications can be avoided or brought under control by modern treatment, and even in severe cases patients can be kept active and in a satisfactory state of health.
Historically the first efficient hormonal replacement therapy was the use of thyroid extract in diminished activity or complete lack of the gland. The thyroid hormone

has a profound influence on almost every cell of the body, increasing oxygen consumption, stimulating metabolic processes and promoting growth. It also stimulates the autonomic (involuntary) nervous system, the heartbeat, intestinal activity, brain waves as seen in the electro-encephalogram, and many other functions of the organism. It is to be expected that a diminished supply of such a hormone should cause striking somatic and mental changes. Mentally these patients become slow and dull; they lack interests and lose their memory. The bodily functions are slowed down, also. The face presents a very characteristic, puffy, featureless aspect; the hands and feet are also puffy. If the lack of hormone begins during childhood, considerable retardation of growth and mental deficiency are the consequences. If started in time and properly handled, the administration of thyroid extract gives excellent results both in adult and in infantile cases. Of course, the lack of thyroid hormone during the fetal period cannot be completely compensated later, and though individuals with congenital complete lack of the gland often remain retarded in their skeletal growth, even such patients may develop into normal adults with average intelligence if treatment is started early and is continued faithfully.
Similarly, so-called eunuchoidism in the male, a constitutional deficiency in the development and function of the testicles, is amenable to replacement therapy with testicular hormone. Sexual behavior and other symptoms are cured, although sterility persists.
Among other instances of hormonal deficiency brief mention should be made of two diseases. The non-tuberculous form of Addison's disease may be hereditary. It is a grave and formerly a fatal condition characterized by extreme weakness and lowering of blood pressure and blood sugar, brown discoloration of the skin, vomiting, diarrhea and other signs. This disease is due to an insufficient supply of hormone from the outer, cortical layer of the adrenal

19

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

glands located at the upper pole of each kidney. The second disease is "idiopathic tetany," characterized by painful spasms in hands and feet and by lowering of the concentration of calcium in the blood. This disease is due to insufficient secretion of the parathyroid hormone which is produced by four small glands located at the back of the thyroid gland. In both these diseases hormonal replacement therapy combined with other measures for the restitution of the disturbed chemical balance is highly effective.
Among the hereditary deficiencies which are amenable to replacement therapy is socalled pernicious anemia (Addison's anemia) (1) which is due to a lack of the "erythrocyte maturation principle," a factor which regulates the normal development of the red blood cells. The term "pernicious" is no longer justified in this form of anemia since we have learned that it may be kept well under control by treatment with liver or vitamin B12.
If, on the other hand, a gland is hyperactive, producing too much of its specific secretion, two methods are available to reduce its function to normal. One is surgical reduction of its volume, the other is irradiation therapy which destroys some of the secreting cells. Both these methods in their effect come as near to causal therapy as the replacement treatment though a certain risk inherent to all surgery cannot be avoided. The most important example is thyroid overfunction in its two somewhat different forms, Graves' disease and toxic adenoma of the gland. While in the latter only the cells of a part of the gland, mostly of a pre-formed nodule, are overactive, in the former, more dangerous kind the entire gland is enlarged and in a state of overactivity. Large amounts of hormone are produced and poured into the bloodstream, to be distributed to the whole organism. Considerable loss of weight, acceleration of the heart rate, excessive nervous excitability, poor sleep, sweating, diarrhea, and in Graves' disease a protrusion of the eyeballs

are the most important features of the clinical picture. In severe, untreated cases Graves' disease may be fatal or may do permanent damage to the heart. With the exception of a small minority of cases, the results of modern therapy are highly satisfactory.
3. Surgery for Unfavorable Mechanical Conditions. In another group of diseases not overfunction but unfavorable mechanical conditions can be corrected by surgical measures. Goiter without functional disorder of the gland which, however, compresses the trachea and hinders breathing, belongs in this category. Large fibromas of the uterus may cause difficulty of urination by pressure on the bladder or they may provoke pain by compression of nerves. The benefit of surgery in such conditions is evident. 4. Other Therapy. Unfortunately, in a great number of disorders complete cure is not possible by means of our present methods. However, we may be able to relieve symptoms, to avoid or delay complications, to stop at least temporarily the progress of the disease. Such therapeutic methods are admittedly far from causal therapy; however, they are decidedly beneficial and modern medicine could not do without them. Though we are unable to restore the eyesight of a person with cataract to normal, we still can prevent his becoming blind and enable him to see sufficiently well for the usual daily routine including reading and writing. There is a large number of hereditary diseases which belong to this group. In this connection we shall mention only a brief selection.
Among the diseases of the heart and vessels important in this connection is the most frequent form of permanently high blood pressure, so-called essential hypertension. Its incidence in the general population is considerable. Treatment is not very effective, but to a certain extent it relieves the patient's symptoms, delays disastrous complications, and slows down the progress of the disease.

20 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

In benign ulcer of the stomach (4) a defect in the inner lining of the organ penetrates to the muscular coat and causes pain and not infrequently bleeding. Very deep ulcers may cause perforation of the gastric wall and escape of the stomach contents into the abdominal cavity. Such a perforation is a very dangerous complication; it may be accompanied by shock and later followed by inflammation in the abdominal cavity. Constrictive scarring, furthermore, may lead to considerable narrowing of the farther end of the stomach with obstruction of the food passage. There is no doubt that medical and--where necessary--surgical treatment is very helpful in relieving the patient's distress, and in warding off complications such as those mentioned above.
Therapy is also fairly effective in some metabolic disorders like gout. In this disease the uric acid of the blood is increased. It is then deposited as a sodium salt in cartilage and in those parts of the bones which form joints. These deposits may cause either an acute attack of gout or chronic gouty arthritis.
Some blood diseases should be discussed in this connection. In the so-called congenital hemolytic jaundice the red blood cells have an increased fragility and therefore a shorter lifespan than normal ones. They are chiefly destroyed in the enlarged spleen. The patients have a more or less marked yellowish skin color through all their lives. In the course of the disease, periods of acute, outspoken anemia occur. Removal of the spleen has a favorable effect in this disease, in particular during the acute crises of aggravation and anemia. In "idiopathic thrombopenic purpura" a lack of blood platelets appearing without obvious cause is responsible for smaller or larger bleedings not only in the skin but also in inner organs. In more than half of these cases removal of the spleen is beneficial. True hemophilia was one of the first pathologic conditions where a hereditary pattern was studied in man. At present there seems to be well-founded hope for a successful

therapy in the form of concentrated blood additives.
Among the various allergic disorders should be mentioned bronchial asthma, hayfever, vasomotor rhinitis (allergic oversecretion of nasal mucus), eczema and others. Although, of course, the allergic trait and tendency to recurrence remain, therapy is fairly successful in fighting the actual allergic ailment.
A few examples of diseases affecting the eyes and ears may be included here. In glaucoma the normal escape of intraocular fluid is blocked. Consequently the intraocular pressure rises, and this high tension leads to impairment of vision and finally to blindness. Senile or presenile cataract constitutes a progressive clouding of the lens of the eye with resultant impairment of vision. Treatment is fairly successful in averting blindness in both diseases. By means of a comparatively new surgical method, remarkable therapeutic results have been achieved in a number of cases of otosclerosis. In this disease bony changes within the inner ear produce progressive deafness.
Most complicated and difficult to judge are the effects of therapy in mental disorders. However, to a certain extent, modern therapy is successful in depressive states and in schizophrenia, where it often keeps patients functioning at a fairly satisfactory level for at least a limited, sometimes for an extended, period of time.
Last of all, cancer should be mentioned, which, of course, is amenable to treatment only in its early stages while complete removal of all cancerous tissue is feasible. Moreover, many authors doubt whether genetic factors play a part in its etiology at all. Other observers again are in favor of the assumption that genetic factors do play a role in cancer etiology, in particular that they are important in cancer of certain organs such as the female breast, the uterus, and the digestive tract.
We cannot conclude this list of treatable hereditary diseases without mentioning

21

that an ever-increasing number of studies suggest that some infectious diseases, notwithstanding their bacterial or viral etiology, are to a certain extent dependent on genetic factors, also. A higher susceptibility to the causal micro-organism may be an inherited trait. This has been demonstrated not only for chronic infectious diseases like tuberculosis but also for acute ones like poliomyelitis, tonsillitis, appendicitis and others. The recent great progress in the prophylaxis and treatment of these diseases is common knowledge.
The above-discussed examples are only

a selection of treatable hereditary conditions and do not represent a complete survey. However, they do illustrate the fact that modern medical science has highly effective methods for dealing with many genetically determined disorders.
REFERENCES
1. SORSBY, A., 1953. Clinical Genetics. Butterworth, London.
2. KLEIN, H., 1946. J. Am. Dent. Assoc. 33: 735.
3. JOSLIN, E. P., ROOT, H. F., WHITE, P., MARBLE, A., and BAILEY, C. C. 1952. Treatment of Dia-
betes Mellitus. 9th Ed., Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia.
4. DOLL, R., and BUCH, I., 1950. Ann. Eugen. 15:
135.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

