Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Morning session: Genetics in medical practice
Chairman John C. Bugher M.D.
To cite this article: Chairman John C. Bugher M.D. (1958) Morning session: Genetics in medical practice, Eugenics Quarterly, 5:1, 3-4, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1958.9987339 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1958.9987339
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:24

voi. s,NO. i,March, 1958 Eugenics

Quarterly

HEREDITY COUNSELING SYMPOSIUM
Sponsored by
The American Eugenics Society at
T H E NEW YORK ACADEMY OF MEDICINE BUILDING

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

GENETICS IN MEDICAL PRACTICE
Morning Session
Chairman: John C. Bugher, M.D.
Director, Medical Education and Public Health The Rockefeller Foundation

CHAIRMAN BUGHER: Will the meeting come scientific content ofhis special field, the know-

to order, please.

ledge of genetics, and particularly the know-

I would like tocall your attention tosome ledge of human genetics. Despite the contrary

aspects of the subject material of today's Sym- opinions which are frequently expressed, I

posium on Heredity Counseling and tosome- think that most of us feel that the objective of

thing of the importance and significance ofits genetics research is to understand more com-

function.

pletely--I don't say the only objective, but the

I suppose there is no region of human ex- chief objective--the manner of inheritanceof

perience which has quite the same content of human characteristics and factors that enter into

«motional overtone as the relation of parent to the manifestation ofthose characteristics as the

child. Most people arefar more concerned human individual develops. All ofour genetics

about the welfare of their children than they research, whether it is in agriculture, general

are about their own health and happiness. Con- biology, or whatever field, comes to bear on the

sequently, the functions which we are dis-problem of human inheritance.

cussing in these symposia of the morning and Speaking of human genetics, here is a field

the afternoon fall among those that come of extreme difficulty. Those of you who have

closest to the lives of people and their sense of worked in the field are quite aware, and need

values in the life of the individual aswellas no reminding, of the fact that the life span of

in the life ofthe family.

the human being is of such length that it is

In genetic counseling one finds there are difficult to get adequate data in terms of genera-

serious problems involved. I think we can say tions. This science rests very definitely upon a

that the responsibility ofthe counselor falls in- statistical basis, and we areconfronted with

to two distinctly different areas. One is the various definitions of likelihood of events and

3

4 Eugenics Quarterly

levels of probability beset with uncertainties. It is this whole background of scientific knowledge and lack of knowledge, of qualitative information, and uncertainty as to the trend of conclusions which may be applicable to man, that the counselor must keep in mind. For he has essentially a second relationship --that of the physician to his patient --a responsibility for the accuracy of his advice and a responsibility for the results of his advice, in a matter which falls so intimately into the reasons why people make certain choices. The responsibility of the adviser here, I think, comes very squarely within the general responsibility of a physician to his patient.
I don't know whether the question of malpractice will ever come up in regard to genetics counseling, but it's not to be put aside lightly as a reminder--not of a legal responsibility but of a moral responsibility which the counselor has in this very intimate and privileged relationship.

I think that as the morning progresses and as the discussion extends from purely morphologic aspects of human genetics through more functional aspects to the purely functional problems as we find them in psychiatry, we will probably become more appreciative of the importance of more adequate knowledge; and the significance of the use of this knowledge in human relationships will tend to emerge.
I will ask each speaker to be prepared for questions and discussion of his paper at theend of the presentation, and we will have to be a little hard, perhaps, in regard to time, because of the number of papers to be presented.
The first presentation, on "The Need for Parental Counseling in Pediatrics," is by Dr. Warkany, who is Professor of Research Pediatrics at the University of Cincinnati, and, I believe, known to very many in this room for his long and distinguished career in this general field of pediatrics, and especially with relation to some of these very difficult problems.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

THE NEED FOR PARENTAL COUNSELING IN PEDIATRICS
JOSEF WARKANY, M.D.
Children's Hospital Research Foundation Cincinnati, Ohio

T JL O DISCUSS THE PEDIATRICIAN S POINT OF
VIEW on Genetic Counseling represents a great challenge and responsibility, especially if. this is to be done before expert geneticists by one who cannot claim to be a geneticist himself. A pediatrician interested in prenatal factors responsible for diseases and disorders of childhood has a great deal in common with those interested in human genetics. He believes, of course, in hereditary factors which cause or predispose to human illness and he knows that such factors must always be kept in mind when disorders of prenatal

origin are under consideration. He, like the geneticist, is interested in prenatal preventive measures which could reduce the suffering of children and their parents. At the present time parental counseling is among the few preventive measures available for this purpose. However, it is to be expected that the pediatrician's point of view will differ in some respects from that of the geneticist. The two specialties encounter different samples of children, of diseases and of questions.
In discussing the need for parental counseling, I could choose the easy way out

