Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Heredity counseling
Sheldon Reed
To cite this article: Sheldon Reed (1954) Heredity counseling, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:2, 47-51, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987177 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987177
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

HEREDITY COUNSELING

SHELDON REED
Dight Institute University of Minnesota

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Philosophy
THE PRIMARY FUNCTION of heredity counseling is to provide people with information regarding the genetic problems they have in their families. After some experience in counseling, it seems as if almost every family has some undesirable situation directly related to the heredity of one or more of the members- The difficulties are practical ones which the counselor can help alleviate. There is much quarreling between husband and wife as to who is "to blame" for an abnormality such as fibrosis of the pancreas. This disease may cause years of hospitalization before the death of the child, and the threat of bankruptcy is very real.' The counselor cannot pay a couple's hospital bills, but he can show them that there is a one-in-four chance that each subsequent pregnancy will result in a child with cystic fibrosis and a duplication of their difficulties. It is this single question concerning the chances that the abnormality will reappear in a subsequent child which all parents want answered and which so seldom is answered correctly, even when the information is in the literature.
It is our opinion that the question concerning the chances of reappearance of an abnormality in a subsequent child is very important to the parents. They pay the physician for this information, and he should make an honest effort either to supply the answer or to admit that he does not know it. It is our impression that too many physicians fail to take either of the above alternatives and instead assure the mother that "there is only one chance in a million" of a repetition of her bad luck, or that "lightening never strikes twice in the same

Discussions of problems in heredity counseling will be presented in each issue of EUGENICS QUARTERLY. A list of heredity counseling centers in North America is available free upon request.
spot." In the families that first came to us after the lightening did strike twice, the mistaken physician was no longer considered a family friend. It has been our experience that one can explain to the parents what the chances are of another abnormal child and that they adjust to the facts very well. Being forwarned, they are psychologically forearmed if the next child idoes prove to have the abnormality. If the child is normal, they experience unusual gratitude and enjoy a mental uplift. In cases that have come to our attention where the parents had not been conditioned to the possibility of a second abnormal child before it appeared, the mother's mental structure was badly damaged. While we have helped to reorganize those psychological shambles, it would have been much easier to have prevented them had the mother been given nonevasive answers by her physician in the first place. It is our experience that, if the terminology is kept simple, the client can understand and profit by whatever reliable information is available. However, one needs a modicum of experience in teaching genetics if the simple facts are to be communicated to the client in an understandable way.
Who Should Do the Counseling?
Information a b o u t heredity, often incorrect, has been provided for families with

47

48 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

abnormal children since the development child, and it gets more than its ordinary

of communication by language. The advice share of attention. The parents are un-

of friends and neighbors was probably quite happy both for the defective child and for

effective in altering the reproductive be- themselves. They do not wish to repeat

havior of the family concerned. The most their misfortune; at the same time their

frequent ideas were fortified by taboo status desire to produce another, normal child is

or even formal incorporation into religious increased in most cases. They always ask

dogma. A good number of the states have what the chances are of another abnormal-

laws regulating consanguineous marriages, ity. We give them the figure if we have a

which were taken directly from the Bible. reliable one; otherwise we tell them that we

Modern attitudes are greatly influenced by do not know the value. They usually ask

the collections of fact and fancy concern- us directly whether or not they should have

ing human reproduction to be found in more children. This question is the one

religious writings. Many of the old ideas that we do not answer because we cannot.

have been taken too literally or have been The counselor has not experienced the

distorted, so that sometimes their modern emotional impact of their problem, nor is

versions are less valid than the original he intimately acquainted with their socio-

conceptions- If advice about heredity is economic environment. We emphasize

to be given, it would seem that the special- what the genetic situation is but the de-

ist in the field, the geneticist, would be in a cision must be a personal one between the

sounder position to do so than even one's husband and wife, and theirs alone.

best friend. The first requirement for the The decision they make can be either

counselor, then, is a reasonable knowledge eugenic or dysgenic in regard to the one

of human genetics. The second require- genetic character under consideration. If

ment is that he have a feeling for the sensi- they decide to have no more children, this

tivities, attitudes, and reactions of the cli- is a eugenic decision, that is, they will not

ent. An additional advantage would be a pass on their abnormal gene either through

medical degree with the training it signifies. affected children or normal "carrier" chil-

This advantage can be somewhat negated dren. If, as is usually the case, the chances

by the very strong pressure of the superior of producing another defective child are

income and social prestige which the prac- less than the parents feared, then they may

tice of medicine offers the physician in go ahead and have more children. This

comparison with the certainty of a none too latter decision would be dysgenic, that is,

lavish salary paid by the academic institu- against the well-being of society as a whole,

tion where the counseling should be cen- since it propagates the defective gene in-

tered. Human genetics is indeed fortunate stead of letting it die out. The over-all ef-

when it can keep within its embrace a fect of counseling is to encourage people to

physician who can resist the urge for spe- have more children than they had thought

cialized practice in favor of the still some- wise, as the chances of having bad luck are

what nebulous area of counseling in human less than they had assumed (though usual-

genetics. The counselor will also find tal- ly vastly greater than the "one in a million"

ents for teaching, public speaking, and chance that may have been given them else-

popular writing to be useful.

where) · As time passes they become more

optimistic, and the desire to "compensate"

The Client's Attitude

for the abnormal child usually overwhelms their fears. While it seems that the coun-

Our serious clients come to us before seling is dysgenic in regard to a particular

they are troubled. They show great affec- abnormal gene, it should be remembered

tion for, and interest in, their abnormal that those people who are sufficiently con-

49

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

cerned about their future children to come Catholic mother came to the Dight Insti-

to the Dight Institute for counseling have commendable concepts of their obligations as parents and these laudable characteristics should be transmitted to the next genera-

tute after several years of trouble due to the fact that two of her four children had fibrosis of the pancreas. One of the defective children had died, but the other child

tion. In the final analysis it would be difficult to determine whether counseling has a eugenic or dysgenic result. It is clear, however, that it has a beneficial effect upon

was still living at the age of six, though half its life had been spent in hospitals. The expenses each year had been much greater than the family's total income, and

family harmony and contributes to an un- they lost their first automobile, then their derstanding of the biology of mankind. small house, and then their ambition- The
more recent expenses have been borne by

"county papers."

Relation to Religious Precepts

The county has a legal claim to any

Most religions have precepts which are intended to spell out the ways in which human reproduction may take place. Some of these regulations undoubtedly have very great significance; others are very difficult to understand. There is no direct connection between counseling and religious precepts. We do not answer the parents' question as to whether or not they should have more children. They must decide for themselves. Nor do we attempt to find out what decision they have in mind. We do intend to make a follow-up study in five or ten years and at that time ask them what their decision was and in what way it was affected by the information about heredity obtained at the Dight Institute.
While we are deliberately discreet in not

property or savings they might be able to accumulate. When the child dies, they could escape their tremendous debt to the county by moving out of the state--a solution which they consider dishonest and unacceptable. Since the client had already had two fibrotic children, she was no longer in the market for the "lightening never strikes twice in the same place" explanation. We told her that her chances were one in four of repeating at each subsequent pregnancy, which was about what she had come to expect. She had already made her decision that her two normal children and the defective children were all that they should have. After coming to this conclusion, she asked her priest for a solution to her problem. The priest agreed that the rhythm method would not be practical for

asking the parents what their decision may be, many of them pop their decision into our laps and ask for comment on it. There is not much that we can say even then. If

a woman with her irregular menstrual cycle and already proven high fertility. The only other solution which the priest could offer was that the couple no longer live to-

they actually understand the genetic situation, their decisions will also show common sense and understanding. In some cases it is clear to all there should be at

gether as man and wife. She pointed out to the priest that they had a good family life and that his suggestion lacked realism in view of the twenty years of fertility which

least some limitation placed on the family she might expect before menopause. She exsize. Here the Roman Catholic family may plained to us that contraceptives were not find itself in a dilemma. The following acceptable, as their use would involve con-

situation has actually happened twice, with tinuous sinning. Sterilization was more ac-

slight variation in detail, and is similar for ceptable to her because it involved sinning other abnormalities. It illustrates clearly only at one time, rather than for twenty the serious problems which may develop. years. She considered it even a greater sin

A twenty-four-year-old intelligent Roman to risk having further defective children

50 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

who would suffer and die while also depriving their normal brothers and sisters of their rightful social and financial position in the community.
This woman had reached her crossroads before she came to us. She had made her choice between her two sins, the continuing one of subsequent pregnancies, with the risk of a defective child, or that of sterilization. Anyone can appreciate her dilemma, but no one can decide for her which alternative to accept.
How to Reach the Client
None of the requests for information which have come to the Dight Institute have been deliberately solicited. The publicity received has all been initiated by the publications concerned. The talks given to agencies, clubs, and societies have all been by invitation. These avenues of increasing the case load could be widened and extended greatly if the director were himself to write articles for the popular press and to initiate lectures and study groups throughout the state. This should be done, at least in theory. Practically, there is little time available for it after the case load now present is cared for.
It would seem that the most effective ways to reach the client are the more stable ones of training graduate and medical students in human genetics so that they can themselves establish heredity clinics, of becoming acquainted with the physicians who are already established, and of helping to establish heredity clinics in the large cities or medical centers where needed.
These last methods of meeting the obvious needs for genetic counseling are more conservative than publicity, and the resultant growth is slower. However, the layman will ordinarily obtain his genetic counseling at the "grass roots" level from the physician, and the latter will refer the client to the heredity clinic. In our experience such referrals bring in people with serious problems and give significant results. Many

of the requests resulting from press or radio publicity are either trivial or unanswerable because they are lacking in medical data. Consequently, the steady flow and increase of case load from local physicians is to be preferred to the feasts and famines resulting from popular press reports. The great usefulness of the latter should not be underrated, however, particularly when a new clinic is being organized.
How Can the Client Reach the Clinic?
It has just been stated that the most satisfactory way for the client to reach the clinic is for him to be referred to it by his own physician. The physician may have enough background in human genetics to comprehend the problem his patient poses, but he probably would not possess the detailed research data necessary to give correct answers. Many of these research studies are published in monographs such as those of the Copenhagen heredity clinic and have no commercial distribution, or in the Annals of Eugenics which is so highly mathematical as to be unreadable for almost everyone. Therefore, the physician should refer his patient with a problem in genetics to a heredity clinic.
This poses an embarrassing question: Where are the heredity clinics? In the Dight Institute Bulletin for 1951 a list of ten places where genetic counseling could be obtained was given. The list was not considered complete, and since then genetic counseling has become available at Tulane University from Dr. H. W. Kloepfer and at the Children's Hospital in Boston from Dr. A. G. Steinberg. There are perhaps as many as twenty or thirty places in the United States where excellent genetic counseling may be obtained. A number of these have been overlooked by their local press and radio facilities, and in such cases the geneticist should take the initiative and develop some publicity himself. A scientist with competence in human genetics has no right to withhold his skill from a public which needs it so badly. Our experience at the

51

Dight Institute leaves no doubt whatever ing should continue to be given free, as has

that the counseling has been of the greatest 'been the case at all the centers.

value to many of the families that have re- To the orderly minded, it would seem

ceived it.

that this public service should be financed

A conservative estimate would envisage from taxes and perhaps by the U. S. Public

at least one hundred heredity clinics dis- Health Service. Others would contend that

tributed throughout the nation in the larg- the clinics should continue to arise at ran-

est cities and medical centers, with each dom and trust to luck for their survival.

state having at least one. This would be The writer would like to see a few new

less than one clinic for each million of our university clinics directly financed by the

population, certainly not a national ex- U. S. Public Health Service, if for no other

travagance. It is not now clear where the reason than to compare their experience

money is coming from to finance this mod- with that of the clinics now in existence.

est expansion of heredity clinics. However, Regardless of the future sources of support,

if the goal is worth reaching, the funds will the present heredity clinics have sown the

be found. It is not contemplated that fees seed of a new type of social service. Hered-

will be charged for counseling. There are ity clinics have a future, and it will be ex-

several practical reasons why the counsel- citing to watch it unfold.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

