Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The multiple bases of human adaptability and achievement: A species point of view
Benson E. Ginsburg & William S. Laughlin
To cite this article: Benson E. Ginsburg & William S. Laughlin (1966) The multiple bases of human adaptability and achievement: A species point of view, Eugenics Quarterly, 13:3, 240-257, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1966.9987673 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1966.9987673
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles
Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:28

THE MULTIPLE BASES OF HUMAN ADAPTABILITY AND ACHIEVEMENT: A SPECIES POINT OF VIEW*

BENSON E. GINSBURG AND WILLIAM S. LAUGHLIN 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

I. T H E PROBLEM OF POLYMORPHISM--
GOALS AND PRIORITIES FOR BIOLOGICAL
RESEARCH ON THE HUMAN SPECIES
The possibilities inherent in a genuinely international biological program keyed to economic productivity and improved human welfare can effectively help to accomplish many scientific and social goals unattainable within the confines of more circumscribed national programs. It is essential that a species point of view should prevail, and therefore the ecosystem of the entire human species must be studied. There should be no major missing links in the intensive multidisciplinary approach that has been recommended for the study of human adaptability, or the predicted chain of future broadly conceived researches will not be forged. An element of urgency intrudes in cases of disappearing peoples who represent in an important degree the conditions under which mankind has spent the major part of its evolutionary history. Many of our present characteristics and diseases represent responses to past environments, and a scientific understanding of these depends upon a comprehensive knowledge of the genetics of such groups of hunters that have remained in the environmental context in which all mankind evolved (Neel, 1958; WHO, 1964).
* The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of several NIH grants supporting their individual research, and that of the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences, which made their study and collaboration possible.
Behavior Genetics Laboratory, The University of Chicago (Ginsburg), and Department of Anthropology, The University of Wisconsin (Laughlin).

Simultaneously, all mankind is undergoing changes with respect to health and fitness deriving from new selection pressures. Changed mating patterns reflected in new nations are constantly promoting the genetic restructuring of all populations, some at a relatively rapid pace" (Goldschmidt, 1963). The assessments of these changes in a wide range of habitats, economies, ethnic groups, and cultures are needed to enhance our basic knowledge of the biology of human adaptability and to provide information directly applicable to many problems of human health and welfare.
Whether mankind's greatest threat is that posed by fallout from future explosions of hydrogen bombs or by fallout from the population explosion that has already taken place and is currently exacting a heavy toll in childhood death and disease, is scarcely a scientific question. Fundamental studies of human adaptability may help to prevent or ameliorate the undesirable consequences of either of these very real hazards. A signal point that we should like to emphasize is that human adaptability has multiple bases and that it is expressed in a variety of ways and achieved by a variety of routes in subpopulations of our species. We should like to underscore the fact that any fair-sized population (whose lower numerical limits remain to be determined) contains sufficient genetic variability to replace the entire human species with genotypically well-adapted populations. Stated another way, it is our contention that any reasonably large population contains sufficient genetic variability to move its

240

Vol. 13, No. 3

Human Adaptability

241

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

adaptive topography by restructuring itself genetically without the introduction of new mutations or of genes from other populations.1 No population has a monopoly on genetic variation essential to future evolution. The recombination of existing variation is more than adequate for the foreseeable future (Crow, 1961). As Ernst Mayr (1963) has remarked: "The essential genetic unity of species cannot be doubted. Yet the mechanisms by which this unity is maintained are still largely unexplored." A major goal of an international biological program should be to obtain precise information that bears directly upon the ways in which our diverse species has maintained its essential unity.
Within the ecosystem of the human species, there is a biobehavioral reticulum whose interdependencies are receiving more attention each year. Some of what we choose to call the intradependencies, however, are neglected both in theory and in application. The congruences of morphology, physiology, and behavior in Eskimo adaptation to cold stress and to glare contains genetically based intradependencies within a biobehavioral reticulum rather than interdependencies between disparate entities. In contrast, interdependence between Eskimos and their dogs is empirically based upon a practical knowledge of breeding and behavior. This in itself, and similarly with other groups of hunters, is an important part of their adaptive system (Laughlin, 1964). The intellectual achievements of primitive groups have been consistently underestimated and underreported (Laughlin, 1963); and to the extent that these constitute an
1 A discussion of this point on the basis of experimental evidence obtained by Dobzhansky and Pavlovsky with Drosophila pseudoobscura is especially pertinent. See T. Dobzhansky, 1962, Mankind Evolving, Yale University Press, New Haven and London, p. 283.

integral part of their adaptive system, they should form a focus for more intensive studies.
The achievements of groups separated by distances and diffusion barriers too great for detectable gene flow attest to the enormous plasticity and potential for achievement inherent in populations generally. Thus, the Maya Indians of Guatemala and Mexico who generated a concept of zero, mathematics, astronomy, writing, monumental architecture, etc., developed these expressions of biobehavioral abilities on their own from a population base of primitive hunters who had entered the New World no more than 15,000 years ago. The fact that populations as remote from each other as Eskimos and Mayas can adapt to environments that are exceptionally diverse, with differences in intellectual interests, growth rates, disease patterns, nutritional regimes, population densities, mating practices, etc., and yet remain similar in many marker genes, suggests that, in fact, we know very little about the epigenetic systems and homeostatic devices shared by diverse populations that place limits on their genetic and phenotypic change and thus maintain the genetic unity of the species.
The genetically diverse populations inhabiting similar habitats, together with the genetically similar populations inhabiting diverse habitats, provide a natural comparison matrix in which research can be efficiently pursued. The basic problems posed by human polymorphisms require that many kinds of groups be studied, for neither the processes nor the parameters of human adaptability can be generalized from any single division of the species. With careful attention to the integrity of the individual and the community of which he is a member, the immediate practical benefits of being studied by teams of

242

Ginsburg and Laughlin

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

dentists, serologists, cardiologists, childgrowth specialists, virologists, nutritionists, behavior geneticists, et al., as well as the expense of undertaking field operations, laboratory tests, statistical analyses, and training of students and other personnel, should be easily justified when added to the long-range benefits and understanding to be derived from such basic information.
II. ANALYSES OF HUMAN DIVERSITY
A broad question such as that of man's place in nature cannot be treated at the research level by a single person or a single discipline. Nevertheless, the evidence that is collected by differently trained and oriented workers must be assembled and interpreted. The utilization of a variety of evidence, drawn from different fields, is a generic problem that poses special difficulties when we attempt to examine ourselves. The Zeitgeist in which we operate is one dominated by a preoccupation with ethical considerations in which one hopes that dispassionate investigation will yield results that are consonant with our moral notions. Where there is an apparent danger of conflict between science and ethic, three modes of operation have been adopted with respect to the areas that interest us here.
The Dichotomy-Dismissal Approach
Here the two major procedures have been:
1. To dismiss the subject of heritable human variability that may extend to behavioral capacities by pointing out that present methodologies and information permit only tentative conclusions to be drawn in this area, and that these are vulnerable to misinterpretation and fraught with political danger (Mead, 1958, 1962).
2. To dichotomize the biobehavioral

continuum, dismissing the biological aspects and, assigning to culture the role of determining all that is meaningful in human behavior. Thus, "In general, human variability seems to have had no proven effect on culture" (Steward and Shimkin, 1962, p. 72).
The practical results, in terms of training students or integrating different kinds of materials, are essentially the same: a serious stultification. For example, Margaret Mead (1958, p. 487) states:
The artificial distinction between culture--as a purely human process-- and all forms of learning through experience--in the rest of the biological sector--may have been a necessary device to dispose of theories of racial difference which assumed a racial factor in "Gallic wit" or "Negro musical ability."
This view had a tremendous influence upon the directions and priorities of anthropological and sociological investigations of the thirties and forties and was given further impetus by the elevation of the pseudoscientific racist writings of Gobineau and Chamberlain to the role of official dogma for the Third Reich. Indeed, the heat generated by the recent suggestion of concerted biological research in the area of human population differences as set forth by Ingle (1964) came partly from the crematoria of Auschwitz and Bergen-Belsen and partly from our own segregationist practices in this country. It is as though the recognition of significant biological differences among human population groups necessarily implies immutable distinctions in behavioral capacities that arrange themselves on a superiorityinferiority axis, and that studies of such differences can only lend themselves to racist doctrines. The ethical scientist, afraid of what he might let loose upon

Vol. 13, No. 3

Human Adaptability

243

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

the world should he open this Pandora's box, is therefore better advised to turn his attention to other variables and to focus upon the social determinism of important human differences. The latter view has been well epitomized by Baker (1962), who states that, "The concept of culture, as defined by some, almost precludes the biology of man from a significant role in his behavior." Biologically speaking, the species Man is the text so far as the identicist is concerned--the genetically partitioned subgroups are merely commentary. Hence, all distinctly human qualities, of whatever degree, become species attributes by definition, and are attainable by any human group under appropriate conditions of the surround.
The Unlike but Equal Approach
Here, the existence of biological differences unequally partitioned among various subpopulations within the human species is taken as a demonstrated fact, but the extension of these differences to include fundamental behavioral capacities is denied or minimized. As Dobzhansky (1964) points out:
Equality does not mean identity. Equality means equality of opportunity. . . . Race is a category of classification applied to subdivisions of mankind--there are races of man and of animals and plants . . . regardless of whether there is someone who wishes to classify them.
The apposition of competent taxonomy and population genetics to problems of human systematics attempted by many workers has not yet produced a synthesis. Instead, the biology-culture dichotomy is invariably reinstated; and the conclusion, though arrived at on other grounds, is that of the cultural determinist. Human population differences are analyzed in terms of beanbag

genetics and referred to as "mere" differences in frequency distributions of genes (although these may include frequencies of 0 or 100% as well as very different probabilities for achieving particular combinations, where intermediate values obtain). The implication is that such differences are nonqualitative and that any gene can get to any population, as there are no impenetrable barriers to genetic exchange between any groups within the species. Man's psyche, together with his intellectual capacities are, again, taken to be properties of the entire species, and no significant biological differences in behavioral capacities are therefore reasonable expectations among human subgroups, however classified. Individual differences occur in all populations, but these are, in this view, not selectively arrayed according to geography, pigmentation, or marriage customs. It is as though no genetic changes have occurred in the human species since the dawn of civilization and cultural factors have had no selective influence on the human genotype in almost 200 generations.
This view is, perhaps, most dramatically illustrated in the recent UNESCO report (1965) in which 22 scientists representing 17 nations agreed that: j
The genetic capacity for intellectual development, like certain major anatomical traits peculiar to the species, is one of the biological traits essential for its survival in any natural or social environment. The peoples of the world today appear to possess equal biological potentialities for attaining any civilizational level. Differences in the achievements of different peoples must be attributed solely to their cultural history. [Our italics.]
Thus, the matter has been resolved by resolution and the issue of the equality of all peoples made to rest on the premise of genetic noninvolvement where differences in significant behavioral capaci-

244

Ginsburg and Laughlin

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

ties are concerned. The very description of these differences in the report gives them a hierarchical value and implies that were they to have any genetic basis, some human groups would then be at least statistically inferior to others, a situation that would be philosophically and ethically intolerable to the authors of the report.
The Holistic Synthesis
On this view, "all aspects of any organism may be thought of as 100 per cent genetic but not 100 per cent determined" (Ginsburg, 1958). The genetic endowment of any organism, which includes its behavioral capacities, represents a potential, the actualization of which involves a series of interactions with environmental factors that restrict the degrees of freedom of this potential. The expressed phenotype at various stages of development, though dependent on what has been encoded in the genome, is not entirely determined by it. To be sure, there are varying degrees of lability between gene and character, but even at the highest level of lability, that of intellectual behavior, limits are set by the genotype. There is no aspect of any organism that is exempted from these biological effects (Ginsburg, 1963).
Turning from the individual to the group, the human species is seen as a population reticulum in which genetic exchange is much more probably within aggregates united by a common biological and cultural history than between them. Despite the intergradations and diversity that occur in all widely distributed and variable species, there are identifiable phenotypic population clusters resulting from a common breeding history under the influence of selective factors. These coadapted genotypes cannot be thought of as simply the sum of their component parts and are, therefore, not

adequately represented by a table listing the frequency of occurrence of each gene. The genomes constituting a population are intradependent environmentally regulated servomechanisms assimilated to an evolved set of phenotypic norms. As such, they are buffered and able to absorb genes from other populations without undergoing a phenotypic change proportional to the amount of genetic infusion. It has, for example, been estimated that American Negroes have an admixture of Caucasian genes that is, minimally, on the order of 30% (Glass and Li, 1953). Although this contributes to the variability of the population, this infusion is continually being assimilated to the prevailing phenotype, which is not obliterated by it. The corollary to this phenomenon is that a population of sufficient size harbors a great deal more genetic variability than its current phenotypic census would suggest and that, given a selective impetus, such a population can move to other phenotypic norms in a relatively short time using its own genetic resources. These resources are probably most meager with respect to those genes that serve as phenotypic markers, on the basis of which assortative mating occurs, and that are, therefore, under extreme selective pressure for phenotypic constancy. Given a multiplicity of genetic ways of achieving similar phenotypic expression, convergence on the part of genetically diverse partial isolates within a species is to be expected under a common and sustained selection pressure. Man's culture, while an expression of his genetic endowment, also affects it via the assortative mating patterns that result, thus constituting part of a feedback system whose components are continually interacting.2 To attribute the
2 This relationship is beginning to receive systematic attention under the rubric of "social genetics."

Vol. 13, No. 3

Human Adaptability

245

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

achievements of peoples solely to their cultural histories, which may be the products of differences as well as similarities in their biological endowments, is, in a dramatic sense, to dispense with the people. The student of culture thereby becomes a paleontologist of behavior, whose fossils are the books, music, technology, and other leavings of human organisms taken as groups--except that most hypotheses regarding the significance of biological factors as contributors to similarities or diversities that might be entertained by the student of fossil behavior of other organisms when he finds consistent differences in the nests built by different species of termites or of birds, for example, are excluded a priori.
III. THE SPECIES RETICULUM APPROACH
Biobehavioral Monism
The holistic synthesis that we are attempting here admits of no geneticalcultural dualism, nor does it array biologically based clusters of capacities that may differ statistically among subpopulations in any necessary hierarchical order. Evidence from the fields of behavior genetics and ethology provide ample documentation of the biological contributions to behavioral capacities ranging from intelligence to temperament to instinct (Ginsburg, 1958, 1963; Fuller and Thompson, 1960; Erlenmeyer-Kimling and Jarvik, 1963; Gardner, 1966; Thorpe, 1956; Shields and Slater, 1960). Freud faced up to the problem of biological determinism in relation to individual differences, but in practical terms he homogenized these differences and left biology primarily at the instinctual level (Freud, 1935).
Contemporary comparative psychologists, among them Beach and Lehman, have gone back to the genome, and

have, as Thiessen (1965) has summarized, ". . . forcefully argued and demonstrated that behavior is the outcome of genotype developing within a milieu of environmental and social influences. Instincts, as a result, are translated into species-specific behaviors with unique heritable and experiential components." The mind and the body have thus again become aspects of each other, not only in the sense of traveling in the same conveyance, but also of occupying the same seat.
Wright (1953), in an intensely provocative article, has pointed out that the organization of a species is that of a network, or reticulum, and that the human social organism includes domesticated animals, cultivated plants, and products of technology. In going from gene to society, his successive levels of involvement include the theory of the gene itself; physiological genetics at the cellular level; developmental genetics at the level of the individual; population genetics at the species level; and genetics of behavior at the societal level. At this societal level of organization, cultural anthropology and history deal' with human behavior descriptively; iwhile sociology and certain aspects of philosophy deal with it dynamically, and behavior genetics, theoretically. On his analysis, these disciplines are embedded in a matrix whose axes and dimensions are biological, and from which aspects of individual and group behavior are emergent.
Analysis by Comparison]
All people belong in museums, Philadelphia lawyers and Eskimo shamans alike, for they are equally exotic to each other. It is a truism derivable both from experience and as a consequence of the practically infinite field for genetic variability attributable to Mendelian recom-

246

Ginsburg and Laughlin

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

bination under biparental reproduction that no two persons derived from separate ova are genetically alike, nor is it probable that the genetic duplicate of such a person has occurred or will occur throughout the history of life on earth. Still, Eskimos, as we know them, are not infinitely variable but are distinguishable from other populations. There exists a cluster of traits by which they can be recognized. Those that are not manifest and subject to convergent selection are often used as "tracers." Those that serve as the hallmarks of recognition may be termed "markers" and are of prime importance in assortative mating. As long as these markers remain within normal limits of variability, a great deal of genetic variation for other characters may be carried by the population. In view of the fact that there is a multiplicity of genetic ways of achieving similar phenotypic expression, selective mechanisms can and have acted to buffer or assimilate this variability to the prevailing phenotypic norms. In domestic animals, the practical breeder has taken advantage of this latent variability to create new color varieties, body types, and behavioral constellations through selective inbreeding (Lush, 1945).
Given the nonpanmictic structure of the human population, in which groups are maintained in partial, and in some cases total, genetic isolation from each other over long periods of time, it is extremely improbable that such subgroups within our species should be genetically alike as populations. Indeed, our evolutionary strength as a species lies precisely in this fact. Such a reticulum of subpopulations within which there is free genetic exchange and between which such genetic exchange is restricted to varying degrees depending upon distance, cultural diffusion bar-

riers, and biological dissimilarities expressed primarily via combinations of marker genes, provides a set of excellent conditions whereby different genetic constellations can be "tried out" in a variety of environmental circumstances and conforms to the conditions that, according to Wright (1939), may be expected to provide the most favorable opportunities for evolutionary advance.
The environments that served as selective agencies by means of which direc. tive effects have been exerted have been consistently dissimilar over considerable periods of time not only with respect to such variables as temperature, altitude, and sunlight, but also with respect to the selective effects of diverse cultures, some of which have placed a premium on attributes having to do with literary, musical, and artistic ability over some 160 or more generations in some genetic stocks, while detecting and selecting for quite different constellations of traits in others. The results of selection experiments with other mammals would suggest, not that populations under such differential pressures would generally develop unique constellations of genotypes (although they might in certain circumstances), but rather that genetic combinations that are adaptive in terms of the demands and opportunities of particular cultures are detected within such cultures and maintained as well as augmented by an assortative mating system that places a premium on these abilities. The frequencies of these genetic combinations are thereby increased.
The differential selective effects of the physicocultural environmental complex are themselves dependent on the biological (i.e., biobehavioral) potential of the population, not only in the ordinary sense of constituting a differential sieve for existing phenotypes, which im-

Vol. 13, No. 3

Human Adaptability

247

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

pose limits upon the selective mechanisms, but also in a very special sense of crossing a biocultural threshold. In order to accomplish the latter, it is necessary for a population to be able to generate enough individuals possessing special and unusual abilities at a particular time and place to make a discovery that has the potential for changing the conditions of life for the group and to translate this potential into actuality. Once such a threshold is crossed, new selective forces are set into motion that extract and fix genetic combinations that would otherwise not be favored, and thereby produce genetic differences that were, in turn, generated by genetic differences that permitted such a threshold to be crossed in the first place.
The detection of such differences, especially when behavioral capacities are involved, can be accomplished only through comparative studies that do not rest on the assumption that the portion of the species reticulum from which the scientists are drawn and with which they are familiar is an adequate sample of the variation existing in the total species reticulum. Otherwise, we are in danger of using the criteria developed in a given culture as measures of abilities for all people in all cultures. Our so-called "intelligence tests" measure attributes that are predictors of success in a certain kind of schoolroom and in other situations requiring verbal and symbolic abilities, relational manipulations, and various other factors that can be identified and listed. When we make such a test "culture free," we free it (to the extent that we are successful) from dependence on particular kinds of experiences but attempt to specify it to the same ends. If our test may be analogized to a prism, which analyzes light in the visible spectrum, then we can make our prism work for light from various

sources and of differing intensities. It does not, however, analyze the nonvisible spectrum. This requires a wholly different instrument in addition to the appreciation that the nonvisible spectrum exists. Comparative studies must attempt to sample the total range of human capacities and should include both similar and dissimilar genotypes in as widely varying environments as possible. Otherwise, we are looking through our instruments at a mirror.
The Meaning of Correlation
Studies of attributes of different peoples provide an important test of the degree to which correlated characteristics are causally related. From the genetic point of view, six major possibilities are apparent:
The first is that where the correlated characteristics are attributable to a common agency. Thus, on the hypothesis put forward by Stockard (1941) that the genotype controls the endocrine balance and that this, in turn, is responsible for both body form and behavior, a consistent relationship between somatotype and behavior is to be expected. The second possibility is that the same relationship would hold if the associated effects were determined by the same genes but dependent on different mechanisms. Thirdly, a less invariant relationship would be expected if separate but linked genes were involved, depending upon the degree of linkage. Coadapted mechanisms resting on a more complex genetic base constitute a fourth possibility, as in the case of the AB and Rh blood groups (Parsons, 1964). As a fifth possibility, the pairing of genes through independent selection for their separate effects may also occur; or, as a sixth alternative, such pairing may occur by chance through the vicissitudes of sampling. Data on the invariant occur-

248

Ginsburg and Laughlin

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

rence of particular associations of traits in widely different populations as against the possibility of their occurrence in different associations in diverse populations (as well as within a single, variable population) are needed to help eliminate the range over which speculation may occur and also to identify, by means of the differences emerging from such comparative studies, what the traits are that may be considered to be natural units of variation for human beings and how they are distributed in the context of the reticular organization of the human species.
IV. CONTAINERS AND CONTENTS
The tremendous field for variation afforded by Mendelian recombination in a sexually reproducing species provides an apparatus whereby some aspects of the phenotype may be held relatively constant (as in the case of marker genes on which assortative mating patterns are often based), while others vary widely. Should selection favor a complex of independently heritable characteristics, these may come to be associated in a given population although they have no other dependent connections. In another population some elements of this complex may appear in association with quite different characteristics. As mentioned above, comparisons of populations based on such similarities and differences may be expected to provide clues regarding the natural evolutionary units involved.
Two complications must be considered in relation to the interpretation of such clues: The first is that those morphological, physiological, and behavioral properties that attract our attention constitute only an aspect of the phenotypic expression of the genes on which they depend. To discover the total phenotype resulting from the possession of these

genes requires further research (Clausen and Ginsburg, 1958). The second is that there is no invariant relationship between genotype and phenotype (Ginsburg, 1958). Whether one is considering amino acid sequences or behavior, there is more than one genetic route to the same end result. In addition, environmental manipulations may produce similar results (phenocopies) by nongenetic means; and, conversely, genetic deficiencies may be compensated for by environmental intervention (i.e., the administration of insulin to genetic diabetics). The phenotypic topography of a population is, therefore, dynamically complex. Its traits and their associations must be considered from the point of view of a context matrix in which correlations may be due to any of the six relationships to the genetic substratum outlined in the previous section. When one adds the considerations just described to the context matrix (namely, that similar phenotypes may arise convergently from different genetic bases, that any given genotype may be variably expressed depending upon environmental conditions, and that phenocopies can mimic particular genotypes), it is evident that comparative studies must include genealogies, mechanisms, and developmental histories in order to arrive at any sensible interpretation of observed phenomena.
In the genetic sense, both populations and individuals may be considered to be container units with reference to the great variety of genetic materials that can be added or deleted with no perceptible change in the continuity of the population over a span of generations, or, put the other way around, in the external appearances of the range of individual organisms comprising the population. Among the important differences between these kinds of units is the fact that natural selection operates only

Vol. 13, No. 3

Human Adaptability

249

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

through populations, not through individuals or types; and populations are what really evolve. Variation for physiological and behavioral characteristics can occur within individuals of a given physical constitution or somatotype (see Rin-Tin-Tin complex, Section VI), and spurious correlations may be secured by comparing constitution with various physiological and behavioral traits as discussed in Section III.3
Just as traits cannot be adequately treated without a knowledge of the context matrix in which they occur, neither can a sample of individuals be treated without a knowledge of the population context in which they occur. An important part of a population is the matrix of pathways connecting the individuals. Populations consist of related individuals, not separate units such as beans in a bag. The sampling of a population should reflect the nature of this population matrix which may enhance redundancy as a consequence of inbreeding, or of assortative mating, large family size, or the many other conditions that structure the genetic distance between individuals. It is efficient and necessary to define isolates and small populations with reference to the fact that they are intrabreeding communities. Thus, a population is a cluster of genetic pathways whose intersections recombine molecular units of inheritance, some of which develop into living organisms that reproduce.4 Too much attention has traditionally been given to the end products of the reproductive system of a population, the developed traits of adult males and females most
3 This area is discussed and illustrated in a kinescope tape entitled "Repackaging People" made by the authors in May 1966 and is available through the University of Wisconsin educational television station, WHA, Elizabeth Bailey, producer.
4 This is the genetic definition of "race."

commonly used for morphological, physiological, and serological sampling.
Genetic populations are clusters of individuals who more frequently mate with other individuals within the group than outside. Geographical and cultural boundary-maintaining devices limit the genetic exchange between groups which, if random, would of course dissolve the groups. No two populations are identical, and they may vary in any trait used to characterize the populations. The common definition of a population as an intrabreeding community differing in the frequency of one or more genes from other such communities is uninformative. The stipulation of differing from others is extraneous and raises a multitude of questions such as, in how many genes they should differ and from whom they should differ. The study of migrant and hybrid groups is especially valuable for obtaining information on processes, even though physical differentiation of isolates separated by only one generation is minor compared with groups that have been separated for 8 or 80 generations. There is little point in collecting data on characteristics of people, be they morphological, physiological, serological, or behavioral, unless the genetic relationships between the individuals are known and means for testing hypotheses can be developed. The relationship of sample to population provides an equally valid reason for genealogical study. In small isolates this constitutes no theoretical problem, though it is tedious and time consuming. In metropolitan studies, where assortative mating is a more important factor and various kinds of subgroups are included, theoretical problems require more attention, and various models such as those based upon isolation by distance may be more relevant (Spuhler and Clark, 1961).

250

Ginsburg and Laughlin

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

There are many ways of making comparisons between populations, all of which are vitiated if the original population unit is not adequately characterized. The construction of a species standard to which each population can be compared is efficient and objective (Penrose, 1950). The construction of clines or character gradients is still another useful method of comparison, and formal classification involving the estimation of biological distance (numerical taxonomy) between three or more groups is a third major category for describing between-group variation. All of these methods of relational systematics are useful for estimating degrees of similarity and difference, for assessing the distribution of variation, and for testing hypotheses. It should be noted that the explanation of similarity between groups (reflected in comparisons) is not automatically provided by the distributional maps or tables of relative degrees of similarity. The correspondence between similarity and affinity is a problem in relational systematics of populations for which there is a rich body of theory. Confusion between the procedures of defining or delimiting a population, identifying individuals who belong to a population, characterizing a population, and then making comparisons between populations (of which classification is only one method) are common. The enumeration of the number of populations is often more of an inventory than a classification. Classification consists of arranging the populations in a meaningful system. The problem of how many there are to be arranged is a separate and prior problem. All human populations intergrade to some extent, though there are many traits that are confined to a single continent and completely missing in another. Since we are dealing with varia-

tion within a single, nonpanmictic species, rather than with different species or with ideal types, intergradation is the rule. The lack of watertight compartments offers no theoretical block to study, though this is sometimes conceived to be so because of the confusion that exists between identifying individuals, on the one hand, and comparing populations, on the other. Paleontologists who work with genera between which there is a decided morphological gap, where identifying individuals and arranging them into series is no problem, have no fewer difficulties in assessing the relational systematics of the taxons with which they work. In the case of human populations, improvement in understanding degrees of relationship between populations is not automatically achieved by the substitution of gene frequency data for morphological data. The classificatory containers can remain the same with change only in the kind of data to be poured into them. Tabulation of gene frequencies is one way of characterizing a limited portion of the variability of a population. The frequency of a gene is not a necessary measure of the significance of that gene in that population. A gene may have the same frequency in two different populations and yet differ in its functional significance in each population because of the frequency of other genes or because of differences in environmental conditions. The trait complex matrix and the population matrix must both be known in order to interpret the significance of the frequency of a gene.
V. MAN: THE SELF-DOMESTICATING
SPECIES
Principles and directions may often reveal themselves clearly in a simplified context where they are difficult to detect in a more complex one. Darwin found

Vol. 13, No. 3

Human Adaptability

251

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

it useful to outline the principles of his theory of evolution on the basis of what could be seen and demonstrated with domesticated forms where man himself was the selecting agency. The analogy to domestic animals, and especially to breed formation, is often extended to man but is as often disputed. Dobzhansky (1964), for example, considers the analogy misleading, because selection in dogs, horses, and cattle has included behavioral attributes such as "temperament," "disposition," "intelligence," and "trainability," whereas selection for behavioral attributes in human beings has, on his view, not been parallel. In advancing this point of view, proponents of this concept are assuming the heritability of these aspects of an organism and sufficient genetic variability with respect to these qualities to make them amenable to relatively rapid selection by man but are denying that man, whose behavioral attributes are the most critically adaptive of any mammalian species and form the basis for his ability to live in groups and generate culture, can have developed these behavioral adaptations by similar means.
The position of biobehavioral monism formulated here precludes such a point of view. Most students of evolution would agree with Simpson (1964) that "Behavior is subject to particularly strong selection, and it is probably farthest removed from the genes and also, most elaborately polygenic as a rule. Some single-gene determinants of behavior are known, but they are exceptional."
Washburn and Shirek (1966) have identified the bridge between behavior and its selection, including man's selection of his own behavior, by pointing out that "There is feedback between behavior and its biological base, so that behavior is both a cause of changing

gene frequencies and a consequence of changing biology." Culture, which is a consequence of man's genetic endowment, is also a selective agency. It helps to determine the extent to which assortative mating will occur on the basis of obvious physical genetic markers. It also detects genetic combinations capable of specialized behavioral performances involved in the evolution of civilization, such as artistic, musical, and mathematical ability, as well as the types of intelligence that are necessary for the production of literature, technology, and art. As these detecting mechanisms improve through the universalization of education, more efficient use can be made of the genetic resources of the population in these regards. By providing attractive niches for the development and execution of these talents, cultures not only detect and develop them, but siphon them off and provide opportunities and impetus for assortative matings, consanguineous and otherwise, based on these criteria, thereby composing and perpetuating useful coadapted gene complexes. The cultures from which ours has evolved have been doing this for upwards of 150 generations--certainly time enough to have exerted selective genetic effects.
These genetic effects have been a source of worry to many students of human population who are concerned that the more intellectually capable segments of a society are outbred by the less capable segments. This is a needless worry on two grounds. The first is minor and is simply that favorable genotypes for the values existing in our culture are constantly being generated from the less advantaged segments of the population. The second is that the numerical proportion of creative minds with specialized capabilities need not be large in order to maintain and advance

252

Ginsburg and Laughlin

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

civilization. They form the keystone of a biobehavioral arch; and as long as there is sufficient sustained assortative mating on the basis of these qualities to keep such a genetic track going, the possibility for shifting its numerical representation as cultural demands change is a potential that the population possesses.
Man as a self-domesticating species may take advantage of a large variety of relatively simple devices in order to exert increasing control over his own genetic potential, on a voluntary basis. These include birth control, abortion, adoption (including prenatal adoption), sperm donor programs (the genetic data from which should be kept on a worldwide basis), and genetic counseling in relation to particular pedigrees, to inbreeding, and to minimizing radiation hazard. These devices can, in turn, provide data on the basis of which more intelligent assessment of alternatives will become increasingly possible and useful, especially as social strictures change. What is important here is that as cultures become more specialized and complex, they provide a multiple-track system demanding different though overlapping biological capacities. While detecting and developing these from an existing genetic base, cultures also encourage assortative matings within these tracks, thereby leading to the formation and retention of particular kinds of genetic combinations on preferential bases. Thus, genetic variability has a demonstrable effect on culture, which, in turn, organizes the genetic pool on the basis of assortative mating systems relevant to the culture.
VI. THE GENOTYPES OF RACE AND
CULTURE
The genetic parsing of experimental animal populations has revealed that

they differ markedly with respect to behavioral capacities (Ginsburg, 1958, 1963). Emotionality and aggressiveness in mice, for example, are profoundly affected by infantile manipulation. Both the direction and magnitude of the effects vary according to strain or genotype. Whether there is a critical period for the maximal effectiveness of the applied stimulation and when it occurs, are also strain-specific. A mouse population from which these diverse response patterns to identical stimulation may be extracted is a reticulum whose measures of central tendency have a misleading biological meaning. Selection can quickly extract diverse styles, magnitudes, and directions of responses from such a population, all of which can be assimilated to a variety of physical marker genes. Thus one could, by genetic manipulation, create a population of black mice having a uniform set of responses to the manipulations described, although there is no causal relationship between the coat color and the behavior. One could as easily have associated the color with another behavioral profile. Similarly, the temperament, disposition, and various other behavioral qualities of dogs can be assimilated to one or another physical type. One of us has been associated with a project that produces dogs to lead the blind, where, possibly because of the image of Rin-Tin-Tin, the demand has been primarily for the German shepherd breed. Many of the foundation animals from which the present stocks on this particular project are derived, although intelligent and highly trainable, were also of a protective and mistrustful disposition and did not transfer easily from one person to another. These qualities, while admirable in a guard dog, are not suitable to one who must be a guide. Neither are they sufficiently reliably

Vol. 13, No. 3

Human Adaptability

253

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

modified by conditions of rearing and training. Over approximately 10 generations of selective line-breeding, it has been possible to change the behavioral predisposition within this population while maintaining the characteristic appearance without resorting to crossbreeding, an indication that a good deal of genetic variability had been assimilated to the prevailing phenotype and could be extracted from it to conform to a different set of behavioral norms while retaining the identifying physical marker genes.
Such clusters of buffered genotypes that can assimilate a high degree of potential genetic variability to a prevailing phenotypic profile are typical of natural populations as well, and, as suggested by data on white and Negro populations, between which there is considerable genetic exchange in this country, are also characteristic of man. He is not panmictic either within or between population subgroups variously designated as racial or ethnic. The use of culture as a scanning mechanism that identifies and repackages the bits and pieces of heredity are, in a longer time, analogous to what may be accomplished with mice and dogs in a much shorter time span of more rigorous selection. The recombined genetic constituents are not entirely independent and may be expected to exhibit secondary interaction effects with other factors in the trait context matrix. Thus, the species reticulum, consisting of subpopulations that differ in marker genes and in the probabilities with which particular genetic combinations expressing themselves as identifiable phenotypes are encountered, is partially and flexibly partitioned. No part of it adequately represents the whole, and every substantial part undoubtedly has sufficient genetic resources to move to a new set of phenotypic norms

under appropriate selection pressures. These new norms most probably include any phenotype now represented in the species reticulum with the probable exception of those dependent upon marker genes, which may be relatively fixed where the history of selection with respect to the phenotypes they control has narrowed the range of variability.
If one views the entire species reticulum at a given instant in time, it is not to be expected that the nature-nurture or genetic-cultural feedback mechanisms have resulted in convergent clusters of phenotypes at all nodal points. Styles and rates of response to environmental agencies as well as other capacities may differ as well as overlap. Just as the critical period at which early trauma has the greatest effect in a population of mice is genotype-dependent, as are the directions and magnitudes of the effects in question, so the rates, sensitivities, and outcomes of the far more sensitive interactions of human genotypes with respect to emotion, learning, and other behavioral attributes of importance to a social species are probably also biologically variable. Nor must it be taken for granted that the capacities measured by tests extrapolated from the capacities and cultures of one part of the species reticulum are adequate measures for all--either in scaling, or in the definition of what is to be measured. Readiness for assimilating particular kinds of experience may easily vary, as may the capacity for sequential ordering --i.e., objects before symbols, for example. What is an optimal early educational procedure in terms of the prevailing phenotypes of European caucasoids, is not necessarily optimal for Aleuts in order to achieve exactly the same goals. Analogy to animal behavior-genetics would lead us to expect such differences. Parallel hypotheses need to be; enter-

254

Ginsburg and Laughlin

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

tained and investigated in relation to our own species where, precisely because we have confined ourselves to particular measures on particular scales and attempted to homogenize our educational procedures, hierarchical value judgments have been made where none necessarily exist. Instead of investigating a problem in a manner that would best enable us to take advantage of the differences offered by varying portions of our species reticulum, we have, out of misguided condescension involving apology for the fact that some of us measure up better than others in proportion as the scale we use was constructed expressly for us, shut ourselves off from the possibility of both understanding and making better use of the rich and varied resources of our species.
VII. SPADE VERSUS GEOTOME: ETHICAL
CONSIDERATIONS
The ethical obligations of a research team to the population being studied should be prominently reiterated in the training of personnel as well as in the actual prosecution of studies. These include respect for the dignity and privacy of subjects; compensation for their time and participation; medical, dental, and related services; consultation and exchange of information with learned men; an appreciation of the impact a research team may have on a community; an assessment of the values that remain after the research team departs; and, of course, cooperation with the officials and agencies of the national authority to which the people are responsible (WHO, 1964, pp. 24-25). The immediate practical benefits of being studied by teams of dentists, serologists, child-growth specialists, geneticists, nutritionists, anthropologists, et al., is often enhanced by the opportunity to train a member of the community who may continue some data

collection and who may use this skill as a source of future compensation or entry to an academic institution. Genetic information as well as general health information is sometimes sought by members of the community as well as local government officials, and the same standards of accuracy and discretion should be applied to all.
A second area in which an ethical obligation is apparent is in the training of the students and other personnel for participation in an international program. Education in human biology of the species, where the genetic unity of the species and understanding of all the variation contained within it is the frame of reference, is an honest and scientifically unqualified undertaking. One of the effective by-products is dissipation of fallacious concepts emerging from the typological models still in use, treatment of human variation in a nonhierarchical reticulum, or the implication that various populations must undergo mixture in order to advance. It is far more effective and much faster to insert scientific and testable ideas into peoples' heads than to delete erroneous ideas already lodged there. The positive facts of evolutionary species biology and the methods for securing and testing them are of value to all members of the species, and they provide the only known basis for intelligently counteracting the arguments of racists and environmentalists.
A third area is that of the reactions to a false dilemma posed by belief in hierarchy and by our egalitarian ethic. The common tendency to read hierarchy into phenomena that are nonhierarchical, and our existing corpus of literature and beliefs in which this "Great Chain of Being" is applied to humans within the species, coupled with the simultaneous espousal of a belief in the worth of

Vol. 13, No. 3

Human Adaptability

255

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

all individuals, should not induce us to eschew biobehavioral studies dealing with differences in maturation rates, various kinds of learning, and other special aptitudes. Variation in aptitudes does not indicate position on an ascending scale, any more than underpigmentation indicates position on a hierarchical phylogenetic scale. It does indicate that different populations have emphasized different as well as similar foci in the biobehavioral reticulum as these have been relevant to their adaptive needs and evolutionary history--a reticulum common to the entire species, whose basic elements are found in all groups. An isomorphic analogy is the difference between males and females, ranging from the molecular to the derivative behavioral characteristics. The differences may be considered minor, but there is cause for rejoicing that they exist at all. It would obviously be inapplicable to configure a study of males and females in terms of an ascending scale of nature.
No single scale or frequency is adequate to characterize a population, and tests designed for one population may be inapplicable to all others. All groups need the information resident in other groups, because no single population or national unit contains an adequate sample of the variability of the entire species in forms that we can presently study. The answers to many fundamental biological questions cannot be secured by more intensive study of one or even several populations.
VIII. GUIDELINES FOR INTERNATIONAL
BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH AND TRAINING
A meaningful study of those parameters of the human species with which we are here concerned must include its total range of physical environments, genetic partitioning, and conditions of rearing and culture. As presently con-

ceived, the International Biological

Program is potentially a major compiler

of the history of the human species. Its

wider role depends upon the produc-

tivity of all the sections in the program,

for they will all provide information

relevant to the understanding of human

adaptability. Competent researchers are

already at work in the various partici-

pating nations on important problems.

A major problem will be to attract and

develop new ideas and projects in the

face of a real shortage of scientists and

facilities for training them. Much help

may be expected from international

agencies such as UNESCO and WHO,

which have considerable experience in

international research. In the final

analysis, the actual research will be sup-

ported by particular nations and indi-

viduals. The momentum of interna-

tional research may exceed the number

of individuals not already committed

and the number of persons who already

have adequate training. We would sug-

gest that priorities should go to new

ideas involving genuinely international

collaboration and cooperation, with spe-

cial attention given to those elements of

urgency arising from both conservational

exigencies and from the crucial nature

of fundamental problems. These may

be epitomized simply as (1) hypothesis

testers, (2) hypothesis generators, and

(3) studies investigating poorly known

parts of the human biobehavioral reticu-

lum which require development of in-

strumentation and interpretation free of

the two common biases: (a) population

bias, reflected in limitation of tests or ob-

servations that have optimum reliability

only on the population for which they

were developed, and (b) interpretative

bias, in which inaccurate and inapplica-

ble ideas of hierarchical arrangement

persist.

'

Basic questions are multitudinous

256

Ginsburg and Laughlin

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

and can best be posed by the researchers who are concerned to answer them. Is an increase of homozygosis harmful per se or only for particular loci? Under what conditions may hybrid vigor be manifested? What is the evidence of actual deterioration reflected in consanguinity models? What are the genetic effects, as well as the ecological ones, of impulsive breeding or relaxation of birth control measures? Is there significant genetic variation in length of gestation and in maturity of the human infant at birth? Do conditions of very early rearing have important differential effects on later behavior of humans, as they do in other mammals; and do similar conditions of rearing produce differing outcomes depending on both the genotype and later cultural influences? Are somatotype-morbidity data congruent in populations between which there has been negligible gene flow? Are there indigenous differences in incidence and patterns of mental illness among diverse ethnocultural intersects? Are there differences in perceptual and motor abilities between populations, and if so, have these resulted in effective differences in educational practices that exploit such variation in abilities? Are the basics of human behavior so predetermined biologically that variations in cultural practices have little influence upon them? If not, do cultural practices compensate for the normal range of variability in order to homogenize human social behavior? Can a child from a primitive culture, if raised from infancy in a highly specialized one, become an effective member of the latter, behaviorally--and is the Tarzan of popular lore a reasonable probability?
Many other questions could be formulated, and most suggest the societies and circumstances in which they can best be studied. Most are feasible for

study. In fact, numerous social and educational practices both here and abroad (i.e., the Headstart program, hospital nursery procedures for normal and premature infants, sperm donor programs, and many other conditions of human husbandry) are either based on assumed answers to the above questions or provide conditions under which scientific studies of these problems could be carried out if the right investigating teams were fielded.
In addition to the need for well worked out human data dealing with the range of behavioral capacities of genetically diverse groups in various social contexts, there is a need for more comparative data on the infrahuman origins of intelligence, emotionality, and social behavior. In this comparative realm there has been a temptation to forget what has been learned with respect to the evolution of morphological adaptation and to infer homologies from similarities in behavior among taxonomically related groups. The gorilla, the baboon, and the rhesus monkey are all highly specialized primates whose social behavior may as easily represent specialized side branches of the evolutionary tree to which we humans trace our biobehavioral capacities, as to the main stem. Studies of other social species such as wolves, dogs, sea otters, and even rats and mice, may add as much of relevance for the understanding of human behavior to the comparative picture as primate studies. Similarities in behavior between various representatives of the primates, where adaptive, may represent convergence rather than common origin, so that, fascinating and excellent as many of these researches have been in their own right, their utility for the evaluation of the origins of human behavior remains to be determined in the context of further com-

Vol. 13,No. 3

Human Adaptability

257

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

parative studies--including studies of
human primitives, additional primate
groups under both natural and labora-
tory conditions, and other social
mammals.
REFERENCES
BAKER, PAUL T., 1962. The application of eco-
logical theory to anthropology. Amer. Anthropologist, 64 (1) Part 1: 15-22.
CLAUSEN, J. A., and B. E. GINSBURG, 1958. Genetic
and cultural characteristics. Eugen. Quart., 5 (2): 95-104 (see p. 101). CROW, J. F., 1961. Mechanisms and trends in human evolution. Daedalus, 90 (3): 416431. DOBZHANSKY, T., 1964. Heredity and the Nature of Man. Harcourt, Brace and World, Inc., New York.
ERLENMEYER-KIMLING, L., and L. F. JARVIK, 1963.
Genetics and intelligence: A review. Science, 142: 1477-1479. FREUD, S., 1935. A General Introduction to Psychoanalysis. Garden City Publishing Co., Garden City, New York (see p. 22 and lecture 10).
FULLER, J. L., and W. R. THOMPSON, 1960. Be-
havior Genetics. John Wiley andSons,Inc., New York and London. GARDNER, R.W., 1966. "Genetics and Personality Theory." In S. G. Vandenberg (ed.), Methods and Goals in Human Behavior Genetics. Academic Press, New York. GINSBURG, B.E., 1958. Genetics as a tool inthe study of behavior. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 1 (4): 397-424.
, 1963. "Genetics and Personality." In J. M. Wepman and R. W. Heine (eds.), Concepts of Personality. Aldine Pub. Co., Chicago, Ill., pp. 63-78. GLASS, H. B., and C. C. Li, 1953. The dynamics of racial intermixture: Ananalysis based on the American Negro. Amer. J. Hum. Genet., 5 : 1-20. GOLDSCHMIDT, E. (ed.), 1963. The Genetics of Migrant and Isolate Populations. Williams and Wilkins Co., New York. INGLE, D., 1964. Racial differences and thefuture. Science, 146 (3642): 375-379. LAUGHLIN, W. S., 1963. "Primitive Theory of Medicine: Empirical Knowledge." In I. Galdston (ed.), Man's Image in Medicine and Anthropology. Monograph IV, Institute of Social and Historic Medicine, pp. 116-140.
, 1964. Races of mankind: Continental andlocal. Anthropological Papers of the University of Alaska, 8 (2): 89-99. Reprinted in G. W.Lasker (ed.), Physical Anthropology 1953-1961, Year Book of Physical Anthropology, Vol. 9. LUSH, J. L., 1945. Animal Breeding Plans. Iowa State College Press, Ames, Iowa (see esp. chap.21).

MAYR, ERNST, 1963. Animal Species and Evolution. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
MEAD, M., 1958. "Cultural Determinants of Behavior." In A.R. Simpson andG. G.Simpson (eds.), Behavior and Evolution. Yale University Press, NewHaven, pp. 480-503.
, 1962. "Retrospects and Prospects." In Thomas Gladwin and William C.Sturtevant (eds.), Anthropology and Human Behavior. The Anthropological Society of Washington, pp. 115-149. NEEL, J., 1958. The study of natural selection in primitive and civilized human populations. Hum. Biol., 30 (1):43-72. PARSONS, P. S., 1964. Interaction within and between chromosomes. J. Theoret. Biol., 6 (2): 208-216. PENROSE, L. S., 1950. "Genetics of the Human Race." In L. C.Dunn (ed.), Genetics in the 20th Century. Macmillan, New York, pp. 393-399.
SHIELDS, J., and E. SLATER, 1960. Heredity and
psychological abnormality. In H.J. Eysenck (ed.), Handbook of Abnormal Psychology. Pitman Medical Publishing Co., Ltd., London, pp. 298-343.
SIMPSON, G. G., 1964. Organisms and molecules in evolution. Science, 146 (3651): 15351548.
SPUHLER, J. N., and P. J. CLARK, 1961. Migration
into the human breeding population of Ann Arbor, Michigan, 1900-1950. Hum. Biol, 33 (3): 223-236.
STEWARD, J. H., and D. B. SHIMKIN, 1962. "Some
Mechanisms of Sociocultural Evolution." In H. Hoagland andR. W.Burhoe (eds.),Evolution and Man's Progress. Columbia University Press, New York and London, pp. 67-37.
STOCKARD, C. R., 1941. The Genetic andEndocrine Basis forDifferences in Form and Behavior. Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology, Philadelphia.
THIESSEN, D. D., 1965. Stickleback zigzags to monomorphic marking. Contemp. Psychol., 10 (6): 246-248.
THORPE, W. H., 1956. Learning and Instinct in Animals. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
UNESCO, 1965. UNESCO Conference Report, August 18, 1964. Proposals on thebiological aspects of race. UNESCO Courier, April 1965, pp. 8-11.
WASHBURN, S., and W. SHIREK, 1966. "Human
Evolution." In J. Hirsch (ed.), Genetics and Behavior. McGraw-Hill, New York (in press).
WHO, 1964. Research in Population Genetics of Primitive Groups. World Health Organization Technical Report Series No. 279, Geneva.
WRIGHT, S., 1939. Statistical Genetics in Relation to Evolution. Herman and Cie,eds., Paris (see esp. pp. 58-60). , 1953. Gene and organism. Amer. Natur., 87 (832): 5-18.

