Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Proposed organization for family planning based on eugenic counseling
Willard J. Hoyt
To cite this article: Willard J. Hoyt (1964) Proposed organization for family planning based on eugenic counseling, Eugenics Quarterly, 11:4, 249-249, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1964.9987597 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1964.9987597
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

Communication

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

PROPOSED ORGANIZATION FOR FAMILY PLANNING BASED ON EUGENIC COUNSELING

Dear Sir:
It is proposed that an operating eugenic movement be established so that people can take the facts of heredity into consideration in their own lives. This would be an international organization with affiliated national associations. Membership would be open to young married couples and unmarried individuals and also to anyone else willing to support the movement.
To the young couples coming in, the procedure will be as follows: After classes in the necessary scientific subjects to understand the movement and its functions, those who wish to participate will take physical and mental tests, along with their close relatives if possible. The results of these tests will enable a selected panel, taking all the known facts into consideration, to make an estimate of the genetic potential which might be expected of their children compared with those of the others of the group, in a linear progression. This would be done in the same way that genetic counselors at the present time give an estimate of genetic potential with respect to defects and deficiencies, but participants and their kin would be tested as well for intelligence, longevity, physical wellbeing and other qualities as tests are developed of sufficient validity.
The panel that will choose the tests will be elected by the participants in such a way as to secure the best scientific judgment possible with current knowledge. They will also do what they can to promote the increase in that knowledge, especially where most needed.

With the results of the tests it will be possible for a participating couple to use this information in planning the size of their family. Advice can be given on a number of children for the circumstances that will insure a reasonable rate of evolution. There should also be a corresponding maximum number. If any couple exceeds that number, taking multiple births into account, they could no longer call themselves participants.
It should be possible for a couple to have at least one child except where, for example, there is one chance in two of such an hereditary defect as Huntington's Chorea. For lesser risks, the maximum might be one child, or two, or three, as the case might be, up to an unlimited number on the best prognosis.
The organization should be able on request to give information on birth control, AID, etc. In the case of artificial insemination, care should be given to seeing that the donors are of the highest quality available, and this could, of course, change the expected genetic potential of the children.
It can be seen that this is basically an organization of the concerned banded together in such a way that they can do the utmost for those not yet born.
Anyone interested or desiring more information, please contact the writer at the address below.
Sincerely yours,
WILLARD J . HOYT
R.D. # 2 Castleton on Hudson
New York

249

