Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Heredity counseling
Alan F. Guttmacher M. D.
To cite this article: Alan F. Guttmacher M. D. (1954) Heredity counseling, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:3, 191-192, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987191 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987191
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

HEREDITY COUNSELING
Diabetes, Pregnancy and Modern Medicine: A Genetic Misadventure
ALAN F. GUTTMACHER, M. D.
Director of Obstetrics and Gynecology The Mount Sinai Hospital New York City

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

I H E THOUGHTFUL PHYSICIAN is forced to make many illogical, frequently disturbing decisions, during the course of professional duties. In many instances the rights and happiness of the individual clash with the ultimate welfare of the community. Not knowing what is in my mind, I fear the reader will charge me with philosophic ambiguities unless I hasten to illustrate.
A young woman presents herself to the diabetic clinic of the hispital with the statement that she is a monozygotic (identical) twin. She has been a diabetic for six years, but as yet her co-twin, who was studied carefully, shows neither the disease nor its prodromita. However, both sisters have had the singular misfortune of having had three unsuccessful pregnancies ending in spontaneous abortion during the first half of gestation. What would the animal breeder do with such dams? He would weed them from his flock; they are bad "reproducers" and if, perchance, they should succeed in "dropping" living young, the progeny may be "tainted," or if normal may perpetuate a "taint" in his herd.
What does the physician do? What did we do? We studied each twin meticulously in an attempt to unravel the mystery of the abortions. Our investigations included a hysterogram, an x-ray of the uterus after fulling its cavity with a radiopaque fluid. We premised that the twins may have an identical, surgically correctable malformation of the uterus. They did not, nor did we find any other explanation for the abortions.
Shortly thereafter, with full medical blessing, both again became pregnant. The

diabetic twin began to stain at the eighth week and was admitted to a hospital bed, where she remained, flat on her back, in an effort to thwart nature. After 20 weeks and an expense of $2000, borne wholly by the hospital, the patient went into labor and expelled a sick, very premature infant with severe stigmata of maternal diabetes. It died in four hours. The non-diabetic co-twin is approaching term as this article is written.
The fecundity suddenly bestowed upon the diabetic in 1922 by the boon of insulin is not a pure blessing, certainly not a genetic blessing. Since then, diabetic parents have been multiplied many fold and potential diabetic offspring to even a gieater number. At The Mount Sinai Hospital, where the author is director of obstetrics and gynecology, at one time recently, its special obstetric-diabetic clinic had 13 pregnant diabetics under supervision. This does not include probably a similar number of pregnant diabetics who had their own private physicians, did not attend the clinic and who also will deliver at Mount Sinai. Mark you, this is the experience of just one large hospital among many in New York.
Even if given very special care, the pregnant woman with diabetes has miserable fetal salvage. Her involuntary abortion rate is 15 per cent in place of the usual 10 per cent and her fetal loss from fetal death during pregnancy and labor added to newborn deaths during the first month of life amounts to at least another 20 per cent, instead of the usual 3 to 4 per cent. In summary, when a diabetic woman under-

191

192 Eugenics Quarterly-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

takes pregnancy, she has less than a 65 per cent likelihood of bearing a surviving child, in contrast to her non-diabetic neighbor, who has an 86.5 per cent chance. Another problem associated with maternal diabetes is the fact that congenital malformations are approximately three times as frequent among her offspring.
Nature seems to be crying: Don't let the diabetic woman reproduce herselfl Despite nature's intelligent genetic viewpoint, modern medicine is doing all within its power to thwart her. And I charge myself with being among the most guilty.
Why? Because the diabetic woman has the same insatiable urge for motherhood as the normal woman. Inability or inadvisability to mother offspring leaves her with the same sense of frustration as any other woman. The doctor who declines to aid her on eugenic grounds would have a petrified heart. The childless diabetic woman's plight is made worse by the attitude of child adoption agencies toward her physical handicap. They prefer to place children in the homes of physically normal parents who have a full life expectancy. Since the demand on most agencies is at

least 12 times the supply, few diabetic parents are given children to adopt.
Diabetes is recognized as an inheritable disease, but there is mixed opinion about whether it is transmitted as a dominant or a recessive. What will be the cacogenic sequelae from the special care given to diabetic women to increase fetal salvage? I leave the answer to the professional geneticist. As an obstetrician I simply state the problem. Before 1922, patients with diabetes rarely got pregnant and when they did, in half of the cases neither mother nor child survived. Today at one hospital, approximately 25 pregnant diabetics are now being given prenatal care, which means that in the same institution in the course of the year 50 diabetic women will either abort, lose their babies, or give birth to living surviving children. It is almost 100 per cent certain that all the mothers will survive and that the 50 women will suceed in taking home 33 to 40 infants. Those women who fail will be back next year to try again. Those who succeed will probably return in two years to test their luck again, aided and abetted by the science of modern medicine.

