Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Future population prospects in the United States
Warren S. Thompson
To cite this article: Warren S. Thompson (1954) Future population prospects in the United States, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:4, 240-243, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987202 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987202
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

FUTURE POPULATION PROSPECTS IN THE UNITED STATES*
WARREN S. THOMPSON

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

T..HE CONCLUSION any student will arrive
at regarding the population prospects (meaning, I take it, the prospect for change in numbers) in any given area will depend upon his evaluation of the changes likely to take place in the three demographic variables-- (1) the birth rate, (2) the death rate and (3) the volume, the direction, and the character of the net migration.
In most western countries, and increasingly in many others, there is a strong belief that, assuming no great unforeseeable catastrophe, the death rate is coming under such a measure of control that it is not difficult to project the number of survivors from any given cohort of the population of today into the future for two or three decades, with reasonable accuracy. This confidence is further strengthened since calculations, based on different, but reasonable, death rates show that the variations in the size of the population derived from the use of these different death rates are comparatively small. Under these circumstances in the writer's opinion any set of age specific death rates which would be considered reasonable by several well-informed students would be satisfactory in trying to assess our population prospects in the United States during the next two or three decades.
With only a few exceptions during the past century and a quarter there has been an excess of persons entering this country over those leaving it. This excess has varied greatly from time to time especially before the quota laws were put into effect. The chief variations have been closely as-
*Presented at the World Population Conference in Rome, September 1954.

sociated with the ups and downs in economic activity although wars have also exercised much influence. Aside from severe economic depression and war the volume of net migration is, in the writer's opinion, likely to remain near the quota level during the next two or three decades. The quota policy now seems to be well established. Besides, calculations on several sets of assumptions regarding the effect of migration on future population prospects can be made so that at any given time that one can be used which accords best with actual or prospective immigration.
The third variable, the birth rate, as we are learning every day, is itself a consequence of so many other variables that at best we can only guess at what it will be a few months hence to say nothing of what it will be over a period of some years. Unlike the death rate which appears to become more stable with increasing control over disease, the birth rate seems to become more variable as the voluntary control over the size of the family becomes more assured. Recent experience in the United States has made us all aware that variations in economic conditions have a strong effect on the birth rate both because they tend to increase marriage when they are good and discourage it when they are hard and because they encourage married people to raise their families sooner after marriage when times are good and to prolong the period during which the children are born when times are hard.
We are also learning, or at least it seems so to the writer, that there may be such a thing as a pattern of thought, a style, so to speak, which can quickly affect the age at which people want to marry, the strength

240

241

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

of the desire to marry and perhaps even exert a decisive influence on the size of the family desired. The writer believes that this change is itself chiefly a consequence of economic changes. But whatever the cause (s) may be the fact is that we have never had such an increase in marriages and such a reduction in the age at marriage and such an increase in births as has taken place since 1940. But this fact seems to the writer to have led many people to the rather hasty conclusion that the young people of today have abandoned much of the control over the size of their families which their parents exercised, or that they have deliberately decided to raise larger families. Both of these changes may have occurred but several points need careful consideration before they are accepted as facts on which to base a judgment regarding the prospects of future growth. These points can only be summarized here.
In the first place, marrying at a younger age is by no means proof of an effective desire for a larger family. It may just as well reflect the widespread acceptance of the fact that the size of the family can be rather easily controlled and, therefore, there is no good reason not to marry at an earlier age. Today earlier marriage does not necessarily exercise a decisive influence over the size of the family.
In the second place, the reasonable certainty that the size of the family can be controlled may have been the deciding factor in the minds of many young couples in planning to have their children within a shorter time after marriage than has bee customary in the recent past. In addition, the fact that times have been good during and since the war has, without doubt, rendered economic conditions of comparatively small importance in the minds of many young people in spacing their children at intervals of more than two to three years.
In the third place, the increase in the proportion of the women 15-44 years of age who were married, from 62.9 per cent

in 1940 to 70.7 per cent in 1950, a proportional increase of over one-eighth, was certain to have a pronounced effect on the birth rate even though there were no changes in the average size of the family, especially since the largest increases in proportions married took place at ages 15-24. At these ages the likelihood of conception is greatest. There is some reason to believe, however, quite aside from economic considerations, that the increasing proportion of persons completing high school and continuing with advanced training in colleges and professional schools will soon place a floor under the age at marriage for an increasing proportion of our population.
It should be noted in this connection that if the age at marriage remains as low as at present and if families are completed to a given size at an earlier age than in the past the length of a generation will decrease and this will lead to a longer period of overlapping between grandparents and their grandchildren and thus add to the population even if the number of births does not increase.
On the other hand, the reduction of the age at marriage has been an important factor in keeping the marriage rate high. As soon as the reduction in the age at marriage ceases, or even becomes slower, the marriage rate will decline because the persons marrying will no longer come, in part, from younger age groups which had not been marrying in the past. The decline in the marriage rate since 1950 may be due, in part, to this factor, although the relatively small cohorts now coming to marriageable age because of the low birth rates during the 1930's is the prime factor. But these small cohorts have already been depleted to some extent by early marriage. The number of new families that will be established during the next few years will, therefore, fall off rather sharply for purely demographic reasons.
It is a sound scientific principle not to

242 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

call on unknown factors in explaining a situation until one is certain that the known factors are inadequate to do so. Hence, it seems to the writer that much of the talk about larger families is out of place until the effects of the purely demographic factors in raising the birth rate have been evaluated more exactly.
In addition, it should not be forgotten that these purely demographic changes are themselves the consequences of previous social and economic changes.
It is not difficult, of course, to project the number of births that will occur to the women aged 15-19, 20-24, etc., in 1970 or 1975 if we assume that each 1,000 of them will have the same number of births, or a specified proportion of this number, in 1970 or 1975, as in 1950, since the number of women who will be aged 20 and over in 1975 can be predicted with reasonable accuracy because all of them except those aged 20 and 21 in 1975, are already born and the additions to them by immigration can be assumed without any considerable error. Such calculations are well worth doing on the basis of several different assumptions, but it must be realized that there is very little basis for judging how realistic these assumptions regarding birth rates will prove to be. We do not know what social and economic changes will take place during the next 20 years nor how they will affect the birth rates of the people already born to say nothing of how many will be aged 18-21 in 1975, i.e., those to be born 1954-57, many of whom will be contributing to births at that time.
The cohort method of studying fertility will help to define the pattern of the birth rate and the changes in this pattern more clearly than this could be done in the past. Such studies may also enable us to anticipate with some degree of assurance several years in advance of menopause whether the completed fertility of a particular cohort of women is likely to be greater or less than that of a younger or

older cohort. This is all to the good, and by focusing attention on the size of the completed family will enable us to evaluate the effects of social and economic changes upon the actual reproductive behavior of women during marriage (their life time) especially if the size of the family should prove to be fairly constant.
The writer would not for a moment argue that there could not be a rather sudden increase in the size of the average completed family, but he does believe that if such a change is taking place it is the consequence of changes in social and economic conditions. Believing this he also believes that social and economic changes having exactly opposite effects can also take place just as quickly, and under the demographic conditions now prevailing a decline in the marriage rate and an advance in the age at marriage might be even more abrupt than the changes in the opposite direction which took place in the 1940's. On the other hand, the more secure the control over the size of the family becomes the less likely it is that the marriage rate and the age at marriage will fluctuate widely and the more likely it is that the crude and age-specific birth rates will vary considerably within relatively short periods of time. This makes the projection of population growth over comparatively short periods an increasingly hazardous enterprise. The reason for this lies essentially in the relatively long period of married life during which a couple can space the children it chooses to have if it is assumed that comparatively few families will have more than four children and that the age at marriage for a large proportion of women remains in the early twenties.
Under these assumptions but with very considerable uncertainty regarding the continuance of the economic conditions which have encouraged young married people to have their families soon after marriage, the prospects of population growth in the United States which lie

243

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ahead are very uncertain if a specific forecast is desired. There are, however, certain factors in future growth which can be indicated with reasonable certainty.
In the first place, there is a period of several years immediately ahead of us during which the number of first marriages will be relatively small and unless it turns out that a rather large increase in the size of the average family is taking place the smaller number of births to be expected from a decline in the number of new families being established will reduce the number of births considerably during the next few years. Moreover, even a mild economic depression will still further reduce the number of births for a few years. (There appears to have been a marked decline in the number of marriages in November and December, 1953.) After about 1960-62 the increase in births following 1940 should lead to a rapid increase in the number of marriages and the number of births will increase even though age specific birth rates should decline considerably. Thus the period 1965-75 should witness a fairly large increase in births as compared with the period 1955-65 even if there were no change in the size of the family. The most uncertain element, of course, lies in the economic changes which may affect the birth rate very quickly.
The writer is moderately optimistic regarding the probability of a population growth of 10 to 12 per cent per decade during the ensuing two or three decades. He has no difficulty, therefore, in accepting the recent projection of the Bureau of the Census labeled "C" and which yields a total population of approximately 206 millions in 1975, as a fairly reasonable guess. This view assumes, of course, that economic conditions will not arise which render people so uncertain regarding their ability to support a moderate-sized family that they will reduce this size rather abruptly. To say more than this seems to the writer to accept as facts certain as-

sumptions which must remain assumptions until a great deal more is known about the interrelations of social and economic conditions and reproductive behavior.
The writer is not disposed at present to invoke the basic economic difficulties that will arise in caring for a population some 45 to 50 millions larger than at present as a reason for believing the rate of growth will fall much below 1 per cent per year because he believes poverty can be largely eliminated even in this larger population and the level of living of the one-third or one-half now having lower incomes can be substantially raised if we use our resources and technology wisely and effectively. But he is, of course, very uncertain that periods will not be encountered when considerable bodies of men will be unemployed and hence, cannot use their time to produce the goods and services which would insure them and their families a decent living. Under such conditions he is convinced that the birth rate will again fall as it did during the 1930's, perhaps even more rapidly, and that population will grow at a slower rate than 10 to 12 per cent in a decade. It seems doubtful to him, however, that even better economic conditions than the nation has experienced since 1940 are likely to raise the rate of growth to any considerable extent, especially if the improvements in living conditions should be largest in those portions of the population in which they are now the most needed. The most needy portions of the population still have the highest birth rates, and better living conditions for them will probably result in lower birth rates in these groups. The decline in their birth rates will only be partly compensated for by higher rates in the families already in good circumstances, but on the whole it does not seem unreasonable to the writer to look forward to an increase of 40 to 50 millions by 1975 if we do not have another depression and if we keep our people employed.

