Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Institutional patterns favoring high fertility in underdeveloped areas
Kingsley Davis
To cite this article: Kingsley Davis (1955) Institutional patterns favoring high fertility in underdeveloped areas, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:1, 33-39, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987218 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987218
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 22
View related articles Citing articles: 31 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

INSTITUTIONAL PATTERNS FAVORING HIGH FERTILITY IN UNDERDEVELOPED AREAS

KINGSLEY DAVIS
Columbia University

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

IRACTICALLY ALL OF THE world's underdeveloped areas, embracing something like three-fourths of the world's population, still have high birth rates, that is, more than 30 births per 1000 inhabitants annually and more than 4 births per woman during her reproductive life. In fact, the rates in many underdeveloped areas today are about as high as they have ever been.
In explaining why the rates are so high, we have to ask two questions: First, why were birth rates high in the past? .Second, why are they that way now?
The answer to the first question is found, interestingly enough, in the death rate. Until twenty to eighty years ago, depending on the area in question, death rates were extremely high by modern standards. The underdeveloped societies therefore had to have a high fertility to match their high mortality, else they would not survive. Probably many societies in the past failed to survive, their members being killed off faster than they could reproduce. The societies we know about today are necessarily the ones that did survive. They did so because they evolved an institutional structure having an incentive system strong enough to induce their people to reproduce abundantly.
In recent times, however, the necessity imposed by a high mortality has tended to disappear. The death rate in most underdeveloped areas has been declining for a considerable period, and in many it has dropped rapidly in recent years, often faster than it ever did in the now industrialized countries. As a result, many of these areas have today a death rate almost as low as that of industrial nations. In Ceylon, for

example, the crude death rate fell by 43
per cent in four years (it was 22.0 per 1000
in 1945, and 12.6 in 1949--and had reached
11.6 in 1951). In Puerto Rico it declined
by 46 per cent during the ten years from
1940 to 1950, the rate now resembling that
in continental United States; and during
the same decade in Formosa it declined by
42 per cent. Comparable reductions have
been experienced in parts of the British
Caribbean and in parts of Latin America
and Africa.
The phenomenally rapid drops in mortality in recent years have generally come on the heels of longer but less spectacular declines in the past. Consequently, our second question is peculiarly relevant -- why, in the absence of the necessity that once existed, has the institutional structure of economically retarded areas continued to support a high rate of reproduction?
In beginning an answer to this second question, one must recall that the underdeveloped regions are still in the peasantagricultural stage of development.1 This is the stage of economic progress that most of them have been in for many centuries, the stage to which their institutional structure
1To be clear as to what is meant by "underdeveloped," we draw the line in terms of the occupational structure. A country with more than 50 per cent of its gainfully employed males occupied in agriculture, fishing, and forestry, we designate as underdeveloped. On this basis, three-fourths of the world's people and three fourths of its area are in countries in this category. See the writer's paper, "Population and the Further Spread of Industrial Society," Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 95 (Feb. 13, 1951), pp. 8-19. For the most part the underdeveloped societies are not primitive. Only a small portion of the world's inhabitants live in societies without any literacy and without other accoutrements of modern civilization.

33

34 Eugenics Quarterly-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

is accordingly well adapted. The rise of industrial nations elsewhere in the world has had an impact on the less advanced areas; it has brought commerce and political change, and it has brought, as we have seen, a marked decline in mortality. But it has not fundamentally altered the agrarian character of the society and to this extent has not forced a change in the institutional structure. Supported by time-honored agrarian conditions, the social organization has retained many of its elaborate mechanisms for inducing a high rate of reproduction. It has done so even though a high birth rate, once functional, has now become strictly disfunctional.
To push the inquiry further, we must try to understand the particular institutional patterns which, in agrarian societies, give rise to this high but disfunctional fertility. Important and clear-cut as the problem is, it has been the subject of surprisingly little research, with the result that misleading theories still persist. Furthermore, since the backward areas embrace cultures of great diversity, students of social structure have been overly impressed and distracted by cultural differences among these areas, overlooking the basic uniformities underlying the surface variations. In other words, if nearly all underdeveloped areas have in common a high fertility, the mechanisms by which they reach this result doubtless also have some things in common. It thus seems wise to look for the deeper uniformities.
In analyzing the institutional factors responsible for fertility, one finds the main key in the family, for human society accomplishes the function of bearing, nourishing, and socializing children primarily through the universal instrumentality of the nuclear family.2 It is through the relations of the

nuclear family to the rest of society, then, that we can expect to find the social factors controlling the level of fertility.
Effect of the Composite Family and Joint Household
In primitive and agrarian societies, as is well known, the nuclear family is less independent of the wider kinship structure than it is in industrial societies. Its formation through marriage, its economic position, and the conduct of its members are all governed by elder relatives to a greater degree. In sociological terms, the nuclear family of procreation tends in agrarian societies to be controlled by other kinship groups, notably by the two families of orientation.
One common arrangement in terms of which such control is facilitated is the joint household, which arises when the newly married couple are required to live with the parents of one or the other partner. Such an arrangement is quite prevalent in underdeveloped areas,3 but even where it is absent the nuclear family tends to dwell close to and be under the surveillance of the in-laws. Furthermore, it is not simply a matter of dwelling arrangements and social control but also a matter of economic solidarity. The joint household and the composite family often function as an economic unit.
Given this subordination and incorporation of the nuclear family by wider kinship groups, several consequences tend to follow which are conducive to abundant reproduction.
1. The economic cost of rearing children does not impinge directly on the parents to the same extent that it does where the nuclear family is a more independent unit. With a common household and a joint

2The term "nuclear family" is used by Geo. P. Murdock, Social Structure (New York: Macmillan, 1949), Ch. 1, to describe the unit consisting of mother, father, and children. This unit has also been variously characterized as the "primary" or "immediate" family, as in the works of Lloyd Warner.

3For the 159 societies for which he secured adequate information on residence and inheritance rules, Murdock found 149 to require residence with extended relatives. Op. cit., p. 38. The majority of these societies, 98 in all, required patrilocal residence. It is hard, however, to reconcile his table on p. 38 with that on p. 32, where the proportion of "independent" families is higher.

35

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

economy, with three or more generations
present, one's own child draws out of the
general exchequer, not out of his parents'
income alone.
2. The inconvenience and effort of child care do not fall so heavily on the parents alone. With grandparents, aunts, uncles, and older cousins in the household, the care of the young children may be so distributed among the entire menage that no particular strain is put upon the parents. In fact, as has often been pointed out, the joint household is an excellent arrangement whereby young mothers, in the prime of life and thus capable of maximum productivity, are freed during working hours for work in the fields or in handicraft, while older women and older children, less productive economically, look after the infants and younger children. Thus the mother's maternal function does not have to compete with her economic function as in an industrial society.
3. The age at marriage can be quite young, because, under joint household conditions, there is no necessary implication that the husband must be "able to support a wife and family" before he gets married. In this respect there seems to have been a difference between West European society, even prior to industrialism, and that of most other parts of the pre-industrial world. The historian, Russell, has pointed out that in the Middle Ages there was a tradition linking the nuclear family with a piece of land adequate to maintain the family.
In each village there were usually a certain number of holdings of similar character which required the efforts of a mature male, physically and mentally; about thirty acres of land together with a quota of animals upon the manor. . . . Obviously only the full holdings could be expected to care for a family satisfactorily in the eyes of the lay population. Thus naturally marriage would be restricted to those who had holdings. . . . The principle of no holding, no marriage, operated as a fairly effective check upon population increase. The conditions of mortality tended to make the average age of

marriage for the young men vary between twenty-two and twenty-five years. It also meant that the weak in mind or body were not permitted to marry. . ..*
Thus West European society tended to set the nuclear family apart a long time ago -- a fact which is borne out by Western legal history, kinship terminology, and courtship custom. As Western peoples became more commercial and more urban, the rule that land is necessary to form a marriage became extended to mean that a job is necessary. In this way, as commercial and industrial positions came to require apprenticeship and training, and as land became scarce, the way was paved for the postponement of marriage to fairly advanced ages.5 The more one looks into the matter, the more it appears that the structure of the family in Western industrial societies is not wholly a product of urban-industrialism but is in part a product of cultural peculiarities extending back at least into Medieval times. In fact, it can be argued that the West European family structure was one factor in the origin of the industrial revolution in Northwestern Europe.
Family organization in non-European . agrarian societies, however, is different from that of pre-industrial Europe. Especially in Asia, it often embodies the principles of joint residence and joint economic responsibility. Furthermore, the parents in many of these societies are morally obligated to find mates for their children and to marry them at an early age. In the patrilocal joint household the bride simply joins her husband's family and the groom continues to live there. The bride can contribute to the
4Josiah C. Russell, "Demographic Values in the Middle Ages," in Geo. F. Mair (ed)., Studies In Population (Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1949), p. 104.
5Such postponement, especially noticeable in the latter half of the nineteenth and early twentieth century, was carried to an extreme in Ireland and the Scandinavian countries. See David V. Glass (ed.), Introduction to Malthus (London: Watts, 1953), pp. 25-54; Conrad M. Arensberg and Solon T. Kimball, Family and Community in Ireland (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1940); John Hajnal, "The Marriage Boom," Population Index, Vol. 19 (April 1953), pp. 80-101.

36 Eugenics Quarterly-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

joint economy even though young, and the groom is not required to be financially independent. In India, in 1891, nearly a fifth of the girls below 15 years of age, and 89 per cent of those aged 15-19, had been married. The marriage age in India is rising, but as late as 1951 nearly 10 per cent of Indian girls under 15 and threefourths of those 15-19 had been married.6 In such countries as India, Korea, Formosa, and Turkey, practically no women 20--24 are single. It is obvious that, other things equal, the younger the age at marriage, the higher the ultimate fertility, especially since a woman's reproductive capacity is apparently greatest in her late teens and early twenties.
4. With an emphasis on kin solidarity the compulsion to marry is often quite strong. Especially with patrilocal residence arrangements, the daughter may be viewed as a potential liability to her family of orientation, to be satisfactorily married at all costs. From the standpoint of the groom's family, a marriage represents not only an alliance with another strong family line but also an essential means of expand-
. ing one's own agnatic line. The necessity of getting one's children married may indeed be viewed as a religious and moral obligation. As a consequence, fewer persons go through life without marrying than in the case of the industrial nations. In fact, in India in 1891, a higher proportion of women aged 20-24 had been married (97.3 per cent) than were ever married by any age in Western countries. In Denmark in 1787, for example, only 91 per cent of the women aged 45-49 had ever been married; and in France in 1881 only 87 per cent of the women of this age had ever been wed.
5. The young wife is motivated to have
6See K. Davis, "Fertility Control and the Demographic Transition in India" in Milbank Memorial Fund, The Interrelations of Demographic, Economic, and Social Problems in Selected Underdeveloped Areas (New York: Milbank Fund, 1954), pp. 85-86.

offspring as early as possible and in considerable number. Given the joint family and the prevailing rule of patrilocal residence, the bride is a stranger among her husband's relatives. Because of her newness and because of her youth, she is often assigned a low position in the restricted hierarchy of women. She has little she can call her own until a child is born. The birth of a son proves her contribution to her husband's line and thus begins her rise to a higher position within the domestic circle. Offspring also give her something to lavish her affection on, something on the basis of which she can stand up for herself. In cultures where the father's bond with the child is a strong one, the birth of offspring gives the wife extra standing in his eyes; and in cultures where divorce is easily possible for the male, as in most Muslim countries, the wife views offspring as a means of holding her husband. Under such circumstances it is not strange that a young married woman has little incentive to avoid childbirth.
6. The man is strongly motivated to demand offspring. The structure of the joint family ordinarily rewards not only the mother's but also the father's reproduction. Often the children are viewed as belonging to him and his family, and the sons as perpetuating his family line. More tangibly, numerous children help to strengthen the patrilineally organized composite family by the sheer weight of numbers. Insofar as this family remains a viable economic and social unit, it gains economic and political strength by having an abundance of youthful members. Young adults can thus provide security for their old age even when few other means are available, and they are encouraged to do so by their elders.
The male's motivation is seen further in what may be called "sociological cures" for sterility. A barren wife not only suffers stigma, but she may be divorced to make room for a new and presumably more fertile wife. A woman who bears only daughters may suffer the same fate. In addition, in some agrarian cultures at least, the wife's

37

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

barrenness may DC a just cause for the acquisition of a concubine or a second wife or for the adoption of children of her husband's relatives.
The Segregation of Male and Female Roles
So far we have traced some of the effects of subordinating the nuclear family to wider kinship groups. An additional influence on fertility is the tendency of stable agrarian societies to segregate sharply the roles of men and women. This tendency is often connected with the dependent status of the nuclear family in the joint household, because when several related men and several women dwell together, strong avoidance rules are required to reduce the possibility of prohibited sexual contact and sexual rivalry. But the segregation of male and female roles is found in agrarian societies with or without joint household arrangements, and thus may be viewed as a somewhat independent factor in high fertility.
The institutional restriction of the feminine sphere may reach an extreme degree-- as in the practice of purdah in Muslim and to some extent in Hindu culture, and in the seclusion of females in agrarian Latin cultures. The effect of such limitation is to confine women largely to the household and to identify them with reproduction, so that their lives revolve around home and children. Female education is regarded as unnecessary if not actually immoral. Women, therefore, have little knowledge, sophistication, or independence. They cannot conceive of a glamor role or a career role which would compete with the childbearing role. They cannot complain that children prevent their getting outside the home, because outside activities are excluded anyway.
7J. M. Stycos and Reuben Hill have particularly emphasized the lack of communication between husband and wife as a factor in high fertility. "Prospects of Birth Control in Puerto Rico," Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Vol. 285 (Jan. 1953), pp. 140-142. Also, "Cultural Checks on Birth Control Use in Puerto Rico" in Milbank, op, cit., p. 61.

With the segregation of roles, the gulf between the man's and the woman's world becomes so wide that communication between husband and wife is reduced to a minimum -- particularly with reference to sexual topics, for the woman is supposed to have no knowledge or initiative in such matters. Curiously, husband and wife in many cases may never discuss the one thing that presumably represents their special bond, sex and reproduction. Toward this aspect of life the woman has mainly a nonrational approach--religious, superstitious, and incurious. The husband views reproduction as his prerogative, something taken for granted and involving simple compliance on the wife's part.7
A further consequence of feminine seclusion is that, when economic development first begins, women do not proportionately enter the industrial and commercial labor market. As a result the cities in many underdeveloped areas (notably in Asia) are heavily masculine.8 The occupations that Westerners now regard as chiefly feminine -- nursing, teaching, stenography, domestic service, retail selling -- are generally staffed by men. Entry into such occupations would take women out of the home and give them a sense of conflict between pregnancy and economic gain. Also it would take them to towns and cities, where rearing children is more difficult. The exclusion of women from the labor market therefore continues for them the conditions favorable to high fertility even after considerable economic development has occurred.
Agrarian Society and the Family
The features of family organization barely sketched above are well adapted to a peasant mode of existence. In traditional agriculture the main instrument of production, apart from land, is human labor. To
8See Eunice Cooper, "Urbanization in Malaya," Population Studies, Vol. 5 (Nov. 1951), pp. 125-126; K. Davis, Population of India and Pakistan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1951), pp. 139-141. The cities of 500,000 or more in India in 1931 had 173 males for every 100 females.

38 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

learn any skill involved does not require formal education but merely observation and practice. Children can thus start producing at an early age. Women can work in the fields and in the household handicrafts without much hindrance from constant childbearing. Furthermore, the type of agriculture in which most of the product is consumed at home rather than sold, in which hand labor substitutes for capital, and in which the level of living is consequently extremely low -- this is the type in which the means of transportation and communication are scant, and in which consequently the rural village is extremely isolated. The state, in such circumstances, tends to be a distant mechanism scarcely less rapacious and unpredictable than the marauding thieves from which it supposedly protects the village. The village must therefore protect itself as best it can. Its means of social control must be strong, and thus family controls and the authority of the elders can be easily enforced. Without much geographical or social mobility, kinship can serve as a principal basis of social position. The division of labor can be simple, resting heavily on the ascription of status on the basis of kinship, caste, age, and sex. With mortality high from disease, occasional famine, disaster, and war, the constant struggle is to maintain the population. Children strengthen and continue both the family and the village, and the institutional mechanisms favoring their appearance are strongly rooted.
The whole economic and family context represents an intricate and tightly integrated complex which can survive an amazing number of vicissitudes and last for an amazing length of time. Favorable conditions are responded to by an irrepressible expansion of numbers; unfavorable conditions are met by a remarkable power of survival and recuperation. As a consequence the stable agrarian mode of life has achieved a wide distribution over the world and still includes over half of humanity. It has in recent times encountered a force

strong enough to liquidate it -- the impact of urban-industrial civilization. But the corrosive power of this impact is not always manifest. Sometimes it affects the stable agrarian society, not as an unfavorable condition, but as a favorable one. If the underdeveloped area continues to remain agricultural, its participation in the world economy being that of a supplier of raw materials; if security is guaranteed by a colonial government or by world peace; and if mortality is reduced by the impact of modern medical science and public health -- if these things happen, as they often have, the effect is to maintain those parts of the social structure most favorable to a high birth rate. The agrarian society therefore expands; it may even send millions of people overseas while its home population is growing rapidly. Eventually, however, the expansion runs into problems of congestion. Conditions either must become worse and the expansion cease, or industrialism must destroy the agrarian institutional complex and thus substitute a new economic and social order which no longer responds to economic growth by an automatic, reflex increase of population.
Religious and Ethical Values
Little has been said thus far about the role of religious values in maintaining a high birth rate. The omission is deliberate, for it seems more reliable to reason in terms of social organization than in terms of avowed values. Above all, care must be exercised in accepting sacred literature or priestly doctrine as evidence of a society's actual values. Motivation is always motivation within a situation. Without an awareness of the circumstances in which people are placed, we can say little or nothing about their values. The latter at best tend to be vague and protean, furnishing the observer with a skimpy basis for predicting behavior.
However, it is worth noting that the religious paraphernalia of agrarian societies is generally in consonance with the institu-

39

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

tions producing a high fertility. The de- societies that are archaic rather than strict-

sire for sons in patrilineal societies -- ly primitive. These societies respond to

whether the religion be Muslim, Hindu, or urban-industrial penetration usually by

Buddhist -- is reinforced by supernatural maintaining much of their social and fa-

beliefs and ritualistic practices. The author- milial organization. Truly primitive peo-

ity of the elders is strengthened by the ples, on the other hand, experience more

tendency to regard them as somewhat sa- of a shock on direct contact with advanced

cred, as being near the other world. The peoples. In this case both a rise in mortal-

segregated role of the woman is ritualisti- ity and a decline in fertility often occur,

cally defined, so that its violation becomes making survival extremely difficult. Primi-

a religious as well as a moral offense; and tive societies which survive such a shock

the wife's subordination to the husband sometimes have their institutional organi-

may be expressed by worship of him and zation so altered that, when mortality is

his lineal ancestors. All told, despite the reduced, the disfunctionally high fertility

diversity found in different cultures, the may not persist long. It seems likely, for

value system seemingly serves to bolster the example, that the societies formed from

institutional arrangements already de- slave populations in the West Indies will

scribed.

achieve a modern demographic balance

sooner than those formed by Asian peasants

Balancing Factors

(e.g. in Formosa). At first it might be

Our intention has not been to imply that every feature of agrarian social structure favors fertility. On the contrary, any social order has functions other than reproduction which its members must perform, and some of these are both partly antithetical to reproduction and equally as important for societal survival. It follows that no society is so organized as to get from its women anything near the maximum childbearing of which they are biologically capable. Some of the mechanisms that

thought that family disorganization, as observed currently in the British West Indies, would be conducive to high fertility in virtue of the lack of institutional restraint on sexual relations. But no society can avoid placing responsibility on somebody to take care of the child -- if not the father, then either the woman who bears the child or whose daughter does so. The institutional system, being disorganized, puts no particular restraint upon the woman's protecting herself by reducing childbearing.9

dampen fertility are the prejudice against All told, the big agrarian societies appear

widow remarriage (Hindu), the taboo on to be the ones where the institutional sup-

intercourse after childbirth (many cultures), ports to functionless reproduction are likely

easy divorce (Muslim), monogamy, an in- to be strongest, to persist longest, and to

sistence on legitimacy, restraints on medical cause the greatest demographic imbalances.

knowledge and practice with reference to It is of great sociological interest to study

pregnancy and parturition, and the preju- the process of change by which this func-

dice against procreation after grandchil-' tionless fertility is gradually eliminated

dren have already appeared.

through alterations in the reproductive in-

However, our purpose here has been stitutions.

merely to consider some of the widespread institutional patterns favoring reproduction, particularly in the massive agrarian

9See Judith Blake, "Family Instability and Reproductive Behavior in Jamica," to be published soon in the proceedings o£ the 1954 conference of the Milbank Memorial Fund.

