Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Family planning practice among the Japanese
M. Muramatsu M. D.
To cite this article: M. Muramatsu M. D. (1960) Family planning practice among the Japanese, Eugenics Quarterly, 7:1, 23-30, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1960.9987427 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1960.9987427
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

FAMILY PLANNING PRACTICE AMONG THE JAPANESE*

M. MURAMATSU, M. D.
Institute of Public Health Tokyo

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

A,. N INTENSE DESIRE to limit family size
became widespread in Japan after the last war. What has drawn the attention of those interested in human fertility throughout the world to Japan is not the simple fact of stated wishes for smaller families. This wish exists in varying degrees in many countries. The extraordinary fact is that the Japanese people used the means available to them and actually had the smaller families that were their stated goals. In 1947 the number of births per 1,000 population was 34.3; in 1957, it was 17.2. This was a reduction of 50 per cent within a decade. It is recognized that the 1947 rate was unduly high. None the less, the decline was phenomenal.
One of the really significant aspects of intensified efforts of the Japanese to adjust the numbers of their offspring' to the environment in which they found themselves was the strength of the motivation in the general public. Official sanction for birth limitation was expressed by the government in a legal document that was permissive only. The government statement undoubtedly had something to do with the rapidity of the spread of family limitation throughout the country. The most significant factor, however, was the desire of the average
*Presented at the annual meeting of the Population Association of America, at Providence, Rhode Island, on April 25-26, 1959.

couple to control the number of children they would have. It is the personal opinion of the author that a level of birth limitation similar to that existing today would have been attained in the absence of governmental support for it, though it probably would have taken a somewhat longer period of time.
As is well known ,the practice of birth limitation has a long history in Japan. Infanticide and abortion are presumed to have been quite widespread in the days of the Tokugawa Shogunate. When the level of living was seriously threatened after the last war, many Japanese couples displayed the traditional reaction to adverse circumstances by using induced abortion. Even today, the total number of induced abortions, including those not reported, may exceed the total number of live births. The focus of the present program of the promotion of family planning in Japan is that of public health. The problem is one of means. How can we shift from induced abortion to the prevention of conception? The total effort to reduce births has already been successful if the measurement is solely in quantitative terms. The question of techniques used to achieve the ends of family limitation rather than the ends themselves arouses the most vigorous discussion in Japan today. The hope is that there may be a shift in means of birth limitation. There is an expecta-

23

24 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

tion of progress toward this goal of altered means in the future, though it is recognized that progress may be slow.
There was a rapid increase of population in Japan after the war. Despite the repatriation of some seven million civilians and members of the armed forces to Japan, the major factor in the increase was the surplus of births over deaths. There was a temporary increase in the birth rate in the early postwar years, but the most extraordianry event was the rapid and continuing decline in mortality. The extensive application of improved public health and sanitation was the major factor in the increased rate of population growth in Japan. Thus from the beginning, the postwar population problem was linked closely with public health. This association of public health with overall population problems was further strengthened when the issue became concentrated more upon medical discussion of the advisability or inadvisability of the methods employed: induced abortion versus contraception.
A most significant observation the author wishes to make here is that the government-sponsored program for the dissemination of contraception in Japan was adopted primarily from the standpoint of public heath and welfare. It came into existence because of the recognition of a responsibility on the part of public health workers for dealing with the birth rate as well as the death rate, if they were really to advance the welfare of the people. The program became part of general health measures because family planning practice was vitally important in its influence on the well-being of each individual and family.
In the last decade, the birth-control movement was very actively advocated as a possible solution to the overall popu-

lation problems, chiefly by those concerned primarily with the economy of the nation. Many official organs, such as committees or councils, were set up at the national level in order to cope with the extraordinary problems of population growth. But the difficulty of adopting a negative population policy by a government is quite apparent in the general fate of these organizations. They submitted many resolutions, often including heavily loaded statements concerning drastic measures to be employed for population control. In general, their proposals remained proposals only, seldom accompanied by adoption or enforcement. The implication of these observations is noteworthy indeed, especially when we know that this course of events came in Japan where people were more or less population-minded.
The major force for carrying out the program for the promotion of family planning by means of contraception has been within the framework of the Ministry of Welfare of the Japanese government. The main justification for permissive legislation on abortion and contraception was the health of mothers and children. As has been noted earlier, the decline in the birth rate that resulted from the health-and-welfare-oriented programs was remarkable. There is little question but that the reduction in the birth rate in Japan and hence in the rate of population growth contributed substantially to the recovery from the devastation of the war. It is admitted that reduction in the birth rate was brought about mainly by induced abortions rather than by the program for contraception which is the primary function of the public health activities within the Ministry of Welfare.
Under these circumstances, it is pertinent to describe some of the most im-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

portant aspects of the findings in the family planning field surveys carried out by the Institute of Public Health, an organization attached to the Ministry of Welfare. The main responsibility of the Institute of Public Health is research and training in matters concerning public health and welfare. It is hoped here to give a fair understanding of the survey results themselves and their implications for the situation in the nation at large.
The main studies the author wants to describe here are a series of field investigations which come under the general heading of "test studies of family planning" or "pilot studies of family planning education." The purpose of these pilot studies was to demonstrate how best people could be induced to practice family planning and to find out the acceptability of various methods as well as the nature of difficulties involved in the whole process of family planning education.
The populations covered by this series are broadly classified into three categories: rural communities represented by three typical farming or fishing villages, coal mine workers in one of the largest private enterprises, and a special group of people who are under the care of public relief. The rural village studies were initiated in 1950, and the studies of coal miners and public relief people are of comparatively recent origin, both commencing in 1953. Rural communities were selected because of the recognition of the importance of family planning among farmers who are still a large group in the population. Coal mine workers were studied because of the value of family planning to more efficient management in the coal industry. Interest in the study of public relief population was aroused because of the chal-

25
lenge involved. This specific group was supposed to be most difficult to deal with in any kind of education that called for planning.
In all of these different groups more or less similar procedures were followed in the educational activities. The first step was concerned with general education in the broad principles of family planning. Usually the director of the Institute of Public Health assumed the responsibility for the initiation of the work. He went to the people and discussed the possible advantages of the planned family over the unplanned family. Movies, lantern slides, reading materials such as pamphlets and leaflets, and other teaching aids were utilized. Efforts were made to use plain language in order to secure full understanding. Special consideration was given to inviting as many people as possible, including even those to whom childbearing was out of the question because of age, so that the feeling could be created that family planning was not merely a matter of concern to a few individuals. Futhermore, it was regarded as essential that a medical doctor or a person in the medical profession should be in charge of the program. This approach helped the people concerned to develop strong confidence in their educators and to overcome the shyness inherent in matters relating to sex.
The second step was group education. On the average ten to fifteen women were invited to attend, and a more detailed account of the various methods o£ family planning was given. As a rule, charts and models were used and actual samples of devices and chemicals were passed around during the explanations. Not infrequently, the meeting was very quiet for the first ten minutes after the doctor's talk. Each woman would watch

26 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

her neighbors to see if somebody else would not raise the question that she herself was most anxious to ask. The women cast glances at each other with peculiar mixtures of shyness and curiosity. Once some one was brave enough to ask a straightforward question, there was a break through the reserve. The meeting then turned into a flow of frank questions and answers, and the goal of getting the women acquainted with various techniques was satisfactorily accomplished.
The third level was individual education in which each woman was invited to talk with a doctor face-to-face. Usually different contraceptive methods were suggested, the final choice being left to the woman herself. At the same time, the woman was always told that she might change the method later in case the first one had failed to satisfy either her or her husband.
As implied in the above descriptions, most of our education was directed to women. Later in our experiences with pilot studies, we made efforts to include men as far as possible. An outstanding discovery in the education of men was that, if given proper opportunities to discuss family planning scientifically, men were really interested in the information, oftentimes more genuinely so than women. They frequently had more accurate understanding about the methods. The author personally knows a number of husbands who calculate the safe period themselves correctly and give the results to their wives.
In regard to the acceptability of various methods among the couples studied, simple generalization is inappropriate and difficult. The findings differ considerably from one group to another. However, some of the most important factors may be listed here.

As is the case in Japan as a whole, the most popular method among the couples observed was the condom. It was used by nearly half the couples in the rural villages. Among the coal mine workers and public relief population it was the method chosen by a little over half. Furthermore, it was the general observation that the proportion using the condom tended to increase as the education program continued. A cogent explanation for this tendency would have to include two factors. One is the possibility of more and more husbands becoming cooperative as education proceeds. The other is the desire of a couple to use the most reliable means once fully convinced of the value of family planning. If the decision as to means is left to the couple, a compromise is involved between how disagreeable and troublesome the method is on the one hand and how effective it is on the other. As long as a couple has only limited motivation to control fertility, the chances are that they may choose the least disagreeable and least troublesome method. As the couple becomes more intensely motivated to limit births, reliability becomes an increasingly important characteristic of the contraceptive means. Hence increasing proportions of the couples turn to the condom or the diaphragm. If the husband as well as the wife is really interested, then the choice between these latter two methods is the simpler of the two: the condom.
In any event, this general observation that the use of condom ranks first deserves special attention, because it illustrates the relatively great cooperation given by husbands to the practice of family planning in Japan, contrary to the general criticisms of them for the lack of such cooperation. We have also noted many instances in which the de-

27

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

cisión for family planning was mutual rather than that of the wife alone.
In regard to the diaphragm, our general impression is that there are serious obstacles to widespread use of this method, especially among the less privileged. The proportion of couples using this method increased gradually among the farmers and coal miners under our observation, but there was little possibility for the public relief population to depend on it. Housing conditions, particularly the lack of privacy and of washing facilities, were the chief factors responsible.
Methods requiring less manipulation, such as tablets, had considerable efficacy. That practical usefulness counts more than theoretical effectiveness was also fully demonstrated in our pilot studies.
In order to evaluate the results of these studies, analyses have been made from time to time of such indices as the birth rate, pregnancy rate, reproduction ratio, number of induced abortions, number of sterilizations and so forth. Also, inquiries were made as to the reasons for failures in conception control, for a change from one method to another, for induced abortions as well as for sterilizations, etc.
The results observed from these analyses and inquiries may be given as follows:
1. The birth rate was reduced by half or more in these various groups in the course of three to five years of education. Admittedly the birth rate is too crude an index to analyze the progress accurately in small populations, but in general the birth rates dropped rapidly to levels far below the national average.
2. The drop in the pregnancy rate was also appreciable.
3. The number of induced abortions fell in most cases to almost half the pre-

education level. About 70 per cent of the reduction of the birth rate in study areas is accounted for by the practice of contraception, whereas the corresponding figure for Japan as a whole may be only 25 to 30 per cent. However, we met difficulties in our efforts to reduce the number of induced abortions. In the rural villages as well as in the coal-mine districts, the number of induced abortions rose somewhat in the year after the initiation of the program. Apparently some women already pregnant when the general education in family planning was started resorted to induced abortion as they became small-family-minded because of the education. Also, there were more failures in conception control during the early stage of the program as the couples were not fully accustomed to the use of the methods they had selected.
Furthermore, there is a most serious obstacle to the substitution of contraception for abortion. An induced abortion can be procured without difficulty, especially in the coal mine and public relief groups. In almost all instances, among these groups, a woman can have an induced abortion through the health insurance system of the company or provisions made by the social security program. The operation costs little or nothing, and the medical facilities are always available in the areas concerned and within easy access. The only possible counter-measure to abortion, it was believed, was to educate and re-educate the people in the desirability of conception control rather than induced abortion. In the case of our pilot studies, this has been reasonably successful. In the general population of Japan, for whom the educational program by experts is rather limited, the substitution of contraception for abortion is a difficult problem.

28 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

4. Although we did not recommend a sterilization operation as a solution to excessive childbearing, the number of those sterilized, almost all of whom were women, has increased slowly but steadily.
5. In dealing with a typical farming village in Japan, one is sure to have a preconception that children are assets rather than liabilities to a farmer's family. We were particularly interested in this idea when we began to introduce the principles of family planning. Our general observation revealed that this tendency still existed in the rural villages studied. This did not mean that a farmer always wanted to have a great many children. As a matter of fact, the people in these communities were very receptive to what we taught them. The desire to have just enough children, but not too many--in most cases, 2 or 3--is becoming popular among farmers in Japan. This may be illustrated by citing one or two statistics obtained from our experiments in the three rural villages. After five-years' education, 98.5 per cent of those couples who needed to practice conception control for one reason or another were actually using some method of limitation. This proportion is a little higher than the corresponding figures observed in other pilot areas. Furthermore, we intentionally cut down educational activities for village people in the third year after the program was initiated in order to see how it would affect the general course. Our follow-up showed that the birth rate continued to decline. Then, in the fifth year, our activities were again strengthened. This time, no further substantial decline was recorded, no matter how strenuous the efforts, suggesting that the birth rate had reached the lowest possible level.
6. The general observation about the

strong desire to control size of family among the Japanese as a whole can be applied to those in the lowest social stratum, such as the population on public relief. Of course, a difference in the intensity of the desire among different social strata must be admitted. In general, however, the cooperation shown by this specific group was much more favorable than had been anticipated. Apparently there exists a certain form of "inferiority complex" among these individuals. Considerable success in the extension of education in family planning to the under-privileged could be expected only if special efforts were made to establish confidence in the program. There would have to be really warm and sympathetic counseling opportunities.
7. Midwives are key personnel who are always in close contact with the people. Wives can talk to the midwives freely about sex, and at the same time the midwives are uniquely familiar with the family conditions in most households.
SUMMARY
These pilot studies have done a great deal in serving as demonstrations of family planning education. A criticism often made in and outside Japan is that the studies have demonstrated what could be done under ideal conditions, with medical doctors and auxiliary personnel such as trained midwives stationed in the areas. According to this argument, the studies have failed to show what could be done where both facilities and resources are limited. In reply, we may frankly admit that the purpose of the studies was the demonstration of what could be done under optimum conditions. However, we do find that the studies have had strong repercussions at local, prefectural, and national levels.

29

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

Many other villages and companies have wished to set up similar patterns of work for the teaching of family planning. There are many "prefectural test villages," "family planning model companies," and so forth.
At the central level, the materials of the studies were used for references when the planning of nation-wide programs was called for. More specifically, they have helped to establish a special national program for the distribution of contraceptive materials free of charge or at reduced costs to those couples who want to practice conception control but cannot afford to purchase the materials themselves.
In addition to the pilot studies of family planning education, the Institute of Public Health has conducted relatively detailed field surveys in regard to induced abortion and sterilization as used among couples whose operations were reported officially to the health authorities concerned. Comparatively more comprehensive publications have been published on these studies, and most of them are available in English. Only a few remarks with regard to the results derived from them may be made here.
It was found that the true reasons for having the operations performed were predominantly economic in the broadest sense. About three-quarters and twothirds of the couples personally interviewed stated, respectively, the reasons for induced abortion and sterilization as a limited amount of income which did not permit them to have another child, the large expenses required for the education of the children they already had, or sometimes, only "We have had enough children." The author was particularly impressed with the frequent statement that the education of children was so important because the poor edu-

cation of the husbands was responsible for the present low social standing of the family. For this reason, every possible effort would be made not to repeat the same experience in their children.
Also, it was noted that induced abortion and sterilization were alternatives to the practice of conception control in the purpose of a voluntary spacing and regulation of the number of children. Some of the Japanese demographers once reported that about half the pregnancies which occurred as a result of failure in conception control would be terminated by induced abortion. A common observation in our studies was that a sterilization operation was finally resorted to after some unsatisfactory experiences with contraceptive measures accompanied by repeated induced abortions.
There are many significant relationships in considering the means of birth limitation. It has been noted that the professional advice of a physician was important in the decision of a woman to have a sterilization operation. And the widespread performance of induced abortions provided contacts for women with medical doctors. The finality of the sterilization operation usually precluded an easy decision by the woman. The advice of a doctor then might be strong enough to tip the scales for the final decision.
In brief, then, these studies indicated that induced abortion and sterilization could hardly be avoided because of the extremely rapid transition that occurred after the war. The desires of the people went far ahead of the provision of facilities for the fulfillment of such desires through the more reasonable methods of conception control. In Japan, the great transition from high to low birth rate took only ten years or so in con-

30 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

trast to the earlier experiences of the West where the processes moved rather slowly. In order to achieve the same level of progress in a much shorter period of time and with much greater urgency, people may often have to use some drastic measures, even though fully aware of their inadvisability.
So far as the number of reported induced abortions in Japan as a whole is concerned, it seems the trend has already passed its peak year. The recent level is in the neighborhood of 1.1 million induced abortions as contrasted to 1.6 million births. However, the author thinks that the total number of induced abortions may still represent almost twice the reported number. The tendency, increasingly strong in the past several years, to have an induced abortion performed quite early during pregnancy is usually regarded as an indication of the decrease in the emotional resistance against it. However, it should also be noted that recent findings indicate a growing dislike for abortion as a method of family limitation.
In regard to the sterilization operation, a similar tendency holds true. The reported numbers have increased little in recent years. Opinions as to this definitive procedure of family limitation are varied among the experts concerned, but in general there is an increasing tendency to emphasize the necessity for

careful precautions before resorting to sterilization.
Among couples with wife under 50 years old, probably some 40 per cent practice some type of contraception. A general trend is that more young couples are taking up family planning as real planning in the early stage of their married life, not because of necessity after the family has reached the desired size.
Finally, the author wishes to emphasize once again the importance and the value of basic education in the principles of family planning. It is obvious that the success of any program designed to facilitate the easy practice of family planning, such as the program for the universal availability of contraceptive materials, is very difficult unless it is preceded by a strong effort to ensure full understanding of the ideals of family planning. In the case of Japan, this task was accomplished without much difficulty, for the favorable motivation was there already. In a country where the idea is introduced as something unfamiliar, the instillation of motivation would require unusual effort and contrivance rather than the actual execution of the project itself.
Grateful acknowledgment is made to Dr. Irene Taeuber of the Office of Population Research at Princeton University for assistance with this paper.

