Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Heredity of joint diseases
Robert M. Stecher M.D.
To cite this article: Robert M. Stecher M.D. (1954) Heredity of joint diseases, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:1, 16-20, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987159 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987159
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 15 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:36

HEREDITY OF JOINT DISEASES

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ROBERT M. STECHER, M.D.

Western Reserve University School of Medicine

City Hospital, Cleveland, Ohio

TLHE PROBLEMS of arthritis are gradually
commanding a larger portion of public attention due in part to the educational activities of the Arthritis and Rheumatism Foundation, the establishing of new arthritic clinics throughout the nation, the training of increasing numbers of specialists in this field and the growing awareness by public and private welfare agencies of the personal, social, economic and family

considered to be the result of a wearingout process, a premature aging of the tissues, or a degenerative, process. As one would expect, it is essentially a disease of middle or later life, but it also tends to involve joints which have been injured, are malformed or are subject to excessive use. In osteoarthritis the patient is well and his general health is good; only the joints seem to be affected.

problems arising from this group of dis- The heredity of Heberden's nodes, or eases. It seems therefore appropriate to osteoarthritis of the fingers, will be disdiscuss special phases of this medical prob- cussed first because the influence of hered-

lem with informed lay groups. One of the ity in this condition has been clearly dem-

problems concerning which there is much onstrated. Heberden's nodes are enlarge-

misinformation is in the field of joint dis- ments of the end joints of the fingers. They

ease heredity.

are called Heberden's nodes after the man

The mistake is often made of consider- who described them briefly in 1799. They ing all arthritis as one disease. Actually, occur in two different forms. The first, many different diseases with different called traumatic Heberden's nodes, occur

causes, characteristics and clinical manifes- immediately as an enlargement of the fintations have symptoms of the joints. Even ger joint after injury. This is a severe, the same type of arthritis differs in many painful, single injury such as occurs from

respects as it involves different joints. being hit by a baseball or a hammer. The

Heredity may be a factor in producing condition reaches a resting stage in several arthritis, but its importance and the mecha- weeks; it is much more common in men nism by which it works varies considerably than in women. Heredity has nothing to

from one disease to the next and for vari- do with this disease.

ous combinations of joint involvement with the same disease. In some types of arthritis the influence of heredity and its mechanism of effect seems to be conclusively demonstrated; in other types it is strongly suspected, and in still others it seems to play little or no part.

The second type, so-called idiopathic Heberden's nodes, starts for no known reason in the end joint of one finger and spreads gradually to others until nearly all are involved. It is ten times as common in women as in men; the incidence advances gradually from the second to the eighth

Many different classifications of joint dis- decade. It is definitely a hereditary disease.

ease have been suggested, but most of them How do we know this? The reasoning

consider two main types of disease. These dif- resulting in this decision is as follows: The

fer markedly in their clinical manifestations, author saw a man with enlargement of all

tissue changes produced, the theory of their his fingers who said four sisters were simi-

causes and the methods of their treatment. larly affected, a fact substantiated by ex-

One of these diseases is osteoarthritis, a de- amining them. The question arose as to

generative joint disease. This disease is whether or not this observation was signifi-

16

17

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

cant. Over 8000 individuals were seen in the hospital, public clinics and homes for the aged to obtain significant data on the incidence of finger enlargement in men and women and in different age groups. It was soon apparent that some enlargement was due to injury, some not, that women were affected with idiopathic Heberden's nodes much more frequently than men, and that the incidence increased as age advanced. The incidence of idiopathic Heberden's nodes was found to be about 30 per cent after the age of 70 in women. An intensive study of women was then pursued in which the mothers and sisters of affected women were examined. Since the incidence of the disease in various age groups was known, it was easy to determine how many affected people were to be expected in any group of known size and age and sex. It was found that the mothers of affected women had Heberden's nodes twice as commonly and the sisters three times as commonly as one would expect in similar groups from the population in general. Certain combinations of multiple involvement in families were not to be expected to occur on a basis of chance alone more often than once in 5,000,000 and once in 10,000,000 families. Heredity seemed to be the best explanation for these observations.
The mechanism of inheritance was then studied. The data, the computation and the conclusions have been reported in detail elsewhere, and since they are quite technical will be omitted here. Suffice it to say that Heberden's nodes is a single auttfsomal character, sex influenced to be dominant in women and recessive in men. Under these circumstances an affected woman would transmit the disease to onehalf her daughters. One-half her sons would inherit the trait and would transmit it to one-half of their children although they themselves would not show the disease. Because the disease is recessive in men, a man would show the disease only if he inherited it from both parents. Such a

man would transmit the disease to every daughter and the trait to all his sons. In a dominant trait one parent is expected to be affected. This is not always true of Heberden's nodes because the unaffected father who carries the trait can transmit it.
The onset of Heberden's nodes is related in some way to the menopause since onehalf the patients first noted finger enlargement within three years of the last menstrual period. Of 99 women studied for these factors, it was found that the women with early onset of Heberden's nodes had early onset of menopause and the women with later onset of Heberden's nodes had later onset of the menopause. The average age of onset of Heberden's nodes is about 50, varying from 30 to 70.
Let us next consider osteoarthritis of the hip. This is a painful, deforming disease resulting in limitation of joint motion, lameness and deformity of the bones seen clinically, by radiological examination and proven by specimens seen in anatomical museums. The socket of the joint in the pelvis becomes enlarged and surrounded by a huge bony growth, the head of the thigh bone is enlarged and altered in shape and the neck of the thigh bone is deformed. It may occur in one hip or involve both. It seems to occur independently of osteoarthritis or of other joints. This disease is known to occur months or years after severe injury without hereditary influence. It occurs in patients who earlier had LeggCalvé-Perthes disease or slipped epiphysis of the hip and also those with congenital dysplasia of the hip. Evidence is accumulating to indicate that Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease not only runs in families but seems to be inherited as a single factor recessive trait. Congenital dysplasia of the hip, an entirely different disease, seems at least to run in families, although whether or not it is hereditary and if so how it is inherited has not been clearly demonstrated. While osteoarthritis of the hip cannot be properly attributed to hereditary factors, certain cases occur as complications of hereditary

18 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

diseases. What proportions of these cases of familial or hereditary diseases, congenital dysplasia or .Legg-Calvé-Perthes result in osteoarthritis is not known. Nor is it known what proportion of osteoarthritis is dependent upon such previous familial or hereditary factors.
Osteoarthritis of the spine, considered as another manifestation of osteoarthritis, seems to occur spontaneously or as a result of hard work or injury but entirely without recognizable hereditary influence.
Rheumatoid arthritis, the second great type of arthritis, is a general systemic disease causing its most marked effect in the joints. These become involved usually one after another over a period of months or years with pain, swelling, deformity and varying degrees of disability. Many different causes have been assigned to this disease, but none have been convincingly proven.
In a study of the genetics of rheumatoid arthritis the families of 224 patients, including 1667 individuals, were compared with the families of 488 controls, composed of 2759 individuals. Three per cent of all relatives of patients were found to have been affected compared to 0.6 per cent in the control series. Of relatives over the age of 50 years the figures were 5 per cent and 0.9 per cent. Rheumatoid arthritis is found among relatives of affected people 5 to 6 times as often as in people in general.
Among 224 families, 250 brothers and sisters had rheumatoid arthritis out of 1054 people, compared to 561 expected if the disease were inherited as a single factor dominant. Gene frequency computation, based upon 16 found affected among the 2759 in the control series, showed 0.58 per cent of the population picked at random ·with the disease. Since penetrance (the proportion of the population affected compared to the proportion bearing the genetic constitution to make the condition possible) was about 50 per cent, the gene frequency is doubled, 0.58 to 1.16 per cent. In other words, 1.16 per cent of the popu-

lation has the proper genetic constitution for the disease and 50 per cent of this or 0.58 is affected. This indicates that 12 per 1000 are susceptible and about 6 per thousand affected.
Although heredity seems to play an important role in the course of rheumatoid arthritis, other secondary conditioning factors must also be significant. They have been sought repeatedly with only indifferent success. An extensive controlled study was pursued in England and published in 1950, in which 532 patients with rheumatoid arthritis were each paired with an unaffected person of the same sex, age and marital state. An arbitrary age of onset was assigned to each control person, the same as that of the affected person.
Data was gathered and related to the age of onset, real and simulated, as to tonsillitis, sinusitis, dental infections, accidents, exposure to inclement weather, faulty nutrition, unhygienic living and working conditions, pregnancy and its complications, menopause, social disaster, emotional stress and other pertinent factors. The only significant difference noted between the two groups seemed to be that the patients had a higher proportion of affected relatives than did the control group and heredity was the one single factor demonstrated.
Ankylosing spondylitis is a particular form of arthritis resulting in a stiffened back. It is less common than rheumatoid arthritis, affects men more frequently than women and comes in early adulthood. That it is a familial disease is indicated by the fact that involvement of twins, brothers, fathers and sons and other instances of multiple family involvement have been recorded. In a study of families of 50 spondylitis cases secondary cases were recorded in 7 of 297 relatives compared to 2 in 2932 relatives of a combined control series. It was shown that spondylitis is inherited as a single autosomal factor with 70 per cent penetrance in men and 10 per cent penetrance in women, with hétérozygotes or sus-

19

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ceptible people occurring in 6 out of 10,000 in the population.
Gout has been recognized as a hereditary disease, but the pattern of inheritance has not been clearly identified. It has long been known to be associated with high uric acid levels in the blood. With the report that significant numbers of relatives of gouty people had high levels of blood uric acid without joint symptoms of gout, it seemed logical to study the genetics of hyperuricemia rather than of gout itself. Serum uric acids were done on 136, all the available relatives of 44 gouty patients. Hyperuricemia was found in 2 of 11 mothers, 4 of 25 brothers, 5 of 24 sisters, 5 of 33 sons, a total of 16 of 136 relatives but never in 45 daughters. Considered as a simple dominant, dormant hyperuricemia was found to be inherited with penetrance of 84 per cent in men and 12 per cent in women.
Plasma urate levels have been found to be higher in men than in women. This is true of normal people, of gouty patients and of hyperuricemic relatives of gouty patients. Men who inherit hyperuricemia often do not show it until puberty. Women do not usually show it until after the menopause. There is some correlation between the duration and magnitude of hyperuricemia and the onset of gout. These factors all help to explain why clinical gout is so much more common in men than in women and why the incidence increases with age.
Wofson has recently advanced a new theory of gout. He believes that the inherited susceptibility to gout depends upon an abnormal male sex hormone from the adrenal which interferes with uric acid excretion by the kidney and thereby produces hyperuricemia. These abnormal male sex hormones produce effects abnormally marked on uric acid metabolism but normal on masculinity. Attacks of clinical gout depend upon a second endocrine disturbance, an inability to produce promptly and in adequate amounts needed 11-oxy-

steroids during periods of stress due to failure of the pituitary to release adequate amounts of ACTH. This explains why ACTH is effective in relieving acute attacks of gouty arthritis.
Rheumatic fever is an acute inflammatory disease of the joints with fever. The patient invariably recovers completely from the joint symptoms, but the disease is a cause of serious, disabling, and at times fatal, heart disease. Rheumatic heart disease is second only to accidents as a cause of death in children and young adults. Acute attacks of rheumatic fever are always preceded by streptococcal infection although this is not recognized in nearly half the cases. When large groups of young people have been carefully observed, it has been found that only 3 per cent of people with streptococcal infection develop rheumatic fever. Such people with recognized preceding streptococcal infection account for 60 per cent of the cases of rheumatic fever. It is easy to see that individual susceptibility is very significant.
Convincing evidence is available which indicates that rheumatic fever is inherited as a simple recessive character. This means that children of two affected parents would all be susceptible to the disease; of one affected parent and one carrier, one-half would be susceptible; of one affected parent and a non-carrier none would be susceptible; of two carrier but not affected parents one-fourth would be susceptible. Such proportions would be seen only in dense populations where streptococcal infections were endemic as in slum conditions in New York. Children would probably avoid the disease regardless of their parents' history and their own susceptibility if they lived in Puerto Rico, Florida or Arizona, regions where streptococcal infections are rare or non-existent. They would also avoid the disease in New York if protected from streptococcal infections by prophylactic doses of penicillin or sulfa drugs.
The above brief survey of arthritis proves that joint symptoms arise from different

20 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

diseases, different even though they may bear the same name. Inheritance varies considerably from one disease to the next, being dominant in most, recessive in several others. The sex incidence, the age of onset, the penetrance and the gene frequency all show marked variation from one disease to the next. The relative importance of secondary causative factors acting upon susceptible individuals varies. Finally the evidence of heredity varies from being conclusive to being lacking entirely.
Review of the evidence presented here allows certain interesting conclusions concerning therapy and prevention. It seems unlikely that any of the diseases listed above occur with sufficient frequency or cause sufficient amount of disability or dependency to justify serious efforts at control by eugenics or sterilization. Less drastic methods may become useful.
The onset of Heberden's nodes is late in middle life, and as the expectancy of life and the average age increases the population promises to include a higher proportion of elderly and therefore affected individuals. The onset in women seems to be related to the menopause. If the menopause could be prevented or delayed or the chemical and physiological effects of the menopause could be prevented or properly counteracted, the onset of Heberden's nodes could conceivably be delayed or even prevented entirely. The necessary knowledge to accomplish this result does not seem to be available at present.
Some cases of osteoarthritis of the hip develop in deformities caused by diseases which are possibly hereditary or familial, Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease and congenital dysplasia of the hip. If these conditions are promptly recognized in children and properly treated, deformities of the hip are minimized or prevented and the probability of arthritis occurring is reduced. The author has no suggestion concerning osteoarthritis of the spine.
Rheumatoid arthritis presents a nice theoretical problem. It was pointed out

that gene frequency and penetrance are both low indicating that a small proportion, 1.2 per cent, of the population is susceptible and only one-half of that succumbs to the disease. Possible secondary causative factors such as infected teeth, tonsils and sinuses, unhygienic living and working conditions, emotional, financial and personal stress, all part of the pattern of everyday living, which 98 per cent of the population sustain without developing rheumatoid arthritis, may well prove on closer examination to be critical to susceptible individuals. Much of the evidence on the cause of rheumatoid arthritis may have to be reevaluated and certain currently accepted conclusions modified.
The familial nature of ankylosing spondylitis is so well known that certain alert rheumatologists now routinely make X-ray examinations of the backs of all brothers of affected people. A surprising number of early cases have been discovered and treated. Even if the course of the disease cannot always be turned, deformities can be minimized or prevented and many of the devastating effects of the disease avoided.
Better understanding of gout based in part on genetic studies allows prompter diagnosis and effective treatment started earlier.
Much of the information on rheumatic fever presented here is under dispute, but prophylactic treatment of patients to prevent recurrent attacks and treatment of brothers and sisters of patients has decreased the incidence of this disease. Other factors such as better housing conditions, better nutrition, closer medical supervision of school children, closer check of men in the army and navy have played an important role in controlling the disease. Rheumatic fever now seems to be a controllable disease.
The above short and incomplete review indicates that genetic studies of arthritic diseases are important and may play a significant role in the handling of disease.

