Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Genetics of interracial crosses in Hawaii
Newton E. Morton
To cite this article: Newton E. Morton (1962) Genetics of interracial crosses in Hawaii, Eugenics Quarterly, 9:1, 23-24, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1962.9987497 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1962.9987497
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4 View related articles Citing articles: 5 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

GENETICS OF INTERRACIAL CROSSES IN HAWAII*

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

NEWTON E. MORTON
Department of Medical Genetics University of Wisconsin Madison

T"1
X HIS is A SUMMARY report on studies made in Hawaii during 1958-1959 to provide answers to the following questions:
1. ' What are the genetic effects of outcrossing in man on the first generation hybrids?
2. Do human populations represent co-adapted genetic combinations that are disrupted after the first generation of outcrossing?
Both heterosis and recombination effects have been demonstrated in experimental material but the magnitudes and the directions of the effects are highly variable among populations and permit no extrapolation to men. Anthropological evidence is limited to the demonstration that long established hybrid human populations tend to be intermediate between the parental groups with variances that are slightly greater than the parents. Precise genetic data from man has so far been limited to inbreeding effects on perinatal morbidity, mortality, and metrical traits.
Our study is based on 179,285 babies born in the State of Hawaii during the period 1948 to 1958, together with samples of blood types from the Hawaii Blood Bank and records of maternal weight and height from the Sträub Clin-
*Presented at the Tenth Pacific Science Congress of the Pacific Science Association, Honolulu, August 21 to September 6, 1961 (abstract of paper).

ic. Parental birth certificates and blood types demonstrate the composition of our material and the substantial reliability of racial information on birth certificates. On the blood type evidence, "Hawaiians" have 8.5% Caucasian admixture and 13.7% Chinese admixture, while "Caucasian-Hawaiians" have 8.4% Chinese admixture and "Chinese-Hawaiians" have 14.6% Caucasian admixture. Changes in the blood-group frequencies with age reflect historical changes in the mating patterns of the part-Hawaiian groups.
The following sociological factors have been studied and allowed for in the analysis using the method of covariance analysis in a diallel cross: legitimacy, year, maternal age, father in armed forces, urban residence, father's occupation, and birth order. The following medical factors have been investigated: attendant at birth, month of first prenatal visit, maternal illness, abnormal labor, birth injury, autopsy, and maternal weight and height. These analyses establish the validity of tests of genetic hypotheses and the effectiveness of control over extraneous sociological and medical factors. There is no evidence of an increased obstetrical hazard in outcrosses. Sex ratio and gestation time show no outcrossing effects. The fre-

23

24 Morton

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

quency of monozygotic twinning is not affected by race while the frequency of dizygotic twinning is independent of the father's race but is greatly influenced by race of the mother. The dizygotic twinning rate of mothers who are hybrids between Caucasians and races with lower dizygotic rates closely resembles that of the non-Caucasian parent. This suggests that a high rate of dizygotic twinning behaves as a quasi-recessive trait in hybrid mothers, in agreement with Negro-Caucasian crosses.
The biological data include several classes of mortality (post-neonatal infant deaths, neonatal deaths, stillbirths, and early fetal deaths), three anthropometries (birth weight, maternal weight, maternal height) and twelve categories of congenital malformations. There is no consistent effect of hybridity of the child or of the parents on size or fitness, and an effect of interracial crossing greater than an equivalent inbreeding coefficient of .0034 can be excluded. This is less than the effect of isolate-breaking within the same race.
No racial effect can be detected on the total frequency of malformations. There appear to be differences in specific malformation rates. Spina bifida is most frequent in Caucasians, clubfoot in Hawaiians, and cleft palate and harelip in Japanese. These differences depend more on race of the father than on the maternal race, showing that maternal

effects are not responsible for racial differences and suggesting that the effects are non-genetic, since except for Y linkage no genetic mechanism is known which operates primarily through the father. In the absence of a hybridity effect, any hypothesis which involves récessives genes, such as Neel's model of multiple homozygous "phenodeviants," can be excluded as the cause of these racial differences.
Neel drew attention to the great excess of spina bifida in Caucasians compared with Japanese. In Hawaii the Japanese rate is significantly increased while the Caucasian rate has significantly declined. This convergence defies any genetic explanation and we must conclude that this, the most striking difference in specific malformations between the two races, is of environmental origin. The high infant mortality of Hawaiians also appears to be environmental.
In summary we can find no evidence of heterosis or recombination effects in man. It may be that a sample much larger than our 180,000 observations would reveal such effects, but the burden of proof is clearly on him who would claim to detect genetic outcrossing effects in human populations. Racial differences in morbidity and mortality are apparently not due to multiple homozygosity as suggested by Neel's "phenodeviant" hypothesis, and some of them are shown to be environmental in origin.

