Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Unwanted pregnancies among a group of relief recipients. A followup report on a persisting problem
Gitta Meier
To cite this article: Gitta Meier (1963) Unwanted pregnancies among a group of relief recipients. A followup report on a persisting problem, Eugenics Quarterly, 10:1, 36-39, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1963.9987540 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1963.9987540
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:27

UNWANTED PREGNANCIES AMONG A GROUP OF RELIEF RECIPIENTS. A FOLLOW-UP REPORT ON A PERSISTING PROBLEM

GITTA MEIER

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

In a prior issue of this journal we reported on an exploratory study of unwanted pregnancies among 25 multiproblem and long-term relief recipients in a midwestern county (Meier, 1961). On the basis of the information contained in the welfare department's case records, at least one-fourth of all pregnancies and at least one-third of those after their first contact with the welfare agency were estimated as being unwanted by these families themselves. The implications of such unwanted pregnancies for both the families and the community also were traced in some detail.
In the spring and fall of 1961--two years after the initial analysis of the case records--it became possible to interview all but five of the mothers at some length. These follow-up interviews were framed 10 serve two main purposes:
1. To provide a check on the accuracy of the original estimate of the incidence of unwanted pregnancies and hence of the appropriateness of agency records and the objective criteria of 'unwantedness' employed for studies of this sort and for any policy decisions and programming that might be derived from it.
2. To gain further understanding and insight into the causes and consequences of unwanted pregnancies among this group that could be both of academic and practical interest because of the unusual combination of data covering several years derived from the case records and the responses from structured, but open ended, interviews.
In this brief space only a few of the findings from this rich interview material can

be presented.
INCIDENCE OF UNWANTED PREGNANCIES
The over-all incidence of such pregnancies turned out to be even higher than previously estimated. Thus, by 1959, one-third of their 150 pregnancies would have been considered unwanted by these women themselves; by 1961 this proportion had increased to 59 out of 161. Furthermore, by 1959, half of the 80 pregnancies occurring after the families' first contact with the Welfare Department had been unwanted; by 1961, 50 out of 90 were viewed in this light.
POTENTIAL CONTRACEPTION EFFECTIVE-
NESS: A TENTATIVE CLASSIFICATION
These women then appear to share, perhaps in a somewhat exaggerated fashion, the fertility pattern determined to be most common among the lowest socioeconomic group in general. Yet, even within this limited segment, and therefore probably even more so for the 1015% of American families among whom very high fertility and excess fertility are most prevalent, the observed demographic uniformities must not be allowed to obscure the very real differences in their potential capacity to keep thenumber of their children within or close to that desired by them and the large majority of American parents. Awareness of these distinctions--which can be made without resort to elaborate interviewing --may in turn assist in the more economical development and adaptation of family planning services.1
O-Excess Fertility Nonusers (Nonplanners)
For less than 5% of the respondents,

36

Unwanted Pregnancies

37

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

giving birth to children appears to be of such overriding importance that all their pregnancies seem to have been wanted, regardless of the dismal circumstances surrounding their occurrence. The resulting complications are accepted with an almost nonchalant fatalism. These respondents justify their complete and open rejection of any form of family limitation on religious grounds, but the interviews revealed deep-rooted, idiosyncratic needs for successive child-bearing as possibly of greater importance. They and their offspring contribute out of proportion to the persistent problems and costs of the community. Unfortunately, the interviews failed to suggest any kind of outside persusasion to bring about any modification of their feelings and behavior, at least not until some very remote, selfset limit of fulfillment or endurance had been reached.
High-excess Fertility Nonusers, or Ineffectual and Uncommitted Users
Because of the very real dilemmas presented by the small minority described above, it is important to distinguish them from this much larger group who would indeed be quite satisfied with only three or four children. Not their religious convictions but varying admixtures of ignorance, fatalism, inertia, low intelligence, ingrained tabus and inhibitions, and unquestioning submission to male preferences explain their nonuse or quite ineffectual use of contraception. It takes more than the mere mentioning of a contraceptive or of the existence of a Planned Parenthood Clinic to encourage adoption of, and some likelihood of suc-
1While space as well as certain practical considerations explain the emphasis on the women alone in the rough categorization to follow, this should not be taken as neglect of the crucial role of the husband or boy friend and his interaction with the woman, which have received attention elsewhere. (Rainwater, 1960; Meier, 1962).

cessful use of, contraception. Public health visitors and social workers in continuing contact with many women of this type may be in a better position than medical personnel inside and outside of Planned Parenthood Clinics to give them the sustained understanding and encouragement neded; but, as a rule, these come too late and are not used for this purpose. For this reason, the more recent departures from the clinic-based family planning programs may hold out a greater promise.2
High-excess Fertility, Unsuccessful Users
For at least another third of the respondents, the number of unwanted pregnancies remains very high, despite certain factors in their background and personality that ordinarily suggest low excess fertility (some high-school education, employment, high aspirations, small family size preferences, and somewhat earlier knowledge and use of contraception). These are the women for whom appropriate help with family planning can indeed make the difference between overall success or failure, and who are quite aware of the personal consequences of high fertility in a society such as ours. Yet the pressures for nonuse and irregullar use of contraception for them is so much stronger than for middle class women that their receptiveness in this regard warrants much more than a casual recognition.3 Thus all the more systematic and positive approaches used or contemplated to encourage family planning among lower class families in gen-
2 Some of these approaches are discussed in two recent Planned Parenthod Symposia (Planned Parenthood Federation of America, 1961).
3 Such as the handing out of samples of contraceptives by some of the physicians asked for advice in the absence of health problems mentioned by the respondents.

38 Brief Reports

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

eral will have by far the greatest importance and impact on such women, especially if they and, if possible, their husbands can be reached early in their married life long before they have become clients of social agencies.
Successful Contraceptors
Since only two couples appear to have been practicing contraception successfully for two years or more after only one prior failure, no generalization as to this limited-success category are possible.
EXCESS FERTILITY AND
UNWANTED CHILDREN
One quite unanticipated, tentative conclusion drawn from these interviews should also be recorded here. It would appear that it is not so much the children born out of unwanted pregnancies but their older, wanted brothers and sisters--and through them the community--that are paying most heavily for their parents' inability to prevent these from occurring. Perhaps most disturbing in this picture is the observation that it is the more promising youngsters, of at least average endowment and from the most cohesive families, that show the greatest gap between initial modest promise and eventual achievement. Demonstrable strains and demands of excess fertility appear to be aggravating the other detrimental features in their environment. A more systematic investigation of this phenomenon would seem well worthwhile.4
CONCLUSIONS
On the basis of other studies in the field of family planning and public wel-
4This topic is discussed in more detail in a paper entitled The social costs of unwanted children, Gitta Meier, Teachers' College Record, Columbia University, New York (in press).

fare, there is good reason to believe that, with some regional variations, the incidence of unwanted pregnancies, as well as their consequences revealed by similar localized studies, are comparable to the one discussed here. From the present findings it appears that the overall dimensions of the problem encountered would be similar regardless of whether such investigations were based on an analysis of welfare department case records or on direct interviews with the clients of such agencies. However, if only the first, less time consuming and expensive method were used as a first step in the adoption of a more positive policy in this area, any realistic advance estimates as to the ensuing reduction of both unwanted pregnancies and their consequences need to take account of a) the continued presence of a small but highly fertile minority indifferent towards any rational argument in favor of restricted procreation and b) the continuing likelihood of repeated contraceptive failure of the women in the other two categories, if only the traditional methods of reaching them are contemplated. This latter consideration should, however, provide a strong incentive to imitate and improve upon the most successful family planning programs, both within the framework of a particular agency or on a communitywide basis. In this context, the increasing availability and acceptability of more foolproof forms of family limitation, both temporary and permanent, should be viewed as adding to the variety of choices open to their potential user. By itself, it does not lessen or eliminate the difficult responsibilites of professional personnel and community agencies in making these choices meaningful and useful to families such as those considered here.

Unwanted Pregnancies

39

REFERENCES
MEIER, GITTA, 1961. The effect of unwanted pregnancies on a relief load. Eugenics Quart., 8 (3): 142. , 1962. The role of the medical social worker in family planning. In The Manual of Contraceptive Practices, Edited by Mary S. Calderone. Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore

(to be published in 1963).
Planned Parenthood Federation of America, 1961. The Uncommon Sense of Social Research (Mimeographed) (April).
, 1961. Social Science and Social Action (Mimeographed) (October).
RAINWATER, LEE (assisted by Weinstein, Karol Kane), 1960. And the Poor Get Children. Quadrangle Books, Chicago.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:27 08 December 2015

