Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Physiological changes in successive pregnancies and birthorder effects
Eugene Schreeder
To cite this article: Eugene Schreeder (1967) Physiological changes in successive pregnancies and birthorder effects, Eugenics Quarterly, 14:1, 75-76, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1967.9987702 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1967.9987702
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:29

Brief Reports

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

PHYSIOLOGICAL CHANGES IN SUCCESSIVE PREGNANCIES AND BIRTH-ORDER EFFECTS

EUGENE SCHREEDER Laboratoire de Biométrie hnmaine Centre national de la Recherche scientifiqae
and Laboratoire d'Anthropologie physique
Ecole Fratiquedes Hautes Etudes Paris

Birth-order effects are probably more important than it is usually thought because they remain obvious in the adult. For instance, body-weight decreases with mother's parity, in full-grown males, whereas adult stature increases with advancing birth order.1 As far as I know, other variations which could be related to the parity, have not been investigated on adult samples.
The biological interpretation of birthorder effects is a difficult one. Newcombe has shown that early mortality increases with pregnancy--or birth order--and his study, based on the best data available, shows at the same time that this birthorder effect is independent of the mother's age. Then, he makes a distinction between the large birth-order effects beyond the first week of life and the smaller effects in the first week of life, the former being, in his opinion, almost certainly environmental in origin, the latter being perhaps due to maternalfetal incompatibility, the risk of sensiti-
1 This has been observed on a large sample of French adult males from rank 1 to rank 4, but in Norwegian soldiers the birth-order effect, also obvious for the same ranks, is reversed as far as body height is concerned (Udjus, 1964).

zation of the mother increasing with each successive pregnancy (Newcombe, 1965).
The scope of the present paper is to show that independently of maternalfetal incompatibility, there may be physiologically "normal" changes in successive pregnancies which may influence the fetus. It is well known that the serum iron level rises in pregnant women: whatever the analytical method used, average values found in pregnant women are about twice as high as averages found before pregnancy. For some authors, this rise is related to fetal haematopoietic needs. The serum iron level falls rapidly after parturition and after fetal death. After parturition, it tends at first to be lower than before pregnancy, but the previous level seems to be restored in a few hours or days.
The remarkable fact is that the serum iron, restored to normal level between pregnancies, rises again in pregnant women but attains lower values in each successive pregnancy. This is illustrated by some results shown in Table 1.
There is no age effect, at least in the present sample (age: 17-39 years). Instead, we find a low negative correlation with the duration of the pregnancy (P=0.05),

75

76

Brief Reports

Eugen. Quart.

TABLE 1
CORRELATIONS OF SERUM IRON LEVEL IN PREGNANT WOMEN (AT = 3 2 )

Correlation with:

r

Age Duration of pregnancy (months) Number o£ previous pregnancies

--0.05 --0.34 --0.55

and this agrees with other similar findings. Finally, there is a higher negative correlation with the number of previous pregnancies (P < 0.01). If the duration of pregnancy is held constant, this correlation does not change.
I do not know whether the rise of iron level in mother's serum is really related to fetal needs. It might just be a sideeffect. Nonetheless, the important thing is that each successive pregnancy seems to produce a physiological or biochemi-

cal change, independent of age, during the following pregnancy. As the mammalian reproductive process is, in a general way, troublesome and hazardous for the female, the successive changes should probably be considered as successive deteriorations.
It seems to me that the search for physiological and biochemical changes in successive pregnancies may throw some light on the birth-order effects. Of course, this does not exclude the simultaneous search for maternal-fetal immuno-incompatibility.
REFERENCES
NEWCOMBE, H. B., 1965. Environmental versus genetic interpretations of birth-order effects. Eugen. Quart. 12: 90-101.
UDJUS, L., 1964. Anthropometrical Changes in Norwegian Men in the Twentieth Century. Universitetsforlaget, Oslo.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:29 08 December 2015

