Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
A short course in medical genetics
John L. Fuller & Victor A. McKusick
To cite this article: John L. Fuller & Victor A. McKusick (1961) A short course in medical genetics, Eugenics Quarterly, 8:2, 98-101, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1961.9987468 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1961.9987468
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3 View related articles Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

A SHORT COURSE IN MEDICAL GENETICS
JOHN L. FULLER AND VICTOR A. MCKUSICK

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

The Roscoe B. Jackson Memorial Laboratory and The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine

aIENETICS HAS recently assumed a more
important place in the medical curriculum. This is in part because conquests in the areas of infectious disease and nutritional disease have made diseases of genetic origin relatively more conspicuous in our population. The genetic consequences of radiation exposure also loom high as public health hazards. Another reason for increasing interest in medical genetics has been the noteworthy discovery that many inherited diseases are actually molecular diseases whose origin is to be sought in faulty construction of basic cell constituents. Variations in the hemoglobin molecule produce conditions such as sickle cell anemia, a serious health problem in some regions of the world. Furthermore, important advances have been made in relating chromosomal aberrations to clinical syndromes. Perhaps most noteworthy has been the finding that mongolism, a type of mental deficiency whose origin was long shrouded in mystery, can be attributed to an extra autosomal chromosome which disturbs metabolic balance in the organism.
The introduction of any new discipline to the medical curriculum presents grave difficulties when it must be added to an already crowded list of requirements. Furthermore, keeping up-to-date in a rapidly moving area of science is difficult for an individual working by himself. To meet the needs of various cate-

gories of individuals who wished an introduction to the field, the short course in Medical Genetics was conceived in the summer of 1959. As originally outlined, the purpose of this course was to provide for faculty members in medical schools, universities and certain other professional schools an opportunity to become acquainted with the recent work in a broad area covered by the term "Medical Genetics." Thus the course was to include much more than the inheritance of specific disease conditions. An attempt would be made to provide insight into the development of modern ideas of heredity and to integrate medical applications with pertinent aspects of experimental mammalian genetics. This objective was emphasized by the subtitle chosen for the course, "Heredity and Disease in Man and Animals." To staff such a program required the collaboration of a medical school faculty and a staff which was primarily concerned with the basic aspects of mammalian genetics. Discussions were initiated between representatives of the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and the Roscoe B. Jackson Memorial Laboratory. As a result of preliminary discussions, the staffs of these two institutions decided to pool their resources and to present in the summer of 1960 an intensive two-week course on the principles of medical genetics.
On the basis of preliminary plans developed at Johns Hopkins and the Jack-

98

Brief Reports

99

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

son Laboratory, a proposal was submitted to the National Foundation for financial support to cover staff costs, teaching expenses and the rental of suitable quarters. The Foundation responded generously, making it possible to eliminate completely all tuition fees, and we are happy to record that similar support has been granted for 1961. The Course was conducted at Bar Harbor, Maine, in the Oakes Center of Bowdoin College, a beautiful mansion located on the shores of Frenchman's Bay. The pleasant and restful surroundings were a major contribution to the success of the venture since distractions were at a minimum and participants could devote full time to reading and discussion.
Announcement of the course was made through the scientific press early in 1960. Originally it was planned to take 30 students, but the number of acceptable candidates increased so that this quota was raised, first to 40 and then to 45. Actually over 200 completed applications were received and many well-qualified individuals could not be accepted because of limitations of space. The final group included representatives from medical schools in 19 states and provinces, one dental school and two schools of veterinary medicine. The academic status of the "students" ranged from Deans of Faculties to recent graduates holding hospital residencies.
As finally constituted, the teaching staff included nine representatives from the Johns Hopkins University and 11 from the Jackson Memorial Laboratory. Eight visiting lecturers also contributed one or more lectures each. Classes met each morning for four hours and again for a two-hour session in the evening. Afternoons were left free for recreational activity, but a number of the partici-

pants used this period for reading in the small library set up especially for the course, while others were regular attendants at a series of films illustrating major principles of genetics.
The first week was devoted essentially to basic genetics, starting with mitosis and the formation of germ cell, extending through blood groups, biochemical genetics, and cytogenetics and into the statistical aspects of genetic investigations. Considerable emphasis was given to the pitfalls of family investigations, and the fact that simple recurrence of a disorder within a family is not enough arbitrarily to label it as hereditary. The second week dealt more specifically with individual syndromes and classes of disorders. The subjects ranged from muscular dystrophy, congenital malformations, anemia, and neurological defects to cancer, circulatory disorders, psychiatric conditions and radiation genetics. Obviously, it was impossible in a short period to deal exhaustively with any of these subjects, but an effort was made to bring the student body up-to-date on the current situation in each class of conditions. The curriculum for 1961 has been revised on the basis of the 1960 experience. Table I provides the tentative schedule for 1961.
Staff and students both seemed to enjoy themselves during the two-week session. At the end of the period all individuals were invited to submit a critique of the course, and favorable comments outweighed the negative ones. However, on the basis of these statements, modifications in the curriculum are planned for the year 1961. In general, the revised course will devote somewhat more time to basic genetics, including the nature of the gene, and the relation of nucleic acid structure to the transmission of genetic information. To compen-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

100
Date Monday, August 7
Tuesday, August 8
Wednesday, August 9 Thursday, August 10
Friday, August 11 Saturday, August 12 Monday, August 14
Tuesday, August 15
Wednesday, August 16 Thursday, August 17 Friday, August 18

Brief Reports

TABLE 1
SHORT COURSE IN MEDICAL CENETICS

Morning

Evening

Principles of genetics: I. Segregation and independent assortment. II. Linkage; inferences from breeding experiments.

Physical basis of heredity. I. Mitosis, meiosis, crossingover.

Physical basis of heredity. II. Chromosomal aberrations.
Allelism. Pedigree patterns.

Cytogenetics in man.

The chemical basis of inheritance.

The variant hemoglobins.

Chemical aspects of gene action. I. Introduction. II. Genetic polymorphisms of serum proteins.

Tryptophane synthetase, a model of biochemical genetics.

Chemical aspects of gene action. III. Inborn errors of metabolism.

Experimental analysis of gene action, with particular reference to the mouse.

Gene action: The blood groups.

Gene action and immunity. I. Biologic individuality. II. Histocompatibility.
III. Resistance to infection.

Biology of mutation I.

Genes in populations. I. Equilibrium states.
II. Factors influencing gene frequency.
Biology of mutation II.

Quantitative inheritance.

Genes in kindreds (Statistical methods, ascertainment biases, modes of inheritance, linkage).

Panel: Selection and evolution in man.

Genes in development.

Congenital malformations.

12 short invitation papers presenting recent works which illustrate approaches and principles in medical genetics.

sate there will be a reduction in the amount of time devoted to the discussion of specific familial diseases, though enough will be given to illustrate the principles of hereditary disease in human populations.
As originally conceived, the course had the particular objective of bringing medical faculties up-to-date information which might be introduced into existing courses. It was recognized that really satisfactory teaching of medical genetics requires professional geneticists attached to the staff and that a short course can-

not provide this type of training. Exposure of pediatricians and internists to geneticists seemed to strengthen sentiment for the introduction of such programs into medical schools. In several instances the short course seemed to provide an added stimulus for participants to continue their training in genetics. At least three members of the first class will be affiliated in 1961 with medical genetics centers in leading medical schools for the purpose of obtaining advanced training in this area. Thus, recruitment of personnel has been added

Brief Reports

101

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

to the original objectives, particularly for those participants who are just beginning their professional careers. It is hoped, also, that acquaintance on the part of deans and senior faculty of medical schools with the scope of, and opportunities in, medical genetics will lead to their counseling promising young men to enter this area. Still another objective is to provide research workers in the medical sciences with information on recent advances in genetics which may further their investigations, and to acquaint them with useful models from the field of mammalian genetics. Although medical genetics will always be predominately human genetics, there are many analogues of human diseases in mice, rabbits and dogs which can be studied experimentally with great profit. The close contact of medical scientists with individuals working predominately with animals is bound to produce significant interactions at the staff level as well as among the students. Because the course is provided with a faculty of liberal size and wide competence, all of these objectives can be approached simultaneously.
Perhaps stimulating intellectual interaction among the faculty should be listed

as an extra dividend, one which may become progressively more important in later years. Opportunity for the interchange of ideas was used to the full and several cooperative research projects were initiated in the coffee hours held on a terrace overlooking Frenchman's Bay.
Plans are proceeding for the 1961 course and the number of applications again suggests that the demand for such training far exceeds our capacity to provide it. We hope to repeat the course annually until the backlog of demand has been substantially reduced, and perhaps thereafter offer such training at regular intervals as a refresher for past students and as an opportunity for younger individuals considering the field of medical genetics as a career. It is too early, of course, to know all the repercussions of this program, but its success must be measured by the extent to which (1) it stimulates individuals to become students of medical genetics,
(2) it raises the level of the teaching of medical genetics in medical schools, and (3) it provides communication between the clinical branches and the research workers who have an intimate concern with problems of heredity and disease.

