Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Psychiatry and marital problems: Mental health implications
Emily Hartshorne Mudd
To cite this article: Emily Hartshorne Mudd (1955) Psychiatry and marital problems: Mental health implications, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:2, 110-117, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987233 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987233
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

Family Life Division

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

PSYCHIATRY AND MARITAL PROBLEMS
Mental Health Implications*
EMILY HARTSHORNE MUDD
Assistant Professor of Family Study in Psychiatry, Ph.D. School of Medicine
and Director, Marriage Council of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania

JL SYCHIATRIC RESOURCES IN THE UNITED inherent in the interpersonal relations be-

States are heavily overburdened with se- tween the disturbed person and his closest

verely mentally ill, psychoneurotics and al- family members: parents andchildren, hus-

coholics. Thousands cannot obtain treat- band or wife.

ment because suitable institutions and ex- The innate complexities of the psychic

perienced medical and nursing personnel attributes of the human organism have

are unavailable or overly costly. For these been subjected in Western culture to only

reasons all avenues to the prevention of the early stages of rigorous scientific scru-

mental ill-health in the United States are tiny. Currently in the United States mem-

being explored and newapproaches to the bers of different professions, primarily the

development of personal competence are physician, the clinical psychologist, the so-

being subjected to experiment.

cial worker, and the minister, have respon-

Customs concerning marriage and fam- sibility for assisting persons troubled in ily living are embedded in the social, re- their marital relationships. There are varyligious, and legal institutions of different ing criteria of how such professional pernations. The rate at which these vastly dif- sons can be trained adequately and accredferent customs reflect cultural change has ited for work in marital adjustment situabeen greatly accelerated in many sections tions, andthere are varying techniquesand of the world recently by the advent of philosophies concerning how most ademechanization, communication, scientific quately theperson who comes for help may discovery and the impact of war. Innu- be assisted.

merable situations andmyriad ways may be Development of Marriage

observed in which resultant stress and Counseling in the U. S.

anxiety are reflected in the daily functioning of men and women. The mental health of the individual is influenced by his adjustment to himself physiologically and psychologically, and his adjustment to persons intimately related to him and his environment. Experience leads many physicians to conclude that symptoms of disturbances in their patients become modified in proportion to thesatisfaction or frustration

As a result considerable experimentation has ensued in theformalization of efforts to work with adjustment problems and to promote increased personal competence focussed in the marriage relationship. Case studies have been reported andsubjected to the scrutiny of an interprofessional group, the American Association of Marriage Counselors.f associated together since 1946. The purpose of this Association is toex-

*Paper presented by invitation at Philadelphia plore and exchange information concern-
Psychiatric Hospital, Jan. 20, 1955, andat the Fourteenth Japan Medical Congress, Kyoto, Japan, April National Headquarters, Room A206, 270 Park
Avenue, NewYork City.

110

Ill

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ing the special skills utilized in what has become known as marriage counseling and to promote high professional standards in this field. The membership of this association in 1954 indicated 30 per cent were physicians--of them 11 per cent were gynecologists, 9 per cent psychiatrists, 9 per cent general medicine, 1 per cent urologists--18 per cent educators, 15 per cent were social workers, 13 per cent clinical psychologists, 12 per cent sociologists, 12 per cent ministers.
Some of these members use marriage counseling skills within their private practice, others in hospital clinics, social agencies, university counseling services or centers organized specifically for marriage counseling. There are several hundred such organizations in urban areas in the United States which offer marriage counseling.^: These are organized under different auspices, primarily medical, educational, religious. All are operated without financial profit, charging nominal fees or no fee payable to the agency. (I)
A Specific Marriage Counseling Service
Third to be initiated in the United States, among services focused entirely on marriage counseling, and related activities, was the Marriage Council of Philadelphia established in 1932 "to help young married couples and those contemplating marriage to a better understanding of what companionship in married life involves, and thus to help them avoid some of the causes of marital difficulties." This agency has always been non profit making, available to anyone, regardless of race, creed, or national origin and sponsored by men and women of recognizedly high professional caliber. It has always employed professionally trained staff, as counselors, primarily social workers with a psychiatrist part time. Its work with clients has been under the supervision of a medical and a legal
These figures include many of the 260 member agencies of the Family Service Association of Amer-

supervisory committee. In 1950 the Marriage Council was officially affiliated with the School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, by becoming the operational unit of a new Division of Family Study of the Department of Psychiatry. (2) It is supported by fees from counseling with individuals and family life education work with groups; grants from private foundations, state and federal funds for training and research. Membership contributions from interested citizens in the community are an important yearly source of revenue.
In 1954 Marriage Council staff saw about one thousand cases yearly, about seven hundred of these being new clients. About nine thousand persons desiring to discuss all aspects of family living met with staff in classes or groups. This is called familylife education. To handle this work in addition to the secretarial staff (5 full time), we have four full-time staff members and seven part-time, and a part-time psychiatric consultant. An interdisciplinary research team of five part-time members is responsible for the research program.
At this point we might well ask ourselves the direct question: What actually is marriage counseling? Marriage counseling is defined as the process through which a professionally trained counselor assists two persons (the engaged or marriage partners) to develop abilities in resolving, to some workable degree, the problems that trouble them in their interpersonal relationships as they move into a marriage, live with it, or (in a small number of instances) move out of it. The focus of the counselor's approach is the relationship between the two people in the marriage rather than, as in psychiatric therapy, the reorganization of the personality structure of the individual. The theoretical framework behind this approach presents the following hypothesis: That, if an individual can experience during the counseling process, new understanding of himself and his marriage partner and more satisfying ways of using himself in his daily relationships in mar-

112 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

riage and with his family he should be clients trust his integrity and can discuss

able to apply these acquired abilities to their feelings and behavior with freedom

other problem situations as these may arise and candor knowing that it will not be

in his daily living.

discussed with the other partner unless he

Marriage requires two persons; therefore so desires.

it has been our philosophy here, as in many By establishing a continuing relationship other marriage counseling services in the with each partner the counselor can learn

United States, to make every effort to work with both husband and wife. This approach is explained at application and reiterated during counseling. When one partner re-

far earlier in the contact, than when working with one partner only, how much the material presented by the client represents projections or reality. When the stories of

fuses counseling initially, we start with the partner who desires help and in over 75 per cent of our cases we do have contact with both partners. We experimented in having each partner work with his own individual counselor, scheduling periodic conferences between the two counselors to keep in touch with progress. We found this procedure time consuming and expensive for agency. We also, on the basis of experience, felt it was often confusing and even separating in effect upon the husband and wife. We have routinely, for the last five years or so, scheduled one counselor to work with both the husband and wife. Each partner is seen separately at weekly interviews of approximately 50 minutes each. As part of the intake process and at intervals, when deemed appropriate by the counselor and each partner, a joint interview with husband and wife together is held. Phantasy and reality often meet for the clients and the counselor in this threeway conference.

events experienced together during, the week continue to be unrecognizable to the counselor from the reporting of each partner, it becomes obvious that one, or maybe both, are distorting reality. On the other hand when the counselor receives almost identical descriptions of events from each partner over a period of weeks, even tho these partners are at dagger's point, it is apparent that, no matter how difficult the situation, we are dealing with problems and situations which appear to have the same reality for both persons involved. By keeping the focus on those factors in attitudes, feeling, and behavior which precipitate disturbance and suffering from one or both spouses, the counselor is able to discuss with each client early experiences which appear to the client to be sources of his present value system and resulting behavior. Obviously the marriage counselor must recognize the kind of apparently satisfying balance which two individuals, whether "normal" or neurotic, can work

We realize there are special problems of out in a marriage. Only if there is dissatis-

transference and counter transference in- faction on the part of one or both partners

herent in one counselor working with both would a couple come for marriage counsel-

husband and wife. It is necessary for the ing. In such a case emphasis would be on

marriage counselor to have a very real self- the way the neurotic behavior affects the

awareness of his dual role; his identifica- partner relationship.

tions, his biases, his cultural prejudices, his Discussion in the area of sexual relations

moral, ethical and sexual codes of behav- can often be particularly rewarding in

ior, his value system as this may affect and terms of understanding certain of the dy-

be affected by the vagaries and perhaps namics of the personalities involved and

divergent attitudes and feelings of his two some of the characteristics of their interre-

clients. He must clarify at the onset of lationship. Schedules, initiated in our re-

counseling the confidential nature of his search program to cover information con-

relationship with each partner so that his cerning sexual feelings, attitudes, and be-

113

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

havior, are utilized during the counseling sion by other thoughtful persons of the sub-

session, at the discretion of the counselor. jects under exploration aids the process of

These permit obtaining systematic mate- assimilation of new ideas, information, and

rial from both husband and wife about the reorientation of attitudes, feelings, and

something presumably jointly experienced. finally behavior.**

The discrepancies in these reports and the The range of contact with clients in our

indicated lack of information in the esti- marriage counseling service is from 1 or 2

mates by one partner as to how the other interviews with an engaged couple to 50 or

partner thinks and feels give important more interviews during a year or so with

clues to the emotional overtones and blocks couples who present continuing and diffi-

of each person. For example in a marriage cult problems. The average post marital

in which the clients both recognize a sexual counseling would run from roughly six to

problem based on the husband being de- ten sessions of 55 minutes at weekly inter-

sirous of more frequent coitus than the vals. These interviews are (of course) face

wife, it can be predicted on the basis of our to face and deal primarily with conscious

research findings, that the husband will be material. When a client becomes more dis-

likely to estimate sex relations as occurring turbed during these contacts or his needs

on the average of say once weekly whereas necessitate exploration of his total person-

the wife in this same marriage will prob- ality organization, psychiatric treatment is

ably estimate sex relations as occurring interpreted to him and a referral is effected

three times weekly. The distortion is in the whenever possible. During fifteen years the

direction of what the individual feels he percentage of such referrals has varied from

most resents; the husband exaggerating his 8 to 15 per cent of total intake. When cli-

deprivation of intercourse, the wife, the ents are referred by a psychiatrist or report

amount of his demand. The actual reality psychiatric treatment before coming to

is probably somewhere between the two Marriage Council, we try to obtain their

reports (3) (4).

permission to consult the psychiatrist as to

When the same counselor works with the suitability of Marriage Council working

both husband and wife, many such exam- with the situation.

ples of the emotional overtones which color We see more women than men, a ratio of

and distort the impressions of reality of about two-thirds to one-third; the majority

an interpersonal relationship are apparent. of our clients are between 20 and 35 years

With skill these discrepancies can be dis- of age, and all religious affiliations are rep-

cussed, the emotions involved explored and, resented, with Protestants leading. Slightly

with the reassuring relationship with the more than half have college or more than

counselor, who often performs the role of college education, the rest some or all of

the kindly, caring, permissive parent surro- high school. Economically we see primarily

gate, the client can risk modifications in his a middle-income group with a few extremes

former behavior. As new experience brings more satisfaction and less frustration these risks are consolidated--communication between husband and wife is effected on both a feeling and verbal level and behavior is recognized within a more realistic framework.
In certain cases the counselor suggests that the client supplement the counseling interview by reading material. Sometimes seeing the written word or finding discus-

**Books found to be of use to clients include: "The Happy Family," Levy and Monroe, Alfred
Knopf, New York, 1943, $2.75. "Marriage: The Art of Lasting Love," David R.
Mace, Doubleday & Co., N. Y., 1952, $2.75. "A Marriage Manual," Stone and Stone, Simon and
Schuster, New York, 1952, $3.50. "When You Marry," Duvall and Hill, Association
Press, New York, 1945, $3.00. "Emotional Maturity," Leon J. Saul, J. B. Lippin-
cott, Philadelphia, 1947, $5.00. "Marriage and Sexual Harmony," Oliver M. But-
terfield, Emerson Books, N. Y., 1943, $.50. "A Sex Guide to Happy Marriage," Edward F.
Griffith, M.R.L.S., L.R.C.P., Emerson Books, Inc., N. Y., 1952, $3.00.

114 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

at either end. Marriage Council quotes a One senior student wrote the following

sliding fee set by the counselor and client statement after his experience in the six-

together on the basis of the client's income week elective at the clinic.

and responsibilities. In 1954 eighty-three per cent of clients paid fees, the average for those paying being approximately $3.66 per office interview ($3.57 for total).
In addition to the individual counseling our Marriage Council and Division of Family Study have accepted responsibility for three other branches of program: teaching medical students, post-graduate training, and research.
Teaching of Medical Students
Three years ago our Division of Family Study offered two electives for senior medical students at the University of Pennsylvania. One course consisted of 16 weekly lectures in Family Attitudes and Sexual Behavior. Ninety-two out of 125 seniors registered for this the first year. The second elective admits a few seniors, (3 to 7) to the clinic yearly as participant observers for a period of six weeks.
The purpose of these two courses, as stated by Dr. Kenneth Appel (5), is to acquaint the senior medical student with the kinds of problems men and women have in marriage, how tensions, anxieties, frustra-

"The art of marriage counseling requires a different approach from that of the science of medicine, but it is an integral part of the art of medicine. Although much of medicine requires the objectivity of science, the importance of interpersonal relationships in the treatment of patients can not be minimized. Every patient has some problems, (large and small) which may at some time be brought to the attention of the physician, isolated or in association with a medical problem. It is of great importance to both the patient and the doctor that the physician be equipped to handle such a situation. Here the approach of the counselor, as an attentive, understanding and sympathetic confidant, is an essential part of the physician's equipment.
The effective physician is a product of his heredity and environment, the whole gamut of interpersonal relationships he has experienced and to which he has responded throughout his lifetime, as well as the technical training in medicine. . . . The practice of marriage counseling does much to reorient the physician in this life-long experience and to integrate the scientific training into the evolution of the good physician."

tions, resentments and angers that accompany these conflicts affect the health of the individuals involved and most important, what the medical practitioner can do to be helpful with his conflicted patients himself, or in referral to psychiatry. "We believe," he continues, "that the study of family attitudes, sex behavior, and marriage counseling are important in the practice of medicine because:

Post Graduate In-service Training
There are many professional disciplines' wherein the need for marriage counseling skill arises. The minister, physician, clinical psychologist, case worker, and familylife educator may all at some time be called upon to render marriage counseling service particularly in smaller communities where there are no established services of this nature or psychiatric resources. How-

1. The doctor is often family advisor in these subjects--is turned to as an expert first and foremost.
2. Much psychosomatic illness has its root in unhealthy interpersonal relationships; in attitudes toward sex and in unhealthy sexual behavior.
3. Family and social ramifications of sexual difficulties result in a great deal of marital unhappiness, divorce and delinquency."

ever, there are few specific supervised training experiences on the post-graduate level focused on marriage counseling within these various fields. Our training program is not concerned with sending "marriage counselors" as such into communities but rather to prepare professional persons in various fields to use the specialized skills they may learn in a marriage counseling

115

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

service, in conjunction with their established profession. In so doing it is our hope that the person should be able (1) to aid in the prevention of future marital difficulties through parent education, young people's discussion groups and individual premarriage counseling, (2) to utilize their acquired skills to judge whether the particular client needs to be referred to another specialized source of help, in particular for psychiatric treatment if it is available, and (3) to counsel on those marital problems which fall within their function and with which they expect to work with a reaonable degree of effectiveness. We believe that marriage counseling is safeguarded and improved when effected under medical or psychiatric supervision and we therefore urge this whenever such facilities are available. The in-service training program at the graduate level has continued at Marriage Council since 1950, the minimum period now being 9 months of halftime work. In addition to the nineteen neuropsychiatric residents, thirty-two persons have completed this program.

years (through 1954) 19 residents--all men -- have completed a minimum of six months' part-time experience in marriage counseling.
Almost all of these "trainees" keep in touch with us, and we receive a substantial number of requests from different parts of the country to fill positions requiring persons with special experience in marriage counseling. Many of these neuropsychiatric residents have written us that the techniques of marriage counseling are time saving and of considerable usefulness to them in their psychiatric practice and that the concept of working with both partners in a marriage-focused problem has in selected cases worked out with practical effectiveness. Of the twenty-three nonpsychiatric personnel, who completed the program in 1954, all are holding positions which utilize their marriage counseling skills in greater or less degree, 11 are employed in marriage counseling services, 5 are in mental hygiene or medical clinics, 4 are teaching in high schools or colleges, 3 are in parish work.

Of the total group of thirty-two who have completed their training (twenty-five completed and seven currently training) two are Medical Doctors, three have graduate degrees in Sociology, four in Social Work, four in Clinical Psychology, four in the Ministry and fifteen in Family Life Education (of whom three also have ministerial degrees). Twelve of the specialists in Family Life Education were sent for training by Teachers College, Columbia University, which uses Marriage Council as a field placement for their interdepartmental doctoral major in Family Life Education and Counseling.
Placement For Veterans Administration Neuropsychiatric Residents
In 1947 the Veterans Administration contracted with Marriage Council to be one of the clinics to train their three-year residents in neuropsychiatry. In the subsequent six

Evaluation of the Results of Marriage Counseling
As we mentioned in the beginning of this paper the psychic attributes of the human organism in Western culture are being subjected to only the early stages of scientific scrutiny. The same limitations hold for objective scrutiny of the processes involved in attempting to help troubled persons with problems of personal or family adjustments. The stresses and strains which precipitate physiological or mental pathology quite naturally vary in different cultures but are inevitable to some degree in all groups. In the process known as marriage counseling, which aims at enabling the upset person to develop more bearable interpersonal relationships, what actually happens within the inner sanctum of the interviewing room is, with few exceptions, a matter of nebulous obscurity to all but the two participators. There is little scien-

116 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

tific information available concerning what effect a series of interviews with an analyst, a psychiatrist, a clinical psychologist, a social worker or a marriage counselor actually has on the adjustment of a disturbed individual or on a distorted situation.
In recent years in many countries an appreciable increase in undertaking the assessment of the outcome of such services has been evidenced in most professional disciplines and specialties. It is healthy that a few pioneer scientists have ignited curiosity among the younger practitioners. It is also fortunate that questions are being asked by these newcomers as well as by boards of directors and intelligent laymen which we, although professionally trained and experienced, find it hard to answer. A cultish apathy will furnish little eventual protection from the necessity of proving through scientifically acceptable methods that our hypotheses concerning how people are helped can be subjected to verification and prove their reliability and validity.
An effort in this direction has been undertaken by our Division of Family Study. Under funds from the United States Public Health Service for the last six years we have studied factors affecting marital adjustment and have also attempted to evaluate the results of marriage counseling.
As a beginning our research team published a method of known reliability for recovering information from discursive case records (6). Subsequently an analysis of a sample of case records was made. This included a judgment of the movement of clients during counseling; (improvement or lack of improvement) i.e., "the extent to which the client has increased in decisiveness, has experienced release from tension, has acquired useful information, new techniques or greater understanding, with which he can deal more successfully with his problems, etc. Types of problems brought to counseling, the counseling techniques used, and the effectiveness of these techniques have been analyzed in part and many of these items have been treated sta-

tistically." In a group of cases in which both clients and their partners were counseled we found that approximately "5 per cent of the cases showed retrogression, from 25 to 30 per cent showed no movement (improvement) at all, and from 60 to 66 per cent showed positive movement (or improvement) ." In studying the various factors affecting movement in counseling we have concluded as follows:
1. "Biographical factors point in the direction which indicates that clients are people rather than statistics. Age, education, and the other bases on which the population is often fractionized seem not to play any essential role in determining movement in counseling.
2. The evidence points strongly in the direction of the fact that the determinants of movement are multiple and complex.
3. There is some evidence to support the view that the setting of a permissive, encouraging atmosphere and relationship is the principally helpful function of the counselor.
4. There is substantial evidence to support the conclusion that, if both marriage partners come for counseling, husbands and wives counseled separately and independently, although usually by the same counselor, move together; that is, if one improves the other improves and if one retrogresses the other retrogresses." (7)
Summary--Mental Health Implications
Certain people are first conscious of extreme disappointment, anger, and emotional disturbance in the daily adjustments of the marriage relationship. Others suffer from physical symptoms, the origin of which cannot be discovered by routine medical examinations. Because in the last decade in the United States popular articles, books, radio, and television programs have emphasized the subject of marriage and family living, many upset or anxious persons will refer themselves or their friends for marriage counseling. The majority of these persons would hesitate at

117

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

this stage in their problem to resort to psychiatry. Experience has indicated that nine out of ten such couples who have marital problems and who come for counseling can be treated through counseling and that approximately two-thirds of this group can obtain some degree of relief and can learn methods of resolving their difficulties. The tenth person can usually be aided to accept referral for psychiatric treatment.
Adequate marriage counseling facilities, in which emphasis is on knowing what not to undertake as much as what to under-

take, offer services which supplement those of psychiatry. Such facilities deal with troubled persons at incipient stages in their difficulties, or when the difficulties, although of long duration, have not yet produced mental illness. Because marriage counseling contacts are brief compared with average psychiatric contacts, the individual cost is substantially less even when psychiatric supervision is maintained. If 66 per cent of counseled cases show improvement, it appears that marriage counseling can offer a service auxiliary to that of psychiatry toward the mental health of the community.

REFERENCES

1. "The Practice of Marriage Counseling," Emily Hartshorne Mudd, Association Press, New York, 1951.
2. Marriage and the Psychiatrists, University of Pennsylvania Medical Bulletin, Philadelphia, December, 1952.
3. "Effect on Casework of Obtaining Research Material," E. H. Mudd, H. B. Froscher, W. L. Peltz, M. G. Preston, Social Casework,Vol. XXXI, No. 1, pp. 11-17, Jan., 1950.
4. Impressions of Personality as a Function of Marital Conflict, M. G. Preston, W. L. Peltz, E. H. Mudd, H. B. Froscher, Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, Vol. 47, No. 2, Supplement, pp. 326-336, April, 1952.

5. Medical School Electives on Family Attitudes, Sexual Behavior, and Marriage Counseling, K. E. Appel, M.D., E. H. Mudd, Ph.D., P. Q. Roche, M.D. Presented at the American Psychiatric Association Annual Meeting, May 4, 1954, and now in press in Journal of Psychiatry.
6. An Experimental Study of a Method for Abstracting the Contents of Social Case Records, M. G. Preston, E. H. Mudd, W. L. Peltz, and H. B. Froscher, Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, Vol. 4, pp. 628-646, October, 1950.
7. "Factors Affecting Movement in Casework," M. G. Preston, E. H. Mudd, H. B. Froscher, Social Casework, Vol. XXXIV, No. 3, pp. 103111, March, 1953.

