Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Mobilizing social pressures toward small families
Edward Pohlman
To cite this article: Edward Pohlman (1966) Mobilizing social pressures toward small families, Eugenics Quarterly, 13:2, 122-127, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1966.9987655 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1966.9987655
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal View related articles Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:28

MOBILIZING SOCIAL PRESSURES TOWARD SMALL FAMILIES*

EDWARD POHLMAN
University of the Pacific Stockton, California

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

A projection of present trends suggests that the technology of contraception will become more and more perfected, and dissemination and use of available contraceptives will be increasingly widespread. If so, harnessing population growth may become less a matter of getting couples to use better contraception and more a matter of influencing people to want fewer children (Meier, 1958b). Such a harsh strategy may seem unnecessary. Osborn (1963) has estimated that if unwanted conceptions could be eliminated in the United States, population growth could be cut back to a replacement rate. Perhaps his calculations are too optimistic (Pohlman, 1965), but on the other hand there are probably more unwanted conceptions than admitted in the survey (Freedman et al., 1959) on which Osborn based most of his figures. Mauldin (1966) and Rainwater (1965, p. 120) have presented figures suggesting that family size preferences or ideals may be smaller in some countries than in the United States. Perhaps helping people to have no more children than they want is sufficient. But speculation on possible ways of manipulating family size preferences does not seem to be wasted, in view of the apparent threats of overpopulation. It is interesting to contrast this threat with the one that seems to have prompted, in part, some studies a quarter of a century ago--a threat of declin-
* The investigations upon which this manuscript is based were supported by the Planned Paremthood Federation of America.

mg population (Whelpton and Riser, 1945, p. 387; Flanagan, 1942, p. 7).
The spectre of "experts" monkeying around with such private matters as family size desires frightens many people as being too "Big Brotherish." But those involved in eugenics, or psychotherapy, or child psychology, or almost any aspect of family planning are constantly open to the charge of interfering in private lives, so that the charge would not be new. As a psychologist, this writer is accustomed to trying to manipulate the behavior of children and adults for ends that he deems as being for their good. Of course, many injustices have been done with the rationale of being "for their good." But the population avalanche may be used to justify--perhaps rationalize--contemplation of large-scale attempts to manipulate family size desires, even rather stealthily.
This discussion is based primarily on research in the United States; it should have some applicability elsewhere, however. A direct appeal to people to volunteer to curtail family size because it will reduce national or world population growth or help the national income is probably somewhat ineffective. When American women who favored contraception were asked why, only 2% mentioned "general social problems," though they were permitted more than one response (Freedman et al., 1959, p. 169). Rainwater (1965, pp. 143, 144) apparently found negligible proportions of husbands or wives referring to population problems as a reason why parents

122

ии' и]

Vol. 13, No. 2

Pressures Toward Small Families

123

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

might wish for a small family. Bogue (1964) sees as a false dichotomy the division of motives for family limitation into self-interest versus collective national interest. He hypothesizes that any substratum of any population is able "to comprehend the national population problem in collective terms, and to be impressed by the urgent need for action." He indicates that family planning programs in several nations have successfully presented the need for birth control in ways that are simultaneously national and individual. However, Bogue does not pretend to be presenting evidence that any parents have been so impressed by national population problems as actually to change their family plans. It may be fairly easy to give lip service to national needs. We regard Bogue's basic point--that national problems can affect parents' decisions--as a good one, but we prefer to incorporate it into the framework below.
If a "climate of opinion" could be encouraged in a subgroup in any population whereby small families were widely regarded as a patriotic duty, or an obligation to mankind, this might have some effects. Here the effective force in reducing parents' family size desires would not be, primarily, concern over national or world population, but concern over the opinions of other people the parents know. Although a complete dichotomy between these two kinds of concerns may be false, in our opinion the latter would be much more influential. Parents might not "really" care about world population growth ("What's our one or two extra kids going to amount to among all those millions?"). But if four or five children were a constant reminder to friends that they had not cooperated in a general campaign, parents might stop families earlier. The strategy suggested here seems to have a parallel in the "war

effort" during World War II, when individuals who might not have been willing to save used toothpaste tubes or collect scrap because of any interest in the war overseas were willing to do so because of the opinions of those close at hand. It seems likely that an unknown proportion of parents feel some social pressure to have additional children and would welcome any "national population effort" as an excuse to avoid having them.
Meier (1958a, 1958b) concludes that the most feasible approach to reducing population growth is to elevate the status of the childless married woman. Half a century ago Hollingworth (1916) wrote about social pressures to have children; Waller and Hill (1951) speak of two great conspiracies: that of the married to get the unmarried married, and that of parents to get the childless to have children. Writing in a popular magazine, Greene (1963) complains bitterly of the pressures to which she is subjected as one who chooses to be childless. Rainwater (1965, pp. 140, 141) found the image of the deliberately childless woman to be completely negative--"either totally self-involved, childish, neurotic or in poor health." The present writer has collected a series of statements from medical or social science publications that imply or state that the deliberately childless are usually somehow maladjusted. Granted such pressures, some may decide they want children as proof of normality.
Whether or not singleness, or childlessness within marriage, can or should be widely popularized is in some doubt. Somewhat more promising, probably, are prospects for popularizing very small families as part of a national or world effort. Rainwater (1965, pp. 139-152) found (to oversimplify) that the parent who has fewer children than he can af-

124

Pohlman

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

ford is viewed as somewhat stingy and selfish, while the parent who has as many as he can support is "good" (p. 150). This contrast implies that to be "good," one needs to have a generous supply of children. The portrayal of the woman with one child is quite negative as a whole and that of the woman with seven children, positive (pp. 140, 141). Granted such a situation, we might expect parents to feel a need to apologize for not having more children. Earlier, Rainwater (1960, p. 49) reported evidence of just that. Parents found it hard to admit that they just did not want more children. They appear to have been apologizing as they explained their behavior in terms of finances or the wife's health. Rainwater (1965, p. 148) interprets some middleclass people as saying, in effect, that "some people have large families not so much because they really want them as because they feel social pressure to do so."
If a climate of opinion could be created that somewhat reversed the above picture, the person with the small family would be seen as "good," nobly cooperating with the needs of the nation and the world to curtail population; and the person with a large family would be flaunting the common good for his own selfish ends. In such an atmosphere, parents would need to give reasons and apologies for having so many children, rather than for not having more. If, as Rainwater (1960, p. 49) suggests, some people use finances or health as an excuse when for other reasons they wish to avoid childbearing, then concern with the "population emergency" might provide them with a good excuse.
As it now stands, having large families is not condemned in this country, and even the having of an unwanted child seems to be more a matter of pity or

humor among peers than of censure. Preliminary studies suggest that for a married couple to have a definitely unwanted conception is not viewed as a very "sinful" act, in comparison to other "sins" (Pohlman, 1966). This picture, too, might change.
Stycos (1958) suggests that any one parent may have several conflicting ideas about family size, gained in part from different membership and reference groups. For example, a lower-class woman might express one view in the presence of her peers, whom she perceives as worshipping the big family, and another in the presence of a middle-class interviewer, seen as promoting moderate family size. Both these views might be different from her own "private" view. Stycos warns us not to assume that "private" views are more important in determining family size than "public" ones. Since others can easily see how many children one has, family size might be geared to public observation more than to private preference. In the light of this thinking, one wonders how many of the interviewees in many surveys in many cultures have been giving socially desirable answers to questions about preferred family size, future family size intentions, etc., and how many of them tailor families to their perceptions of the "right" family size.
It is possible that a sort of "chain-step" phenomenon occurs in some groups concerning family size. If each one of a large group of individuals assumes that he is alone in wishing to break with a pattern, he may stay in chain step. If there is some indication that many others share his bondage, each person may feel free to join in breaking with the chain step. Examples where this phenomenon may have operated in other areas are prohibition, sexual morality, and member com-

Vol. 13, No. 2

Pressures Toward Small Families

125

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

pliance with Roman Catholic Church sanctions on certain contraceptives. Possibly family size desires are somewhat under this influence (Smith, 1965, p. 1210). If so, an attempt to manipulate public opinion towards smaller families might meet with surprising success.
In the United States the perceived "ideal" family size appears to have changed from a mode of two children in 1941 to four children in 1955 and 1960 (Freedman et al., 1959, pp. 220-223; Whelpton, et al., 1966, Tables 11, 12). Although some rational explanations for this change can certainly be made, in part it may have elements of "fad" and "fashion." Freedman and his colleagues (1959, p. 402) write:
The rapidity with which new standards of family size have spread throughout the whole society since World War II indicates how quickly a population may now adjust its values. . . . Apparently our population is now so closely linked together in a single system of communication and interdependence that . . . new values can be developed, diffused, and put into action on a massive scale very quickly.
Attempts to shift the trend in a nation's values would seem to be made easier by the closely linked, interdependent structure pictured above for the United States.
Historically, the influence of Roman Catholicism may have been to encourage larger families, whether or not Church leaders expressed such a view directly. The heavy reliance on the "rhythm" method may have meant that a contraceptive procedure less effective in actual practice led to larger families (although the "rhythm" method has probably had too much of a black eye--see Westoff et al., 1963, pp. 38-44). Even if using Church-approved methods, Catholic cou-

ples are not free to avoid child-bearing just on whim, but should have "serious motives" for so doing (Freedman et al., 1959, pp. 415-418). Menninger (1942, pp. 229-235) argues that if parents do not want a given conception, this is a barometer indicating that it would be unwise for them, from a psychiatric viewpoint, to have that conception. But traditionally the Church has not accepted a mere wish to avoid additional children as sufficient reason for not having them.
Rock (1963), a Catholic, notes that some laymen and some local clergy have interpreted the Catholic stance to mean that bigger families are better than small families. However, against "the-mofe-themerrier view" Rock sees a growing body of Catholic opinion, with support from high echelons within the Church hierarchy. This body of thought stresses that family size must be determined with cognizance of population pressures; hence, a stress on "responsible parenthood." Catholic thinking on matters relating to contraception and family size seems to have been in rapid evolution in recent years. All in all, it seems that while historically the Church may have provided social pressures (perhaps unwittingly) toward larger families, this pressure many not be felt strongly in the future; and a program of encouraging smaller families might not be opposed by the Church.
Perhaps it could be made fashionable for those wanting more than a small family to adopt children after procreating two or three. Powerful motives that lead many people to want to have their "own" children could be satisfied, in large measure, with these first two or three. Adoption means no increase in population and often means superior home environments for the children adopted. Some parents object to such

126

Pohlman

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

a plan, on the grounds that they would show partiality to their "own" children. This objection might be overcome in the case of parents whose "own" children were all of the same sex, if those parents shared the widely found desire for at least one child of each sex (Freedman et al., 1960). After parents had two (or more) of their "own" children of the same sex, instead of trying again with something like a half chance of being "wrong" again (with mental health implications for the child of the "wrong" sex added to the implication for population), they might adopt. The asset of the child's being of the long-awaited sex would tend to counter the liability of being adopted.
In brief, it seems that other people's opinions, as felt by individual parents, affect family size desires. If a climate of opinion could be fostered that saw small families as part of a patriotic duty or a duty to the human species, this might have a desirable influence on population growth. An obvious question is how such a climate could be created. We present no comprehensive strategy here, but offer a few miscellaneous ideas. The blessing of government might be important and might not be too hard to secure as nations continue to awaken to their population problems. It might be desirable to start with the more prestigeful strata in any population on the assumption that other strata would copy them. If the higher classes are having larger families, then having large families may be a way of identifying with the higher classes among those who are upwardly mobile (Westoff et al., 1961). Similarly, small families might be emulated. The idea of encouraging smaller families by starting this encouragement among higher classes raises long-standing fears about

the sterility of the able. Hopefully,
lower classes would fall in step without
too much delay, especially if effective
contraception permitted them to tailor
family size to their desires.
REFERENCES
BOGUE, D., 1964. Hypotheses for family planning derived from recent and current experience in Asia. Studies in Family Planning (Population Council), No. 3:6-8.
FLANAGAN, J. C., 1942. A study of factors determining family size in a selected professional group. Genet. Psychol. Monogr., 25: 3-99.
FREEDMAN, D. S., R. FREEDMAN, and P. K. WHELP-
TON, 1960. Size of family and preference for children of each sex. Amer. J. Sociol., 66: 141-146.
FREEDMAN, R., P. K. WHELPTON, and A. A. CAMP-
BELL, 1959. Family Planning, Sterility, and Population Growth. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York. GREENE, G., 1963. A vote against motherhood. Sat. Eve.Post, Jan. 20: 10-12. HOLINGWORTH, L. S., 1916. Social devices for impelling women to bear and rear children. Amer. J. Sociol.,22: 19-29. MAULDIN, W. P., 1966. "Application of Survey Techniques to Fertility Studies." In M. C. Sheps and J. C. Ridley (eds.), Public Health and Population Changes: Current Research Issues. Schenkman Publishing Co., Cambridge, Mass. MEIER, R. L., 1958a. Concerning equilibrium in human population. Soc. Problems, 6: 163175.
, 1958b. Is birth control enough? The Humanist, 18:69-76. MENNINGER, K., 1942. Love Against Hate. Harcourt, Brace, NewYork. OSBORN, F., 1963. Excess and unwanted fertility. Eugen. Quart., 10: 59-72. POHLMAN, E., 1965. A note on Osborn's "Excess and unwanted fertility." Eugen. Quart., 12: 165-166.
, 1966. "Sinfulness" of unwanted conceptions, as perceived by conservative and more liberal Protestant college students. J. Sex Res. (In press.) RAINWATER, L., 1960. And the Poor Get Children. Quadrangle Books, Chicago.
, 1965. Family Design. Aldine Publishing Co., Chicago. ROCK, J., 1963. The Time Has Come. Alfred A. Knopf, New York. SMITH, M. B., 1965. Motivation, communications research, and family planning. J. Chron. Dis., 18: 1201-1213. STYCOS, J. M., 1958. Some directions for research in fertility control. Milbank Mem. Fund Quart., 36: 126-148.
WALLER, W., and R. HILL, 1951. The Family:
A Dynamic Interpretation, 2nd ed. Henry Holt &Co.,NewYork.

Vol. 13, No. 2

Pressures Toward Small Families

127

WESTOFF, C. F., R. G. POTTER, JR., P. C. SAGI, and
E. G. MISHLER, 1961. Family Growth in Metropolitan America. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
, , and , 1963. The Third Child. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
WHELPTON, P. K., and C. V. KISER, 1945. Social
and psychological factors affecting fertility:

IV. Developing the schedules, and choosing the type of couples and the area to be studied. Milbank Mem. Fund Quart., 23: 386-409.
, A. A. CAMPBELL, and J. PATTERSON, 1966.
Fertility and Family Planning in the United States. Princeton University Press, Princeton.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

