Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The origin and evolution of man
Frederick Osborn
To cite this article: Frederick Osborn (1954) The origin and evolution of man, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:1, 67-70, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987166 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987166
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

THE ORIGIN AND EVOLUTION OF MAN1 Cold Spring Harbor Symposium 1950

FREDERICK OSBORN

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

The meetings held in the summer of 1950 at Cold Spring Harbor seem to have marked a turning point in the acceptance by other scientists of work in the field of human genetics. The sponsors of the symposium may have had chiefly in mind that it would be worthwhile to bring together the most recent information on human origins. This was indeed the case.
The papers are published in Volume XV of the Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology. From the opening paper by Dr. Strandskov on the genetics of human populations, which seems to have taken the chairman of the session rather by surprise, through the three sessions on the genetic analysis of racial traits and the sessions on race concepts and on constitution, the dominant basis of discussion is the human gene. To quote the words of a participating anthropologist, Joseph B. Birdsell: "The problems of human evolution and racial differentiation are essentially population problems, and their solution will be advanced by borrowing techniques of analysis from the vigorous field of population genetics."
For this reason the record of the symposium is immensely stimulating reading for anyone interested in eugenics. Except for the papers of Book, Kemp, and Neel, the traits chiefly discussed are not of direct eugenic significance. But a discussion of the distribution of the blood groups and of taste discrimination is a lesson in methodology which we may hope will later be applied to the distribution of genes with greater social significance.
The symposium was attended by one hundred twenty-nine leading geneticists
1Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology, Vol. XV, The Biological Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, L. I., N. Y., 1950, 425 pp.

and anthropologists from this country and abroad; it lasted eight days and heard twenty-eight papers. This brief review can do little more than indicate the range of material presented and some of the more striking conclusions.
Strandskov's opening paper on "Genetics and the Origin and Evolution of Man" is a model of conciseness and pertinency. Compressed in nine pages, it covers the basis for an understanding of population genetics, with consideration of intra-breeding populations, mating systems, ascertainment of the genetic composition or allelotype of intra-breeding populations, factors making for change, isolation, genetic drift, and the interaction of these various factors in evolution.
The genetic analysis of racial traits was discussed through three sessions and in nine papers. In a way this was the high point of the symposium. At no previous meeting of scientists have so many qualified men brought together in this field so much sound material based on modern statistical techniques. The total makes an impressive picture of the beginning of knowledge about the differences between racial groups and between other smaller population units.
Book of the Department of Medical Genetics of the University of Lund, Sweden: Kemp of the University Institute of Human Genetics, Copenhagen, Denmark; and Neel of the Institute of Human Biology, University of Michigan contributed papers on the population genetics of inherited defect and tendency to disease. These men are among the leading authorities in the field of medical genetics. Book gives figures for the rough frequency of various hereditary disorders and defects in the Swedish population as a whole as com-

67

68 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

pared to a number of Swedish isolates. Kemp gives tables for the incidence in the population of Denmark, numbering a little over four million inhabitants, of fifteen types of congenital malformations, nine diseases of the internal organs, ten types of hereditary eye diseases, eight kinds of inherited mental illness, and hereditary blindness and deafmutism. Added together these anomalies affect a surprisingly large fraction of the total population.
Neel's paper "raises problems in population genetics that are both complex and baffling at the present time." It deals with thalassemia (Cooley's anemia), thalassemia minor, and sickle cell anemia. The thalassemias are prevalent among a large fraction of people in the Mediterranean area while sickle cell disease manifests itself chiefly among Negroes in the United States. Thalassemia major and thalassemia minor are a severe and mild form of the same disease. There is no doubt of its hereditary nature. Among the siblings of individuals with thalassemia major, the thalassemia major is so severe that those who have it (the homozygous for the gene) always fail to reproduce; the incidence of the gene should therefore be reduced at a constant rate, offset only by the increase caused by new mutations. It should be possible to calculate the incidence of the gene from the proportion of deaths from the disease. But when this calculation is made, the incidence of the gene in Sicily and other Italian areas is so high as to require a disturbingly high estimate of the mutation rate. No satisfactory answer to this problem has been found.
Sickle cell disease is a severe chronic type of anemia prevalent among American Negroes. It is found in persons whose blood shows observable "sickle cell characteristics." But not all persons with this type of blood have the disease. Studies by Neel indicate the existence of a gene which in a single dose elicits the sickle cell phenomenon or blood type, and in a double dose, sickle cell disease. Other studies have con-

firmed this homozygous-heterozygous hypothesis. Studies made in Africa indicate that in some areas 20 per cent of the population have the sickle cell trait. Since it is a rare event for a woman with the sickle cell trait, in double dose, that is, with sickle cell disease, to give birth to a live child, the gene for sickling should suffer a rapid reduction. Actually the incidence is so high that to maintain it at that level it would be necessary to postulate an impossibly high mutation rate. As in the case of thalassemia, this raises some thorny questions in gene dynamics. There is some evidence from the bones of now extinct human groups that both of these diseases may have played a significant role in the decline of certain racial groups in which they appear to have occurred. In Neel's closing words, "these several situations fairly bristle with loose ends . . . but many of these questions can and should be answered in the next ten years." Their treatment in this symposium is evidence of the quality of the work now being done in the field of population genetics.
The final session on the Genetic Analysis of Racial Traits opened with a paper by Race of the Lister Institute on the eight blood-group systems and their inheritance.
The blood groups provide the best example of all the basic uncomplicated types of inheritance that Mendel discovered. If the gene is present, then the blood group is present. Blood-group genes are unusually free from the influence of other genes in the body, and free from the influence of sex, of age, of health and of climate. . . . The eight blood groups, together with the ability to taste phenyl thio-carbamide, are the only human physiological characters (apart from sex) of which the manner of inheritance is known with certainty. Though this opening statement may seem to some geneticists an understatement of their progress to date, Race's paper lays a fascinating basis for further studies, particularly in one of his final statements: "It is quite possible therefore that in the eight blood group systems we have markers for

69

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

eight of the twenty-three autosomes of
man."
The session on Race Concepts and Hu-
man Races discussed the influence of cul-
ture upon genetic changes in human
populations (Coon) ; the operation of
genetic drift among Australian aborigines
and certain ancient gene flows through
space in Australia, based on blood groups
and other anthropological data (Birdsell) ;
a discussion of the concept of race
(Montagu) ; anthropological maps of the
Nordic countries (Lundman) ; microevolu-
tion in Greece, based on 708 skulls, 200
skeletons and 37 living males from before
3000 B.-C. to modern times (Angel). The
summary by Dr. Dunn and some of the
statements in Montagu's paper are worth
quoting because of the light they throw on
the views of scientists today on the subject
of race.
Populations can only be defined as races in particular relation to, or in respect of, the gene or genes in the frequency distribution of which they differ from other populations. This is a very different conception of race from that which until comparatively recently prevailed among most zoologists and anthropologists, who were accustomed to thinking of races in terms of absolute phenotypical differences rather than in terms of relative differences in the frequency distribution of traits or genes. (Montagu)
The traditional races of Europe are certainly in very different taxonomic categories from the "races" which at different times peopled the Americas and Oceania. Races change as periods of isolation and interbreeding alternate with periods of expansion and migration and mixture. Consequently race as a noun cannot have a fixed or exact meaning, but only a broad and general one, whereas "racial differences" or "racial mixture" and other adjectival uses convey a real meaning without ambiguity if one thinks of "racial" as referring to the relative and characteristic frequencies, within a group, of a given collection of genes. (Dunn)
The session on Constitution developed

some of the most spirited discussion of the
entire symposium. It began quietly enough
with Garn's discussion of the constiutional
modification of Mendelian traits, part of
which will be briefly quoted.
Men whose serum cholesterol exceeds a defined upper limit are more likely to develop atherosclerosis. . . . men whose serum uric acid concentration is in the upper portion of the normal curve are more likely to develop gout . . . high serum concentrations of both cholesterol and uric acid are inheritable, . . . physique alone shows correlations with these constituents . . . Cholesterol showed a significant positive correlation with endomorphy, and a negative correlation with ectomorphy. These correlations were independent of diet. . . . Physique is subject to selection. . . . If a trait is disadvantageous, and if either the degree of expression or the age at appearance varies with physique, then selection will tend to remove those physiques showing either the maximum expression of the trait, or the earliest expression of the trait.
Most of the discussion centered around
the papers by Seltzer and Sheldon. Seltzer's
500 male juvenile delinquents were on the
average of the mesomorphic or athletic type
as compared to the 500 males of the con-
trol group, who averaged higher in ecto-
morphy or the more slender types. His
analysis of the corresponding temperamen-
tal differences and of their effect on the de-
velopment of personality is most interest-
ing but was considerably criticized in the
discussion which followed. It remained for
Sheldon's presentation of his philosophy of
the relations between the somatotype, the
morphophenotype and the morphogenotype
really to arouse the participants at the
symposium.
Sheldon assumes that the somatotype
and personality are but differently measured
and differently presented reflections of the
same thing--reflections of bodily structure
at different levels of action. "It is my dark
presentment that only through general ac-
ceptance of (such a point of view) will the
great schismatic tragedy of this age be over-

70 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

come, and will final human disaster for the time being be averted. The immediate tragedy lies in the schism between biological and social science . . . locked up in the enigma of the somattype there is a clue to the crucial problem of bringing biological and social studies into a single focus."
This point of view and the material presented by Sheldon in its support drew a very lively discussion which was summarized by Hooten thus: "As to the possibility of determining the genetic basis of body type, some geneticists (including Stern) and some anthropologists averred that such a task was possible and exigent, and others asserted that body type is principally phenotypical and as such of no importance to geneticsts." But emphasis on this particular aspect scarcely does justice to Sheldon's highly imaginative, patient investigations in which Dobzhansky sees great possibilities.
In the final session on Perspective of Future Research, Dobzhansky touched on various aspects of human diversity and adaptation. No review could do justice to this able paper. It should be read in its entirety. His account of the polymorphism which enables a population to survive under sudden changes of environments, and his account of the "balanced polymorphism" which is known to occur in Drosophila and may be typical of sexually reproducing forms including man--both of these give us a new insight into complexities of the gene distributions which have enabled living things to survive. Dobzhansky's paper ranges over a broad field. A few quotations may indicate its scope and interest:
Of Sheldon's work he says:--The polymorphism which the students of human constitutions have begun to describe and classify may be produced by a relatively small number, perhaps as few as half a dozen, of genes or integrated combinations of linked genes, with far-reaching pleiotropic effects which extend into every aspect of human morphological as well as physiological and psychic organization.

Medical genetics should not be con-
ceived only as compilation of a catalogue
of rare hereditary disorders but also as a
study of the reaction norms of different
human genotypes in different environ-
ments. . . . The most important evolu-
tionary trend in the human species is
toward genetically determined educabili-
ty, i.e., ability to learn from experience
and to modify one's behavior according-
ly. . . . This trend is the specifically
human feature of Homo sapiens. . . .
Genetically conditioned educability fa-
vors diversity, and not uniformity, of
human individuals as well as of human
cultures. . . . In heterogeneous environ-
ments, plasticity results in diversity.
The final paper by Kluckhohn and Grif-
fith on Population Genetics and Social
Anthropology is a plea for the unity of the
science of man. We think the presumptive
evidence strong that the distinctive qualities
of each culture and the personality type
or types modally associated with that cul-
ture will be fully understood only when the
genetic predispositions and limitations of '
that population are described as complete-
ly as possible.
We may close the account of this ex-
traordinarily interesting symposium with
a paragraph from the concluding remarks
of the chairman of the final session, Dr.
Curt Stern:
The emotional weighing of such terms as species, race, delinquency, breed, purity, eugenics, selection, and others is heavy. Knowing the terrible harm which has grown out of misconceptions and for which these misconceptions were used as attempted justification, there is a tendency to shy away from conceptual regions, or from terms, which might be exploited by ill-will or stupidity. I believe that science should not yield to such derived impulses. . . . We should not assume that facts do not exist because their uncritical postulation has been detrimental. , . . These thoughts apply particularly to the problems of eugenics. Whether we like it or not, selective forces cannot be excluded from acting in our societies and nations. A thorough study which will enable us gradually to control selection is in the tradition of human cultural evolution.

