Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Biochemical fertility regulation
Sheldon J. Segal
To cite this article: Sheldon J. Segal (1959) Biochemical fertility regulation, Eugenics Quarterly, 6:2, 94-101, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1959.9987397 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1959.9987397
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

BIOCHEMICAL FERTILITY REGULATION
SHELDON J. SEGAL
Laboratory of the Population Council Rockefeller Institute

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

FERTILITY CONTROL IN EVOLUTION
IN THE EVOLUTION OF HIGHER vertebrates
reduction of the reproduction rate may be recognized as a characteristic feature, with most physiologic adaptations that result in fertility control appearing in the female of the species (for review, see Witschi, 1956). An amphibian or teleost ovary may produce hundreds of thousands of mature ova during the reproductive era, while the human ovary gives rise to a mere few hundred. Although the principal adaptations contributing to this fertility regulation have been described at the morphologic level, the translation of these events into terms of biochemical phenomena remains undone. We know, for example, that the process of follicular atresia contributes enormously toward reducing the fertility potential of mammalian vertebrates and that a further limitation is achieved by the characteristic single egg ovulations of most primates. The human ovary contains an estimated five to ten million germ cells at birth. Through the years this number decreases until the menopause when the last ovocytes disappear. Considering the small number actually released as mature ova, it is apparent that an overwhelming majority--almost the entire five to ten million--end by degeneration within the ovary. This atretic degeneration and the strict limitation of ovulation are normal and well-

regulated processes, but the biochemical mechanisms involved have not been characterized. Restriction of the reproductive rate by limiting the total germ cell number is encountered along many evolutionary lines in which population restriction has an apparent survival value. In man's effort to exert physiologic regulation of his fertility, he has been unable to invoke this direct and basic method so successful in nature; this goal is rather remote. Trying to develop methods of biochemical fertility regulation, we accept our endowment of potential gametes--eggs and sperm-- and attempt to exert willful control of one of the many other potentially vulnerable links in the chain of reproductive events.
The reproductive process in the mammalian female may be considered as a sequence of steps, each depending on the successful completion of the preceding ones (Nelson, 1956). These may be listed as: (1) production and release of hypophysial gonadotrophic hormones; (2) stimulatory action of gonadotrophins upon the ovary; (3) ovulation and entrance of the ovum into the Fallopian tube; (4) fertilization; (5) early development of the zygote during passage through the Fallopian tube; (6) rubal exit of the zygote and blastocyst formation; (7) nidation of the blastocyst in the endometrium; (8) maintenance of placentation and embryogenesis. With

94

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

the acceleration of research interest in fertility control that has occurred in recent years, each of these events has been focused upon in the attempts to develop acceptable methods to regulate the reproductive process.
STEROID ANALOGUES--ORAL PROGESTINS
The most advanced work, with newly developed steroid compounds, is based upon the ability of these substances to suppress the production of pituitary gonadotrophic hormones--the first step in the reproductive sequence. Secondarily, this influence on the hormonal control of gonadal function results in the inhibition of ovulation.
It is a classical endocrinologic concept that the sex hormones, estrogens, androgens and progesterone, engage in a physiologic feed-back mechanism which controls the rate of production and release of hypophysial gonadotrophic hormones. To a greater or lesser extent, each of these steroids has the capacity to suppress the pituitary production of gonad-stimulating hormones which are required for the normal process of ovocyte maturation and ovulation. As a practical method to affect ovulation suppression, however, each steroid type presents serious disadvantages. Androgens would be contraindicated because of the virilization that would be likely to occur in many women receiving effective doses. Estrogens present a multitude of problems including the fear, real or fancied, that the administration of estrogenic substances for a prolonged period of time might initiate neoplastic processes in the female reproductive tract. Also, these hormones would tend to produce endometrial hyperplasia and, in many instances, breakthrough bleeding. Experimental evidence has indicated that the third type of steroid hormone, progesterone, is at best a weak

95
suppressor of pituitary gonadotrophins. Particularly when administered orally, large doses would be required and 100 per cent effectiveness could.not be expected. Historically, at about the time that investigations had suggested the utility of oral progesterone in combination with small amounts of estrogen, many newly synthesized steroid analogues became available which, inherently, appeared to have effects on the reproductive system similar to the proposed combination. Three of these substances, 17-a ethinyl estraenolone (Enovid), 17-a ethinyl 19-nortestosterone (Norlutin) and 17-a acetoxyprogesterone (Prodox) are now being evaluated clinically for their effectiveness in the control of fertility.
The impetus for the development of these steroids did not come from a visionary view of their potential utility in oral contraception. Rather, the incentive behind their development was the need for cancer chemotherapeutics, for anabolic agents in the field of geriatrics, and, paradoxically, for the application of their activity in the treatment of some types of female sterility and habitual spontaneous abortion. Rock et al. (1956, 1957) observed that relatively low doses of 17-a ethinyl estraenolone had the dual action of suppressing pituitary gonadotrophins and maintaining a progestational type of endometrium. Utilizing these biologic effects, he was able to simulate menstrual cycles in women with long histories of amennorhea and lack of ovulation caused by insufficient pituitary gonadotrophin production. The compound was administered cyclically, about 20 days each month. During this time the hypofunctional anterior pituitary was completely suppressed and the endometrium developed to the progestational condition. Upon the with-

96 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

drawal of therapy, endometrial breakdown with menstrual bleeding ensued and shortly after the cessation of flow, the induced cycle could be repeated. Many women continued to menstruate regularly, without therapy after several months of artificially induced cycles. Frequently, the post-therapy cycles proved to be completely normal, with ovulation occurring. Presumably, the suppressed pituitary "rebounds" after the treatment, producing adequate gonadotrophins to initiate normal cycles. This experience in the field of infertility therapy made it apparent that steroidinduced pituitary suppression could be achieved without the untoward contraindications of the usual, steroid sex hormones. The subsequent contraceptive trials of the new steroid analogues have demonstrated the physiologic effectiveness of this mode of action for the biochemical regulation of fertility (Table 1) (Pincus et ah, 1958; Tyler and Olson,

TABLE 1

USE OF EN OVID AS AN ORAL CONTRACEPTIVE

No. of tablets missed*

No. of cycles

Preg. rate/100 woman years

0 1279 0.0 1-5 282 9.2 5-19 151 25.9
Pre-treatment pregnancy incidence--62.5 ± 1.35

·Treatment involves app. 20 tablets of 10 mg. per month.
These data taken from Pincus et at., 1958, describing their study in San Juan, Puerto Rico.

1959). The extent to which this method will become acceptable for widespread usage will depend on considerations of cost, complexity of dosage, and experience with long-term drug administration. Regardless of eventual application, however, the method deserves recognition as an outstanding achievement toward controlling fertility by physiologic means.

PLANT EXTRACTS
LITHOSPERMUM RUDERALE
Animal experimentation with extracts of the North American prairie plant, Lithospermum ruderale, has provided evidence that gonadotrophic hormones, after being released by the pituitary, may be inactivated in the general circulation, and thus prevented from exerting their stimulatory influence on the gonad (Noble et al, 1954). The work suggests that this material possesses an active constituent capable of influencing the gonadotrophin molecule in a manner that causes biochemical inactivation. An activity of this sort may offer an important advantage in avoiding an intrinsic interaction with the endocrine glands, for this is likely, to minimize the possibility of undesirable, irreversible effects with long-term usage. Through the years, efforts to isolate a stable, active constituent from Lithospermum have not been successful. Breneman and Carmack (1958) have prepared spray-dried powders which have retained activity for as long as two years, but these investigators do not yet know the chemical identity of the active constituent. Gorman et al. (1956) have described extraction procedures for Lithospermum which have produced a crystalline material and several amorphous fractions, but more investigations are needed to determine if a specific component is related to the biologic activity.
IMMUNOLOGIC PHENOMENA
Among the intermediate steps between ovum maturation and zygotic development, the process of fertilization would present many advantages as a target for potential anti-fertility substances. At the present time, immunologic methods offer most promise in this approach. Establishment of the role of agglutinat-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

ing substances (fertilizins) in the normal process of mammalian gamete fusion (Bishop and Tyler, 1956) has followed many years of exploration of this subject in invertebrate marine species. Tyler (1949) concludes that fertilizin and antifertilizin, when present on the surface of the respective gametes, facilitate fertilization. When present in solution, they block fertilization. If it is firmly established that gametes of the human produce interacting substances of this nature, it would be feasible to attempt controlled interference with this biochemical mechanism in the fertilization process. Lindahl (1954) has reported that mammalian spermatozoa are prevented from agglutinating, and, therefore, from losing their fertilizing capacity, because of the presence of a protein substance present in the semen for which he has introduced the term male antagglutin. He has demonstrated that antibodies can be formed which precipitate with antagglutins (Lindahl and Edlund, 1955). This type of investigation seems to hold great promise for the future. Another immunologic approach involves the formation of antibodies against the germ cells themselves; until now most work has been with the male gametes. Freund and his collaborators (1953) have been able to induce the loss of all germinal tissue from the testes of guinea pigs immunized with homologous testicular extracts. This has been confirmed by Katsh (1958) who, in agreement with Isojima et al. (1959), has found that extracts of guinea pig testis also induce sterility when used to immunize female guinea pigs. The mechanism of this latter phenomenon is not yet fully understood. One of the possibilities suggested has been that the immunized female is "protected" against spermatozoa, so that adequate quantities of antibodies appear

97
in the female reproductive tract and inactivate spermatozoa deposited during coitus.
ANTI-ZYGOTE ACTIVITY
Until recently, the process of tubal passage and early cleavage of newly fertilized eggs was not seriously regarded as a likely vulnerable point in the reproductive process. With the analysis of the s y n t h e t i c compound 1-(p-2-diethylaminoethoxyphenyl) I-phenyl-2-p-anisylethanol), referred to as MER-25, we have come to recognize this step as a likely site and time of action for potential antifertility compounds. On the basis of laboratory work it was established that MER-25 causes rapid degeneration of tubal ova (Segal and Nelson, 1958). Postulating that the activity in the rat would carry over to the human, it would offer an intriguing method of fertility control. Assuming the most ideal outcome of clinical tests, on the basis of what was seen in the rat, one might predict that the compound could be taken orally for a day or two subsequent to coitus and would prevent ovum development when and if fertilization occurred. Since implantation would never take place, there would be no disruption of the natural menstrual cycles and a fertile cycle would pass completely unnoticed. In a sense it would be like inducing pharmacologically in all cases what gynecologists believe occurs normally in 10 per cent or more of human fertilizations, i.e., the degradation of an ovum which, though fertilized, does not remain viable for the 8 days necessary to start the nidation process.
In the experimental work, post-copulatory events in female rats were studied following the administration of MER-25. The compound was given orally, in most instances at a dose of 25 mg/kilogram

98 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

body weight (Table 2). When treatment was initiated on the day of mating

TABLE 2

ORAL ADMINISTRATION OF MER-25
25 mg. per kilogram daily

Treatment days No. of

post-coitus

animals

No. of pregnancies

Control 1- 4
2- 5 3- 6 4- 7 5- 8
5-21

15 20. 8
8 8 8 4

15 0 0 0 0 8
4

and continued throughout the normal period of tubal passage of the ova, implantation never occurred. Treatment of similar length (4 days), including any part of the period of tubal passage, was equally effective in preventing pregnancies. When the 4-day treatment was initiated after tubal exit of the ova (days 5-8), not a single pregnancy was terminated and the fetuses developed normally. In fact, it has been possible to administer the compound continuously following the period of oviducal passage without impeding gestation, causing fetal resorption, or reducing litter-size. A single daily ingestion of 25 mg/kilogram body weight failed frequently to provide absolute protection against implantation and gestation, but when the dosage was raised from one-a-day to twice- and three-times daily, complete effectiveness was observed (Table 3). In fact, with 3-times-a-day administrations, dosage could be reduced to 8 mg/kilogram.
In studying the course of events within the Fallopian tubes, it was found that there is a blockage of early cleavages, so that ova of females treated with MER25 undergo rapid degeneration shortly after fertilization.

TABLE 3

ORAL ADMINISTRATION OF MER-25
Single Day Treatment
Treatment day Dosage No. of Full-term
post-coitus mg/kilo animals pregnancies

1 25

86

1 25 b.i.d. 8

1

1

25 t.i.d.

15

0

1 8 t.i.d. 9 0

3 25

83

3

8 t.i.d.

14

0

5 25

88

5

25 t.i.d.

19

4»

5

8 t.i.d.

10

2"

·Additional 10 showed evidence of resorbed prreeggnnaanncciieess pre··g··nAAaddnddciiitetiisoonal 2 showed evidence of resorbed

From the studies in rats, it was not possible to determine if the early zygote deterioration resulted from an action directly on the egg, or on the Fallopian tube, altering it in such a manner that it no longer provided the necessary support for development of the egg. In order to test for possible direct action of the compound on ova, experiments were carried out with eggs of the American sea urchin, Arbacia punctulata (Segal and Tyler, 1958). This marine invertebrate presents several distinct advantages for a study of this nature. It provides an external fertilization situation, avoiding the complications of internal fertilization and viviparity. Several thousand eggs develop in synchrony, so that one does not have to depend on observations on isolated eggs. Also, development occurs very rapidly, so that deviations from normal can be observed in the living state, as they occur, under the scrutiny of the investigator.
The results indicate that minute concentrations of MER-25 have a direct blocking action on the fertilized eggs of the sea urchin. A concentration of 2X 10~5 per cent added to the sea water medium five minutes after fertilization

99

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

blocks first cleavage of over 50 per cent of treated eggs. Those which initiate development do not progress beyond the blastula stage. At lower doses (2XlO~T per cent) the compound's inhibitory activity is manifest, also, although a small percentage of the zygotes may progress through gastrulation and develop into normal plutei. The blocking effect of MER-25 on fertilized eggs may be reversed by washing after exposure to even highly active concentrations.
The observations of the direct blocking effect of MER-25 on developing eggs has been extended to the mammalian egg by Chang (personal communication) .* He has found that the isolated zygote of the rabbit, which can develop to the blastocyst stage in vitro, is prevented from doing so when small concentrations of MER-25 are added to the ambient medium.
With the realization that the compound acts directly on the egg, it became of interest to determine if pre-fertilization, follicular ova of mammals were susceptible to the biochemical influence of MER-25. Although the laboratory rodent is not the animal of choice to resolve this question, preliminary experiments have been carried out with the rat. Treatment was confined to variable periods of time before mating and the post-copulatory events were studied (Table 4). The results indicate a significant diminishment of fertility, which may have resulted from a deleterious influence on pre-ovulatory ova. Further investigations are in progress which may elucidate this matter.
1This information, to be published soon, was kindly provided by Dr. M. C. Chang, Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology, Shrewsbury, Massachusetts.

TABLE 4
PRE-FERTHJZATION TREATMENT WITH MER-25
25 mg/kilogram per day, orally

Duration of treatment pre-coitus 3-14 days controls

No. of animals
10 12

No. of pregnancies
5 10

Average litter size
4.5 9.5

ACTIVE CONSTITUENT

,

OF PISUM SATIVUM (LINN)

From the studies of MER-25, mentioned above, it may be concluded that the compound is effective in preventing the nidation of a fertilized egg because of a direct blocking action on the egg itself. The investigations established that the endometrium of an MER-25 treated animal is capable of developing decidual tissue, necessary for placentation (Segal and Nelson, 1958). Another substance has been studied which is reported as having the same essential end result, i.e., the prevention of nidation, although the mode of action is entirely different. In the case of m-xylohydroquinone, the reported anti-placentation activity occurs as a result of an effect on the endometrium, vitiating its capacity to prepare for gestation. According to Sanyal (1956), the compound inhibits the peripheral action of progesterone, so that the endometrium does not develop adequately for nidation of the blastocyst. Although this activity in laboratory animals has not been confirmed by others (Thiersch, 1956a; Banik and Chakravarti, 1957), the substance has been given widespread clinical testing in India. Subjects are given oral tablets containing 350 mg. m-xylohydroquinone two times a month, on the 16th and 21st day. On the basis of the data now available, this method is said to have reduced fertility by 50 per cent under the conditions of the field trial.

100 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

More information is needed to determine if, indeed, the reported anti-progestational activity in animals can be demonstrated in human beings. This could be established readily by endometrial biopsies, performed following drug administration.
ABORTIFACIENT AGENTS ANTI-
METABOLITES
Subsequent to nidation and placentation, interruption of the reproductive process can be achieved by many substances which interfere with normal developmental processes. Thiersch (1956b) has studied a group of folic acid inhibitors (aminopterin) and amino acidanalogues which are effective fertility inhibitors in animal tests. For example, diazo-acetyl-serine and diazo-oxo-norleucine, first isolated from cultures of streptomyces and later synthesized, were found to cause litter destruction in rats anytime from nidation to mid-term (Thiersch, 1957a,b). Themechanism is apparently a biologic antagonism, with the analogue blocking normal amino acid incorporation in protein synthesis. For eventual human application, compounds of this type would have to be administered under strict supervision. Suboptimal conditions of dosing could result in a partial effect without an actual termination of pregnancy, but interfering with the normalcy of embryonic development. Excessive doses could be harmful to the mother as well asthe conceptus.
The studies that have been reviewed are relatively advanced toward development of acceptable measures for physiologic fertility regulation. No onemethod may be regarded as perfect; each has its limitations. Of equal, or perhaps greater importance, arethemany studies being carried outwith thehope of gain-

ing a broader and more basic under-
standing of each link in the chain of re-
productive events. Much remains tobe
learned about these processes before the
ultimate opportunities for fertility regu-
lation canbe appreciated. It may be re-
garded as certain that many more leads
will be developed from present labora-
tory investigations that will warrant
evaluation as potential methods forthe
biochemical regulation of fertility.
REFERENCES
BANIK, U. K. and CHAKRAVARTI, H. S. 1957. Ef-
fect of m-Xylohydroquinone on the peripheral action of progesterone. Annals of Biochem. & Exper. Med. 17:139.
BISHOP, D. W. and TYLER A. 1956. Fertilizin of
mammalian eggs. J. Exper. Zool. 132:575.
BRENEMAN, W. R. and CARMACK, M. 1958. In
vivo and in vitro inactivation of hormones by lithospermum. Anat. Rec. 131:538.
FREUND, J., LIPTON, M. M. and THOMPSON, G. E.
1953. Aspermatogenesis in the guinea pig induced by testicular tissue and adjuvants. J. Exper. Med. 97:711.
GORMAN, M., BIEN, S. and GINSBURG, D. 1956.
Constituents of Lithospermum ruderale I. Extraction procedures. Bull. Research Council of Israel 5:253.
ISOJIMA, S., GRAHAM, R. M. and GRAHAM, J. B.
1959. Sterility in female guinea pigs induced by injection with testis. Science 129:44.
KATSH, S. and BISHOP, D. W. 1958. The effects
of homologous testicular and brain and heterologous testicular homogenates combined with adjuvants upon the testes of guinea pigs. J. Embryol. Exp. Morph. 6:94.
LINDAHL, P. E. and KIHLSTRÖM, J. E. 1954. An
antiagglutinic factor in mammalian sperm plasm. Fertility & Sterility 5:241.
LINDAHL, P. E. and EDLUND, B. 1955. On the
antigenicity of male sperm antagglutin. Experimental Cell Research, Suppl. 3:241. NELSON, W. O. 1956.Survey of studies relating to vulnerable points in the reproductive processes. Acta Endocrinol. Supp. XXVIII:7.
NOBLE, R. L., PLUNKETT, E. R. and GRAHAM,
R. C. B. 1954. Direct hormone inactivation by extracts of Lithospermum ruderale. J. of Endocrinol. 10:212.
PINCUS, G., ROCK, J. GARCIA, C. and RICE-WRAY,
E. 1958.Fertility control with oral medication. Am. J. Obstet. &Gynec., 75:1333.
ROCK, J., PINCUS, G. and GARCIA, C. R., 1956.
Effects of certain 19-nor steroids on the normal human menstrual cycle. Science 124:891.
ROCK, J., GARCIA, C. R. and PINCUS, G. 1957.
Synthetic progestins in the normal human menstrual cycle. Recent Progress inHormone Research 13:323.

SANYAL, S. N. 1956. Pisum sativum (Linn.). mxylohydroquinone as an oral contraceptive: A critical evaluation. J. of Med. & Internat. Med. Abstracts and Reviews 19:3.
SEGAL, S. J. and NELSON, W. O. 1958. An orally
active compound with anti-fertility effects in rats. Proc. Soc.Exper. Biol. and Med. 98:431.
SEGAL, S. J. and TYLER, A. 1958. Inhibiting ac-
tion of a triphenylethanol derivative on the development of eggs of Arbacia punctulata and on the fertilizing capacity of the sperm. Biol. Bull. 115:364.
THIERSCH, J. B. 1956a. The effect of metaxylohydroquinone (mXHQ) on reproduction of the female rat. AdaEndocrinologica Supp. XXVIII:46. 1956b. The control of reproduction

101
in rats with the aid of antimetabolites. Ada Endocrinologica Supp. XXVIII:37.
1957a. Effect of O-diazo acetyl-1serine on rat litter. Proc. Soc. Exper. Biol. ir Med. 94:27.
1957b. Effect of 6 diazo 5 oxo-1-norleucine (DON) on the rat litter in utero. Ibid. 94:33. TYLER, ALBERT 1949. Serological aspects of fertilization. The Collecting Net 19:6.
TYLER, E. and OLSON, H. The fertility-promot-
ing and antifertility effects of new steroid hormonal substances. J.A.M.A., in press, 1959. WITSCHI, E. 1956. Development of Vertebrates. Philadelphia, W. B. Saunders Co., Chapter 24:426.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

GENUS The Review of the
ITALIAN COMMITTEE FOR THESTUDY OF POPULATION PROBLEMS
and on the
ITALIAN SOCIETY OFGENETICS AND EUGENICS
edited under the auspices of the National Research Council
EDITOR: CORRADO GINI
Summary of Volume XIII December 1957 n°l-4 GINI C.--Progres et instability L. E. TAVENER--A New Approach to Urban Geography G. GIUROVICH--Alcune considerazioni sulla concentrazione della popolazione Italiana prima e dopo l'ultima guerra. GINI C.--Sulla scomparsa delle colonie Normanne in Groenlandia A. OKASAKI--Growth of Urban Population in Japan.
Recension! Review of Italian, English, American, French, German, Dutch, Belgian, Chinese, SouthAmerican books.
GENUS
Accepts scientific articles, papers, notes, and communications written in Italian, English, French, German and Spanish in the field of the different sciences related to population problems (Demography, Sociology, Economics, General Biology, Genetics, Eugenics, Anthropology, Social Hygiene, Pslcology, Geography).
Orders should be addressed to: SEGRETERIA DEL COMITATO ITALIANO PERLO STUDIO DEIPROBLEMl DELLA POPOLAZIONE--Viadelle Terme di Diocleziano 10-- ROMA--ITALIA.

