Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Medical dilemma: Is insulin therapy increasing the frequency of the gene for diabetes mellitus?
Charles M. Woolf
To cite this article: Charles M. Woolf (1962) Medical dilemma: Is insulin therapy increasing the frequency of the gene for diabetes mellitus?, Eugenics Quarterly, 9:4, 228-230, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1962.9987529 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1962.9987529
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

Brief Reports and Communications

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

MEDICAL DILEMMA: IS INSULIN THERAPY INCREASING THE FREQUENCY OF THE GENE FOR DIABETES MELLITUS?

CHARLES M. WOOLF
Department of Zoology Arizona State University
Tempe, Arizona

THE THEME of many classroom lectures and discussions as well as sections in textbooks (Stern, 1960; p. 633) and articles (Guttmacher, 1954) is that insulin therapy is increasing the frequency of the gene for diabetes mellitus. This medical treatment allows some diabetics to pass the gene to the next generation who otherwise would not have done so. It is concluded from this observation that the frequency of the deleterious gene and potential diabetics will increase in future generations. Insulin therapy is viewed therefore as "Dr. Jekyl and Mr. Hyde"-- a blessing for diabetics but dysgenic in nature. However, the fact may well be that insulin therapy is not increasing the frequency of the gene in question.
Present day gene frequencies have resulted from evolutionary forces acting in past generations. We cannot at present account for the high frequency of the gene for diabetes mellitus, but several models present themselves. Assuming that diabetes mellitus results from an autosomal recessive gene showing about 20% penetrance (Steinberg and Wilder, 1952), the frequency of potential diabetics in a large population at equilibrium

is given by R = u/s, where u is the mutation rate from the normal gene (D) to the recessive gene (d), and s is the selection coefficient against individuals homozygous for the recessive gene. In the derivation of the formula it is assumed that DD and Dd individuals have similar reproductive fitness values. If a population were in equilibrium before the discovery of insulin in 1922, then reducing the effect of selection against diabetics by insulin therapy (i.e., decreasing the value of s) would throw the population out of equilibrium, and R would increase until equilibrium was once more restored. In this case, insulin therapy would increase the frequency of the gene and potential diabetics in future generations. The difficulty with this model is that diabetes mellitus is a relatively common disorder. It is estimated that 1.7% of the population in the United States has the disease. The assumption of equilibrium requires an extremely high mutation rate to balance the genes lost through the action of natural selection against diabetics. Such a high mutation rate has not been recorded for any locus. It is unlikely that this model is correct.

228

Diabetes Mellitus

229

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

Another model is selection for the heterozygote. If the fitness values of DD, Dd, and dd individuals were 1-- s^ 1, and 1 -- s2, respectively, then in a large panmictic population at equilibrium, the frequency (q) of the recessive gene would be given by: q = s1/(s1 -f- s2)- Lowering s2 by increasing the fitness of diabetics would increase the value of q. Consequently, under this selection scheme insulin therapy would also increase the frequency of diabetics in future generations. This model may be correct.
A third model presents itself, which is the reason for the present communication. According to the Steinberg-Wilder hypothesis, only a minority (20%) of the individuals homozygous for the responsible gene actually show symptoms of the disease. Because of reduced penetrance, it is possible that in past generations the gene may have been favored by natural selection in some environments. The dd genotype, in addition to predisposing to diabetes, may have also influenced one or more characters of adaptive importance, such as increased fecundity or viability. If the overall fitness of DD and Dd individuals was surpassed by dd individuals, the recessive gene would increase in frequency until it reached a high value. Selection could have also favored modifiers prolonging the age of onset and reducing the severity of the disease and penetrance. In such a population only a very small percentage of dd individuals might have manifested the disease before or during the age of reproduction.
The advent of civilization could have changed the selection scheme so that the advantage possessed by dd individuals in the past does not exist at the present. If the one or more additional characters attributable to the dd genotype were no

longer of adaptive importance, the recessive gene would decrease in frequency. Selection would be against the recessive gene because of the disease occurring in a certain proportion of the homozygotes at a young age. According to this model, the gene is dropping in frequency at the present time and will continue to drop until "loss of genes due to selection" is balanced by "gain due to mutation." Since the mutation rate is likely low, the frequency of diabetics at equilibrium at some future time will be low.
Even though insulin therapy has increased the fitness of diabetics, it is still apparent that the recessive gene is being selected against at the present time. A pregnant diabetic woman has less than 65% chance of producing a living child, and the risk of a congenital malformation in this child is increased three-fold (Guttmacher, 1954). If this third model is correct, then insulin therapy is not increasing the frequency of the recessive gene, but merely slowing down the rate of decrease. Therefore, this form of medical treatment should not be viewed as a necessary evil that is increasing the frequency of diabetics but a modern intervention that is delaying the time when the population will reach equilibrium with a very low incidence of diabetes.
What is needed to support this hypothetical model is evidence that the gene in question was favored in past generations in some environments. It would be informative to determine the incidence of diabetes mellitus and glycosuria in populations with primitive cultures in various regions of the world at the present time. The added advantage of dd individuals in a population in past generations may still be exhibited in some populations at the present, resulting in a high frequency of the recessive gene. Al-

230 Brief Reports

though some populations with a primitive culture exhibit a low incidence of diabetes and glycosuria, such as the Burtha-Buthe district of Basutoland in Africa (Politzer, et al., 1960), it is of extreme interest that the Pima and Papago Indians in Arizona presently show a very high incidence. These Indian populations and others should be studied extensively.

REFERENCES
GUTTMACHER, A. F., 1954. Diabetes, pregnancy and modern medicine: a genetic misadventure. Eugenics Quart., 1: 191-192.
POLITZER, W. M., B. HARDECCER and T. SCHNEI-
DER, 1960. Incidence of diabetes mellitus in the Burtha-Buthe district of Basutoland. Brit. Med. J., 5173: 615-616.
STEINBERG, A. G., and R. M. WILDER. 1952. A
study of the genetics of diabetes mellitus. Am. J. Human Genet., 4 : 113-135. STERN, C., 1960. Principles of Human Genetics. W. H. Freeman and Company, San Francisco. Second Edition.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

