Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Genetics today and "the origin of species"
I. Michael Lerner , Theodosius Dobzhansky & Hermann J. Muller
To cite this article: I. Michael Lerner , Theodosius Dobzhansky & Hermann J. Muller (1959) Genetics today and "the origin of species", Eugenics Quarterly, 6:4, 240-248, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1959.9987420 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1959.9987420
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

GENETICS TODAY AND "THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES"

EDITOR'S NOTE:
The centennial of the publication of Charles Darwin's "The Origin of Species" has been commemorated during the past year by scholars all over the world. Two outstanding groups in the United States, the American Philosophical Society and the University of Chicago, have held meetings at which centennial papers on evolution of far-reaching import have been presented. Darwin himself lacked all knowledge of modern genetics, and his attempts to explain the mechanism of natural selection were quite unconvincing. He would have giv-

en a great deal to have had the opportunity of reading the papers written by able geneticists during the celebration of his greatest work. Developments in genetics have come so rapidly that even for those engaged wholly in the field many of these papers are a must. The following excerpts from the centennial papers of these eminent geneticists-- I. Michael Lerner, Th. Dobzhansky, Hermann J. Müller--are published here in the hope that they may be useful to those who do not have time to keep fully informed but want to know the trend of genetic thinking, particularly in regard to the evolution of man.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

I. THE CONCEPT OF NATURAL SELECTION1
I. MICHAEL LERNER

. . . every biologist agrees that selection and isolation are the basic working methods of evolution. . . . I propose to pass over the speciation or splitting level of evolution, since it involves interaction with isolation, which is to be considered here by others. . . .
[Darwin] did not see in selection a process in which deliberative judgment or choice on the part of any agency plays a part. . . . He understood that the crux of the selection process lies not merely in the ability of an individual to survive longer than others but in its
1 Presented at the Darwin Centennial Celebration of the American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia, April 1959. Reprinted by permission from Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 103, No. 2, April 1959.

greater capacity for production of living offspring. . . . The expressiveness of Spencer's superlative [fittest] seduced Darwin into accepting "survival of the fittest" as being equivalent to "natural selection." . . . Yet neither strength of character nor moral goodness, neither extreme size, nor high intelligence, nor even long life per se causes an individual to produce more offspring. . . . Indeed, often organisms which are totally undistinguished by any physical standards, organisms exhibiting average dimensions for various properties, in fine individuals which are mediocre for any traits obvious to the human eye, are the ones which are most successful in propagating themselves. . . .

240

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

Darwin's description of natural selection can now be paraphrased to say (1) that in nature individuals differ among themselves, (2) that their differences are in part determined by heredity, and (3) that, therefore, whenever these differences are correlated with fitness, that is, success in leaving offspring, the properties of the more fit individuals will be represented in succeeding generations to an increasing extent. Thus, changes in the make-up of successive generations are determined in a measure by the inequalities between the reproductive rates of individuals differing in hereditary endowment, that is to say, by different genotypes. . . .
It was not until Mendelian theory was developed that such pathetically artless conjectures as, for instance, the direct hereditary effects of use and disuse of organs and parts of the body, became superfluous. Three aspects of Mendelism were especially important in this connection: (1) the paniculate basis of the units of inheritance to which we may refer as genes, (2) the distinction between phenotype and genotype, and (3) the statistical nature of the phenomena of heredity. It was also in large part Mendelian inheritance that resolved the problem of persistent variation and, more generally, led to the possibility of quantifying evolutionary processes. . . .
From the quantitative approach an understanding of the components of selection-induced alterations in fitness (those due not only to changes in gene frequencies, but also to modifications of the environment and of the mating system, as well as to gene interaction) has been gained. Methods for estimating the extent to which a population can be transformed by selection have been devised. Quantitative bases for systems of correlated response (i.e., effects on traits which themselves are not being subjected to selection pressure)

241
characterizing changes under selection have been established. . . .
Of the several forms of pressure antagonistic to the preservation of fitness which selection must counterbalance, those of mutation and segregation are of greatest import. Elimination of deleterious mutants by selection is a process that has long been recognized. The significance of selection against non-optimal genotypes which arise in every generation as a result of segregation of chromosomes in the process of germ-cell formation, however, has been appreciated only recently. Studies from many fields . . . argue for at least as great an evolutionary importance of selection against segregation as of that against mutation. . . . Without selection against segregation genetic variability already present could be lost. William Blake's affirmation that "to be an error and to be cast out is a part of God's design" seems to be an apt description of selection against both mutation and segregation.
. . . many genotypes which rendered their possessors unfit in earlier days do so no more. Natural selection now, therefore, is not based on the same components of fitness or results in the same directional changes as before. . . . The basis of fitness has been changed, but natural selection still [goes] on. This kind of change has undoubtedly occurred many times in the past history of man, for instance, when fire-making tools were invented, thereby affording protection to some genotypes which were formerly disadvantageous.
Susceptibility to many diseases may not then contribute any more to differences in fitness of man. It is not impossible that resistance became in some instances an encumbrance. More likely, however, major importance in determining fitness was assumed by genes in control of other phenotypic traits. For instance, the genetically determined as-

242 Kugenics Quarterly

pects of the ability to provide young with food obtained by strength may have now lost their positive selective value. On the other hand, genes for philoprogenitiveness in a world in which conception is under man's volitional control may have become of correspondingly greater import in the selective process.
Exactly how dysgenic in terms of human values today's natural selection may be is difficult to tell. Selection which might have the most serious potential consequences to mankind could be that operating through the medium of differential reproductive rates of groups with differing intelligence. However, there are reasons to believe that this process may be of the stabilizing kind, maintaining constant genotypic frequencies rather than shifting them in a direction

commonly agreed to be an undesirable one.
Generally speaking, selection in man is probably not as stringent as it was in the past, though this is by no means certain . . . the actual reproductive rate in man is of course still greatly below its biological maximum, which means that there is still considerable opportunity for selection to occur. Evidence that inequalities in fitness currently observable are independent of genotypic constitutions would doubtless be difficult to obtain. Even so, it would seem that only when man has achieved such complete mastery over his environment that all possible human genotypes will be equally likely to produce the average number of surviving progeny, can we be sure that natural selection has ceased in our species.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

II. VARIATION AND EVOLUTION2
THEODOSIUS DOBZHANSKY

. . . In recent years almost a surfeit of natural mutants has been discovered. True, nothing approaching exact quantitative data is available for organisms other than a few species of Drosophila. But only in these species have genetic tools needed for such work been devised. More indirect evidence, such as that derived from experiments on inbreeding, suggests that numerous recessive mutant genes are concealed in hétérozygotes in populations of probably all sexual species, including man. This is also what one is led to expect on theoretical
2Presented at the Darwin Centennial Celebration of the American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia, April 1959. Reprinted by permission from Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 103, No. 2, April 1959.

grounds, although, of course, the magnitude of the store of mutants may vary greatly in different species.
Modern evolutionary genetics must, then, face the problems of the structure, organization, and biological significance of the stores of mutants which natural populations are known to carry. One of the salient facts about these mutants is that most of them, like most mutants observed in laboratories, are deleterious to their carriers, at least when the mutants become homozygous. We find a great abundance of lethal, semilethal, sterile, and subvital mutants. The populations are said to carry genetic loads of deleterious variants. . . .
Hereditary diseases, defects, and weaknesses in human populations are manifestations of the genetic loads which

243

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

these populations bear in their corporate genotypes. The question unavoidably presents itself, what maintains the genetic loads in existence? Why does natural selection, which was supposed already by Darwin to perpetuate the fit and to eliminate the unfit, fail to purge the deleterious mutants from natural populations? No fully satisfactory and universally agreed upon answers to these questions can yet be returned. This is a field which requires much further research. For the time being two working hypotheses are available, referred to as the classical hypothesis and the balance hypothesis, respectively. (Dobzhansky, 1955) It may as well be stated at the outset that these hypotheses are not mutually incompatible or exclusive; on the contrary, the problem may well be reduced to finding out what proportions of the genetic loads are maintained in different living species by the mechanisms visualized by these hypotheses.
The classical hypothesis is a direct descendant of Morgan's view referred to above, but its modern guise is due chiefly to H. J. Müller (1950 and later work). Its basic postulate is that almost all mutants that arise are unconditionally deleterious . . . their effects in heterozygous condition are qualitatively similar to, although often much weaker than, in homozygotes. . . . Deleterious mutants will, then, cause slight incapacitations in many heterozygous individuals, as well as serious incapacitation or death of sporadic homozygotes. . . . Using certain assumptions, Müller has estimated that in human populations an average person is heterozygous for about seven deleterious genes. . . . The mutational load tends to grow heavier if the mutation rates increase or if the selection rates decrease. Both contingencies seem to be realized in human populations--mutations are induced owing to misuse of x-rays and atomic ener-

gies, and selection slackens because modern medicine, technology, and philanthropy save and protect from elimination many genotypes which otherwise would have failed to be perpetuated. The mutational load in the human species is, therefore, increasing and the fitness decreasing. . . . [This is the classical hypothesis.]
If the genetic load which a population carries is merely an unavoidable evil, would, then, a man, or a Drosophila, completely free of the genetic variants which are deleterious in homozygous condition, enjoy the greatest possible health, vigor and fitness? Would an ideally fit population be one consisting of such homozygously "normal" Drosophilae? We really do not know, since it is most doubtful that such populations ever existed in sexually reproducing and cross-fertilizing organisms. It may well be that the genetic loads were lighter in primitive human populations, or in those of our pre-human ancestors, than they are in modern man. But it is quite certain that the evolution of most of the living world has been enacted in sexual populations which carried genetic loads. The possibility must be considered that sexual species have become adapted to their genetic loads, and even may have used these loads to some advantage. Such a hypothesis is visualized by the balance hypothesis of population structure.
Fisher pointed out in 1930 the interesting consequences of the situation when a hétérozygote for two genetic variants has an adaptive value higher than in the two corresponding homozygotes. . . . . Fisher showed that natural selection will, in an outbred sexual population, establish an equilibrium condition known as balanced polymorphism. . . . We have an apparent paradox--natural selection will maintain in the population genetic variants which cause loss of fitness, disease, or even lethality in homo-

244 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

zygotes, provided only that the hétérozygotes possess hybrid vigor or heterosis.
Perhaps the key problem now facing the students of the genetic variability is to determine what share of the genetic loads in different forms of life can be attributed to the mutational and what to the balanced loads. This matter is important both for theory and for practice. A mutational load is kept up by recurrent mutation; a balanced load is maintained by the hybrid vigor in the hétérozygotes. Stringent selection might diminish the mutational load; it would keep the balanced load at a fixed equilibrium level. Increased mutation rates, due to radiation or to other causes, would increase the mutational loads. The reaction of a balanced load expected from increased mutation is a more complex matter; at least under some conditions the balanced load would be affected only slightly.
In man there is at present but a single convincingly established case of balanced polymorphism, namely that of the sickle-cell gene in African populations. . . . However, I think that it is fair to say that there is presumptive evidence for several more balanced polymorphisms in man; doubtless there will be much activity in this field of study in the near future.
Lerner, who must be credited more than anyone else with the authorship of the balance hypothesis of the population structure (1954, 1958), has summarized a large amount of evidence from his own experiments, and from those of other workers, dealing with selection for improved performance in breeds of domestic animals, particularly in poultry. What this evidence shows is essentially that top performance is very often found in hétérozygotes. Attempts to fix this peak performance by rigid selection are unavailing, since when the selection is

relaxed a relapse to a lower level of performance is observed. This resistance to continued gains with selection, and the loss of the gains already achieved upon relaxation of selection, Lerner has called the genetic homeostasis. A trait selected may show a high degree of heritability as estimated by usual methods, and yet no progress may be achieved by selection. The task of the breeder is, then, more intricate than the classical hypothesis has led us to believe. It is not isolation of some one genotype which engenders superior qualities in its carriers. It is rather construction of a new balanced gene pool of the population, such that the processes of Mendelian segregation and recombination would usually yield highly productive genotypes and phenotypes. The adaptive norm existing in a highly fit natural population, and that desired in a population under artificial selection, are aggregates of many genotypes in which the constituent alíeles interact in a favorable manner. .. . .
The conclusion seems warranted that, in species with a genetic structure like Drosophilae which we have studied, the genetic variability in natural populations is kept up mainly by the recombination of the genetic variants stored in the gene pool. These variants have arisen ultimately by mutation. Nevertheless, so great is their accumulated store that a suppression of the mutation process, if it were attainable, would not appreciably diminish the genetic variability available for evolutionary adaptations, and this probably for many generations.
It is not due to academic scruples alone that the above conclusion is explicitly limited to the species actually studied. For one of the tenets of modem evolutionary thought is that there are many evolutionary patterns rather than a single universal one. . . .

III. GUIDANCE OF HUMAN EVOLUTION3
HERMANN J. MULLER

245

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

. . . If . . . we define fitness in the narrow (but erroneous) sense by the criterion of leaving a larger number of immediate offspring, then, of course, later generations of men must by definition, be increasingly fit. Yet this type of fitness is no longer the same as fitness in regard to the qualities conducive to the well-being and survival of mankind in general. In fact, it seems not unlikely that in regard to the human faculties of the highest group importance--such as those needed for integrated understanding, foresight, scrupulousness, humility, regard for others, and self-sacrifice--cultural conditions today may be conducive to an actually lower rate of reproduction on the part of their possessors than of those with the opposite attributes. . . .
From these considerations arise the possibility that a much faster-acting and more serious cause of genetic deterioration than the previously discussed accumulation of detrimental mutations occurring in the wake of relaxed selection is an actual reversal of selection in regard to those psychological traits that are of the highest social importance. Objective data are badly needed on this question . . . potential consequences for the biological evolution of man have not been considered seriously enough, even though Darwin himself called attention to them. . . . Unless we are willing to remain, when viewed in larger perspective, helpless creatures of circumstances, we must take these insidious operations into account, master their
3Presented at the Darwin Centennial Celebration at the University of Chicago, November 1959. Reprinted by permission from Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, Autumn 1959.

principles, and devise ways of dealing with them.
. . . many warning voices--even among geneticists, or perhaps among them more especially--will be raised protesting that we cannot predict the results of any matings in such heterogeneous material as an existing human population. We have, for such purposes, the merest smattering of knowledge regarding the genes concerned; and what the more important ones--those concerned with the traits we are here most interested in-- will do in new combinations is anyone's guess. We could not proceed according to the principles governing simple Mendelian differences, and we should be practising not genetics but a dangerous hoax.
This argument sets up straw men and then knocks them down with straw swords. The multifactorial basis of most phenotypic differences in human and other natural, cross-breeding populations is undisputed--especially in regard to differences in traits of importance and therefore long subject to natural selection--although, of course, some gene differences produce major effects, along with many more that produce minor ones.
. . . selection carried out on a purely empirical basis does work. . . . Even primitive man was intelligent enough to do much better than nature usually did, inasmuch as he effected changes in his domestic races, in the directions sought, at a pace much faster than that at which species ordinarily change when under natural conditions of breeding. This was because his manner of selecting was less haphazard and more singletracked than nature's. The selection

246 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

practiced by modern man, especially in the present century, has been much more rapid and effective still, even though it likewise has in the main had to proceed without analysis of the individual genes concerned. Where the inherited differences are multifactorial, as they usually are in the case of traits of importance in any organism, gene identification is seldom feasible. , . .
Since the hereditary mechanism is known to be the same in man as in sexually reproducing organisms in general, there is no reason to doubt, on purely genetic grounds, the potential efficacy of an empirical type of selection for man also--consistent with general genetic considerations but not, at least in the early stages, based on knowledge of the particular genes concerned. . . .
Although the mores of our society approve the extension of society's aid to individuals for the purpose of saving lives and thereby enabling them to reproduce, they do not yet, reciprocally, recognize a duty on the part of individuals to exercise their reproductive functions with due regard to the benefit or injury thereby done society. So long as illegitimacy is avoided, the individual is not considered to be under any genetic obligation but deems it his right to have as many or as few children as he personally wishes. This being the case, his choice in the matter is largely determined by irrational factors and by shortsighted aims. Such practices worked out well enough genetically only so long as, in matters of survival, the families or the small groups were in large measure on their own.
What is most needed in this area of living is an extension of the feeling of social responsibility to the field of reproduction: an increasing recognition that the chief objective in bringing children into the world is not the glorification of the parents or ancestors by the mere act of having children, but the

well-being of the children themselves and, through them, of subsequent generations in general. When people come to realize that in some measure their gifts as well as their failings and difficulties--physical, intellectual, and temperamental--have genetic bases and that social approval or disapproval will be accorded them if they take these matters into account in deciding how much of a family to beget, a big step forward will have been taken in the motivation of human reproduction.
It can become an accepted and valued practice to seek advice, though not dictation, in these matters, even as it is today in matters of individual health. Although no one enjoys admitting his faults, he can learn to take pride in exercising humility and ordering the most important of his biological functionsreproduction--in such ways as to win the approbation of himself and his fellows. This is, to be sure, a higher type of mutual aid, a superior moral code, than exists at present, but it can be just around the corner for people who have been alerted from early youth to the fact of genetics and evolution and who have been imbued with a strong sense of their participation in the attainment of human well-being. . . .
That is not to say, of course, that there can be hard and fast rules and that any one or a few known genetic defects should enjoin a person from reproduction. Everyone has many minor and some more serious inherent imperfections. In conscious decisions, as in the process of primitive natural selection, it is the total balance of these that should count, and the answer need seldom be an all-or-none one.
Contrariwise, for those clearly better endowed, this kind of social motivation should lead them to place special importance on creating children, even though in such cases especially there will be much temptation to expend dis-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

proportionately much effort in other directions. It is true that economic and other aids could be of value here. However, the underlying mores will inevitably exert the more powerful influence. The main job, if the situation is to be rectified, consists in laying the foundations for these mores.
This does not mean that we can expect ever to specify just what would be the optimal number of children for any given individual to have, in view of his genetic constitution. Natural selection would never have succeeded in the past if such precision were necessary. Environmental influences always complicate, sometimes inextricably, the determination of developed traits. It is enough, from a long-range point of view, if only the trend is in a salutary direction. And that is the result that must be sought in the attempt to protect man's most invaluable possession--his own genetic material.
Two developments of our present period are powerful positive influences toward the needed change in motivation. One is the sudden realization of the damaging effects of radiation on heredity. This, by reason of having been made a political football, has done more to arouse the public and all its leaders to the fact that our genetic constitution requires protection than all the propaganda that eugenicists have ever put forth. Characteristically, the danger has been greatly exaggerated in some quarters, . . . and has been just as unjustifiably dismissed or played down in other quarters. . . . Nevertheless, the over-all effect of the controversy has been highly educational and has helped to make people far more genetics-conscious than they ever were before. It so happens that this same radiation problem is one of the proper faces of the ax which is here being ground. Thus it is fitting to take advantage of the receptivity created by political circumstances to awak-

247
en the public to the more general need for a reformation of our attitude toward reproduction.
The other relevant development of our time is the menace of overpopulation. Even publicists are at last becoming alarmed at the smothering of cultural advance and the disaster to democratic institutions that it can bring about in a generation or two if unchecked. To check it absolutely requires not only that birth-control techniques be made available but also that large masses of people execute an aboutface in their attitude toward having children. They must recognize that to have or not to have children, and how many, should be determined primarily by the interests of the children themselves--that is, of the next and subsequent generations. If this change in outlook is effected--as it must be sooner or later--it is a relatively short step to the realization that the inborn equipment of the children also counts mightily in their well-being and opportunity for happiness. . . .
[There are] . . . vast individual differences in native intellectual capacity, temperament, and emotional pattern . . . among human beings, even as among higher animals. Studies of twins and people brought up in institutions and foster homes have shown clearly the high, though far from absolute, importance of their heredity in the determination of psychological as well as so-called physical traits. Undoubtedly, even seemingly minute features of the personality can be strongly influenced by the genes. More important, there are abundant instances of extremely high mental ability, of a generalized kind, reappearing conspicuously in some members of families while missing other members. Certainly, there is already genetic material on hand, recognizable through its expressions, which, if conferred on the population at large, could

248 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

enable men in general to find freedom
and release by engaging in great co-
operative as well as individual assaults
against the seeming inexorabilities of
the outer world and their own stubborn
natures and by giving the feelings thus
engendered creative and artistic ex-
pressions. . . .
No people, no caste, or class, has a monopoly on these essentials. But there is everywhere a dearth of them, in relation to present needs. Let men become more conscious of this dearth and, conversely, of the richer life that later generations may have in proportion to the degree to which that dearth is remedied.
· ··
The main values to be striven for genetically are the same as those generally recognized already as the chief aims in the bringing up and education of individual children: namely, on the physical side, more robust health; on the intellectual side, keener, deeper and more creative intelligence; on the moral side, genuine warmth of fellow feeling and cooperative disposition; on the apperceptive side, richer appreciation and its more adequate expression. A con-

science that is socially oriented in regard to reproduction will lead many of the persons who are loaded with more than the average share of defects in the genetic bases of these faculties to refrain voluntarily from engaging in reproduction to the average extent, while vice versa it will be considered a social service for those more fortunately endowed to reproduce to more than to the average extent.
This trend will be greatly promoted as techniques and facilities are improved and accepted that allow the transfer of germ cells or potential germ cells, their accumulation and maintenance in frozen or multiplying condition, and their rational testing, selection and manipulation. Thus children can be adopted not merely after birth but even (as it were) before fertilization. These children may come to attain the status and enjoy the affection and other advantages of those naturally conceived.
By these means the way can be opened up for unlimited progress in the genetic constitution of man, to match and reenforce his cultural progress and, reciprocally, to be re-enforced by it, in a perhaps never-ending succession.

