Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Female sterilization in Puerto Rico
J. Mayone Stycos
To cite this article: J. Mayone Stycos (1954) Female sterilization in Puerto Rico, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:2, 3-9, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987171 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987171
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 20 View related articles Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

FEMALE STERILIZATION IN PUERTO RICO
J. MAYONE STYCOS
Social Science Research Center College of Social Sciences University of Puerto Rico

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

JLUERTO RICO IS A classic example of the rapidly developing economy in which successes of public health create problems of overpopulation. With a crude death rate of 9, a birth rate of 36, and with about 650 inhabitants per square mile, the island is finding great difficulty in improving the lot of the average Puerto Rican. Yet, despite the handicaps usually present in a Catholic population, the Co¡mmonwealth has not been unprogressive in its outlook on population. A liberal law passed in 1937 permitted the dissemination of materials and information on birth control, and since that time both birth control materials and female sterilization have been available, largely free of charge, in the island's clinics and hospitals. Other papers have been concerned mainly with birth control on the island.1 The present paper will address itself to sterilization.
The Background of Sterilization The Commonwealth's Department of
Health appears to have no explicit policy with regard to sterilization, leaving decisions on the operation to the Director of each hospital.
As near as can be determined, the practice of post-partum sterilizations was ini-

ated in a leading private hospital about 20 years ago. A good many physicians on the island were already aware of the problems of population, the prestige of the private hospital was great, and a number of physicians came informally to learn more about operative techniques. At the same time, the efforts of Dr. José Beiaval, head of the Pre-Maternal Health program (a division encompassing the birth control clinics) made many physicians interested in the pressing need for sterilization and birth control. Many physicians thought, and still think, that contraceptive methods are too difficult for lower class Puerto Ricans and regarded post-partum sterilization as the most feasible solution to the problem. Little by little its popularity grew among the medical profession, and in 1952, questionnaire returns from 453 of the island physicians indicated that 80 per cent were in favor of sterilization for reasons of health, 66 per cent in favor for reasons of poverty, and 63 per cent favored the operation when the woman had more children than she desired.2
If acceptance among the medical profession grew rapidly, it grew even more rapid-

1 See J. Mayone Stycos, "Family and Fertility in 2José Beiaval, Emilio Cofresi and José Janer,

Puerto Rico," American Sociological Review, Octo- "Opinión de la Clase Medica de Puerto Rico sobre

ber, 1952; "The Dynamics of Birth Control in the el Uso de Esterilización y los Contraceptivos,"

Lower Class of Puerto Rico," Revista Mexicana de mimeographed private release, 1953. Only about 50

Sociologiá,January, 1953; and, (with Reuben Hill) per cent of the 900 questionnaires mailed were re-

"The Prospects of Birth Control in Puerto Rico," turned by the physicians. It is probable that ob-

Annals of the American Academy of Political and jections are more current among those who did

Social Science, January, 1953.

not make a return.

3

4 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

ly among the population which regarded sterilization as a quick and easy solution to its problems. People began flocking to public and private hospitals to have their children, if delivery could be followed by sterilization. When one metropolitan hospital temporarily abandoned sterilization as a result of criticism, it soon found its wards almost empty. Charging from 60 to 90 dollars for delivery and sterilization, private hospitals cannot keep up with the demand. Heads of public hospitals began to experience political pressures from local mayors and politicians to secure bed space for wives of loyal party members. Many public hospitals began to require two pints of blood in return for the operation, a practice which has caused no reduction in the demands. Currently, according to reports from a number of hospital obstetricians and gynecologists, demands for "la Operación" are tremendous but are not being filled due to lack of facilities and fear of too much publicity. What data do we have on the incidence of sterilization?
The Incidence of Sterilization
No one knows precisely how many sterilizations are occurring in Puerto Rico, but a few data are available to give some idea of their frequency. In 1947, an island-wide survey of about 6000 households representative of the island was conducted by Paul Hatt. Hatt found 6.6 per cent of all ever married women sterilized, 8.3 per cent in the upper income category, 2.7 per cent in the lower income category. For marital unions started between 1930 and 1939, 11.3 per cent were sterilized.3 At least three factors would indicate that these figures underestimate the actual incidence: (1) It is felt that Hatt's interviewing methods were not such as to elicit the most reliable responses from respondents on this delicate subject. (2) Impressionistic evidence indi-
3Paul Hatt, "Backgrounds of Human Fertility in Puerto Rico," (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1952). Computed from Table 318, p. 444.

cates that the rate of sterilization has increased considerably since Hatt's data were collected. (3) Other studies have indicated higher rates.
In 1950, a Department of Health official requested all private and public hospitals to report the number of sterilizations performed for the year 1949. A total of 5,427 were reported, representing 17.8 per cent of the total number of hospital deliveries for that year. Since about 40 per cent of Puerto Rico's births currently occur in hospitals, it might be concluded that close to 7 per cent of all births in 1949 were reported to have been followed by sterilization. What is not known, however, is the number of women having home deliveries but hospital sterilizations. If much of this is occurring, the 7 per cent figure would be considerably higher. Furthermore, in a few cases known to the author, sterilizations are not recorded as such in the hospital records. Thus the rate may be still higher.
The rate of sterilization was found to be increasing. In the District Hospitals, where the highest incidence occurs, there was, with one exception, a steady increase in the six-year period between 1944 and 1950. Table 1 shows this in terms of index numbers, taking the sterilizations in fiscalyear 1944-45 as equal to 100.

TABLE 1

TREND OF STERILIZATIONS IN DISTRICT HOS-

PITALS--YEARS 1944-1950 (Index Numbers)

1944-45 1945-46 1946-47 1947-48 1948-49 1949-50

100 114 78 120 166 195

One other source of data comes from a survey conducted in 1953 by Reuben Hill and the author at the Social Science Research Center of the University of Puerto Rico. During a two-month period, a random sampling was taken of men and women attending public health centers in nine parts of the island. These health centers service any individual free of charge with

5

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

any type of health problem. Three hundred and four males and 2,667 females who met the criteria of currently living with a partner and having had at least one birth were given a short interview concerning knowledge and practice of birth control. In terms of residence, education and fertility they do not differ greatly from the normal population. Rural residents comprise 63 per cent, median education is 4.2 years, and median number of live births in current union is 4.2. In the urban groups, however, an over proportion of young women were interviewed, median age being 29.4 as compared with 33.4 in the 1950 census. In general, however, we can say that as far as general background is concerned this group is not much different from the rest of the population. What then is the incidence of sterilization in this group? One out of every five. This almost incredible figure must of course be viewed in the light of the fact that all the cases have had some sort of contact with the health center and therefore might be more health-oriented than the rest of the population. Still, the fact that they resemble the population in many other essential characteristics indicates that the figure may not be grossly far from the truth.
Even if the figure does not represent the true incidence of sterilization, there is no reason to believe that the group is not representative of the sterilized population. Therefore, we can address several further questions to it: (1) What types of individuals become sterilized? (2) What is the effect of sterilization on fertility? (3) What accounts for the great popularity of sterilization?
Characteristics of the Sterilized Group
First of all, sterilization would appear to be the most popular form of birth control being practiced, accounting for slightly over half of all methods currently in use. The method is more frequently practiced by the better educated. Of all urban cases, only 12 per cent of those with no education

are sterilized, whereas over 28 per cent of those with six years of education or more have used this method. In the country, the relationship is less marked, rising from 16 per cent to 24. This relation is understandable in the light of the requirements for sterilization. In private hospitals a fee is required; in public hospitals "pull" is often necessary to acquire bed space. Both these factors are associated with education, not to mention the greater interest in birth control on the part of the better educated.
An unexpected datum was that practically no difference between urban and rural groups was found with regard to sterilization. If true, this might be accounted for in terms of convenience and knowledge. The urban dweller has easier access to mechanical and chemical methods than the rural dweller. The poorly educated rural respondent, presumably with less economic resources, is at a particular disadvantage and appears to utilize sterilization even more than the urban person of the same education. Moreover, the city dweller is more informed about other methods, knowing a median number of 5.2, whereas the rural dweller knows only 4.2. It is interesting to note that Hatt's study showed the opposite tendency--sterilization was more common in the city, though residence was of much less importance than economic level. If both data were assumed to be correct, it would indicate a strong increase in rural sterilization with the past five years.
As we would expect, sterilization is also

TABLE 2

PER CENT STERILIZED BY LENGTH

OF MARRIAGE
Less than 4 years

7.1

5-9 years 10-14 years

25.0 28.7

15-19 years

27.0

20 years or more

17.9

correlated with age. Those recently married would not be expected to become sterilized, and those married a very long time are of another generation. When sterilization was most needed, it was not in vogue.

6 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Now, with fertility almost completed, it In each length of marriage group except

loses its point. Thus the maximum point the first, sterilized cases have had fewer

of sterilization occurs after ten years of pregnancies than those who have used birth

marriage. These are women both of a mod- control or who have used nothing. It can

ern generation and who are experiencing be assumed too, that by completion of

the maximum pinch of fertility.

childbearing, the differences between the

The Effect of Sterilization on Fertility two groups will increase, since the steril-

Regardless of the absolute degree of ster- ized will have no more children, while the

ilization occurring on the island, it is clear other groups presumably will. Notice too,

from all sources that the extent is consid- how relatively ineffective other birth con-

erable. Yet, as far as is known, fertility levels have not changed a great deal. Only within the past few years has the crude birth rate fallen somewhat, and this may only be due to the large number of emigrants in the fertile ages. There is some evidence for a decline in marital fertility, but it is hardly impressive. From our own data we can examine the fertility of the sterilized with the rest of the sample.

trol methods are, the fertility in three of the five groups being practically identical with the fertility of the never users. It is clear, too, that the more recently married groups become sterilized much earlier than the longer marriage groups. To a large extent this may only reflect the fact that women in the younger age group cannot have had as many pregnancies as those in the older group, having had less time to do

TABLE 3

so; but it may also indicate a trend toward

PREGNANCIES IN CURRENT UNION, BY USE
OF STERILIZATION
Sterilized Others

0-1

6-1%

15.7%

2-3 31.0

26.3

4-6 34.4

27.5

7-8 14.1

12.3

9 14.4 18.2

earlier sterilization. In sum while it is obvious that sterilization is an effective method of birth control, its effects on fertility tend to be vitiated by the fact that it is employed at such a late stage in the pregnancy history. We may now ask, why is

100.0%

100.0%

this method so popular, and why is it used

There is not a striking difference between so late?

the two groups, showing that sterilization occurs too late to be of maximum effective-

Attitudes Toward Sterilization

ness, well over a quarter being sterilized The first factor explaining the pervasive-

after the seventh pregnancy. We have not- ness of sterilization is knowledge. Practical-

ed previously the tendency for sterilization ly everyone knows of the "operation." In

to cluster in the middle age groups. Let the present sample, 90.5 per cent of the

us now compare the effectiveness of sterili- women admitted knowledge of this tech-

zation in various age groups with the fer- nique, and it is felt that this figure consid-

tility of those who have used birth control.

TABLE 4

MEDIAN PREGNANCIES CURRENT UNION, BY

LENGTH OF MARRIAGE AND TYPE OF

BIRTH CONTROL

Less than ! years 6-9
10-14
15-19 20

Sterili-
tation
2.8 3.8
5.3
7.1 9.6

Other
Birth
Control
2.3 4.4
6.2
7.8 9.7

No
Birth
Control
2.1 4.2
6.2
8.7 10.2

erably underestimates the actual knowledge.4 Moreover, it is the method most likely to be known before marriage. The reasons for the wide knowledge of this method are at least three: (1) It has received wide publicity. (2) The nature of
4 About 500 of the 3000 interviews were conducted by nurses rather than by trained interviewers. Analysis of their findings in contrast with those of the hired staff shows that ignorance of methods was far greater with the nurses' respondents.

7

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

the method makes it more acceptable for conversational purposes. (3) The advantages of the method for the Puerto Rican are such that its praises are loudly sung by most of those who have experienced it.
Publicity: The Catholic Church is mainly responsible for the wide publicity given to birth control in general and to sterilization in particular. By means of pulpit, pamphlet and newspaper, it has attacked birth control and sterilization over the years and thus informed many people of its existence. One writer reports, for example:
After a mountain clinic performed a dozen or so sterilizations, it was attacked in a pastoral letter. The reading of the letter in the rural churches was followed by a wave of inquiries at public health clinics and to private doctors as to the availability of the operation which had been denounced by the bishop.5
A respondent indicated the dramatic fashion by which the individual priest can call attention to birth control.
. . . we went to mass and the priest asked that everyone who practiced birth control raise their hands. He called us apart, one by one, and told us it was a very great sin to avoid children who wanted to come into this world.
The newspapers too, have been full of the controversy. In the three-year period between 1949 and 1951, close to 200 articles on birth control and the population problem appeared in the Puerto Rican press. The clergy and their spokesmen were the most frequently represented of any group, and their arguments and charges drew forth counter arguments and refutations by those in favor of birth control. Sterilization in particular has been attacked because it presents the greatest threat to the church, and because accusing the gov-

ernment of "mass sterilization" (esterilización en masa) is much more dramatic than accusing it of fostering birth control. Since the control by the Catholic Church over the conscience of the average Puerto Rican is slight,6 the net effect of all this propaganda may have been to supply information to the uninformed.
Nature of the Method: Puerto Rican culture tends toward the prudish with respect to sex. Young girls are chaperoned, kept in ignorance of sexual matters, and trained to be pure and to regard the Virgin Mary as their ideal. Men expect such behavior from their wives, and therefore even between spouses there is a surprising lack of communication of sexual matters. For women, birth control is associated with the obscene and the tabooed. Consequently, this subject tends not to be discussed as freely as it is in some other cultures. Sterilization, however, has few of the overtones of the obscene. The word most commonly used is "la Operación," a completely neutral term understood to mean a process undergone in a hospital after delivery of a child to insure that no more children will be had. It is relatively easy for women to discuss this with other women and with their husbands without embarrassment, whereas the condom, douche, withdrawal, etc. cannot but be associated with the sexual organs and the sexual act. Thus in a sub-sample of 850 females, 22 percent knew of sterilization before marriage; whereas of those who knew other methods, only 1 per cent knew the diaphragm prior to marriage, only 1 per cent knew jelly, 8 per cent douche, and 12 per cent condom.
Advantages of the Method: We cannot understand the popularity of sterilization without understanding the lack of popularity of other methods of birth control. The objections to the other methods are

5 Clarence Senior, "An Approach to Research in Overcoming Cultural Barriers to Family Limitation," Studies in Population, ed. S. Mair (Proceeding of the Annual Meeting of the Population Association of America), 1949, p. 150.

6 Twenty-five per cent of the island's males and 15 per cent of its females never go to church. Another 55 per cent of each group attend only occasionally. Hatt, op. cit., Table 23, p. 39. For other evidence, see articles cited in footnote 1.

8 Eugenics Quarterly

many and have been described elsewhere.7 Briefly, contraceptives are thought to be dangerous to the health, for the use of prostitutes, dirty, and productive of infidelity. Moreover, as can be deduced from Table 4, they are used erratically or inefficiently. About half the sterilized cases in our study had previously tried other methods, mainly mechanical and chemical ones. Failure brings the desire for a sure but easier method. Practically everyone cited the "sureness" of sterilization as its main advantage. This also helps to account for the fact that sterilizations are performed so late; other methods are tried first, and failures ensue before the individual turns to sterilization.8 Probably the popularity for the method was best summed up by a lower class woman: "It is only once, sure, and then you can forget about it and don't have to use those dirty things."

we have also noted that those who need it most, the poorer, lesser educated, are less likely to have it than the more well to do, better educated. Not only the requirements of "price and pull" operate to the disadvantage of the lower class but certain attitudes as well. For those who object to sterilization, the principal reason is a fear of the operation. For the lower class, unfamiliar with hospitals and suspicious of doctors and operations, sterilization is feared to have deleterious effects on health. The remarks of several lower class respondents are given below:
One isn't good anymore after sterilization. Many women have told me they cannot do hard work after it.
People say that after the operation you cannot wash or do any hard work, and because of that I've never thought about being sterilized-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

The Future for Sterilization In Puerto Rico

I have seen cases of women who got sterilized and then died of T.B.

Barring the oral pill, there seems to be little chance that any contraceptive will usurp the place of sterilization for Puerto Ricans. A drastic measure by American standards, it is a godsend to a population not sufficiently educated and motivated to practice systematic birth control. What indications do we have for its future on the island?
In considering the future of sterilization, both the attitudes of the people and of the physicians must be considered. We have already cited evidence to show that the demand for the operation far exceeds the supply and that the method is considered a panacea by many in the population. But
7See footnote 1. 8 Ithas been reported by Senior and others that the use of birth control involves periodic sin, whereas sterilization involves only one sin which can be confessed and forgiven. While this particular reasoning has never been uncovered in our studies of the lower class, it may be an important motivation for the more religious upper class.

Sterilization might kill her or harm her permanently. . . . I know a young lady who afterward got fat and listless.
Discounting much of the foregoing as the superstitions and rationalizations characteristic of this class with respect to all methods, there may still be truth in some of the allegations. As many as 25 per cent of Hatt's sterilized cases said they would not do it over again. Although the reasons were not given, we might suppose that a feeling of poor health consequent to the operation may have accounted for a number of the objections.9 It is charged by some physicians that a number of their profession are performing the operation without sufficient training in its techniques. If this is true, it is a situation which demands correction, not only from the ethical point of view
9 In the questionnaire sent to the island's physicians, eight objected to sterilization because they felt it impaired the health of the patient.

9

but because it may discourage many from being sterilized.
However, the principal bottleneck appears to be in supply rather than demand. Hospitals lack the facilities, and many physicians the motivation, to perform all the sterilizations that are requested. At this point it is anybody's guess as to the future provision of facilities, though there is little likelihood that they will be expanded. Should the Department of Health move from neutrality to an actively negative attitude, or should the Church improve its

campaign, there is every likelihood that services will be curtailed.
Although the rate of sterilizations may be slowed, there is probably little danger of any drastic reduction. Puerto Rico is a democratic Commonwealth. Its people want sterilization and are more and more coming to recognize it as their right. Consequently, it is a good bet that they will continue to get it. If they would get it sooner, or if effetive birth control were used to space births prior to sterilization, the island would be spared a host of miseries.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

MAN'S INBORN NATURE AND
OUR SOCIAL PHILOSOPHY
"In spite of many nineteenth century reformers who pretend that heredity is irrelevant in human affairs, it now again seems that the opposite may be true. Man's inborn nature may well turn out to be the most important of facts in formulating a sound personal or social philosophy or in setting up political and economic organizations.
The presently known facts of human heredity already make it seem foolish in religious, moral or esthetic fields to believe that each new generation can disregard all the painfully evolved experience and wisdom of the past. Scientific psychology also must actively investigate the limitations and special characteristics of human mental life which are inborn and which do not result primarily from environmental conditioning or cultural learning.
A full scientific study of human genetics and of the importance of heredity in determining the limitations and the inborn characteristics of man's mental life is thus a great need of our age if we are to develop a sound social philosophy and maintain our democratic freedoms.
Better education, in science, social science and especially in the humanities is important in the present age of atomic development and of dangerous international tensions. A proper study of the best wisdom of the past as given in religion and in the humanities is thus now needed in a unique way. (Dr. Leonard Carmichael, Secretary, Smithsonian Institution of Washington, excerpts from Phi Beta Kappa Address, Dec. 30, 1953.)

