Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Communications
Bruce Wallace & Henry E. Garrett
To cite this article: Bruce Wallace & Henry E. Garrett (1962) Communications, Eugenics Quarterly, 9:3, 161-165, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1962.9987520 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1962.9987520
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

Brief Reports and Communications

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

Communications

RACE AND REASON

Professor H. E. Garrett has seen fit to respond to Gordon Allen's review of Race and Reason by Carleton Putnam. I realize that Professor Garrett is only one of four persons signing the Introduction to Putnam's book and, in any event, cannot be held responsible for statements made by the author. Nevertheless, as one whose name is associated with this publication, both by his original participation and now as a volunteer defendant, Professor Garrett might want to comment on the following questions:
1. Where can a copy of "The Mutation Factor in Human Evolution" (1915) by R. Ruggles Gates be obtained? In his Foreword, Mr. Thomas R. Waring (Editor, Charleston (S. C.) News and Courier) lists this book as one of Gates' publications and, by inference, as evidence of his productivity as a human geneticist. At the Cornell University Library, I find a book entitled "The Mutation Factor in Evolution with Special Reference to Oenothera" (1915) by R. Ruggles Gates.
(Both Mr. Waring and Professor Garrett refer to Gates as one of the world's leading geneticists. Three Cold Spring Harbor Symposia have dealt with human genetics in one form or another; Gates does not appear among the 97 speakers invited to give papers at these meetings, nor is he listed among the other 330 scientists in attendance. In fact, among the several thousand references cited by the speakers, Gates is referred to only four times. In three of the four cases the speaker cites Gates in order to take issue with him. On the other hand, in a 450-

page University of Indiana publication (ScienceSeries #16, 1950) on the cytogenetics of Oenothera, Gates rates but a single reference. On the basis of these facts, I fail to see why Gates' endorsement of a book should be regarded as compelling evidence that that book deserves attention, serious or otherwise.)
2. In Professor Garrett's opinion, is Putnam's book to be regarded as science or propaganda? (The last sentence of the Introduction leads one to expect the former; the book itself betrays any such expectation.)
3. As one who has taught at the college and university level, how much credit would Professor Garrett give on a term paper in which a student cited authorities in the vague fashion of Putnam, as illustrated below:
a. "a prize-winning Northern scientist"
b. "another" (another prize-winning scientist?)
c. "internationally known" (scientists)
d. (scientists who) "had received the highest prizes"
e. (a scientist?) "who was simply biding his time"
f. "non-equalitarian anthropologists who will tell . . . the truth" (a--f; p. 19. g; p. 51)
4. What serious meaning can be ascribed to the following statement: "The character-intelligence index--the combination of intelligence with all the qualities that go under the name of character, including especially the willing-

161

162 Communications

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

ness to resist rather than to appease evil --forms the only possible index of the capacity for civilization as Western Europeans know it, and there is no test for this index save in observing the native culture in which it results." (italics mine)
5. What is the meaning of the reference to Kluckhohn, footnote 6, p. 51? As early as 1950 (Cold Spring Harbor Symposium 15, p. 405, among others), Kluckhohn spoke of genetic differences between populations; certainly he did not reverse himself in 1959, as Putnam states.
6. By what stretch of the imagination can statements of the following sort be considered pertinent to or worthy of a scientific discussion of race?
a. ". . . Franz Boas, a foreign-born Columbia University professor . . . a member of a racial minority group . . . [p. 23]
b. ". . . Professor Melville J. Herskovits . . . a member of Boas' own minority group . . . [p. 47]
c. ". . . the more authoritative and influential newspapers and magazines, such as the New York Times and the Time-Life group, are using their columns for sheer propaganda . . . [p. 49]
d. ". . . to see a Negro man hiding behind a white woman's skirts is just a little sickening, [p. 59]
e. "Birds of a feather flock together.
[P. 70] f. "The communists have made the
integration movement a part of their conspiracy... [p. 73]
g. "There is a noticeable similarity between many of the hat-in-hand arguments of the racial and backward-country pressure groups and the typical panhandler on the street, fjp. 76]

h. ". . . the equalitarian virus produces that most disastrous of all diseases, the complete appeasement of evil . . . all ability to discriminate is lost, all resistance to wrong ceases, all indignation dies, all evil is met with sobbing pleas which evil most naturally greets with contempestuous laughter . . . [p. 83]
i. ". . . our social carburetor has been put dangerously out of adjustment to the left. ¿p. 84]
j . ". . . most of them [Negro doctors and other estimable Negroes] owe their ability to some percentage of white genes in their system [p. 92]
k. "It is what he is that makes the average Negro a second-class citizen . . . [p. 94]
1. "The inclination of Negroes in the mass to be primarily interested in spending rather than conserving their own or other people's money . . . [p. 98-99]
m. ". . . the Harvard faculty is not distinguished by the number of conservatives among its members. In fact, the FBI only recently arrested one of them, a man named Zborowski . . . [p. 99]
n. ". . . devious Oriental thinking, and the pervasive mood of appeasement, of resignation under evil, and of expediency, so characteristic of the Eastern mind . . . [p. 99]
o. ". . . the native English-speaking stocks . . . are at last becoming restive. They are growing tired of watching their public leaders pander to minority groups . . . and molding policy to suit the minorities . . . [p. 104]
p. "This [left-wing] overdrift has other manifestations. We see i t . . . in the disappearance of the servant class and the resultant waste of

Communications

163

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

higher energies upon domestic duties . . . [p. 106. I cite this as one of the more ludicrous of several "manifestations".]
q. "There were no lynchings until the North drove the white South to the wall . . . [p. 98]
r. " . . . the 'new immigration' has concentrated very largely in the urban northeast and northcentral sections of the United States, has bred prolifically there, not only in children but in ideas, . . . this 'new immigration' was not initially schooled in the Protestant Ethic upon which our nation was founded, [p. 85]
7. I understand that Race and Reason is now required reading in the public schools of Louisiana. I am curious to know how Professor Garrett, as an educator in one of the branches of science, feels about this. In the education of thousands of young students, does he favor the mandatory use of a book which takes liberties with the truth (such as the citation of Gates' Mutation Factor in Human [sic] Evolution and the reference to Kluckhohn's reversal [sic] of opinion in 1959), which remarks disparagingly on the racial origins and religious beliefs of the opposition in an obvious effort to prejudice the reader, which questions the motives of and ascribes gullibility to those who hold opposing views, and which hopelessly intertwines pseudobiology and politics, irrelevant facts and unsupported assertions.
8. Finally, I would pose the following problem for Professor Garrett: Granted that the Negroes in the United States reject (as they surely will) Putnam's plea that they concentrate on being kindly and good-natured (and, presumably, second-class) and that they reject the notion that whites are to be regarded as elder brothers, what course of action is better

than integration, with or without intermarriage?
BRUCE WALLACE
Professor of Genetics N.Y. State College of Agriculture
Cornell University
Garrett's Reply
Professor Bruce Wallace raises certain questions regarding Race and Reason by Carleton Putnam which he addresses to me as one of the scientists who signed the introduction to this book.
I am glad to answer some of these questions, but my task would have been easier if Professor Wallace had read both the introduction and the book more carefully. In the introduction we state clearly that "our professional interest lies in the scientific foundations on which Mr. Putnam rests his thesis," and we also specify what those foundations are. "We believe," we say, "that there are vast areas of difference within mankind . . . in such matters as adaptability to varying environments and . . . in mental ability and capacity for development." We state, further, that we "confirm Putnam's estimate of the extent to which non-scientific, ideological pressures have harassed scientists in the last thirty years, often resulting in the suppression or distortion of the truth."
We do not, as scientists, extend our endorsement beyond these points, however strongly we may or may not feel as citizens of our respective countries. Nor does Race and Reason, beyond these points, make claim to being a scientific treatise. As Mr. Putnam has said elsewhere: "Race and Reason is not primarily a book on science. It is a book on a situation I found to exist among scientists." Actually, the volume is in major part a political and social discussion

164 Communications

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

of factors arising out of but otherwise unrelated to, the scientific premises I have mentioned.
Perhaps these prefatory remarks will clarify my position in regard to Professor Wallace's letter and will serve to answer Wallace's second question as to whether I regard Putnam's book as science or propaganda. They will also explain why I feel Wallace's many subheads under his Question 6 are unrelated to our introduction or to the scientific aspect of Race and Reason. Possibly under subhead "e" a scientist may wonder whether Wallace intends to imply that birds of a feather do not flock together, and under "p" he may envy Wallace the household arrangements which make it possible for him to call Putnam's clause here "ludicrous." Otherwise, I must suggest that as far as these social and political questions are concerned Wallace address himself to Putnam.
Coming to Wallace's remaining queries:
Question 1 deals with a typist's error. The word "Human" was incorrectly introduced in the title of this particular book by Professor R. Ruggles Gates. But does Wallace intend to imply that this error was attributable to dishonesty on Putnam's part? Wallace seems to do so in his summation in Question 7 where he refers to the error as "taking liberties with the truth." Frankly, if the word "ludicrous" must be employed in this discussion, it may well be used here. When the poverty of their arguments is such that they are driven to this kind of debate, it is a sad commentary on the equalitarian school.
Putnam has no need to build up Gates as a human geneticist. Gates is certainly one of the world's leading scientists in this field, not only because of his treatise, Human Genetics,2 Vols., N. Y., I946, but

also because of his many studies of racial genetics in his travels of the last ten years. This is a branch of science which he has created, and in which he has no rival.
Regarding the Cold Spring Harbor Symposia, and Gates' absence, nothing could more forcefully confirm the main thesis of Race and Reason. Gates was not wanted at Cold Spring Harbor because he is not an equalitarian. The attitude of those in attendance at these symposia may well be summarized in the saying: "Don't disturb us with the facts. Our minds are made up." Gates himself writes me on this score: "It is well known in the United States that I have always derided the view that the doctrine 'all men are equal' is a suitable basis for the study of races. It is not likely I'd have gone, even if invited, to meetings in which ths view of race was regarded as the only one to take." Gates' absence from Cold Spring is a reflection on Cold Spring, not on Gates.
Question 3. Here I again doubt that Wallace has read Race and Reason with any care. If he has, then one must wonder about his motives in criticizing Putnam for protecting with anonymity the names of the scientists involved. To answer Wallace's query specifically, I would give high rank to a student who had the discernment to analyze the suppressive climate in which non-equalitarian scientists operate, and the decency to protect them.
Question 4. Can Wallace suggest a better criterion, presently available, than the one Putnam offers here?
Question 5. Part of the answer to this question will be found in the quotation itself. Kluckhohn's words are: "In the light of accumulating evidence . . ." These words present a changing situation and a corresponding change of outlook. The other part of the answer is contained

Communications

165

in a letter I have before me from a distinguished scientific friend whose anonymity I now for my part intend to protect but whose words are: "As for what Kluckhohn meant, all I know is that I discussed this subject with him before he died and that is why I believe that Putnam's interpretation is correct."
Question 7. This is a sort of catch-all summary of the other questions, most of the points in which I have already answered. I will simply add that I do not find Putnam's biology "pseudo," his facts "irrelevant," or his assertions "unsupported." As for the allegation of prejudice, I think it high time that young Americans examine all the facts regard-

ing racial origins so that they may not pre-judge, that is, be uninformed, on any facet of the issues. Unfortunately, I can imagine nothing more obviously prejudiced against the truth than the whole tone and content of Wallace's letter, and I deplore his influence upon his students.
Question 8. My answer here is simplicity itself: Reverse the Supreme Court's revolutionary decision in the Brown case and permit the relationship between whites and Negroes in the United States to develop in the normal course they were following before 1954.
HENRY E. GARRETT
Professor Emeritus of Psychology Columbia University

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

