Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Population problems and family planning in Japan
Yoshio Koya M.D.
To cite this article: Yoshio Koya M.D. (1957) Population problems and family planning in Japan, Eugenics Quarterly, 4:3, 157-161, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1957.9987323 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1957.9987323
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:24

POPULATION PROBLEMS AND FAMILY PLANNING IN JAPAN

YOSHIO KOYA, M.D.
Professor, Nippon University Japan

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

I

T
X HE POPULATION PROBLEM IN JAPAN h a s
reached a very critical stage. However in some quarters it is held that family planning has nothing to do with population policy. In a sense this is true, but it is natural for a country with a very serious population problem to wish to promote family planning from that standpoint.
The most significant question in Japan's population problem is whether the present industrial development and the future scope of foreign trade will be sufficient to support the rapidly growing population. The total population of Japan in 1955 was already over 89 million. In comparison to the pre-war population this increase is approximately equal to the total population of six prefectures in the northeastern part of Japan.
Why has this rapid expansion occurred? It is due to the high birth rate and the sudden drop in the death rate which occurred after the war. The birth rate in Japan showed a sudden rise after the war: 34.3 per 1,000 in 1947. On the other hand the death rate showed a rapid drop. Before the war the death rate did not go below 14 or 15 per 1,000, but in 1955 it dropped to a low of 7.7. Owing to the introduction of high-standard techniques in public health from the United States--especially the importing of antibiotics for use in therapeutic medicine--deaths from pneumonia, communicable diseases, and tuberculosis markedly decreased, and such diseases had formerly been the leading causes of death in Japan. As a result severe population expansion has occurred. Estimates indicate

that the population of Japan will reach 100 million in 1970.
When we look in more detail at the change in age composition from the present to the future, it indicates a striking phenomenon. First we shall estimate the population composition by age groups in 1960. The total population will be about 94 million. Considered in terms of age, the population below 15 years of age will decrease to 27 million, but the labor age population between 15 and 59 years of age will increase to 58 million. The population over 60 years of age will be about 8 million. In these changes the most important problem we have to face is the increase of the labor age population.
Furthermore, in 1970--ten years later-- what will happen to the age composition of the population? According to our estimates the total population will then be 101 million and the labor age population will have increased further to 68 million, an increase of 10 million from 1960. On the other hand the population below 15 years of age will have decreased to about 21 million, and the old age population will have reached about 11 million.
The decrease in the population below 15 years of age is a real problem in these estimates for 1970 as is the increase in the oldage group. However, most important of all is the increase in the labor-age group, which is about 10 million every 10 years or 1 million each year. The most serious problem here is how to provide jobs for the rapidly increasing labor group. According to a recent official announcement of the Ministry

158 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

of Labor, there are 750,000 wholly unemployed and almost 5,000,000 partially unemployed persons even now. To find jobs for this steadily increasing group year after year poses a serious problem. Of the 1,000,000 increase each year, 300,000 are girls who will get married, which leaves 700,000 for whom new jobs must be provided each year. Will it be possible to do this? The prospect of such great increases in the number of unemployed each year is to be dreaded. Every one should recognize the danger of having such a large mass of hungry people in a country.
II
Family planning is ensuring a prosperous and happy family in the future by having a reasonable number of children. This movement started in Japan actively toward the end of the war. However, small movements to promote family planning have existed for quite a long time, and much hard work has been done by people who have introduced this movement from abroad. Although the necessity for family planning was known, the idea was not seriously considered by the Japanese Government because the limitation of the number of children is a very delicate problem connected with fundamental rights in the national constitution. Therefore the overwhelming opinion of government leaders was that the government should not deal with this question.
However in 1949, the government reached the point where something had to be done about the problem, and in June 1949 a Council on Population Problems was established in the Cabinet. The Council studied various counter-measures concerning population policy and brought out strongly the need of birth control. Unfortunately the recommendations were not considered carefully, and the Council was abolished within a short time.
But, fortunately or unfortunately, the public began to practice birth control without any relation to government direction. One of the biggest reasons for this practice

was the difficulty of having a satisfactory married life owing to the shortage of houses especially in cities where war damage was severe. Although war damage was much less in the rural districts, it was difficult for people to have children as freely as they desired because of such conditions as the return of a large number of repatriates from abroad or two or more families living in the same house. Under such circumstances the general public began to practice birth control voluntarily, and, to our regret, the great part fulfilled its purposes by induced abortions. Just at that time the Eugenic Protection Law was amended, whereby induced abortions were no longer regarded as crimes. In this way abortion increased rapidly; in 1950 the total number of abortions was 490,000 and reached 1,140,000 in 1954. These figures are only for the reported cases, and if the abortions performed secretly or unreported were added the total is estimated to be about double the reported number, in other words over 2,000,000 in 1954.
It has been mentioned previously that the birth rate showed a sudden drop within the last seven or eight years. Most of the demographers in this country believe that this remarkable decrease was caused by and large by the performance of induced abortions. On the other hand the increase in induced abortions led to recognition that such operations were dangerous for mothers. For example, according to the investigation of the Gynecological Association in 1949, there had been 76 deaths from 40,000 operations for induced abortion. In addition there were over 260 serious complications and a still larger number of minor health hazards such as abnormal bleeding or anemia. These results could not be overlooked and became a serious problem from the standpoint of public health.
When Mr. Ryugo Hashimoto, the then minister of Health and Welfare, visited the Institute of Public Health, I showed him these figures and said that something must be done about the situation. Although Mr.

159

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

Hashimoto was of the opinion that birth control should not be practiced from the standpoint of population policy, he was struck with the statistics and agreed that the problem should not be left untouched. He felt that it was an important humanitarian as well as public health problem and that conception control must take the place of induced abortion which had become so prevalent in the nation. Finally this point of view became the official decision of the Cabinet on October 26, 1951, a day which I can never forget. As a first step the Japanese government took counter measures concerning this situation as part of the national policy. Thus at first it was not considered a population policy but was taken up from the standpoint of maternal protection. However, this has changed; today it is recognized that this movement should be promoted as part of a population policy. This idea is based upon the recommendations made by the Council on Population Problems which was lately established according to the Welfare Ministry Establishment Law, 1954. The government changed its attitude and held that the practice of birth control or family planning is absolutely necessary throughout the nation in order to prepare for or at least to mitigate the danger of unemployment. Some said that the practice of birth control at present would not help to solve the problem of unemployment because the people who would lose their jobs in the near future had already been born. As a member of the Council I used to explain to such people that unemployment was not just a problem of the unemployed person but also of his family. We need to think what a tragedy it will be if the breadwinner of a large family is out of a job.

better to have as many children as possible, which they used to say before. It is true that agriculture cannot exist without ,the help of children, especially in the busy season when farmers need "the hands of a cat." But today farmers are beginning to recognize that too many children are a cause of trouble later. The results of various investigations show that most of the people wish to have three children on the average even in the agricultural districts. These changes were greatly influenced by economic circumstances in these years. Before the war the eldest son succeeded to the family property and other sons were able to get their living by working outside in factories, etc. Needless to say, things do not go so easily today.
Another big problem is the system of equal inheritance legalized by the new constitution after the war. A few years ago, when we held a round table discussion with the farmers at Akita Prefecture, I asked an old woman how many children she wanted. After long consideration she answered that she would want about five. This woman had 15 tan (about 4 acres) to cultivate. Later when we talked about equal inheritance, I asked this woman whether she thought 3 tan sufficient for each child if she had five children. Of course that would not be sufficient, she said. All the fanners then began to think seriously about the matter. Recently, however, even the farmers in the purely agricultural districts began to think seriously about family planning. I am sure there are few who want to have three or more children among the younger generation who are about to start their family life. Incidentally, most of the couples in cities do not want to have more than two children these days.

There are few now who oppose the family planning movement even in the political field. So far as the people at large are concerned, most of them are cooperative. Even in the purely agricultural districts, for example in Yamagata or Akita Prefecture, farmers are no longer thinking that it is

Ill
Next I would like to say a little about our experiences in the agricultural villages and coal mines where we have worked, using these districts as test districts for family planning. Six years ago I started the

160 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

guidance in family planning at Minamotomura in Yamanashi Prefecture, and at Kamifunaka-mura and Fukuura-mura in Kanagawa Prefecture. These places represented the farming village in the mountainous district, the rice-farming village in the plain, and the fishing village. Guidance has been given continuously in these three typical villages. Quite good results were obtained after six years' work. Not only did the birth rate drop, but the number of induced abortions also decreased. I talked about these facts to people in the government and suggested various points in guidance and education that would contribute to the government program of family planning.
However, some people said that it was more difficult to give guidance to laborers than in the rural villages. Their opinion was that guidance among laborers was more desirable, especially in the coal mines where many children were common. Others felt guidance was more important among the indigent group who, however, do not think seriously about planning their children.
We chose the Joban Company as a coal mine and 12 districts of Katsushika-ward within Tokyo as a model of needy families protected under the Public Relief Law. In three years that have passed, the guidance in these areas has been very successful. The birth rate has decreased greatly and the number of induced abortions also. Induced abortion increased a little when we started our birth-control education. However, due to our continuous guidance it has decreased to one-third of the national average. We were very pleased with such success because we thought we could show our way of guidance to the government people which would lead to a decrease in birth rates without raising the number of induced abortions.
Every year in June I gather all the housewives together and talk to them about the results of the campaign during the previous year. Recently I explained to the wives in

Joban by showing them calculations on how economic savings could be made and how the standard of living in each family could be higher if the birth rate continued to decrease at the present pace. When a child is born, 1,000 yen is paid to the family as a delivery allowance in this mine. Also 300 yen is paid as a family allowance every month from the birth of the child until he becomes 18 years of age. This allowance constitutes quite a sum of money over a period of 18 years. How much would the the coal mine save if it did not have to pay these allowances? In the Joban coal mines there are about 7,000 families, and if the birth rate is to drop at the present pace the company will have saved 300,000,000 yen in 10 years. And the expenses which must be borne by the miners themselves in raising their families would decrease by 1,500,000,000 yen. This amount may not necessarily remain as a deposit in the bank but will provide increased expenses for better nourishment or be used in educating the children or in clothing them. It will also raise the level of living for housewives.
Mr. Kawasaki, the Minister of Health and Welfare, made a visit to the coal mine some time ago, and I accompanied him. Members of the House of Representatives from this district joined the party, and sevrai senior staff officers of the company were present. The party became too big, and when the round table discussion was about to begin the housewives became so nervous that they did not speak out. I told them not to hesitate, for the purpose of the Minister's visit was to hear frank expressions of opinion from them. Then they began to talk as freely as ever. One of the wives said that when her husband came home drunk he did not care to use conception control, and that in such instances she withdrew. Another woman was appreciative of the guidance because she felt at ease not worrying about a baby she didn't want. She had been worrying about having another child at the time of her husband's retirement, which

161

was 55 years old in this particular mine. In other cases the children's attendance at school was much better for they did not need to stay home to look after their small brothers and sisters; the attendance rate at the parents-teachers meetings was also much improved. The Minister of Health and Welfare was very pleased and stated that he was deeply impressed.
Conclusions
The number of induced abortions decreased to one-third of the highest amount, and the birth rate dropped to 9.7 in the third year which may seem too low as com-

pared with the whole of Japan, which is 19.3. Some may feel anxious about this drop and feel it is too low, but there is no need to worry about it. These people have already had many children, so the drop in birth rate in recent years does not necessarily mean that the family size has become too small.
This experience in various test districts of actual guidance in family planning has been reported in detail to the government. I think it has contributed greatly in encouraging the family planning campaign by the government now under way throughout the country.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

