Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
A new heredity counseling service in Western Canada
Margaret W. Thompson
To cite this article: Margaret W. Thompson (1959) A new heredity counseling service in Western Canada, Eugenics Quarterly, 6:3, 167-170, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1959.9987410 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1959.9987410
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3
View related articles Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

A NEW HEREDITY COUNSELING SERVICE IN WESTERN CANADA
MARGARET W. THOMPSON*
University of Alberta Edmonton, Alberta

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

J[ HE HEREDITY COUNSELING SERVICE of
the University of Alberta Faculty of Medicine, set up in 1957, is the first service for counseling in human genetics in Western Canada. Its establishment came about as a natural outgrowth of teaching and research in human genetics in the University, in accordance with the University's tradition of service to its community. It has been well received; at present, just two years after its inception, an average of ten cases a month are referred to it for genetic assessment. Some account of its background, operation, difficulties, and prospects may be of interest to other workers in the field of applied human genetics.
Alberta has a population of just over a million people and an area of a quarter of a million square miles. The population is more concentrated than these figures suggest, however; only the southern half and the northwestern Peace River Block are really settled, and almost half the total population is concentrated in the two cities of Edmonton and Calgary. The 1200-bed University Hospital in Edmonton is a referral center for the whole province.
To a human geneticist, Alberta's population presents some unusual genetic aspects, particularly because of its mixed ethnic origin and its recent set-
* Assistant Professor of Human Genetics; Chairman, Heredity Counseling Committee.

tlement. Settlement of the province followed upon the completion of the transcontinental Canadian Pacific Railway in 1885. The settlers came mainly from older parts of Canada and the United States, the British Isles, Germany, and the Ukraine. There are about 20,000 native Indians and Metis, most of whom live on reservations as wards of the Federal Government.
A striking illustration of the newness and the rapidly changing character of Alberta's population is provided by the changing proportion of University of Alberta students born in the province. According to the records of the Registrar's OSice of the University, in 1913-14 only 7.6 per cent of the University students were Alberta-born; in 1933-34 the 50 per cent mark was passed; and by 1953-54, the most recent year for which these figures have been compiled, the percentage of Alberta-born students was 73.9.
The breeding structure of the Alberta population is far from random. Particularly during the early years of settlement, small isolates developed, usually formed by groups who had come at the same time from the same homeland, shared the same religious beliefs, and may well have already been somewhat inbred. The Hutterite colonies form the most striking remaining example of these isolates. More recently, in contrast with

167

168 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

the former tendency to form isolates, wide out-breeding has become common. Inspection of the marriage column of any Alberta daily paper will show that marriages between people of rather dissimilar origin (especially between those of Eastern European and those of Western European parentage, as indicated by surnames) are increasingly common among young Albertans. Usually, couples who seek counseling do not know whether or not their parents are consanguineous, although the geographic origin of the parents may make consanguinity seem probable.
Another unusual feature of the local scene in relation to human genetics is that Alberta is the only Canadian province to have and to enforce a so-called "eugenics law." Under this law, passed in 1928 during what Neel and Schull (1) have called "the first flush of eugenic enthusiasm," compulsory sterilization can be performed for Huntington's chorea, epilepsy with psychosis and memtal deterioration, neurosyphilis, and mental defect where in the opinion of the Eugenics Board the condition is hereditary or involves the risk of mental injury to the patient or to his progeny. During 1957, 82 sterilizations were performed under the Act. Furthermore, as is customary elsewhere also, the major hospitals have "eugenics committees" to consider cases for voluntary sterilization. The decisions of the Eugenics Board and eugenics committees seem to be determined more often by medical and sociological than by genetical considerations.
At the 1954 Teaching Institute of the Association of American Medical Colleges, the value of genetics in medical education received recognition. Immediately thereafter, in the spring term of 1955, Alberta became one of the first

medical schools in the country to add a formal course in human genetics to the medical curriculum. (This development was facilitated because a trained human geneticist was already present on the campus as a part-time physiologist and faculty wife. In the present shortage of human geneticists, Alberta may be the only university to have found staff readily available when required).
Two years later, because it was obvious that many physicians and social agencies in the province would find it convenient to have a center to which genetical problems encountered in daily practice could be referred, the Heredity Counseling Service was instituted. The Service is under the guidance of five clinical departments: Medicine, Preventive Medicine, Paediatrics, Obstetrics and Psychiatry. The heads of these departments, with the human geneticist, form the Heredity Counseling Committee of the Faculty of Medicine. The affiliation is with the University rather than the University Hospital so that the Service will be accessible to as wide a group as possible, but most of the counseling so far has been done in and for the University Hospital. In order to prevent improper use of the Service, it is required that cases be referred by physicians or by agencies such as the Department of Child Welfare of the provincial government; this was decided on the advice of an original Committee member who had had experience with British heredity clinics which were open to the general public. Financial support has been provided by a Federal-Provincial Public Health Grant, and at present no fees are charged, although the decision not to charge fees was reached against the advice of some of the clinical members of the Committee and may be changed later. Cases in which heredity counsel-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

ing is requested are referred to the chairman, who can then discuss the clinical and genetical aspects with the appropriate clinical member of the Committee if necessary. The referring physician may request that only he, and not the patient, receive a report; this frequently happens in cases of, for example, dermatoglyphic diagnosis of mongolism, but only rarely except when our assistance is primarily for diagnostic purposes.
We find it necessary, for reasons of medical ethics, to accept the diagnosis provided by the referring physician, even when its accuracy is doubtful; for example, if a patient is sent in for heredity counseling as a case of muscular dystrophy, and if the family history does not contradict this diagnosis, we feel we must base the genetical opinion upon it even though it may be incorrect. This presents a real difficulty, potentially at least. Fortunately it is not always necessary to have an accurate diagnosis in order to identify a hereditary pattern. Nevertheless, cases in which the diagnosis is obscure have been the least satisfactory to deal with; no doubt this statement is even more true to a medical practitioner.
The types of problems sent to us are varied and undoubtedly depend to a great extent upon the research interests of the counselor and her colleagues. The most common type of problem is that of the probability of a second abnormal child in a family in which one such child has already appeared; this seems to be the most common kind of case in every heredity counseling center. A particularly large number of requests come to us for dermatoglyphic diagnosis of mongolism, especially in cases where a difference of opinion exists. Dermal pattern analysis is not truly genetic counseling, but no one else in Alberta provides

169
this particular service and we are glad to do so. There are fairly frequent requests for diagnosis of chromatin positivity or negativity, formerly termed "nuclear sex"; these are referred in turn to an anatomist who is interested in the technique and its applications. We suspect that the recent advances in human cytogenetics (2) will have some effect upon the types of problems submitted. Recently the number of requests for preadoption counseling has risen; such requests have come from both adoption agencies and adopting parents. Premarital counseling, at least in a formal way, does not make up a large proportion of our work; as any geneticist who teaches University students knows, premarital counseling most often takes place at the end of a lecture or during a lull in a laboratory period, when a student sidles up embarrassedly and says, for example, "My girl friend is Rh negative; should I give her up?" These inquiries, though they have their comical aspects, are desperately serious to the young people involved and deserve to be treated seriously. Consanguinity is rare as a counseling problem in Alberta. Finally, certain cases are referred either because the genetical picture may be required as a diagnostic aid, or primarily for the purpose of broadening the geneticist's experience ("Have you ever seen a case of Leber's optic atrophy? Well, go and talk to Mr. X on Station 99.")
Whether or not it is proper to give advice by mail is a controversial subject among heredity counselors. (3) Many inquiries come to us from rural practitioners whose training did not include medical genetics and who are distant from medical libraries. There is certainly nothing questionable about looking up the appropriate information and sending it, complete with references, to the

170 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:25 08 December 2015

inquirer. Our regulation that cases be referred by a physician spares us the necessity of providing this service to the general public.
The value of the Heredity Counseling Service to the medical profession and to Alberta citizen is best measured by its steadily increasing case load. It has also assisted greatly in promoting the development of human genetics in the University of Alberta, because we receive so much interesting material that would otherwise be lost. The geneticist has gained much experience because of the wide variety of the referrals. Almost all teaching examples used can now be taken from the Heredity Counseling Service files, and, in research, several family histories have been well worth further investigation.
We expect that, as time goes on, an increasingly large proportion of the province's physicians will be able to recognize and to handle genetical problems themselves, and that the Heredity Counseling Service will then receive only the more complicated types of cases as referrals. We also anticipate that "eugenics committees" will become in fact what they are now in name, and will develop a more sophisticated approach to the

problems of eugenical sterilization. Furthermore, we hope that with the expansion of our understanding of human genetics, particularly in the areas of detection of carriers, empiric risk figures, and the interrelation between genetical and environmental factors in development, we will be able to be increasingly helpful to the people who seek our advice.
The small beginning that has been made in heredity counseling in Alberta has been described. It is a pleasure to report, in closing, that two of the other three Western Canadian universitiesnow have, or soon will have, human geneticists on their staffs. It is obvious that our science is receiving increasingly wide recognition and that the institution of a heredity counseling service here has' been only one instance of the increasing recognition of human genetics as an indispensable means of widening man's understanding of his own nature.
REFERENCES
1. NEEL, J. W., and SCHULL, W. J. 1954. Ch. 20,
Human Heredity. Chicago, University of Chicago Press. 2. ANONYMOUS. 1959. The Chromosomes of Man. Lancet 1 : 715-716.
3. HAMMONS, HELEN G. (Ed.) 1959. Heredity
Counselig, New York, Paul B. Hoeber.

