Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
A return to the principles of natural selection
Frederick Osborn
To cite this article: Frederick Osborn (1960) A return to the principles of natural selection, Eugenics Quarterly, 7:4, 204-211, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1960.9987449 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1960.9987449
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2 View related articles Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:25

A RETURN TO THE PRINCIPLES OF NATURAL SELECTION

FREDERICK OSBORN

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

Editor's Note: It is generally agreed that much further research is needed if eugenics is to make progress. But it is difficult to agree on what types of research are needed so long as there is no theoretical framework covering the operation of eugenic selection and so long as we are without objective criteria

for measuring the types of people being selected. The following article is of immediate interest because it proposes answers to these questions. The Quarterly would like comments from its readerson the practical soundness of these proposals compared with other suggestions.

T»HE AIM OF EUGENICS should be to re-
sAtoHre the principles--but not all the methods--of natural selection as it operated for 500,000 years of prehuman and human evolution.
NATURAL SELECTION SELECTION
FOR AN ENVIRONMENT
During the long period of prehistory the measure of selection was ability to cope successfully with the environment. Selection was related directly to achievement, namely, to survival. The area of selection included both the physical and the social environments. When prehuman primates first began to use tools, the area of physical selection was progressively reduced and that of social selection increased. The first tools may have been only small stones in their natural shapes, but they gave their users a new weapon in their struggle for survival. It took intelligence to use tools, even stones. When natural selection began to

favor those who among other things used tools most effectively, intelligence became the critical factor in the selective process. Intelligence could invent new tools, develop new uses for them, and so increase its selection advantage. At the same time, prehuman man began to develop responsible social relationships based on kinship. Success in the social group, the care of others, became a factor in survival. "The structure of modern man must be the result of the change in the terms of natural selection that came with the tool using way of life.-- The reason that the human brain makes the human way of life possible is that it is the result of that way of life."1
THE DECLINE OF NATURAL SELECTION
The conditions in which natural selection operated were altered when man gave up hunting and gathering in favor
1Sherwood L. Washburn. Tools and Human Evolution, Scientific American, Sept. 1960.

204

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

of agriculture and the domestication of animals. Since food was distributed among large groups of people, individual abilities did not count so much toward survival in times of drought and famine. At the same time, during long periods when food was relatively abundant, ties of kinship made people care for the weak and inefficient. Selection was becoming less related to achievement. With the coming of civilization the relation between selection and achievement declined and probably continued to decline during the 6,000 years of recorded history.
The real breakdown in the relation of natural selection to achievement, or "success," in an environment has come in the last hundred years. Until the middle of the nineteenth century, almost half of all infants born died before they reached the age of reproduction. Selection by deaths still had a chance to operate. At the same time married women were having children about up to the biologic maximum, and there could have been little selection by births except for biological fitness. Then two things happened almost simultaneously in the more technically advanced countries. The death rate began going down, and the introduction of birth control began slowly to reduce the birth rate. The reduction in deaths caused an immediate increase in the growth of populations. The first result of the reduction in births was greatly to increase differential fertility between social, economic and educational groups. The use of birth control began among the more educated people and was rapidly extended among them. It spread much more slowly among the less educated. At the period of extreme differences, which in the United States came during the great depression, large

205
groups of the more educated couples were having only half the birth rate of the less educated. If we assume, as we have some ground for doing, that the more educated couples had on the average a superiority, however slight, in the genetic capacity for developing intelligence, then, as between these groups and for this period of time, natural selection had gone into reverse.
This situation was in part temporary. The great post-war baby boom was largely a phenomenon of the white-collar classes. Their birth rate almost doubled between 1940 and 1960 and accounted for most of the rise in births in that period.2 The proportion of families of five or more children continued its long decline. Group differentials lost much of their significance. Within the major groups in our society we do not know what kind of people are having the most children or in what direction we are moving. There is evidence for genetic gains but also for genetic losses.
Meantime deaths have continued their rapid decline. In the United States today, over 95% of all children born alive live to reach their thirtieth year, which is the middle of their reproductive period. At such a low death rate, the chief selective effect of death is to keep down those genetic anomalies which result in early deaths. Selection for traits of personality and intelligence can no longer operate through selective deaths.
Thus there is no evidence now available which indicates that on balance, man's genetic structure is changing in a direction which will make him more able to cope with his increasingly complex environment. It seems that natural se-
2Calculated from Graybill, W. H., Kim, C. V., Whelpton, P. K., "Fertility of American Women," Wiley & Son, 1958. Tables 48-54. Cum. Series P20, No. 84, Table 5.

206 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

lection for man's higher traits has for all practical purposes ceased to operate. The most important long-term job facing man today is to get natural selection back to selection for success or achievement in the human environment.
A RETURN TO NATURAL SELECTION
In the past, natural selection operated mainly through deaths. Obviously we are not going to return to that method if we can help it. Our alternative is to enlarge the part played by birth selection. Voluntary birth control gives us a special opportunity to switch from death selection to birth selection.
It seems pretty certain that present methods of birth control, which are difficult to use and not always effective, will soon be superseded by physiological means of control which will prevent conception over considerable periods of time by means of a pill, a vaccine, or an immunization. The prospect of such a development is sufficiently good to justify our considering birth selection in terms of conditions of entirely voluntary parenthood, when parents will have children only after passing a deliberate judgment that they want them. We can get some idea of the effect of such a development by analysis of studies of couples using present methods of birth control.
Recent studies have been made on large-scale samples of the U.S. population, in which the couples using contraception most effectively have been studied separately from the others. For such couples there are indications of a trend toward size of family being related directly to income, that is, couples with incomes of six thousand dollars may, under certain conditions, be having more children than couples with incomes of

five thousand dollars, and so on.3 Indications of a similar trend have appeared in a number of studies in this country and abroad. Thus, under conditions in which birth control is used and is effective, pressures of an economic sort have a direct effect on the distribution of births. It seems probable that if, with new methods of fertility control, parenthood became even more a matter of personal decision, similar tendencies would provide opportunities for the development of a whole set of pressures not only economic but also social and psychological, which would tend to a selection of births favorable to genetic improvement. "The response would be voluntary, a selection drawn out by the environment itself, so that, in so far as children tend to resemble their parents for either hereditary or environmental reasons, there would be in each generation a proportionate increase in the number of people best fittted to the environment."*
It is not likely that voluntary parenthood alone would be sufficient to produce a population best fitted to succeed in its social environment. But so long as birth control offers some tendency along selective lines, it should be easier to develop measures which would strengthen and confirm the tendency. Such measures should be developed from the knowledge obtained in studies of factors affecting family size among people of different kinds and different environments. This is a proper field for sociological study. To be carried out effectively, we require criteria for those qualities which are to be selected for survival.
3Freedman, R., Campbell, A. A., Whelpton, P. K., "Family Planning, Sterility and Population Growth," McGraw-Hill, 1959, p. 293.
4Osborn, Frederick, "Preface to Eugenics." 2nd ed. Harper's, 1951, p. 240.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

CRITERIA FOR NATURAL SELECTION
The criteria must be of a sort which will define fitness in terms of success in the various social environments men live in today. For this we know nothing better than to accept the forms of recognition given by society itself. Every society offers its members rewards for the work they do. In our society the rewards vary in kind, including wages paid and prestige elements, such as Federal judgeships and inclusion in "Who's Who," a higher education, and many other evidences of achievement. But for the great majority of people the rewards are mostly in money, and this criterion will be necessary in measuring the larger groups. Money rewards can be scaled, which is an advantage to the investigator. The recognitions given by society provide a generally accepted value judgment of the individual's achievement of "success" in his environment. If the judgments are "wrong" the fault lies with society, and we should try to change the society.
It will be immediately argued that even in the best society many rewards go to the wrong people for the wrong services. But so was the reward of death in many instances in the past. All we can hope for is to find measures which most nearly, and for the greatest number of instances, define qualities valuable to society. The measures now proposed are probably more accurate in more instances than were the measures used in the old processes of natural selection where pure chance played so large a part. Considerable elasticity is permissible in using the rewards given by society as a measure of value. We do not include rewards to those whose work is clearly anti-social, or those who have taken rewards in defiance of the law, as gamblers, racketeers, etc. Nor need we be too concerned that we are eliminating

207
from procreation some valuable elements now not recognized by society. No man-made alterations in natural selection are going to work so well that man will thenceforth breed to a particular type or types and none other. All we can hope for, and indeed all that is desired, is that by and large, in general, man's genetic structure will be changing in the direction of making him more able to cope with his environment. Since man must operate in a great number and variety of environments, he would by natural selection be breeding not to one type but to as many different types as there are different environments and different types of human activities.
The proposed criteria would provide tools for measurement which do not involve value judgments on the part of those who are studying and making proposals. The factors to be studied would range from existing social institutions as they affect birth rates, to psychological pressures which may affect parental decisions. Most of the institutions needing study are already under pressure for change by people who want to improve social conditions.
A few of such situations may be listed as examples.
SOCIAL SANCTIONS AFFECTING THE
DISTRIBUTION OF BIRTHS
Tax Structures. There have been a number of studies recently on the attitudes of parents in regard to desired size of family. These all tend to confirm the impression that in the great middle-income group of families which includes the professional classes, the cost of rearing children and particularly the cost of higher education is a limiting factor in decisions as to size of family. Present income-tax load is particularly high for the parents of children in this group.

208 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

Deductions for children have been made larger in recent years but are not nearly large enough to offset the cost of a college education. Most professional people spend an unusually long time in preparation before they begin to have earning power, and they marry late. But they cannot regain the lost ground. After paying their income tax, there is no sufficient margin for the later education of their children. These people are among the most useful and most needed in our society, and it has long been felt that changes should be made in the incometax laws for their benefit as a matter of social justice and to encourage more people to enter these fields. An equally important reason for such changes is the effect of the present law on the distribution of births. Tax laws which put a disproportionate burden on couples in the middle-income groups when they have children tend toward an inverse relation between selection and achievement.
Illegitimacy. There are about 200,000 illegitimate children born in the United States each year.6 Few people would affirm that bearing illegitimate children is in itself a mark of "fitness" in our society. Yet, apart from a diminishing social disapproval, society does little to discourage such parents in their ill-considered propagation. Society makes varying degrees of effort to care for the children, and this is right and proper. But these efforts should not relieve the parents of their responsibility, as is now too often the case. Our laws should be greatly strengthened, to seek out the father and require that he bear part of the expense and to hold the mother to her respon-
5 U. S. Dept. of Health, Education & Welfare, National Office of Vital Statistics, Vital Statistics of U.S. 1958, "General Characteristics of Live Births," Sect. 12, Table 38, p. 264, 1960.

sibilities to the child. Such changes are widely urged on the grounds that society needs them for its protection. Changes are also desirable for their effect on the distribution of births. A high frequency of illegitimacy is also a force tending to an inverse relationship between selection and an effective response to the environment.
Marriage Laws and Divorce. It is quite generally agreed that our marriage laws should be drawn to prevent, so far as possible, the marriage of people who are not prepared for the responsibilities of having children. Most states do not permit marriages at ages considered too young to undertake the responsibility of rearing children. But the state laws are not uniform in this matter. Few states proscribe marriage by individuals who are too feeble minded to give their children adequate care, or by alcoholics, and others whose children will in turn become social problems. In most states divorce laws do not sufficiently hold parents seeking divorce to their responsibility to their children. Because state divorce laws are not uniform and requirements for residence easy or easily evaded, most people think that divorce will be easy. But easy divorce tends to encourage careless marriage, and marriage, careless or not, promotes childbearing. Marriage and divorce laws should be drawn with more consideration for their effect on the distribution of births.
There are many other economic and legal conditions which could be changed to the immediate benefit of society, and such changes would at the same time bring us closer to the principles of natural selection for achievement.
Further studies may be expected to develop valuable information in the field of psychological pressures which af

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

feet couples in their decisions as to size of family. It is already known that couples are influenced by the opinions and attitudes of those in their immediate surroundings. They want to follow the fashion in regard to size of family, and the fashion is usually quite undiscriminating. During the depression, in the white-collar groups, strong social pressures were exerted to maintain the "fashion" of small families. Just now, in the same groups, the "fashion" is for large families. It should be possible to develop a fashion which is discriminating and encourages children among people who are making a recognized contribution to society and who could be counted on to give their children responsible care, while it discourages children among couples less suited to parenthood. Psychological pressures of this sort are becoming increasingly important with the increasing spread and effectiveness of means of fertility control.
HOW FAST MIGHT CHANGE BE EFFECTED?
Such proposals as those which we have indicated, and those we believe can be developed through further study, would change present trends. We would be coming back toward the principles of natural selection for an environment by which man became continually better fitted to handle an increasingly complex environment. It is time that this system of continuing genetic change be re-established. We seem to have developed a society so complex that it is beyond the ability of any but the most highly endowed of our people to handle it. We are only fooling ourselves if we think that we can sufficiently increase, by educational means alone, from the ranks of the less well endowed, the proportion of really able people we presently need.
Our hope lies in the fact that we do

209
not have to wait for nature to develop a new and different type of man. We have only to increase the proportion we now have of people whose genetic endowment fits them to achieve the highest development. Scientific opinions differ as to how rapidly this could be done. Geneticists do not know how many genes are involved in the development of man's mental and emotional machinery. They do not know the method of their interaction, nor in which chromosomes they are located. Nor is it known whether the genes are separately and widely distributed throughout the population or are considerably concentrated in particular family lines. Lacking such knowledge, while geneticists do not reject proposals of the sort being considered, they cannot at present endorse them. There are, of course, exceptions. H. J. Muller, Nobel prize winner in genetics, supports such proposals and goes considerably further. He urges insemination with sperm from people generally recognized as having made important contributions to society. He suggests that the sperm might be frozen and used after the death of the donor so as to avoid the psychological difficulties arising when the donor is alive at the time of insemination. He would be using the soundest criteria of a person's value, namely, the judgment of society after death. It thus embodies to the highest degree the criteria of selection for achievement in an environment. But it is opposed to our present mores and may take some time for acceptance.
Paleontologists, with their long view of man's evolution, may find ground for approving the type of selection here proposed, but they are not in a position to tell us how rapidly it could begin to increase the proportions of able people. We might hope to find the best answers

210 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

in analogies from the breeding of domestic animals, or from changes in gene frequencies in wild populations under the influence of changes in the environment. But animal breeders use methods incompatible with man's other needs, and this would invalidate the analogy. In the case of wild populations, the analogy might be fairly close if it were not for an important difference in the breeding habits of man compared to wild populations such as the fruit fly Drosophila. There is no evidence of selective breeding among fruit flies. They mate by chance, and geneticists call this system pan-mixia. But humans exercise considerable selection, and this selective or assortative mating tends to concentrate groups of genes in specific family lines. For a number of reasons which need not be considered here, there is probably a particularly high rate of assortative mating in the United States. In New England the able stocks have been intermarrying since their arrival in this country; among the newer immigrants, the abler individuals have moved rapidly up into the industrial-management and professional classes, while the less able individuals have found mates in other groups. Even more significant is the probability that within, as well as between, each of our social and economic classes there has been a continuous process of assortative mating with a considerable sorting out of able strains into specific family lines. By this process the proportionate distribution of favorable genes would be somewhat heavier among the smaller well-educated groups, compared with a somewhat thinner distribution among the larger less well-educated groups, but the greater aggregate of genes for ability would still be found in the larger though less well-educated group. These assumptions appear to get

some confirmation from the studies made by psychologists on the distribution of capacity for intelligence among the various socio-economic classes in this country.6 Such findings are important for they indicate that any process of selection, to be effective, must be all-inclusive, operating within every social-economic and educational group, and including the whole population.
To the extent that specific types of genes tend to concentrate in specific family lines within every social class, a system of selection which was only moderately effective might still make a considerable increase in the proportion of able people within one or two generations. Able people, like all other people, develop out of conditions in which heredity and environment are so intertwined that their "relative" effects cannot be sorted out. The people who have responded most successfully to their environment have by and large the best genetic capacity for responding and live in home environments best fitted to bring out such a response. Their children, therefore, have a double reason, both genetic and environmental, for achieving the ability to respond successfully to the environment. This reasoning is supported by the extensive studies of Terman7 and many others in the field. There are thus strong grounds for the belief that any system of birth selection which improved genetic capacity would at the same time favor a bettter environment for the rearing of children. For this reason a return to the principle of selection for an environment should
6 Anastasi, Anne, Differentiating Effect of Intelligence and Social Status, Eugenics Quarterly, Vol. 6, No. 2, June 1959, pp. 84-91.
7 Terman, L. M., Genetic Studies of Genius. Vol. V, "The Gifted Child Grows Up," Stanford University Press, 1947.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

be favored by "environmentalists" as well as by "hereditarians."
Such principles of selection do not carry connotations of "superiority" or "inferiority" except with respect to relative success or failure in specific environments. A man might fail in business when he might have made a great success as a musician, and so on through all the categories of different kinds of service to society. The success of a system of selection using the criteria of success or achievement in an enviiCnment, would depend a great deal on people finding the right niche for their particular capacities. In our society this is increasingly possible, and desirable for many reasons. The kind of proposals here suggested for establishing principles of selection conducive to the improvement of the genetic endowment of man are not of the sort to arouse opposition. Hereditarians, equalitarians and environmentalists can join hands in their support, along with all those who are interested in the future condition of society. No stage could be better set for their adoption.
Yet today the only important group of men engaged in the problems of man's genetic future are the medical geneticists with practical applications in the field of heredity counseling. This is an

211
important field for it deals with genetic factors which natural selection should certainly tend to reduce. As present the field is necessarily limited to the simpler genetic manifestations such as genetic abnormalities; as knowledge increases it will move on to more complicated formulations and finally reach consideration of the extreme complexities involved in the factors which underlie the higher traits.
It would be a long time to wait for geneticists to unravel the genetic complexities of man's higher traits. And it is not necessary to do so. The assumptions on which we can base the development of eugenic proposals have far more scientific justification than those assumptions which, in other fields, we are using to determine actions of great importance. It is time that social scientists should be undertaking the serious study of the social, economic and psychological factors which affect parents of various kinds and in various environments in their decisions as to size of family. On the basis of such studies we can embark with confidence on a return to those principles of natural selection which accompanied the evolution from ape to man, from the society of animal bands to the complex societies of civilized man.

