Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
The effect of unwanted pregnancies on a relief load: An exploratory study
Gitta Meier
To cite this article: Gitta Meier (1961) The effect of unwanted pregnancies on a relief load: An exploratory study, Eugenics Quarterly, 8:3, 142-153, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1961.9987476 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1961.9987476
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 2
View related articles Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:26

THE EFFECT OF UNWANTED PREGNANCIES ON A RELIEF LOAD: AN EXPLORATORY STUDY

GITTA MEIER
Ann Arbor, Michigan

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

I. BACKGROUND OF INVESTIGATION
JCROM THE DATA in recent demographic studies in the United States it would appear that the traditional differences between the total number of children desired and the total number of children already born to or expected by the majority of American families have greatly declined if not altogether disappeared. This remarkable trend could not be established, however, for a minority group still numbering many millions whose achieved and prospective fertility has continued to remain larger than their expressed preferences as to family size. By and large, such excess fertility was found to be strongly related to low educational and socioeconomic status. The procedure and schedules used in such investigations as the Growth of American Families study permit only some rather general speculations as to why the parents least able to afford large and very large families should be the ones producing them (Freedman et al., 1959).
In an even more recent study, based on intensive interviews with 100 men and women in this group, Dr. Rainwater (1960) made one attempt to provide answers to this question.1 He found that
1 Undoubtedly future investigations can be designed so as to overcome some of the methodological criticism raised against this study, once it has been established that respondents in the lower socioeconomic groups are indeed willing to discuss most relevant aspects of their marital relations with sympathetic interviewers.

the large majority of these couples, in particular the women, were indeed "motivated" to limit the number of their children. Yet their style of life, their over-all incapacity to plan ahead, and their misinformation on the physiological features of reproduction seemed to combine with certain conceptions of their own parental and marital roles and with poor communication between husband and wife to reduce the chances for effective contraceptive practices. Perhaps not surprisingly, many of these same factors are listed with monotonous recurrence as obstacles to family limitation in underdeveloped countries.
Our own exploratory study of unwanted pregnancies among relief clients suggests an alternative and rather economic way of investigating some of the underlying causes of this fertility differential for at least one segment of this group, namely, those families who have had frequent and prolonged contact with social agencies (Meier and Littig, 1959).
This investigation was undertaken as part of a larger research and demonstration project on the prevention of longterm dependency, with the doublepronged purpose of providing more adequate services to the families involved and seeking ways to reduce public commitment for their support in the long run. This project is one among a growing number of efforts in various localities to deal with so-called multi-problem, chronic, or hard core clients, their special

142

Effect of Unwanted Pregnancies

143

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

needs, and their disproportionate demands on community supported services (Buell and Associates, 1952; Community Research Associates, 1954; Osborn, 1960). In this framework it was our purpose to isolate as far as possible the additional services by, and the expense to, publicly supported agencies which might be attributed partially or fully to unwanted pregnanciesamong long-term reliefrecipients. Incidental to this we were looking for possible explanations of the families' failure to use existing contraceptive services and methods effectively which could prove useful to Planned Parenthood clinics and other community agencies such as the Welfare Department in deciding on suitable means of reducing a suspected high incidence of unwanted pregnancies among groups such as the one under study.
In order to accomplish these goals we had (a) to determine the incidence of unwanted pregnancies among this group and (b) to trace as far as possible the circumstances surrounding such pregnancies and their consequences in the lives of the families. Probably, the approximate determination of the social costs of such unwanted pregnancies is of the most immediate practical significance, given the reluctance of most social agencies to enter into the controversies surrounding family planning. Such a determination, however, hinges on the findings related to the incidence and the consequences of these unwanted pregnancies. This paper will discuss these findings along with some explanations of the group's unsatisfactory contraceptive experience that are relevant to the major purposes of our investigation.
I I . PROCEDURE
Selection of Cases. We examined in

detail the records of 25 families with one or more children, all of whom had been receiving direct relief for 12 months or longer. They constituted one-fourth of the entire group of clients receiving such relief in August 1958, all of whom had been classified as long-term and unpromising by the staff of the Department of Public Welfare.2
Material Contained in Records. The Welfare Department records, though concerned more with eligibility for relief and justification of payments made than with the personal problems of the clients, contain a surprising amount of factual information interspersed with accidental insights into the circumstances under which children are born to these families.3 They reveal a great deal about the feelings of the parents towards the advent of another child, without the screening and distortion that can occur in postfacto interviews. No claim is made here that findings based on material from such a limited sample will apply in their entirety to families of very low socioeconomic status in general. Moreover, we cannot tell exactly how much unwanted pregnancies among this group might have been reduced if far-reaching prohibitions on contraceptive counselling by visiting nurses and the medical staff of the clinic and hospital primarily used by these families had not been in
2Excepting some elderly couples and single individuals who also were put in this category, the families in our sample appear to be representative of the group as a whole with regard to age (25-45), education (almost entirely 8 years or less), occupational status (predominantly unskilled, race (3:2 ratio of Negro to White), place of birth (predominantly South and border states). Only one of the families was Catholic.
3We might point out here that the records of other social agencies such as family service and child guidance agencies would present a much richer source of information, particularly if one's main interest lies with marital interaction and rational decision-making in this area.

144 Meier

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

force in this particular county (see Section V). We believe, however, that a clearer understanding of the occurrence and implications of unwanted pregnancies among this restricted group can help in evaluating this phenomenon among a much broader segment of our population.
Definition of Unwanted Pregnancies. Since in its initial stage our study was to be based on recorded material rather than on replies to interviews, it was important to define the term "unwanted pregnancy." It would have been preposterous on our part to assume that all of the pregnancies among relief clients are not desired by the families themselves on either a conscious or an unconscious level, or that the children born out of an undesired pregnancy of necessity must become unwanted or rejected children. For the purpose of our study we therefore have limited the term "unwanted" to pregnancies believed to be not desired by one or both parents4 because:
a) It was believed that additional pregnancies would involve a serious threat to the mother's health. In this context such a threat needed not be as strictly circumscribed as it would be for the consideration of either therapeutic abortion or sterilization, but ordinarily would be based on some indication of medical advice against further pregnancies (Calderone, 1958).
b) It was feared that the mother was mentally, emotionally and/or physically incapable of caring for an enlarged family (Guttmacher, 1959).
c) Marital relations were seriously disturbed and the stability of the mar-
4Inline with other demographic and family
planning studies as well as the practical aims of our study, it seemed appropriate here to include all known pregnancies regardless of whether or not they issued in live births.

riage appeared in danger. (Physical violence, repeated desertion, threat of divorce.)
d) The pregnancy occurred out of wedlock and apparently was not desired by the woman.
e) The father was incapacitated and his earning ability was seriously impaired over an extended period of time.
f) An increase in family size would worsen serious overcrowding and other substandard living conditions without likelihood of their improvement.
g) The family was experiencing severe economic stress so that additional births would lower an already marginal living standard and reduce hope for betterment for present family members5 (Lorimer and Roback, 1940).
h) One or both parents had specifically indicated a desire not to have any more children (or not to have children at the time pregnancy occurred) or else were known to have attempted contraception or abortion, or requested sterilization.
In any real life situation it is not possible to make such neat distinctions. Thus we have found that in most cases at least two of these conditions prevailed simultaneously.6
5 This appears to be one of the rare studies in the sociological literature to analyze the effect of increasing family size on the various components of a family's living standard. Contributions from home economists tend to be normative rather than descriptive of actual adjustments made. A recent study of families receiving Aid to Dependent Children (published after this report was written) also contains some relevant data on the effect of family size on various budgeting problems (Greenleigh Associates, 1960).
6 Initially, separate categories were set up to include pregnancies considered to be highly undesirable from the community's point of view, but in the final analysis this subclassification was abandoned. For this small group at least, no

Case
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 Total

Effect of Unwanted Pregnancies

145

TABLE 1
INCIDENCE OF CHILDREN, PREGNANCIES, AND UNWANTED PREGNANCIES

Children
5
3
6
8
10
5 2 5 8 5 6 2 1 5 11 3 8
5 4 10 5 6 9 10 16 152

Total Incidence
Estimated Unwanted Pregnancies Pregnancies
5 1 to 5 3 Oto 2 6 1 to 6
80 11 3 to 7 5 1 to 4 3 0 to 1
5 0 to 5 13 5 to 10
50 6 0 to 4 20
1 Oto 1 5 0 to 3 11 2 to 5 2 Oto 2 9 4 to 8
5 3 to 5 4 1 to 3 11 4 to 6 5 1 to 3
6 2 to 4 9 2 to 6 9 6 to 8
16 1 to 3 165 37 to 111

Incidence After Welfare Dept. Contact

Children

Estimated Unwanted Pregnancies Pregnancies

2 2 1 to 2 1 1 0 to 1 1 1 1 to 1
550 9 10 3 to 7 3 3 1 to 3 1 1 0 to 1
4 4 0 to 4 3 4 4 to 4
44 0 5 5 0 to 4 000
1 1 0 to 1 4 4 0 to 3 4 4 2 to 4 0 00 5 6 4 to 6
2 2 2 to 2 3 3 1 to 3 6 7 4 to 6 2 2 1 to 2
1 1 1 to 1 5 5 2 to 5 9 8 6 to 8
6 6 1 to 3 86 89 34 to 71

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

I I I . THE INCIDENCE OF UNWANTED
PREGNANCIES
In order to accomplish the main goals
of our study, we had to determine the
probable frequency with which unwant-
ed pregnancies occurred among relief
clients. Had unwanted pregnancies
turned out to be quite unusual among
this group, there would have been little
point in continuing much further with
clear-cut instances of what might be considered eugenic counterindications to childbearing, or a degree of mental incompetence or emotional disturbance on the mother's part such as would ipso facto devolve the care of subsequent offspring on community agencies, could be discovered. Other possible criteria under this heading turned out to be more debatable and suspect of middle class bias than the categories actually used. While it may be argued that the latter still reflect the investigators' values or bias, it is believed that this has been eliminated in the subsequent analysis by the exclusive use of the lowest, most conservative estimate of unwanted pregnancies in each case.

our investigation. Table I represents our estimate of the incidence of unwanted pregnancies, as derived from the relevant information available in each case. Thus, for the family designated in Column 1 as No. 22, our entries in Table 1 would be based on such material as:
after birth of third child, doctor told her she should have no more children. Husband deserted at least twice during her pregnancies and she filed for divorce after birth of fifth child. Sixth (illegitimate) pregnancy ended in disappearance of boyfriend after birth of baby. Children present many health problems. Apparently no attempt at contraception or referral to Planned Parenthood.
Or for the family designated as No. 3: 7/57 . . . wife at intake states that

146 Meier

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

she is seriously considering not reuniting with husband after his discharge from VA hospital. States that her married life has been very difficult, as he never has supported family adequately. She has not been able to work much outside, as she seemed to be pregnant all the time. She does not desire to bring another child into the world. . . . 10/57 . . . wife states she and husband mutually agreed on separation. Child expected 2/58.
In the calculations based on Table I we have used only the lowest estimate of the incidence of unwanted pregnancies throughout. Thus we could feel reasonably certain of having established the minimum dimensions of our problem.
What appears to be the significance of the figures in Table I? Of a total of 165 pregnancies a minimum of one-fourth and a maximum of two-thirds can be considered as unwanted according to the criteria laid down previously. Moreover, of the 89 pregnancies occurring after first contact with the Welfare Department, we have reason to believe that at least one-third and possibly as many as threefourths were unwanted.
As long as our main interest lies with the prevention of unwanted pregnancies among this particular group or with the determination of their costs to the community, it is very useful to know that almost all the pregnancies which could be classified as unwanted with some confidence occurred after first contact with the Welfare Department. It must be recognized, however, that such lower limit figures are not strictly comparable to the "excess fertility" figures in other demographic studies because of the paucity of information concerning earlier pregnan-

cies. Only direct interviews can provide us with this missing information.7
Moving from an analysis of the incidence of unwanted pregnancies to an examination of the circumstances which made such pregnancies appear unwanted, we can summarize our findings as follows:
1. For at least one-fifth of the mothers serious health hazards were found to exist prior to their fourth confinement. With successive pregnancies and confinements the frequency of such health hazards increased, so that medical counterindications appeared to be present in one-fourth to one-third of all the higher parity pregnancies.
2. At least three of the women appeared to be laboring under severe emotional or mental strain prior to the onset of at least one of their pregnancies.
3. In at least ten of the cases pregnancies occurred during periods of serious marital discord. Disturbed or antisocial behavior of the husband was an aggravating factor in these situations.
4. All of the fifteen illegitimate pregnancies occurred under circumstances which would make them appear unwanted.
5. Six pregnancies occurred while the father was incapacitated for a prolonged period and unemployable.
6. In at least eleven families pregnan-
7 Preliminary results from the follow-up interviewing under way since this paper was completed indicate that these lower estimates erred on the conservative side. The upper limit estimates, however, appear to have been too high, due to the presence of a few very large families where all pregnancies were desired at least by the respondent, in spite of the very dismal circumstances surrounding their occurrence. This raises some very different questions from those to which the present report addresses itself.

Effect of Unwanted Pregnancies

147

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

cies occurred while they were living in seriously overcrowded and substandard housing, with no opportunity for improvement. 7. At least eleven women had to in· terrupt either full-time or parttime employment due to another pregnancy, thereby reducing the family income below the minimum necessary for self-support. No specific mention was found in the records themselves, however, that any one pregnancy was unwanted because of the family's economic difficulties. 8. At least half of the clients had specifically indicated an interest in limiting the size of their family. At least two women wanted to be sterilized; one apparently attempted abortion. (This information is analyzed in more detail in Table 2.)

TABLE 2

CLASSIFICATION OF CASES BY EVIDENCE OF DESIRE TO CONTROL CONCEPTION

Evidence

No. of Cases

Definite statement in records that family

limitation through either contraception

or sterilization is desired by the family 8

Very strong evidence that woman did not

desire additional pregnancy

1

Cases seen at the Planned Parenthood

Clinic through referral by other source

than Welfare Department

3

Admitted attempt at abortion*

1

Objections to contraception on religious

grounds regardless of personal desiresf

Catholic

1

Church of God

2

Cases with too little information to per-

mit any conclusions

9

Total

25

·This figure seems quite low in the light of other recent figures on the frequency of abortion but possibly can be related to an earlier study which indicated low abortion attempts among non-users of contraception of a comparable socioeconomic class (Pearl, 1937).
fThe Catholic woman was sterilized after her 16th child; the husband of one of the Protestant women deserted for good after the 12th.

I V . IMPLICATIONS OF UNWANTED
PREGNANCIES
To what extent did these unwanted pregnancies appear to create new or aggravate existing problems for these families? Here one must speak with considerable caution, as such associations are more often implied than stated directly and the causal relationship is by no means clear in every instance.
Health. Considering the large number of completed pregnancies and the somewhat haphazard medical care received by these women before, during, and after their pregnancies, neither the incidence of genuine medical counterindications against childbearing (see III (1) above) nor the frequency of serious aftereffects seems excessively high. They are not inconsiderable in the lives of these women themselves, inasmuch as all the women for whom medical counterindications to pregnancy existed also showed continuing or additional health impairment subsequent to their occurrence. Such impairments included serious physical exhaustion, abortions, delivery complications, various gynecological complaints, and need for hysterectomy. Serious illness apparently unrelated to pregnancy but coinciding with it also was noted in several of these cases. Altogether, the health of about one-third of these women seems to have been adversely affected. It should be pointed out here also that in three out of the six cases where sterilization was considered, health was the major grounds for doing so.8
Mental Health. In several instances either the women themselves or the case-
8 Inall six of these cases, however, sterilization emerged primarily as a measure of last resort once the families had grown beyond the size considered manageable by the social workers. In the one case where sterilization was actually performed, the woman's health did not appear to be the determining factor.

148 Meier

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

workers attributed an increase in men-
tal and emotional strain to the occur-
rence or aftereffects of another pregnan-
cy. This applied particularly to the three women referred to under III (2) above.9
Marital Relations. Our data suggest
that the wife's concern for her health in
the event of another pregnancy may
have led to or increased marital strain in
perhaps one-fifth of the cases. In addi-
tion, already existing marital difficulties,
whatever their cause, appeared to in-
crease in severity with the actual occur-
rence of another pregnancy for at least
one-third of these couples. Temporary
desertion took place in at least nine cases,
and permanent desertion and divorce
followed in at least four of these. In sev-
eral instances the highly disturbed or
antisocial behavior of the husbands dur-
ing this period also led to their commitment to a mental institution or prison.10
Unwanted Pregnancies and Illegiti-
macy. Fifteen illegitimate pregnancies
are known to have occurred to seven
women in this group. In two cases these
preceded marriage, and for two other
couples the children apparently served
as a means of securing a prolonged and
acknowledged association between the
parents though marriage was not legally
9 The evidence in the records suggests that the more middle class oriented women might be somewhat more prone to show these as well as other psychosomatic symptoms than the more fatalistically inclined members of the group.
10 The relationship of marital and behavior problems also is a complex one and the latter at any rate cannot be directly attributed to unwanted pregnancies. On the other hand there can be no doubt that irresponsible behavior on the husband's part prior to, during, or after a pregnancy added to the wife's distaste for additional parental responsibilities. These circumstances led not only to prolonged involvement of the entire family with police, courts, and other community agencies, but also to their immediate or eventual resort to the Welfare Department (or the Bureau administering Aid to Dependent Children) for their long-term financial assistance.

possible. On the other hand, half of the alleged fathers disappeared within one year after the women were known to be pregnant. While it is therefore impossible to generalize on the over-all consequences of such illegitimate pregnancies for the individuals involved, we can say for certain that the social setting in which they took place was not one to make them accepted with equanimity by the mothers themselves.11 They feared and received community reaction (in the form of eviction threats, loss of Aid to Dependent Children benefits and criticism by neighbours) instead of acceptance and assistance beyond the minimum support from public agencies.12 The case records as yet do not contain very much information about the consequences of illegitimacy in itself for the children involved.
SeriousDisability of Husband and Unwanted Pregnancies. When pregnancies occurred while the father was seriously incapacitated, or in need of surgery or hospitalization for a prolonged period, the families became more completely dependent on public assistance and less able to become self-supporting even if the husband was again considered employable.
Pregnancies Occurring When Family Was Occupying Seriously Substandard or Overcrowded Housing. In most of these cases not just one but several pregnancies occurred while the families were living in accommodations judged to be either seriously substandard or dangerously overcrowded. Additional children simply aggravated these conditions and made it even more difficult to find stand-
11 As may still be true in certain other parts of the United States (Smith, 1948).
12 We found no indication whatsoever that any of these women might have become pregnant in order to qualify for Aid to Dependent Children benefits as is frequently claimed.

Effect of Unwanted Pregnancies

149

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

ard housing. Our data here mainly pose tell in view of the real scarcity of appro-

unanswered questions as to the responsi- priate jobs throughout this period.

bilities of social agencies and the com- Quality of Child Care and Children's

munity at large for securing minimum Adjustment. The effect of unwanted

standard housing.13

pregnancies on the care given to the chil-

Pregnancies and Economic Stress. dren in the family and on their subse-

While we found no specific statement in the records that any one pregnancy was not desired by the families because of its adverse effect on their economic circumstances, these effects were nevertheless noticeable in the following ways:14
Particularly with the smaller families, need for Welfare Department assistance arose not so much because their already marginal income became insufficient with additional mouths to feed, but rather because the loss of the woman's employment and earnings due to pregnancy and childbirth reduced the family in-

quent adjustment obviously is not straightforward. Among these families at least, rejection of children born under .these circumstances could not be detected from the records. More often than not it seemed to be the older, wanted children who turned out to be most vulnerable to some of the ensuing stress. It also should be emphasized that in the majority of these families the youngsters were receiving adequate and sometimes admirable care, given the limitations under which these families were operating. Nonetheless:

come below minimum needs. As the fam- a) In at least 14 families, involving

ilies grew beyond three or four children,

at least twice as many children, se-

the women's attempts to return to work

rious school, behavior, and health

increasingly were frustrated by sickness

problems were encountered. At

and inadequate child care arrangements.

least two of these children were of

For the larger families then any further increase in family size made it much more difficult if not impossible to remain or become once again self-supporting on the husbands' low and irregular

very low intelligence and eventually required institutional commitment; at least four were sufficiently disturbed to require psychiatric treatment on an outpatient basis.

earnings. Whether this prospect actually served to discourage some of the men from actively seeking work is difficult to

b) In at least five families we also found instances of poor care and serious neglect, often aggravated by the father's behavior. All these

13The records mostly just note beds shared by three or more children, bathrooms converted into sleeping quarters, progressive deterioration of formerly high housekeeping standards.
14 Apart from the incompleteness of the records this gap in our findings, which seems contrary to very consistent responses in interview studies, can be explained (a) by the frequent timing of requests for Welfare Department assistance long after the pregnancy had become an established fact; (b) by the relatively minor deterioration in the living standard of the families already on relief as long as budget adjustments were possible under the allowable maximum; and (c) by the presence of other more critical problems which made these pregnancies unwelcome.

families had five or more children.
V . SOME REASONS FOR CONTRACEPTIVE FAILURE
In both the Growth of American Families and the Rainwater studies it was found that families in the lowest socioeconomic group are not only less likely to do something to control their family size, but are also much less likely to be successful if and when they attempt to

150 Meier

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

do so. Our limited data, as summarized in Table 3, certainly would seem to bear out these findings for our sample. Combined with some additional information available both from the records and community sources, the data also tend to raise some additional questions about the nature of the relationship between low socioeconomic status and failure in family planning which lie somewhere between broad sociological generalizations and an interpretation primarily in terms of individual and family psychodynamics.
It appears to us that both the likelihood and the effectiveness of family planning among families with less than grade-school education in any given locality will depend to a greater extent than is often realized on the policies of prenatal and well-baby clinics, of visiting nurses, of outpatient departments and of hospitals in this respect; not less important may be awareness and concern on the part of private physicians, social

TABLE 3
CONTRACEPTIVE SUCCESS AND FAILURE AMONG CLIENTS»

Explanation

No. of Cases

Successful contraception after attendance

at Planned Parenthood Clinic (all rath-

er recent attendance)

3

Failure due to apparent lack of knowl-

edge about contraceptive devices and

facilities

2 or 3

Physicians apparently told patients they

should have no more children, without

giving them effective information on

contraception

2 or 3

Failure to attend Planned Parenthood

Clinic, even though advised of its ex-

istence or referred to it

3

Refusal to consider birth control even

though it was discussed

2

·This table is based on only 11 cases. For several of these women more than one category was found to apply in the course of several years. For the remaining 14 cases the records do not offer relevant information. To the extent that pregnancies did occur more than two years apart, additional, unrecorded, attempts at contraception can be assumed.

workers and ministers, even the particular location of a Planned Parenthood clinic. This common sense assertion might well be tested by comparative studies in communities with different institutional policies in this connection. We should like to illustrate some of its implications as they emerge for the group under consideration.15
The Role of the Visiting Nurses. In the absence of free prenatal or postpartum clinics in this particular county, the visiting nurses are the main intermediaries between the medical profession and low-income families. They visit the homes after the arrival of a new baby, the time when postponement of another pregnancy is generally considered desirable. They counsel and help very effectively with a wide variety of medical and related problems, so that their advice on family planning would be appropriate, professional, and more likely to be acted upon in this context than that coming from other sources. It so happens that the agency for the past two decades has been headed by a Catholic with strong reservations concerning the use of contraceptives. As a result its unwritten but rarely counteracted policy permits advice on family planning or referral to the Planned Parenthood Clinic only at the specific request of the women themselves. It cannot be initiated by the nurses as they deem appropriate. It is not likely that women who themselves lack the knowledge of feasible and acceptable contraceptive methods or young mothers preoccupied with other questions concerning the care of a new baby will avail themselves of the opportunity
15 In this respect, as happens to be the case with some of the other issues raised in this paper, we have more information and research available for underdeveloped areas in the rest of the world than for the disadvantaged sectors of our own society.

Effect of Unwanted Pregnancies

151

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

to make such inquiries during a postpartum visit.
The Role of Outpatient Clinics and Hospitals. In this county, as elsewhere, the only inexpensive outpatient clinics and hospital facilities are in a Catholic hospital, so that opportunities to receive contraceptive information are not available even to non-Catholic patients who have attended its prenatal and other clinics or who have been rushed to this hospital as an emergency case for their confinement.
The Role of Private Physicians. Pri vate physicians conceivably could serve as a very important source of contraceptive information to these families, at least during their more prosperous periods (Guttmacher, 1949). However, in the three cases where we have found a definite reference to a discussion with doctors, the latter appear to have contented themselves with a prescription of abstinence from sex relations in the first case, a warning of the health risks involved in additional pregnancies in the second, and a vague mention of Planned Parenthood in the third. One can assume that difficulties in communication between the doctor and patients with little education and a different cultural or racial background may have entered into the picture here as well as in some other cases where direct information in this respect is lacking. Perhaps the doctors' advice was much more specific than could be inferred from the clients' statements in our records. It is also claimed that physicians admitted to practice at the Catholic hospital are reluctant to prescribe contraceptives to their private patients or to refer them to the Planned Parenthood Clinic for this purpose, but we did not find any evidence of this in our records.
The Role of the Department of Public Welfare and Family Service Agencies.

The staff of the Public Welfare Depart-
ment is permitted to make referrals to the local Planned Parenthood Clinic18
and caseworkers in the family service
agencies are also doing this on their own
initiative. Yet a close look at the circum-
stances surrounding these referrals offers
at least a partial explanation for the fail-
ure of the families concerned to comply
with such recommendations:
a) Welfare Department referrals of
clients to the Planned Parenthood
Clinic were made only after the
families had reached the size at
which they could be expected to
remain self-supporting in the jobs
open to them--all the women had
been pregnant seven or more times
before they were referred to the
Planned Parenthood Clinic. Bar-
ring serious illness or marital
strain, motivation for birth control
by then does not appear to be
strong enough to balance inertia,
embarrassment, and genuine ob-
stacles to clinic attendance and regular contraceptive practices.17
16 This is not true of many such departments in our major cities.
17 It is well to remember that a more systematic and aggressive stand of the Welfare Department with regard to family limitation--and other areas where prevention at an earlier stage might seem desirable in retrospect--would not be easy to achieve: Many of these marginal families have been self-supporting during the past decade and appeared on the relief rolls at first only for quite brief periods during lay-offs, strikes, illness or other short-term emergencies. When applying for relief, they rarely presented any other problems than temporary need for financial assistance. Welfare Department workers and relief applicants alike may consider routine questioning about their interest in family planning or any other home problems as unjustified and time-consuming meddling into their personal affairs, particularly since their initial requests rarely involve assistance with confinement costs which are covered by hospital insurance. These difficulties are not insuperable. Once prevention of all unwanted pregnancies is considered desirable both from the agency's and the family's point of view, relatively minor changes in case work procedures can accomplish as much as can be hoped for under the circumstances

152 Meier

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

b) It seems likely that the context in which such referrals were made was not altogether favorable for compliance by the clients. One wonders whether they understood the exact nature of the services rendered by the Planned Parenthood Clinic or whether they felt threatened by the referral to yet another social agency dealing with a somewhat dubious subject. Perhaps they suspected that such a referral was merely a device to decrease future relief expenditures on their behalf. Perhaps the clients in general were so antagonistic toward the worker and his agency that any noncompulsory recommendation from them would fall on deaf ears. Some of the Negro clients might feel that they had to show polite interest and agreement with a suggestion from a white caseworker regardless of their own misgivings about its nature.
The preceding explanations for contraceptive failure--along with others of a similar nature not discussed here-- might still be lumped together under the label "lack of, or inadequate, motivation" which is thought to fit the more fatalistic and present-oriented life style possibly common to most of the families in this group. Only closer attention to the different components of this category can provide us with the knowledge and tools suited to evolve a program of family planning geared to their specific needs rather than to those of middle class families.
V I . FURTHER RESEARCH POSSIBILITIES
We expect to check on our findings by
(Meter, 1961). For a very different and rather drastic tie-in between a relief and a family limitation program, see Koya, 1957.

direct interviewing in order to arrive at a more precise estimate of the incidence of unwanted pregnancies and a better understanding of their implications in the lives of these families. This information also will be valuable in establishing with a smaller margin of error than is presently possible the costs of such pregnancies to the Department of Welfare and other social agencies. We would like to see corroboration of our data by similar investigations in other localities.
VII. SUMMARY
This paper presents a method for tracing the incidence and the effect ofunwanted pregnancies from the case records of a group of long-term relief clients. The small size of the sample and the special restraints on contraceptive information and counseling peculiar to--though certainly not limited to--the county in which the study was undertaken, preclude generalizations to other families of very low socioeconomic status or even to long-term relief clients elsewhere. Nevertheless our findings appear to complement the data from recent survey-type and intensive interviews among the former, much larger group. At least for the welfare clients in one locality they also suggest additional explanations for contraceptive failure in terms of the functioning of various professional and social agencies as related to family planning.
REFERENCES
BUELL, BRADLEY, AND ASSOCIATES. 1952. Com-
munity Planning for Human Service. Columbia University Press, New York.
CALDERONE, M. S., ed. 1958. Abortion in the
United States. Proceedings of the Conference Held under the Auspices of the Planned Parenthood Federation of America, April and June 1955. Hober-Harper, New York.
COMMUNITY RESEARCH ASSOCIATES. 1954. The
Prevention and Control of Disordered Behavior in San Mateo County, California. Community Research Associates, New York.

Effect of Unwanted Pregnancies

153

FREEDMAN, RONALD, PASCAL K. WHELPTON, AND
ARTHUR A. CAMPBELL. 1959. Family Plan-
ning, Sterility andPopulation Growth, pps.
100-153, 198-214, 290-297. McGraw-Hill Book
Co., New York.
GREENLEIGH ASSOCIATES, INC. 1960. Facts, Falla-
cies and Future: A Study of the Aid to Dependent Children Program of Cook County, Illinois, Addenda: 43-43. Greenleigh Associates, NewYork.
GUTTMACHER, ALAN F. 1959. The influence of
fertility control upon psychiatric illness. Am. J. Psychiat., 115 (8) : 683.
GUTTMACHER, ALAN F. 1949. Contraception
among private patients. J. Am. Med.Assoc., 140 (16) :125.
KOYA, YOSHIO. 1957. Family planning among
Japanese on public relief. Eugen. Quart., 4(1): 17-23.
LORIMER, FRANK, AND HUBERT ROBACK. 1940.

Economics of the family relative to the number of children. Milbank Mem. Fund Quart., 18:114.
MEIER, GITTA. 1961. The need for family plan-
ning. Social Work 6(1) : 114.
"MEIER, GITTA, ANDIRIS LITTIG. 1959. The Effect
of Unwanted Pregnancies onthe Relief Load. Planned Parenthood Federation of America, Inc., New York. (Mimeographed.)
OSBORN, F. G. 1960. Eugenics and euthenics.
Law and Contemporary Problems, 25:406425.
PEARL, RAYMOND. 1937. Fertility and contracep-
tion in New York and Chicago. J. Am. Med. Assoc., 108: 1385. RAINWATER, LEE (assisted by Weinstein, Karol Kane). 1960. And the Poor Get Children. Quadrangle Books, Chicago.
SMITH, OLIVETTE. 1948. A study of unwed moth-
ers by census tracts. (Unpublished MA. Thesis.) Atlanta University, Georgia.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:26 08 December 2015

