Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
On the estimation of random inbreeding
Gordon Allen
To cite this article: Gordon Allen (1966) On the estimation of random inbreeding, Eugenics Quarterly, 13:1, 67-69, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1966.9987647 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1966.9987647
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 1 View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:28

Communication
ON THE ESTIMATION OF RANDOM INBREEDING
GORDON ALLEN
National Institutes of Health Bethesda, Maryland

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

The article by Crow and Mange on "Measurement of inbreeding from the frequency of marriages between persons of the same surname" {Eugenics Quarterly, 12: 199-203) seems to be the first practical approach to estimating total inbreeding over the entire history of an isolate. It is also a necessary supplement to my own article on "Random and nonrandom inbreeding" (Eugenics Quarterly, 12: 181-198). Their method and their example better illustrate the components of inbreeding than did the material I presented. Their equation (4) clarifies the mathematical relation between the two components. I thank them for calling attention to the early discussions by Sewall Wright of the same principles; discussions that I did not fully understand or appreciate. I wish to add that my line of reasoning had been guided by some of Dr. Crow's unpublished lecture notes, again without my full recognition of the similarity of his statements to the formulation I subsequently reached.

One formula given by Crow and Mange is particularly interesting. They equate inbreeding from random consanguineous marriages to

Fr= spiq(/i,

(1)

where pi and qt are the frequencies of name i (proportion of the total) in males

and females, respectively. If the frequen-

cies in males and females are similar,

they may be represented by a single

quantity, xit and the formula becomes

*V = 2x<s.

(2)

They state that, regardless of sex differ-

ences, the second formula is correct for

ideal random mating. In fact, formula

(2) seems to belong in their other genetic

formulas in place of formula (1), which

is chiefly of sociological interest. How-

ever, in the case of a large population

like the Hutterites the effect of substitu-

ting ideal randomness for possible ran-

dom marriages is trivial; it reduces the

estimate of nonrandom inbreeding by

only 5% in the case of their data.

Formula (2) emphasizes three genet-

ically interesting properties of sur-

names. First, as Crow and Mange found

in the Hutterites, the random compo-

nent of inbreeding is probably very close

to the total inbreeding in any well-de-

fined human isolate. Therefore, this

formula, based on name frequencies

alone, is a good estimator of F, and the

ascertainment of matings is not very im-

portant in this connection.

Second, the formula can be derived

intuitively; in this derivation it becomes

evident that transmission of surnames

is, in fact, a rather good model of gene

transmission, actually coinciding with

transmission of Y-chromosomes as others

have noted. Among the founders of an

isolate the number of possible genes at

one locus is, on the average, four times

as great as the number of names of males

if each name and each gene is unique.

67

68

Communication

Eugen. Quart.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

The average frequency, g, of all genes

is one-fourth the average frequency of all

names: g=5c/4. Except as names and

genes are lost by random elimination

(see below), these 4:1 ratios should per-

sist indefinitely, even as male and female

immigrants introduce new names and

genes. If names are regarded as models

of genes and are taken from the pop-

ulation in random pairs, the frequency of identical pairs will be Sx42. If gametes

from the same population were paired

randomly, the proportion of homozygos-

ity at the average locus would be Sgf,

where g{ is any particular gene. There are four times as many terms in Sg,2 as in txt2, and the relation is given by the

equation

iH

Fr = 2g,2 = 42(x,/4)' = 2X.V4.
Here formula (2) is clearly more appropriate than formula (1); names are merely models of genes, and their frequencies can best be estimated from males and females taken together.
Third, surnames behave very much like genes even in random drift. Names are transmitted only through males and are lost in females; for each offspring the probability of transmitting the family name is 1/2. A name carried by one male in a population has the same probability of irrevocable loss in the next generation as does a single gene.
Crow and Mange listed some assumptions and limitations of the use of names in estimating inbreeding. Examination of the differences between surnames and genes in mode of transmission clarifies these defects. First, drift is random, and any one gene, as much as any one name, is a poor indicator of what is happening to other genes. Second, names are mutually exclusive, like multiple alleles at a single locus; name frequencies in a given population do not vary independently, and their distribution is not quite

analogous to that of genes at different loci. Third, surnames do not distinguish inbred from outbred individuals and so cannot, like homozygous loci, register cumulative inbreeding in a single line of descent. The result is presumably a damping of positive fluctuations of name frequencies relative to those of gene frequencies; although rare names may fluctuate like rare genes, common names cannot so readily displace one another as can common genes. Fourth, when estimated from names, F has a limit of 1/4 instead of 1; evidently the closest relationship that can be distinguished by surnames is that of sibs.
When a surname is derived independently from two or more ancestors of a population, the distribution of names will tend to overestimate the random inbreeding. Otherwise, the second, third, and fourth defects listed above would assure underestimation.
The article by Morgan and Spuhler (Eugenics Quarterly, 12: 204-208) again emphasizes the difficulties of inbreeding analysis by the familiar methods. I agree that deviation of genotypic proportions from the Hardy-Weinberg formula is so insensitive to inbreeding that it may be a misleading index of inbreeding even in large populations. In small populations the main problem concerns detection of remote inbreeding from genealogical data. The resulting error is just as troublesome in the usual estimates of total inbreeding as in my proposed estimate of random inbreeding. This leaves two courses open to the investigator who is dissatisfied with such estimates. First, he may subtract the random component from the total and compare populations with respect to the nonrandom component. The latter is almost independent of remote inbreeding and is a sensitive index of the mating system. However, in human isolates it does not accumu-

Vol. 13, No. 1

Communication

69

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:28 08 December 2015

late like random inbreeding and is probably of negligible evolutionary importance. Alternatively, one may estimate random inbreeding from population parameters, chiefly size and age of the isolate and source and number of immigrants. This also is difficult, but because of its greater genetic relevance, it seems to deserve more attention than genetically-minded anthropologists now give to mating preferences. Age of an isolate and size history are not even mentioned as desirable data in the WHO pamphlet, Research in Population Genetics of Primitive Groups (World Health Organization Technical Report Series, 1964, No. 279).
It is true that the actual partitioning of inbreeding may often or usually be unnecessary. In very large populations detectable inbreeding is nonrandom, and its only effect is deviation from HardyWeinberg proportions, together with the consequences of such deviation. In contrast, in defined isolates even as large as the 5000 or more Hutterites, the nonrandom component is relatively small, and the only important consequence of inbreeding is drift of gene frequencies. In either case, the assignment of all observed inbreeding to one type or the other is approximately correct.
When it is desirable to partition the inbreeding, I believe the problems are not so great as Morgan and Spuhler suggest. First, the full description of inbreeding in an isolate requires defini-

tion, not of one, but of two "base populations" or two "zero points." The ancestral reference generation, necessary for any rigorous discussion of past inbreeding, is always more or less obscure. The second zero point, random mating in the present generation of an isolate, is difficult to define only for the purpose of the social anthropologist. For the geneticist, the specification of random mating with respect to an age-constant trait (including coefficients of relationship of pairs) does not require recognition of possible or probable mates, but only an adequate sample of the population. In an isolate of viable size and reasonable homogeneity, members of different generations have about the same average coefficients of relationship as do members of one age group. If there is a time trend, males of generation X marrying randomly into generation X + 1 will be nearly balanced by females of X marrying males of X -- 1.
Second, variance of family size, variations in population number, etc., are indeed essential variables in genetic drift. These variables are already accounted for in estimates of JF based on surnames or adequate genealogy, within the accuracy of the data. This is the outstanding qualification of F as a measure of genetic drift and justifies the continued collection of genealogical data in any isolate where possible genetic drift is of interest.

