Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Some aspects of the genetics and evolution of man's behavioral characteristics
Herluf H. Strandskov
To cite this article: Herluf H. Strandskov (1955) Some aspects of the genetics and evolution of man's behavioral characteristics, Eugenics Quarterly, 2:3, 152-161, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1955.9987240 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1955.9987240
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 4
View related articles
Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

SOME ASPECTS OF THE GENETICS AND EVOLUTION OF MAN'S BEHAVIORAL CHARACTERISTICS*
H E R L U F H. STRANDSKOV
Department of Zoology The University of Chicago

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

T A HERE PROBABLY ARE NO PROBLEMS m o r e
intriguing and perhaps none more important than those which pertain to the genetics and evolution of man's behavioral characteristics. Although no final answer can be given as yet to most of the suggested questions, it seems of interest from time to time to review a few of the facts which have been revealed relative to these problems and to consider some of their possible relationships and probable implications.
In this discussion I propose to deal only ·with broad aspects of the genetic and evolutionary problems of behavior. Hence I shall refer primarily to large subdivisions of behavioral characteristics rather than to specific patterns. The subdivisions which seemingly serve well this purpose are: (1) those behavioral variations which indicate mental deficiency or oligophrenia, (2) those which represent mental disorder, (3) those which fall within the "normal" range. I include within the third category those variations which represent special or superior mental capacities.
1. The lowest level of human mental deficiency that one can imagine is seemingly that of a human being completely lacking a brain. There are such individuals born. Fortunately they are rare and even more fortunately none survives birth, but they do exist or are alive for a period of time in utero. Hence, it appears proper to consider their behavior during this interval a valid representation of one form or type of mental deficiency.
What the factor or factors are which are
*Extracts of a symposium paper read before the American Psychological Association, New York City, September 1954.

responsible for the development of fetuses lacking a brain is not known with any degree of certainty. Their rarity, their early death and other reasons make a determination of their casual factors a very difficult one. However, on the basis of some indirect evidence, it appears probable that a variation in heredity may be the major causal factor in at least some instances. In other words, it appears probable that some of the acephalic or paracephalic fetuses which develop may represent variations in heredity which limit the expression of human behavior to the lowest degree imaginable. That hereditary factors exist which cause death at early developmental stages is well established.
Among the various types of mental deficiencywhich are exhibited by human individuals who possess a brain and survive birth, fairly many have been shown to have some hereditary basis. Of these, quite a few are clearly inherited in a relatively simple fashion, i.e., are the result of a gene variation at a single chromosome locus. Some of these specifically inherited types have been given specific names. Of these we may mention at least one or more form of microcephalic idiocy, infantile and juvenile araaurotic idiocy, and phenylpyruvic oligophrenia. The last is nearly an ideal example of a human variation inherited in a simple manner. This specific defect was originally discovered by Foiling of Norway in 1934. The affected individuals show varying degrees of mental deficiency ranging from high imbecility to low idiocy and always have phenylpyruvic acid detectable in their urine. The variation has been investigated with respect to mode of inheritance by Foiling, Ruud, Penrose, Jervis,

152

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

153

Munro, and others, and it has been demon- ered their mentality to be below normal.

strated quite clearly tobe the result of the The zygosity of these twin set is in each

action of a single autosomal recessive gene. instance determined by using as criteria

Of the many occurrences of mental de- the A-B, M-N and Rh blood types. P T C

ficiency which appear tobe inherited in a taste reaction, finger and palm prints, and

relatively simple fashion but which have about ten other physical characteristics. In

not been given a descriptive or specific each ofthree instances the twin set brought

name, the one reported by Allan, Herndon in was shown to be monozygotic and the

and Dudley (1944) is not only one of the two members were found toscore very low

most recently presented examples but also and almost identically on general intelli-

one of the most distinctive. The affected gence tests. One pair, whose chronological

individuals are mentally deficient and show associated with it a type of muscle weakness. The syndrome is reported for 24 individuals appearing in six generations. As the authors suggest, the pedigree (Figure 1) seemingly warrants the conclusion that the syndrome is theresult of theaction ofa single sex-linked recessive gene.

age atthe time oftesting was 31, was of special interest in that each member was found to have a mental age of about six, but at the same time was found to score somewhat higher on a mirror tracing test than does the average American university student. This pair of twins was also of interest in that both members were, and had been

Much of the additional information from birth, allergic tocow's milk and some

which is at hand relative to therole of other foods.

heredity in the occurrence of mental defi- The two most extensive twin studies

ciency hasbeen provided by a study of reported in the literature which pertain

twins. At the University of Chicago we specifically to mental deficiency are those of

have been investigating twins over a period Rosanoff, Handy and Plessett (1937) and

of years relative to abnormal as well as of Juda (1939).

"normal" variations and from time totime Rosanoff and his co-workers located in
have been asked to ascertain thezygosity the schools for thefeeble-minded of Caliand the mental age of a number of sets of fornia and some other states 366 pairs of twins whose parents or guardians consid- twins of which at least one member was

INHERITANCE OFMENTAL DEFICIENCY

· 0IOCr SCJ-LiKTO nectssivc

OU¡l<i°> ·
I
pi I

L G" BBunuuujçp Q E3 ü u u u · «youU u u u u u u çju u y y y u i i H U B u i a u u UÜU BUG OUETWD
FIGURE 1. Pedigree Published by Allan, Herndon and Dudley showing inheritance of idiocy associated witö a form of muscle weakness. The mode of inheritance of the syndrome appears tobe that of a sex-linked recessive.

Investigator
RosanofE et al, 1937 Juda, 1939
Total

TABLE 1

CONCORDANCE PERCENTAGES OF MONOZYCOTIC AND DIZYCOTIC TWINS WITH RESPECT TO MENTAL DEFICIENCY

Total No. Pairs

Total No.

Monozygotic Concordant
No. ·%

Total No.

Dizygo tic Concordant
No. %

366 126 115 91 240 128 53 273 71 69 97 202 83 41
639 197 184 93 442 211 47

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

mentally deficient. Of the 366 pairs diagnosed for zygosity, 126 were shown to be monozygotic and 240 dizygotic. Among the 126 monozygotic sets, 115 pairs or 91 per cent were found to be concordant with respect to mental deficiency, whereas among the 240 dizygotic sets, 128 pairs or only 53 per cent were found to be concordant. (By concordance, as used here, is meant that the co-twin of a first-examined member of a twin pair was found to show the same variation as was exhibited by the first member.)
Juda, working in southeastern Germany, ated 273 pairs of twins in which at ast one member was mentally deficient. Of these 273 pairs, 71 were shown to be monozygotic and 202 dizygotic. Among the ^ monozygotic sets she found 69 or 97 ) per cent concordant with respect to men? tal deficiency, whereas among the 202 dizyJ gotic sets she found 83 or only 41 per cent. If we compare the results of these two extensive twin studies, pertaining specifically to mental deficiency, we note that their corresponding concordance percentages are strikingly similar. If we combine these results, as it seems permissible for us to do, we obtain a concordance percentage of 93 for the monozygotic pairs and 47 for the dizygotic sets (Table 1). The difference between the concordance percentages of both the separate and the combined results is highly significant, and together with available evidence in the literature seemingly permit the conclusion that variations in heredity are responsible for a major share of all occurrences of mental deficiency. No exact percentage may be given, but the evidence seems to indicate that it is

well above 50 per cent. This statement takes into consideration the evidence that many instances of mental deficiency are the result of trauma, dietary deficiency and other environmental variations. It also takes into account what seems to be a fact, namely, that some individuals have been classified as being hereditarily mentally deficient who actually represented only a lack of educational opportunity.
2. Among the many behavioral variations which belong within the second or mental disorder category and which have been shown to have some hereditary basis, we may mention as generally accepted examples: Huntington's chorea, spino-cerebellar ataxia, and certain forms or occurrences of epilepsy. Relative to the dementias, such as schizophrenia and manic-depressive psychosis, which especially have been the subject of controversy, the answers may not be specific, but even in regard to these variations fairly conclusive evidence does appear to be accumulating in favor of a considerable degree of genetic determination.
Because of the wide variety and the many indefinitely defined mental disorders which are properly included in this second delimited group of behavioral variations, it is impossible to formulate more than a very general statement relative to the role of heredity and environment which will pertain to the group as a whole. About all that one may state is that many of the variations within this group, if not to be inherited in a relatively simple or specific Mendelian fashion, have been shown to have some hereditary basis.
3. We come now to a consideration of

155

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

the genetics of human behavioral variations which fall within the arbitrarily delimited "normal" range, including those which may be said to represent superior or special mental capacities.
Most of the genetic studies pertaining to behavioral variations within the "normal" range have been attempts to ascertain the relative contributions of heredity and environment to variations in intelligence as measured by general intelligence tests. Since the results of most of these studies, such as those of Barbara Burks (1928), Freeman, Holzinger and Mitchell (1928), Leahy (1935), and of Newman, Holzinger and Freeman (1937) are well known, I shall not review any of these studies here. I should like, however, to state that all or at least most of these studies appear to provide evidence that variations in heredity exist which contribute a small if not major share to the observed variations in intelligence as measured by general intelligence tests.
When psychologists began to apply factor analysis to behavioral variations and verified the existence of more or less distinct units or components of mental characteristics, new opportunities for genetic study seemed to have been opened up. At least it seemed of interest to the geneticist to test these units, no matter what they represented, for possible contributions of heredity to observed variations in their occurrence. A few years ago a joint study with Professor Thurstone was proposed and started at the University of Chicago while Professor Thurstone was still a member of the faculty. The object of the study was to compare the differences between the scores of the two members of monozygotic twin sets with those of dizygotic pairs relative to a large number of psychological tests, some of which presumably tested for certain components of intelligence.
A total of 142 pairs of same-sexed twins was located in the high schools of Chicago. Their mean age was found to be 14. Of this number 103 pairs were diagnosed unquestionably for zygosity. A-B, M-N, and

Rh blood types, P T C taste reaction, finger and palm prints, and about ten other physical characteristics were used as criteria in the zygosity diagnoses. Of the 103 same-sexed twin pairs unquestionably diagnosed, 48 were found to be monozygotic and 55 dizygotic.
Prior to or completely independent of the zygosity determinations, the psychological tests were administered to the 103 pairs of twins. These tests, as Professor Thurstone has described them, consisted of "a diversified battery of 34 psychological tests which yielded 53 separate scores." Following the scoring of the tests, the difference between the scores of the two members of the dizygotic and of the two members of the monozygotic pairs was obtained relative to each of the 53 tests. It was found that large intrapair differences were shown by both types of twin pairs, but that the tails of the distributions of the dizygotic pairs were in general longer than were those for the monozygotic pairs. To determine whether the large intrapair differences relative to each psychological test were significantly more numerous for dizygotic than for monozygotic sets, a Chi-Square test was applied. A large difference was defined as one which fell beyond the 80th percentile of the combined results.
In Table 2 are shown for each of the 53 administered psychological tests the obtained Chi-Square value and its probability (P). Attention may be called to the fact that the first 13 of the 53 psychological tests are significant at the 1 per cent level and the first 23 at the 5 per cent level.
In a report from the University of North Carolina Psychometric Laboratory, of which Professor Thurstone is the director and at which the latest portions of the statistical analyses were carried out, Professor Thurstone writes as follows: "It is natural to inquire whether these psychological tests that show the best differentiation between identical and fraternal twins have something in common as regards psychological content or nature." He gives a partial answer to

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

156 Eugenics Quarterly

TABLE 2

T H E PROBABILITY (P) THAT LARGE INTRAPAIR DIFFERENCES IN TEST SCORES OF FRATERNAL AND IDENTICAL TWINS ARE SAMPLES
OF THE SAME POPULATION ( T H U R S T O N E - S T R A N D S K O V )

Test No.

Test Name

1 Koh's Block-Arthur
2 P.M.A.-Space 3 Stroop--Gard B-Time
4 Stroop--Gard C-Time 5 P.M.A.-Verbal 6 Dynamometer-Right Hand 7 Street Completion 8 Tapping-Left Hand 9 Telegraph Key-Right Hand
10 Two-hand Coordination-Left Hand 11 P.MA.-Word Fluency 12 Minnesota-Left Hand
13 SpiralAfter-Movement-Time

14 Stroop--CardA-Time 15 P.M.A.--Memory-First Names
16 Mutilated Words 17 Spelling 18 Hidden Pictures 19 Two-Hand Coordination R + L 20 Letter Memory 21 Gottschaldt 22 Seashore-Tonal Memory
23 California P.S.-Total

24 Dynamometer-Left Hand 25 Two-hand Coordination-Right Hand 26 Seashore-Pitch
27 Individual Tempo 28 P.M.A.-Number
29 Minnesota-Right Hand
30 Dot Counting 31 Color-Form Memory--(C-fF) 32 Color-Form Memory-Form 33 Backward Writing 34 Rapid Spelling
35 P-Test 36 Cross-out 37 P.M.A.-Reasoning 38 Acuity-Left 39 California P.S.-Social 40 Seashore Rhythm 41 Retinal Rivalry 42 Shape Constancy-Span 43 California P.S. Self 44 Telegraph Key-Left Hand 45 Color-Form Memory-Color 46 Shape-Constancy 47 Tapping-Right Hand
48 Ehrenstein Illusion 49 Two-hand Ratio 50 Two-Hand Coordination-Both Hands Together
51 Dot Patterns 52 Acuity-Both Eyes 53 Acuity-Right

Chi-Square Values
14.3753 14.3753 13.1569 13.1569 12.9261 10.1854 10.1396 8.5084 7.3333 6.6912 5.2460 5.2085 5.0657
4.2690 4.0902 4.0827 3.6393 3.5617 3.4496 3.4445 2.9181 2.7425 2.7366
2.2702 2.2574 2.2539 2.2702 2.1166 2.0091 1.4376
1.3297 .9510 .8263 .7827 .7133 .5659 .3978 .3014
.1942 .1298 .0556 .0505 .0446 .0388
.0262 .0236 .0140 .0055
.0292 .0376 .0505 .0556 1.0261

.00005 .00005 .00013 .00013 .00015 .0007 .0007 .0018 .0033 .0049 .0110 .0113 .0123
.0195 .0217 .0218 .0283 .0297 .0318 .0320 .0438 .0492 .0492
.0660 .0664 .0668 .0730 .0730 .0783 .1150 .1253 .1650 .1814 .1889 .2004 .2258 .2643 .2929 .3205 .3607 .4053 .4130 .4172 .4207 .4340 .4470 .4551 .4821 .5661 .5793 .5870 ¿947 .8448

157

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

this question when he states that, "The 13 erativeness, sociableness, morals, etc., the

tests which are significant at the 1 per cent extent to which heredity plays a role is

level represent visual and verbal functions less clearly indicated. The studies which

as well as several motor functions." Rela- have been reported do give some positive

tive to the contribution of heredity to the observed results he states: "These data seem to justify the conclusion that large differences in psychological tests are found much more frequently among fraternals than among identicals." And in a concluding paragraph he writes: "These findings also appear to support the conclusion that the mental abilities in these test performances have large genetic components."
As a participant in the study, I subscribe to these very general conclusions.

evidence, and it is my opinion, based partly on these results and partly on less direct evidence that heredity contributes considerably to fundamental differences in all or most of these subtle behavioral characteristics, i.e., to variations in capacities. Everyone will probably agree that the extent to which each inherited variation in a "normal" capacity is expressed depends upon the physical and cultural environment to which it is exposed. Some environments tend to enhance inherited differences in "normal" capacities, whereas others tend

From a genetic point of view it would be to mask them. It seems probable, however,

of interest to have these twin data analyzed that the expression of most of these in-

more specifically for the relative contribu- herited variations can never be masked

tions of heredity and environment to ob- completely, but become evident to some de-

served variations in the occurrence of the gree at least, at some time or other, in the

various capacities or abilities which the lives of individuals.

test scores represent, but so far completely satisifactory statistical tests for this purpose have not been found.

With respect to the inheritance of superior or special mental capacities the evidence is quite specific and conclusive. At

In addition to what are generally called least it seems certain that variations in mu-

variations in general intelligence or in com- sical and mathematical capacities have some

ponents of intelligence, there occur of genetic basis. Actually one hardly needs

course within the normal range hundreds the results of scientific studies to arrive at

of behavioral variations of one form or an- this conclusion--for who can attend a Men-

other. I am thinking here especially of delssohn, a Bach or a Mozart concert and

variations in behavior that may be related have the temerity or audacity to say: "I

to sex, personality, temperament, coopera- could have composed that music had I re-

tiveness, sociableness, morals, etc. Of all ceived the proper training"; or who among

these variations the differences between the us would dare claim that he could have

two sexes in basic sexual behavior patterns contributed the basic mathematical formu-

are probably the most completely inherited. lations of Pascal, Poincaré or Klein had he

At least, it seems true that primary physi- been reared in the environment in which

cal differences in sex are completely or any one of these men developed.

nearly completely genetically determined, Again we find it difficult to formulate and all available evidence indicates that an overall genetic statement relative to an these basic physical differences determine entire subdivision of behavioral variations to a major degree the primary differences except to say that a considerable amount of in the behavior of the two sexes. With re- evidence exists which demonstrates that spect to differences in sexual behavior for variations in many different capacities, a given sex, or to differences between indi- whose expressions fall within the "norviduals of either sex relative to other as- ' mal" group have been shown to have some pects of personality, temperament, coop- hereditary basis.

158 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

It would be even more difficult to formulate a general statement relative to heredity and environment which would cover all three behavioral groups as a unit, i.e., all of man's behavioral characteristics. For this reason we shall refrain from attempting such a statement.
Among the numerous genetic problems which are suggested by the data reviewed so far, one pertains to the number of loci which exist on human chromosomes whose gene variations play a more or less direct role in the occurrence of human behavioral variations. In their 1944 paper referred to earlier, Allan, Herndon, and Dudley ventured the opinion that, "There are probably several hundred genes concerned in the production of low grade mental deficiency." I have attempted an actual count based on reports in the literature and have arrived at the conclusion that there appears to be good evidence for the existence of at least eight human chromosome loci where gene variations may result more or less directly in the occurrence of human mental deficiency or oligophrenia. Less specific evidence suggests that the number of such loci may be two or even three times higher. How many actually exist is difficult to predict, but I suspect that the number may be well over a hundred.
Relative to the second or the mental disorder group of behavioral variations I have also attempted a direct count, and have concluded that good evidence is to be found in the literature for the existence of a dozen or more directly involved loci. As to the total number which may exist I hardly dare to venture an opinion, but I suspect that this number may be as high, if not higher than the number which is involved in the occurrence of mental deficiency. Actually these two sets of loci may not be completely independent. From a genetic point of view one can conceive of one member of a series of genes at one locus (one gene of an allelic series) being responsible for a particular form of oli-

gophrenia, and another member responsible for a particular type of mental disorder. Even the same gene in different genetic combinations or under varying conditions of environment might conceivably express itself in two such seemingly distinct ways.
With respect to the third category, or the "normal" range of human behavioral variations, it is an even more difficult task to arrive at an estimate of more or less directly involved human chromosome loci. Not only do the inherited variations within this range appear to be exceedingly numerous, but it seems very probable that many of them are what the geneticist calls polygenic characters, i.e., the result of the action of genes at many loci. However, it also seems probable that if many loci are involved, relative to each recognized variation, many of them for the different variations overlap An estimate of one thousand loci for the "normal" group does not seem excessively high.
On the basis of our estimates for the three separate categories of behavioral variations, and allowing for a considerable amount of overlap of loci for the three groups, we arrive at an estimate of at least one thousand loci whose genes are more or less directly involved in the occurrence of all man's behavioral variations. This number would be only about one-tenth of all loci that commonly are estimated to be present on the twenty-four chromosomes of man. Considered strictly from a logical point of view this fraction does not seem to be more than a reasonable proportion of all loci which one might expect to be concerned with as important a set of variations as those which occur in man's behavioral characteristics. In fact one might have expected one-fourth or even one-half of all loci to be more or less directly involved.
If we accept the figure of one thousand loci as a reasonable estimate, and if we assume the existence of two genes (alíeles) at each locus, we arrive at a total number

159

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

of possible behavioral genotypes given by of all individuals uniform because of in-

the expansion of three to the one-thou- herited differences in capacities but also sandth power (31000), which is an exceed- that it would be extremely undesirable to

ingly large number. If, in addition to this possibility, it should be true that some of the one thousand loci are represented by more than two genes (alíeles), the number of possible behavioral genotypes would be increased with each additional locus of this type and with each additional alíele at each of such loci. Multiple alíeles as high as eight or ten in number are known for some human chromosome loci, and among lower organisms the number is

have such conditions realized. To me it seems probable that should such conditions obtain no one would be happy, no one would be active, no one would have a feeling of personal satisfaction, and perhaps most important of all no one would feel free in any real sense. A good discussion of this last point has been presented by Professor Roger J. Williams in his latest book, "Free and Unequal."

known to reach a somewhat higher total.

Relative to genetic differences between

Should the conditions outlined in the preceding paragraphs represent reality -- and to me it seems very probable that they do--it follows that with the exception of monozygotic plural births all human beings should be genetically different to a considerable degree relative to behavioral variations. This should be true even to some degree for ordinary members of a given sibship. That these conditions are realized seems probable not only with respect to abnormal behavioral variations but also with respect to those which fall within the normal range. Accordingly it would seem that more serious consideration should be given to these probabilities than there ever has in the past, in the training of children in the home, in the formulation and administration of educational policies, in the enactment and enforcement of local and national laws, and perhaps most importantly of all in the daily associations of in-

human populations with respect to behavioral characteristics very few studies have been reported or attempted, primarily because of test or measurement difficulties. Hence, there is a limit to the extent to which a positive statement may be made which is based on direct evidence. However, since many behavioral differences between individuals within populations have been shown to exist and to have some hereditary basis, if not to be inherited in a relatively simple Mendelian fashion, it seems reasonable to assume that any two or more populations which have been separated to a sufficient degree, and for a long period of time for evolutionary forces to have differentiated them genetically with respect to what are generally known as physical characteristics, would also have become differentiated genetically--at least to some degree--with respect to behavioral characteristics (Strandskov, 1944).

dividuals.

By a genetic difference between popula-

From statements which appear in news- tions is not meant a difference in any abso-

papers, magazine articles and books it seems lute sense as is so often assumed, but a dif-

true that, even in this day and age, there ference in the percentage frequencies of

exist some people who think that all hu- the genes (alíeles) which occupy the vari-

man beings who are born and survive will ous chromosome loci. In general it may be

respond equally to all environmental situa- said that the significance of the genetic

tions, or if they do not think this, would difference between two or more populations

want all individuals to respond in such a depends upon the number of chromosome

way. Not only does it seem true, on the loci involved in the production of the dif-

basis of the evidence available, that it ference, the extent of the percentage differ-

would be impossible to make the behavior ences in the frequencies of the genes at each

160 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

involved locus, and the import of the effects of the genes concerned. (For a brief outline or summary of general genetic and evolutionary principles see Strandskov, 1950.)
A few statements by geneticists appear in the literature which seemingly are not in complete agreement with the statement presented above. Dobzhansky (1950) argues for a high degree of similarity in respect to what he calls "educability," but does conclude that, "Genes that condition or modify special abililties, intelligence, emotional reaction and other psychic traits vary from individual to individual and from group to group." David and Snyder (1951) seem less convinced of the existence of populational differences in heredity relative to behavioral characteristics. Following a discussion of the extent to which selection operates within the human species in favor of plasticity of response, they write: "It therefore seems to us highly improbable that any significant genetic differentiation in respect to particular response patterns, personality types, temperaments or intellectual capacities among different populations or races has occurred in the history of human evolution."

There exists one additional reason, not mentioned thus far, why it seems desirable or Jortunate that individual and populational differences in heredity occur relative to behavioral as well as physical characteristics. This reason is that without such genetic variation the behavioral or mental evolution of man -would not or could not continue. It may be true that many people are quite satisfied with the existing evolutionary stage of man and are unconcerned about his future evolution. However, it seems justifiable to think that there is room for genetic improvement with respect to some or even all of man's characteristics. It unquestionably is true that man's future evolution will not be so rapid and phenomenal as was his evolution the past million or more years, but it does not seem completely unreasonable to assume that a future man may be evolved sometimewho, because of his heredity, will be able to experience a greater degree of happiness than can present-day man; who can live peacefully more readily than present-day man seemingly can, and who can claim more justifiably the dignity which presentday man so readily or hastily ascribes to himself.

I would agree with Dobzhansky that because of the nature of some of man's behavioral capacities existing human populations may not be so different genetically relative to them as they are relative to some other capacities. Any disagreement that I might have with the conclusion of David and Snyder might depend upon what these authors mean by a "significant genetic differentiation."
Not only does it seem to me probable that present-day populations differ genetically to a considerable degree relative to some behavioral as well as some physical characteristics, but I would consider it fortunate or desirable that they do so. I am of this opinion more or less for the same reasons that I considered it desirable or fortunate that differences in heredity occur between individuals within a population.

If it be true, as it seems to be, that individual and populational differences in heredity exist relative to behavioral as well as physical characteristics, and if it be desirable or fortunate that they do occur, then it would seem to me to be sensible for us to recognize these differences and to give intelligent consideration to them rather than to ignore them or try to wish them away as so many people seemingly try to do.
REFERENCES
ALLAN, W., HERNDON, C. N. and DUDLEY, FLORENCE
D., 1944. Some Examples of the Inheritance of Mental Deficiency: Apparently Sex-Linked Idiocy and Microcephaly. Am. Jour. Ment. Def. 48: 325-334. BURKS, BARBARA S., 1928. The Relative Influence of Nature and Nurture upon Mental Development. Twenty-seventh Yearbook, Nat. Soc. Stud. Educ. I, 219-316.
DAVID, P. R. and SNYDER, L. H. 1951. Genetic
Variability and Human Behavior. Chapter III in

161

Social Psychology at the Crossroads. Edited by J. H. Rohrer and M. Sherif. Harper Brothers, N. Y.
DOBZHANSKY, T. 1950. The Genetic Nature o£ Differences among Men. Chapter III in Evolutionary Thought in America. Edited by Stow Persons, Yale University Press, New Haven, Conn.
FREEMAN, F. N., HOLZINGER, K. J. AND MITCHELL,
B. C, 1928. The Influence of Environment on the Intelligence, School Achievement and Conduct of Foster Children. Twenty-seventh Yearbook, Nat. Soc. Stud. Educ. I, 101-217.
Fölling, A., 1934. Uber Auscheidung von Phenylrenztraubensäure in den Harn als Stofrwechselsanomalie in Verbindung mit Imbicillität. Zeitschr. Für Physiol. Chemie 227:169.
, MOHR, O. L. and RUUD, L. 1945. Oligo-
phrenia phenylpyruvica: a Recessive Syndrome in Man. Monograph, Norsk Vid. Akad. Oslo. pp. 44. JUDA, A., 1939. Neue Psychiatrisch-Genealogische Untersuchungen an Hilfsschulzwillingen und ihren Familien. Zeitschr. Für die Gesam. Neurol. 166:365-452; 168:448-791, 804-826.
KALLMANN, F. J., 1953. Heredity in Health and Mental Disorder. W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., New York. pp. 315.
KLUCKHOHN, C., 1949. Mirror for Man. Whittlesey House, McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York. pp. 314.

LEAHY, A. M., 1935. Nature-Nurture and Intelligence. Genet. Psychol. Monog. 17:235-308.
NEWMAN, H. H., FREEMAN, F. N. and HOLZINGER,
K. J., 1937. Twins: A Study of Heredity and Environment. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
ROSANOFF, A. J., HANDY, L. M. and PLESSET, I. R.
1937. The Etiology of Mental Deficiency. Psychological Monographs 216:1-137.
SLATER, E., 1953. Psychotic and Neurotic Illnesses in Twins. Her Majesty's Stationery Office, London, pp. 385.
STRANDSKOV, H. H., 1944. Further Comments on Comparative Studies in Human Biology. Science 100:146-147.
, 1950. Genetics and the Origin and Evolution of Man. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology, 15:1-11.
THURSTONE, L. L., THURSTONE, G. T. and STRAND-
SKOV, H. H., 1953. A Psychological Study of Twins. I. Distribution of Absolute Twin Differences for Identical and Fraternal Twins. Report No. 4, The Psychometric Laboratory, University of North Carolina.
WILLIAMS, R. J., 1953. Free and Unequal: The Biological Basis of Individual Liberty. University of Texas Press, Austin, pp. 177.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

