Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Heredity counseling: Genetic clinics and their preventive medical implications
Charles F. Wilkinson Jr. M.D.
To cite this article: Charles F. Wilkinson Jr. M.D. (1957) Heredity counseling: Genetic clinics and their preventive medical implications, Eugenics Quarterly, 4:4, 202-205, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1957.9987330 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1957.9987330
Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3
View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:24

HEREDITY COUNSELING Genetic Clinics and Their Preventive Medical Implications

CHARLES F. WILKINSON, JR., M.D.
Department of Medicine New York University Post-
Graduate Medical School

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

T
JLHE FUTURE OF MEDICINE LIES in the treatment of accidents: either accidents due to trauma or accidents due to inheritance. If this is true, or even partly true, the knowledge of how to prevent or modify these accidents is a necessary goal. Human genetics has in the past been an ugly stepchild of medicine. Many people think of it as a study of people with six fingers or two heads. The general public has little knowledge of the part it plays in heart disease, cancer, diabetes, allergy and a host of other conditions. Frequently not much more is known by the general physician. To the breeder of fine cattle, the attitude of the medical profession in this respect must seem foolhardy. Research in genetics will enable us to learn what diseases are hereditary, methods of their transmission and the detection of carriers. Only through genetic counseling can this knowledge be exploited.
What is genetic counseling? Who should be the counselor? In what environment can it best exist? It is almost necessary to answer these questions in reverse order from which they are asked, because for counseling service to be effective it must have a number of disciplines readily available and the individuals representing these disciplines must not only know the genetic implications of their discipline but must also be able to work with the similarly oriented individual of another discipline.
Since there is probably no perfect heredity clinic, it gives the author a chance to describe his concept of a perfect one.
Such an institute of human genetics would cut across departmental boundaries within a medical center, and even across college boundaries in the university. It

would be physically located in the medical center for a number of reasons, the chief one being that a large percentage of the material going through it would be detected there. By this I mean that the lead subject, or a large percentage of lead subjects, would be detected in the hospital. This type of lead subject is known, technically, as a "propositus"; and from him an investigation is made backwards to the parents and grandparents, forward to the children and grandchildren, sideways to the siblings, aunt and uncles. Also there are certain facilities available in a medical center that would not have to be duplicated, were the institute located there. This location would also be ideal from a teaching point of view. Residents in medicine (and, I should hope, pediatrics and obstetrics and gynecology) could be rotated through it as part of their basic house staff training. Some, if not all, residents from otolaryngology and ophthalmology should also have some experience here, as well as other specialties. Ideally, undergraduate students would have at least two experiences in the clinic the way most curricula are set up at present. If, however, the trend towards a vertical curriculum persists, such an institute would lend itself wonderfully to a continuing experience.
The members of the institute would give basic indoctrination lectures in the subject to both undergraduate and postgraduate medical students. There would always be a need for some didactic work, but more emphasis would be placed on case work and counseling, with special emphasis on the genetic aspect of any case or family the student might be assigned.

202

203

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

Physical facilities would consist of outpatient space that could handle five to ten interviews per day. Considering the amount of time necessary for a genetic work-up, this would include about four combination office and examining rooms, one treatment room, a waiting room and a director's office. There would be in-patient research facilities consisting of two male and two female beds.
Permanent personnel would consist of a director who should be an M.D. His training would be broad and, I believe, an internist with a deep interest in genetics would best fill this position. In addition, there would be a Ph.D. geneticist either as co-director or associate director. His professorial title would be in the Department of Zoology so that he would not lose liaison with his own group in the field of nonhuman experimental genetics.
There would also be a statistician, with his title in the Department of Bio-statistics, but spending at least eighty-five per cent of his time in the genetic institute. The remainder of the time would be spent in maintaining liaison with the Department of Bio-statistics. Many other disciplines would be represented, or at least available on call, such as anthropology, social service, etc.
There would be one full-time or threequarter-time physician at the level of assistant or associate professor, who would not only act with the director and others in advising on research problems but would also act as part of the counseling team. He, too, would maintain close contact with his basic clinical discipline.
It is not anticipated that the basic budget would maintain any specific research projects, as these would be supported by other funds and with additional personnel as the need arose, or the opportunity for such research was visualized. The institute would serve as a framework and a nucleus to coordinate such research, maintain a central repository for pedigrees and advise groups planning research. It would give

genetic counseling as this became necessary to those individuals affected by this research and to those members of the community referred to it.
An institute such as I have described would also be active in, and at the disposal of, non-medical groups. Its personnel would be not only available but also anxious to participate in non-medical group activities, such as the Parent-Teachers Association, church leagues, etc. In fact, it appears to me that a large part of their time would be spent in direct contact with lay groups in an educational and/or preventive fashion. This impact would not be local but, through regional hospital programs, would make its influence felt over several states.
Now that we have established the environment and described the counselors, we are prepared to explain what genetic counseling is. It might be easier first to say exactly what counseling is not. Counseling is not birth control. Counseling is not planned parenthood. Counseling does not run at cross currents to any religious sect or creed with which the author is familiar.
For a positive definition of counseling I prefer the second definition given in Webster's dictionary which states that counseling is: "interchange of opinions; mutual advising; deliberation together; consultation." Genetic counseling, then, means that personnel representing the various disciplines in the genetic institute confer with the person or persons concerned and share their knowledge, so that a decision may be arrived at in the light of the best available information.
At the end of the counseling period, the person or persons who have come to the clinic would be in a better position to make up their own minds regarding their problem. To illustrate some of the everyday problems that come up in genetic clinics, it seemed desirable to actually take the reader through an established heredity counseling service.
The Department of Human Genetics* at

204 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

the University of Michigan Medical School was selected for several reasons. First, it is the oldest and one of the most active such clinics in the United States. Its Director is a personal friend and, for a time, I was associated with the group.
Figure 1 shows three young people talking. Their problem, however, is quite different from that of most young people. The married couple has had one child, a Mongolian idiot. They have been welladvised by their family physician and have placed the child in a mental institution, but they would like to know the probability of another child being afflicted in the same manner. Not only had they no knowledge of previous Mongolism in either family, but they have been rather proud of the scholastic achievements of their families and the birth of a Mongolian idiot has shaken them considerably. The geneticist has assured them that the probability of a second misfortune occurring is not likely, but that it has been shown that the older the mother the higher the percentage of Mongolism and, since they are young, it is probably wise to complete their family while the mother is young. He cannot explain the occurrence of the Mongoloid child as well as he can many other inherited traits, but he can explain to them that it is probably due not only to a familial predisposition but also to some unknown metabolic circumstance in the pregnancy which is not likely to occur again.
Figure 2 illustrates an entirely different problem. The child on the examining table is illegitimate, and it is known that his parents are of different races. Is this child to be raised and brought up with a Negro family? Or is he to be raised as a white child? Here we see the social worker, two physical anthropologists and a physician. Through physical measurement, blood type, etc., they will be able to guide the social worker.
Another problem that constantly presents
*Organized as the Heredity Clinic in 1940.

itself in genetic counseling clinics is the question of paternity. Testimony can be given as to the possibility or impossibility of paternity, based on studies of the blood types, which is now accepted in our courts.
In Figure 3 on the left we see a hematologist determining blood types that may or may not establish whether a child kidnapped ten years ago has been found or not. Probably less well known are newer techniques that are constantly being used in genetic studies to enable geneticists to be more and more sure of such problems.
Figure 3 on the right illustrates a young lady using one of the newer research approaches to the same problem. She is setting up a series of starch column electrophoretic analyses which will add additional data in attempting to determine the paternity of the child.
It would be impossible in such a short discussion to illustrate all the activities of a genetic clinic. The above illustrations have been chosen to give the reader some idea of the divergence of the clinic's daily activities and also to tell why so many disciplines must be represented and why an efficient counseling service can only exist in an environment of research. There are all too many problems that arise in which the geneticist can be of little help, but they are far fewer than was the case several years ago. There is probably no metabolic disease which has been studied from a genetic standpoint but that some genetic implication has been found. When one knows the mode of inheritance of a disease and is able to detect its carriers, the next step is to be alert to the possibility of the disease appearing in children of the carriers. It is not too much to expect that many of the metabolic disorders which we see today as catastrophic episodes in a person's life will be anticipated early and, through precautionary measures, either prevented entirely or treated at their onset and modified to such an extent that they will not seriously interfere with the person's way of life.
It has been implied all through this dis-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

FIGURE 1.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

205

cussion that the best genetic counseling can be done in a genetic institute. One might well ask why the family physician cannot offer this service and advice. We have tried to show that genetic counseling does not depend on one service only but requires the interplay of many disciplines. Only through constant investigation by a welltrained and multi-disciplinary group can progress be made in human genetics.
There are still relatively few medical schools where human genetics is taught and fewer that have the facilities to give proper counseling. Just as the family physician refers patients to a skilled neurosurgeon for the removal of a brain tumor, he will utilize the services of a genetic clinic if it is available. It is true that many genetic problems can be answered today without such recourse, and, as human genetics progresses through research, many

more will become second nature to the family physician. However, one would hesitate to predict that the services of the counseling clinic will ever be superfluous, for the more that is learned through research, the more questions will present themselves for consideration. The complexion of the practice of medicine is clearly changing, and during the next several decades it seems almost certain that the emphasis of medical practice will be upon metabolic disorders. Through the cooperation of the basic scientist, clinician and the geneticist we can expect progress, and through counseling services we can make this progress available to those who need it.
The author is indebted to Dr. James V. Neel, Professor of Human Genetics, and his staff of the University of Michigan Medical School for their cooperation and advice.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:24 08 December 2015

