Eugenics Quarterly
ISSN: 0097-2762 (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi18
Genetic factors affecting intelligence: Symposium
S. C. Reed , W. Reed & J. D. Palm
To cite this article: S. C. Reed , W. Reed & J. D. Palm (1954) Genetic factors affecting intelligence: Symposium, Eugenics Quarterly, 1:1, 44-52, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1954.9987162 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1954.9987162
Published online: 23 Aug 2010. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3 View related articles Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hsbi18

Download by: [University of Michigan]

Date: 07 December 2015, At: 06:37

II. FERTILITY AND INTELLIGENCE AMONG FAMILIES OF THE MENTALLY DEFICIENT

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

S. C. REED, ELIZABETH W. REED, and J. D. PALM
Dight Institute for Human Genetics University of Minnesota

a'NE OF THE LARGE PROJECTS at the Dight
Institute is a study of mental deficiency. This would seem to have considerable social significance because the mentally deficient are not normal at birth. By definition they do not function in a socially adequate way and they serve mainly to test the quality of our charity. They do not get well, nor do they usually die young.
Great progress has been made in curing the bodies of the mentally deficient, exclusive of their brains. No striking progress has been made in discovering ways of overruling the hosts of different genes responsible for the various diseases known as mental deficiency. Recently considerable attention has been devoted to the valiant hope that glutamic acid might rehabilitate the mentally deficient. It is conceivable that glutamic acid might improve a few specific types of mental deficiency, but it is unlikely that it would have much effect on any large proportion of the many different kinds of mental deficiency. The discovery of a "cure" for the phenylketonuric imbecile, if possible, would not be expected to be also a cure for the microcephalic idiot.
It is obvious to the geneticist that many of the various kinds of mental deficiencies result from different genes at different loci on the chromosomes and that until the different kinds of mental deficiencies are named and described not much medical progress toward cures can be expected. One important way of learning more about the different types of mental deficiency is to study the families of the affected persons. This is not a particularly novel idea, but no large, adequate, and longitudinal study

of the families of the mentally deficient has been produced so far. Our study is large and longitudinal but also inadequate in several ways. However, it does provide some description of the families of the mentally deficient, particularly in regard to their intelligence and fertility.
It is well known that if one takes a group of school children and arranges the children according to their I. Q.'s, those with the highest I. Q.'s come from the smallest sibships and those with lower I. Q.'s from the larger families. This negative correlation between the intelligence quotient and size of family has been known for a long time and has given rise to considerable apprehension that because of the differential fertility of those with different intellectual capacities, the genes for high intelligence are gradually being replaced by those for low intelligence.
It is surprising that no one has made a study as to the later reproduction of the sibships of varying size and intelligence. There are a number of reasons why this highly important work has not been done. The first reason is that one ought to wait for the tested children to complete their reproduction and then find them again and test their children, or else take a group of people already past the reproduction period and search back to find I. Q. values obtained for them when they were children.
We are fortunate in our project in having family genealogies which were carefully worked out forty years ago with some I. Q.'s obtained then, and it has been possible to search out large numbers of I. Q.'s since

44

45

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

then. We have taken advantage of both of the above methods. When our study is completed there should be adequate material to demonstrate the reproductive capacities of people with I. Q.'s up to perhaps 120; the sample of persons with I. Q. values above 120 will probably be too small to give valid answers. However, the reproductive characteristics of people with I. Q.'s above 135 are known from Professor Terman's longitudinal study of gifted children, while the gap between I. Q. values of 120 and 135 perhaps can be filled satisfactorily by interpolation. At this moment we will be content to consider only the sibships of the mentally deficient who were institutionalized at the State School and Colony at Faribault, Minnesota, forty or more years ago.
Our project is a follow-up study of some of the patients who were in the Institution for the mentally deficient at Faribault, Minnesota, some forty years ago. The original work took place between the years of 1911 and 1918 and was partly supported by an appropriation of $25,000 from the Legislature of the State of Minnesota. The late Dr. A. C. Rogers, then Superintendent of the State School and Colony at Faribault, was responsible in large part for the grant by the, Legislature. The grant was used for the research and travel expenses of the workers on the project, while their salaries were provided by the Eugenics Records Office of the Carnegie Institution at Cold Spring Harbor, New York. There were two investigators employed, both college graduates, with training in social work and in what was then known of human heredity. They were the late Miss Sadie Deavitt and Miss Marie Curial, now the wife of the Reverend Guy Menefee of Rochester, Minnesota. We are greatly indebted to Mrs. Menefee for information concerning the original work. The early Stanford-Binet tests were carried out by Dr. Maud A. Merrill, Miss Mildred Thomson and others.
The illness and death of Dr. Rogers

brought the study to an end, and it was never published. The original data in excellent condition went to the Division of Public Institutions in St. Paul and copies were sent to the Eugenics Records Office in Cold Spring Harbor. Both sets of records were presented to the Dight Institute for Human Genetics many years later.
In 1949 the study was reopened. The new research has been supported by the Minnesota Human Genetics League, by a contract number E-1126 with the Division of Public Institutions, and by the Rockefeller Foundation. It is a pleasure to point out that our work has been dependent upon the cooperation and generous assistance of Miss Mildred Thomson, head of the bureau for the mentally deficient and epileptic, State of Minnesota, and her staff. In addition we are deeply indebted to Dr. E. J. Engberg, Dr. Ralph Rossen, Dr. R. J. Gully, Dr. John Pearson, Mr. C. J. Jackson, Miss Caroline Perkins and Mr. Wendell Swenson of the Division of Public Institutions, Dr. J. A. Book of the State Institute for Human Genetics at Uppsala, Sweden, Dr. John Schut of the State Hospital at Galesburg, Illinois, and Dr. Ray Anderson of the Dight Institute, for necessary help with the work. We are also indebted to an army of school superintendents, school psychologists and others who have provided us with I. Q. values.
It was found very soon that the records had been most carefully and conscientiously compiled by the original workers. Extensive sociological data were available for the patients, their sibs, parents, grandparents, aunts, uncles and cousins, as well as some I. Q. values and other information such as predictions as to the possible fate of various children. We have had considerable fun checking on these predictions, most of which were quite shrewd and borne out by subsequent events. However, in one case, a rascal from whom no good was expected became a United States Congressman from Minnesotal

46 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

Selection of the Sample Our material is not a random sample of
any population. Indeed, it is almost impossible to get a truly random sample of a human population. Our sample is biased in various ways, the most obvious bias being that in every case the propositus, or index case, was institutionalized for some part of his life, whereas about nine-tenths of the mentally deficient population of the country is never institutionalized.
The original sample of 549 propositi was selected in the following way. It was intended to complete the family histories for all of the approximately 1500 patients then at the State School and Colony in Faribault. This was too ambitious a goal, and the changing population of any large institution would make a complete sample very difficult to achieve. In order to start the project, it was decided to select first those patients whose next of kin were geographically closest to Faribault, as travel by train and horse was slow. One of the workers, Miss Curial, though now in her seventies, still shoots a deer or brace of grouse each season and at that time drove a pair of horses that were considered too fast to be handled by a woman.
No attempt was made to select patients because of their type of abnormality or I. Q. No attempt was made to select those with relatives also in the institution.
A drastic subsequent selection from the original 549 family histories has been made for the present study. We have eliminated many of the histories from our study according to definite criteria. In 33 cases the original patient had an I. Q. of 70 or more. Most of these were mentally ill rather than mentally deficient; one of them had an I. Q. of 112 and was clearly psychotic. It was found that 38 of the propositi were not actually in the institution at the time of the original study. Their family histories found their way into the group because of unusual circumstances of one kind or other. The third and largest group of histories set aside were the 182 histories of epileptic

patients, some of whom were mentally deficient and others were not. We do not understand the relationship between mental deficiency and the epilepsy which often accompanies it, and therefore wish to avoid that complication for this study.
Of the original 549 families, we have set aside the above three groups totaling 253 histories, leaving 296 as the sample for our present study. Our 296 patients have already totaled 6725 years in institutions, an average of 22.7 years each. Five per cent of the patients have averaged over 50 years in Faribault and one man has been placed in a home for the aged after 65 years at the State School and Colony. Only nineteen per cent of the patients were in the Institution for less than six years. The I. Q. for all but six of the 296 patients was taken by the original workers and the average I.Q. = 38.
We have followed the lives of the propositi, of whom at least 80 (27 per cent) are still alive after forty years, which is remarkable when it is realized that many were already old at the time of the original study.
Fertility of the Propositi We expect to find a very low fertility for
the propositi because they were all institutionalized for some part of their lives. Only 37 (12.5 per cent) were known to have had any children. The 37 propositi had an average I.Q. of 48 while their 80 children had an average I.Q. of 71. The average I. Q. of the children of the mentally deficient will always be higher than the I. Q. of their parents due to Galton's law of filial regression. Half of the children were mentally deficient and half were not.
If we average the 80 children over the 296 propositi, we have an average of 0.27 children per institutionalized mentally deficient subject.
There were 21 sibs or parents of propositi who were also institutionalized and produced children. The average I.Q. = 61 for the 21 relatives is higher than that of

47

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

the propositi, but the average I.Q. = 73 of their 65 children is only slightly higher, and not significantly so, than that of the children of the propositi.

segments of the population to replace themselves several times over. The families of our study were large and because of that our project is rather gargantuan. We have

The low fertility of the institutionalized patients and relatives is to be expected and is introduced only for the record and to remind us that our expensive institutions are effective eugenic agencies and without institutionalization the total of 145 children of the above two groups of persons would have been greater. Had the propositi and relatives been committed before they

done some work on the families of all 296 propositi, but so far have completed only 54 of the kindreds, about one-sixth of the total. The average size of these kindreds was 158 persons, which means that 8532 persons are included so far. If this is onesixth of the total population, we should have almost 50,000 persons included in our 296 kindreds, when we finish the study.

reached reproductive age, the 145 children would not have been born and considerable misery and expense would have been avoided.

Illustrative Kindreds
Let us examine some of the 54 kindreds individually.
The idea that all the families of the

Scope of the Present Study

mentally deficient breed like rabbits is, of

The high quality of the original research allows us to work back to the grandparents of the propositi, though I.Q. values could not have been obtained for them as they died before the invention of the tests. It would be impossible today to get any good information about these people, long since dead. But because of the early work we have good records for these early generations. We are at present able to follow up the children of the original study and their offspring. Consequently, we have masses of information for three generations, usually for four and sometimes five generations.

course, not true, as the first illustration shows, Figure 1 (KMD 146). Here the mother of the propositus was an only child and the father had only one sister who died at 16 years of age. The patient (P) was mentally deficient without obvious physical stigmata and later became mentally disturbed, and died at 37 years of age. The boy went to school for seven years but could not get through the second grade. He was committed at 14 years of age. The home conditions seemed to be adequate, and he was treated kindly there. This family has become extinct.

We have set an arbitrary pattern of studying all descendants from the four grandparents of the propositus. This gives four generations of people which are now completed but with part of the fifth generation yet to be born.
If a family of this structure were to merely replace itself, there would be the four grandparents of the first generation, six persons in the second generation, 12 in the third and 24 in the fourth, a total kindred of 46 persons. No such small family pattern would be expected on the average in a young pioneer state such as the Minnesota of the years when our propositi and their parents were born. We would expect all

Figure 2 (KMD 477) is another small family. The arrow indicates that the person was institutionalized. In this case there were two idiots, numbered 8 and 10 on the pedigree, both were in the institution at Faribault and the "P" indicates that number 8 was the proposita. The blackening of the symbols indicates the mental deficiency and the numbers encircled below the two defective children are their I.Q. values of 16 and 7. The small blackened circle shown as number 11 represents a still birth. The diagonal slash through all the male and female symbols means that all these people were assumed to be normal but that no definite evidence to that effect

48 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

was available. The double bond connecting numbers 5 and 6 indicates a consanguineous marriage, in this case first cousins. It is assumed that the two very low grade mentally deficient children resulted from the homozygosity of a recessive gene inherited from a common ancestor as a result of the consanguineous marriage of their parents.
The first two figures showed families which became extinct. No new data were expected from them, as they were known to have come to an end at the time of the original study. Figure 3 (KMD 95) is a different story. There were a number of people in this kindred at the time of the original study, but since then they have just disappeared. The "U" under the symbols indicates that the person could not be found and is lost to the study. Undoubtedly a number of the members of generation III had children and grandchildren, but we have no clues as to where to find them. This family is our greatest failure. Fortunately no other kindreds this large were completely hopeless.
Let us leave the extinct and the missing families and proceed to the better ascertained and more interesting kindreds. Figure 4 (KMD 339) is a very interesting family. There are two kinds of dotted lines on this pedigree with entirely different meanings. The dotted lines connecting a male and female and then dropping to a child indicate that the child was illegitimate. It is rather ironical that the mentally deficient person (5) was herself illegitimate and produced two illegitimate mentally deficient children, but finally, after taking on the sanctity of marriage with (7), failed to produce any more children, as shown by the very short horizontal line at the bottom of the 5 to 7 union lines. The second type of dotted line is the long horizontal one which should always be looked for, as it divides those people born by the time the original study was done from those born since then, that is, during the last forty years.

The half sister of the proposita produced a varied brood of 10 children. Number 12 was given an I.Q. test in 1924 by Miss Mildred Thomson on which he scored only 35. However, it was recognized that he was deaf, so he was sent to the State School for the Deaf. He made fair progress at the deaf school and upon discharge from there acquired a wife and four children, of which the eldest (26) is now at the State School for the Deaf. He is not considered to be mentally deficient, so his square is not filled in. The next boy (14) has no hearing trouble, but is considered socially mentally deficient, and could only complete the sixth grade. The next three boys (16, 18 and 19) finished at least the first two years of high school. The next girl (21) was in the School for the Deaf for six years, but was found to be mentally deficient and transferred to the School and Colony for the mentally deficient, where she is at present. The remaining four children are not mentally deficient though the girl (23) was in an "opportunity room" until it was abolished. There is wide range of I. Q. values here, from 37, where deafness was also present, to 74 and 76 without deafness to a high of 118.
Figure 5 (KMD 454) is presented to show the rather remarkable number of still births. Of the four children in the sibship of the propositus, the other three died of "convulsions" at less than one year of age. One of the three was hydrocéphalie and the proposita had spina bifida. However, she survived to be 54 years old and died of carcinoma of the liver.
The mother was syphilitic which may have accounted for some of the infant mortality, though the genes for the hydrocephalus, spina bifida, anencephaly syndrome are probably responsible for the mental deficiency.
Figure 6 (KMD 105) is a "Kallikak" type of family. Number 10 had an affair with (11) and felt it necessary to marry her though she had previously had an illegitimate child (34). The rest of the paternal

49

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

side of the family is highly respectable; number 15 was a judge. Number 31 escaped from the Institution several times before she accepted sterilization, and was then discharged. She married a mentally deficient scamp (30), and they then abducted her sister (33) from the Institution and took her to California with them, where they promptly abandoned her. The State of Minnesota had to pay the expenses of returning her to the Institution. However, as the abductors have been on relief in California for over thirty years now, Minnesota has not suffered from their departure. Furthermore, it is California's good fortune that the young lady (31) was sterilized before arrival.
Figure 7 (KMD 341) presents something of a problem in that three of the sibs of the proposita are now lost to the study. We know that numbers 18 and 22 had children, and it would be important to determine their intelligence. In the 29 persons of this kindred where the mentality has been established, 15 of the 29 were mentally deficient. There is a hint here that a dominant gene is being transmitted, which causes the mental deficiency. The original workers knew that number 3 was a brilliant merchant in Russia and the relatives in this country said that the grandmother (4) was normal. The grandparental generation is just beyond the line of reliability of ascertainment, particularly when the grandparents did not come to this country as was the case here. We suspect that perhaps the information from the relatives in regard to the grandmother (4) was falsified.
The family conditions were adequate and the parents over-indulgent to the proposita. The proposita had several physical examinations, the last was a thorough physical and neurological work-up by Drs. Book and Schut in 1950. They spent much of one year giving such examinations to persons in this study. The proposita had many abnormal neurological reactions, but none of them could be selected as correlated with her idiocy. She is still alive, in

general good health, and her Wasserman, Kolmer and chest X-rays were all negative.
So far we have considered only small families. Let's look at the largest one in the study, Figure 9 (KMD 163). There are five grandparents here as one of them (4) married twice. The five established a kindred of 494 persons. There were 16 persons of the 211 in the original study (internal to the dotted line) considered to be mentally deficient at that time, but these were mostly subjective determinations. We have found no mental deficiency in the 283 persons added in the recent generations (external to the dotted line). Furthermore, we are satisfied that two of those originally said to be mentally deficient were not so; one of them was the father of the only college graduate among the 494 persons.
This family is not interesting for its mental deficiency but because it is the largest family and because it is a part of the kindred which we have studied by reason of the 121 cases past, present or future, which it is expected to produce, of Huntington's chorea. We have presented an hypothesis, Reed and Palm (1950), suggesting that the gene for Huntington's chorea was in part responsible for the high fertility in the family.
The next kindred includes 419 members, Figure 10 (KMD 133), and is of considerable genetic interest. It will be noted that either (111) or (112) could be considered to be the proposita as they are identical twins, both microcephalic idiots. The last born of the twelve children in the sibship is also a microcephalic. Figure 12 shows the girls on the steps at Faribault about forty years ago, and Figure 13 shows them as they look today.
Considerable work has been done with this kindred. For instance, we have at least one I. Q. determination for no less than 68 members of the kindred. A careful physical and neurological study of the microcephalic twins, their microcephalic brother and other members of the kindred has been reported by Book, Schut and Reed

50 Eugenics Quarterly

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

(1953). In that publication the hypothesis was presented that while two "doses" of the gene for microcephaly produce the characteristic head shape and idiocy, one dose of the gene also lowers the I. Q. to that of the dull normal or moron level of intelligence. This is a reasonable hypothesis, whether here true or not, for many of the types of mental deficiency. Countless cases are known in laboratory plants and animals in which the effect of a single dose of a gene is greatly increased when it is present in the double dose. If a single dose of the microcephaly gene does lower the I. Q. significantly, then it might be expected to increase the fertility of those having it and thus account in part for the very large size of this kindred.
Both parents of our twins and two of the four grandparents must have been heterozygous for the microcephaly gene, and we can be certain that there is now a large number of persons, in the county in which the kindred lives, who are heterozygous for this pernicious gene.
The last kindred which we will consider in our brief survey is also a very large one of 430 persons, Figure 11 (KMD 342). We have at least one I. Q. value for 86 persons. Furthermore, in one family of the kindred we have I. Q. values for four consecutive generations, undoubtedly a record. Figure 8 is a condensed verison of the part of KMD 342 for which we have I. Q. values in four consecutive generations.
This is one of the most gruesome families we have come upon. One of the four grandparents was mentally deficient. There were 13 mentally deficient in the second generation, 19 in the third generation, 13 in the fourth and one in the still unfinished fifth generation, or a total of 47 mentally deficient. There would have been even more than this if the State had not carried out its eugenic function of institutionalizing seven of the mentally deficient by the time the first study was done and eight more in the subsequent years. However, the kindred is also a striking example of

what happens when the State fails to carry out its eugenic function completely. For example, (31) is now an old man in his seventies who never worked. By his three wives he produced 17 children and three more by two of his mentally deficient daughters. Among his children and their offspring are 12 cases of mental deficiency, of whom only four have been institutionalized. The agencies of the government subsidized this man's venture in reproduction and society will pay for the results for some time to come.
The other remarkable man (17) in this pedigree (see Figure 8) produced 15 mentally deficient offspring, of whom nine have been institutionalized. Unfortunately, institutionalization usually did not come soon enough.
Eugenics fought a good fight with the genes for mental deficiency in this family but won only a partial victory. But let us not underestimate the value of the partial victory, not only to our society but also for the unfortunate individuals who would have been born in misery were it not for the action of the State in preventing their births. Replacement Rates
When looking at a kindred such as that shown in Figure 11, the future seems to be composed mainly of black squares and circles. But that is the blackest kindred we have. Let us consider the whole picture rather than isolated kindreds.
We know that the 296 propositi, all institutionalized at some time, did not as a group anywhere nearly replace themselves. But what about the brothers and sisters of the propositi? Did they breed like rabbits? We should expect that there were many brothers and sisters. For the 54 completed families the average size of the sibship, including the propositus, was seven persons. In order for a sibship of seven to replace itself it must produce two children apiece or a total of 14 children. Actually we find that the production was only nine children, instead of the 14 necessary for

Figure 4. This family combines mental deficiency and an hereditary deafness. Three persons (12, 21 and 26) have all been resident at some time at the Minnesota State School for the Deaf. Note
the wide variation in intelligence shown in the ten children of generation IV.

Figure 5. This family was severely limited in she by the large proportion of still births. Spina bifid« and hydrocephalut were present in the sibship of the proposita- at least (33 through 36).

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

í ÍII

» 12

IS Ï l 4

*·

-.---0

Ehr-»

22

!S 24

U s 26

J2T 28 1

-r-O QT-O

0· ·

?9) (40) (51) (40

37
O

Figure 6. A family of the "Kallikalt" type.

KMD 1 0 5

I2
0-H2)

34
D-T-O
lolll

22 23 124 |25 26 U ul U

31 132 33 I34135 36 137 38 I » Uo Ul 42 143 0 <3 IZrV* D-T<2) * 0 - r O · É h - ® O
u uu

IV
KMD 341
Figure 7. There is a large amount of mental deficiency in this family which suggests the inheritance of a single dominant gene causing some still undifferentiated type of mental deficiency.

Í67 lee IG9 [TO 71T72 IP I i · B-.--4

74

18 19
·-HZI

77 78

I79 if0 i?'

IV

238 239 240 241 J242 243 1244 245 1246 |ï47 I J249 - D-rO ÉÊ-Q> Û O

250 251
D-T-O

|252 |253 254 |255 |2

(97) (82

402 ¡403 404 405
0 00 0

406 [407 MOB 409 4K> Mil 4
a · ù a ta 0 0

Figure 8. Part of the whole pedigre« shown in Figure 11. The fact that we are able to present four consecutive generations of I.Q. values is not only a record, but is a measure of the trial which the descendants of 17 and 18 have been to the State of Minnesota. The arrows indicate the members of the family who have been in the State School and Colony at Faribault. N osymbolis -;--._ t«. . « . . . mJ'viJuaU. «ueh at (250). who have served iom> time 5n prison or in other institutions.

Detail from KMD 3 4 2

Figure 10. This family is of interest because of the appearance of a pair of identical twins with microcephaly (111 and 112) fallowed by a brother (130) with the same defect.

95 96 97 98 99 1100 101 102

103 104 105 106

107 1108

109 1110! / | | \ | I 2 113 114 115 116

274 ?75 276 277 278
ÛÛÔÛD

[279
OÛ00

Î83 284 J285 286 fce7 U s 289 290
0 0 U0 0

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

o o o o cy-o

5 ci S ' f* y> u cu -* ¡ I r * * w

Figure 11. This ¡s one of the most gruesome families of the study« There nave been 430 members of the families of which 47 were classified as mental!/ deficient.
nrn

t\ g| s] S) S Si S
* àWé5 àIr<2> D T O

S§ d s G * [V0

« w| Kl el n o -- M) >rA * |
ssl I s[a ajl al ä si

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

?<?>
en
OJ

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

23 4
78
I
lí,
KMD 146
I. The smallest family of the study. The meaning pedtgroes.

12
2

34
00

i 19 lip II
p 0 · 1,
· fe

I2

n 5 J6
m u ¥uT¥u Yu ir

uu

J25 126 J27 J28 _|29 30 31 132 J

Ú Ó Ú Ép I EH-®

U U UX*

U

<u¿> u<¿
U

uu
Figure 3. The greatest failure of the study. All members of the family have been loit from our study and cannot be found.

KMD 9 5

A

JlS 17 Jl8 II? 20 Izi J22 JUj l?4 U S

<2> É i 0 g- ! 0 g D-]--0

é aó· ó

I37
IV

23

12
o°

34
2h

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

r
FIGURE 12. (KMD 133). The identical microcephalic twins on the steps of the State School and Colony at Faribault about forty
years ago.
I
FIGURE 13. (KMD 133). The same twins, shown in Figure 12, as they look today. Their long life in the institution has been
healthy and uneventful.

51

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

mere replacement. This is 0.65 of the num- ment is not complete because some aunts

ber necessary for replacement and is quite or uncles remained in Europe, or a section

a surprise. We will have to consider the of the kindred in this country is lost to us,

complicated causes for this relatively low we find that the average size of the kindred

fertility of the sibs of the propositi else- for the cumulative first, second, third and

where. Some of the more obvious causes fourth generations, including the people

may be mentioned, however. In the first who have married into the kindred, is 158

place, there are often sibs that are affected persons where we would expect an average

with mental deficiency in addition to the of 40 persons for exact replacement. The

propositus. Some of these sibs will also be kindreds as a group, through the fourth

institutionalized and the ones with very generation and omitting the persons born

low I. Q.'s will not reproduce, even if not so far in the fifth and sixth generations, are

institutionalized. Secondly, the sibship of therefore almost four times as large as

seven includes still births; none of them would be necessary for replacement. This

have any chance of reproducing, of course. does not impress us as being an unusually

Finally, as one or both parents of the sib- high rate of increase for kindreds started

ship are sometimes mentally deficient, the by persons born between 1800 and 1850 in

accident rate resulting in fatalities among a frontier state.

the sibship is very high. Furthermore, the presence of mental deficiency in the family may act as an eugenic brake and cause the normal sibs to limit their families.

It is most interesting that the kindred as a whole had a higher reproductive rate than the sibs of the propositi, and that the sibs had a higher rate than the propositi

It might be thought that the nine children actually produced by the seven members of the propositus' sibship is still a rather high rate of increase, as there would only need to be six persons in this generation to replace the genes for mental deficiency of the parents of the propositus. However, it should be remembered that some of the nine are still-births and others may be institutionalized, so that you can't tell till the next generation is produced how biologically effective the nine children will be.
Finally, when it is recalled that the nine children were born in Minnesota, while birth rates were still fairly high, and certainly well above replacement, it seems doubtful whether the genes for mental de-

themselves. If this finding is substantiated by the other five-sixths of our kindreds, it means that the more distant relatives of the propositi reproduced at a higher rate than the sibs of the propositi. It would seem that this shows that the normal genes reproduce themselves at a higher rate than the genes for our group of mental deficiencies as a whole. This conclusion is not that held by many eugenicists of the past. Perhaps their attention was restricted to those ghastly families, such as KMD 342, the last one illustrated, which are not representative of the average kindred where mental deficiency was present. But even in KMD 342, the longitudinal study shows that the mental deficiency genes are being eliminated in favor of the normal alíeles.

ficiency present in the parents of the pro- The evidence from the part of the study

positus have held their own in relation to so far completed indicates that the genes

their normal alíeles in the rest of the popu- for the various kinds of mental deficiency

lation.

behave like the genes for physical abnor-

Let us consider now the replacement rate malities. That is, they are eliminated from

of the whole kindred, including the sibship of the propositus. If we take the 54 kindreds that have been completed and reject from them the kindreds in which ascertain-

the population because of their failure to compete successfully with their normal alíeles. There may be a few cases where the gene for mental deficiency when près-

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 06:37 07 December 2015

52 Eugenics Quarterly

ent in the heterozygous condition gives a reproductive advantage, as we have assumed, for microcephaly. However, even here there must be some brake upon the spread of the gene, or it would be more frequent than it is.
On the whole, however, the genes for mental deficiency must be inferior to their normal alíeles and are being continuously eliminated, only to be replaced by new mutations to the same abnormal genes. The eugenic activities of the state assist in the more rapid elimination of the abnormal genes. The most exciting discovery that the eugenicist could make would be to find a way of preventing the remutation of the genes for the various kinds of mental deficiency.
Summary and Conclusions
In 1949 the Minnesota Human Genetics League initiated a follow-up study of an investigation of the intellectual and reproductive capacities of the families of the mentally deficient. The original work took place between 1911 and 1918 with the families of a selected sample of 549 patients at the Minnesota State School and Colony in Faribault.
A drastic subsequent selection from the original 549 family histories was made for the follow-up study. Two hundred and fifty-three histories, mostly of epileptic patients, were set aside, leaving 296 families for the present study.
The intelligence quotient for all but six of the 296 patients was taken by the original workers and the average I. Q. = 38.
A very low fertility was expected for the propositi because they were all institutionalized for some part of their lives. Only 37 (12.5 per cent) were known to have had any /children. They had an average I. Q. of 48 while their 80 children had an average I. Q. of 71. If we average the 80 children over

the 296 propositi, we have an average of 0.27 children per institutionalized mentally deficient subject.
In the present study the four grandparents of the propositus and all the descendants of them are included. The average size of the 54 families so far completed was 158 persons. This is about four times the number of persons necessary for exact replacement of the genes of those involved in a family structure stemming from four grandparents and extending over four generations. This does not seem to be a particularly high rate of increase for families from grandparents born between 18001850 and residing in the frontier state of Minnesota.
For the 54 completed families the average size of the sibship containing the propositus was seven persons. In order for a sibship of seven to replace itself it must produce a total of 14 children. Actually the production was only nine children, instead of the 14 necessary for replacement. This is 0.65 of the number necessary for replacement and is quite a surprise.
It is most interesting that the kindred as a whole had a higher reproductive rate than the sibs of the propositi and that the sibs had a higher rate than the propositi themselves. If this finding is substantiated by the rest of the study, it means that the more distant the relatives from the propositus the higher the reproductive rate. It would seem that this shows that the normal genes reproduce themselves at a higher rate than the genes for our group of mental deficiencies as a whole.
We conclude that the genes for severe mental deficiencies behave in the same way as do the genes for severe physical defects. They tend to be gradually eliminated from the population and presumably are replaced by new mutations from normal genes.

LITERATURE CITED

BÖÖK, J. A., J. W. SCHUT and S. C. REED, 1953. A REED, S. C., and J. D. PALM, 1951. Social fitness

clinical and genetical study of microcephaly. versus reproductive fitness.

Am. J. of Ment. Def. 57:637-660.

Sci. 113:294-296.

