Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Public policy and adolescent sexual behavior in
the United States

Madelon Lubin Finkel & David J. Finkel

To cite this article: Madelon Lubin Finkel & David J. Finkel (1983) Public policy and
adolescent sexual behavior in the United States, Social Biology, 30:2, 140-150, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1983.9988528

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1983.9988528

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 14

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:39

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Public Policy and Adolescent Sexual Behavior
in the United States

ne ay ag
a ‘ me ed

Tsk BEE GER,

fe
; S
a

 

Sot SE Band |

Madelon Lubin Finkel and David J. Finkel

Department of Public Health, Cornell University Medical College, New York, New York;
and Research Consultant, 292 Sarles Lane, Pleasantville, New York

ABSTRACT: In the past decade, significant policy and legal changes have occurred that affect
sexually active minors, pregnant adolescents, and adolescents who have become parents. This
paper examines U.S. governmental policies and laws relating to (1) the development and dissemination of sex-related health services and information for male and female adolescents and
(2) the formal teaching of sex education in the public schools. It is maintained that despite the
progress that has been made during the 1970’s, a need for sex-related services and information
to the adolescent population still remains. Much remains to be done to formulate more relevant,
effective policies and programs for adolescent males and females.

The prevention of adolescent preg- cian would treat any medical condition,
nancy is farlessexpensive,economically pregnancy-related or otherwise.
and psychologically, than the alterna- In the last decade, much attention
tives (birth or abortion). Unfortunately, has been given to the adolescents’ rights
the majority of American teenagers to exercise control over certain aspects
who are at risk of becoming pregnant do of their lives. Significant legal changes
not receive family planning services have occurred that affect sexually active
from public or private agencies or from minors, pregnant adolescents, and adoprivate physicians (Dryfoos and _ lescents who have become parents. SexHeisler, 1981). While most teenagers ual intercourse is occurring at earlier
would prefer to avoid an unplanned ages for more teenagers than was the
pregnancy, present policy limits, re- case a decade or two ago. Also, venereal
stricts, and, in some cases, denies ado- disease and other sex-related problems
lescents access to birth control informa- are occurring frequently in an increastion which they need; that is, ingly younger population, and a greater
institutional barriers often serve to limit number of teenagers are becoming
the dissemination of birth controlinfor- pregnant. Predominantly as a result of
mation and services to teenagers (Finkel changes in social mores among the teenand Finkel, 1981). Inthe past, forexam- age population and partly as a result of
ple, teenage girls had difficulty obtain- changes in adult attitudes toward teening effective methods of birth control age sexual behavior, substantial changes
unless they first became pregnant (Sklar in laws and policies relating to the proviand Berkov, 1974), and family planning sion of sex-related services! and inforclinics rarely considered including the
teenage male in their programs. Fur- IGex-related services refer to the treatment f
thermore, adolescents of both sexes had venereal disease, pregnancy testing. and fiting/into have parental consent before a physi-  sertion of birth contro! devices.

140

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 30, No. 2

mation to the adolescent population
have taken place.

This paper presents an overview of
the changes in public policy during the
1960’s and 1970’s. Examination of U.S.
governmental policies and laws relating
to (1) the development and dissemination of sex-related health services and
information for male and female adolescents and (2) the formal teaching of sex
education in the public schools will show
that from the early 1960’s to the late
1970's, such policies and laws have become more favorable to the adolescent.
This trend has made it easier not only for
adolescents of both sexes to consent to
and receive sex-related health care, but
also for physicians to dispense such care
without fear of legal recriminations.

The government’s role in the provision of sex-related services and information to the adolescent also has become
increasingly important and constructive
during the 1970’s as compared to the
1960’s. Nonetheless, the government is
content to design programs which assist
the pregnant teenager during and following her pregnancy rather than formulating policies and programs to aid
both the adolescent male and female in
the prevention of unintended pregnancies. While policies have begun to address the need to provide teenagers with
straightforward information to help
them understand human sexuality and
to behave responsibly, there is little evidence of strong commitment by state
legislatures, boards of education, or the
federal government in developing a
school curricula on sex/family life education.

JUDICIAL ACTIONS

Until very recently, laws, policies,
and programs denied teenagers access

Adolescent Sexual Behavior

 

141

to services to prevent or to terminate unwanted conceptions. Unemancipated
adolescents of both sexes had to have
parental consent before a physician
would treat any medical condition,
pregnancy-related or otherwise, except
in cases of emergency. The mature minor doctrine,? however, has superseded
parental consent requirements.

An epidemic of venereal disease
among sexually active minors in the
1960’s led many states either to remove
the age limit or to lower the age at which
minors would consent by themselves to
medical treatment without parental consent. During the late 1960’s and early
1970’s numerous court rulings expanded
a minor’s right to obtain sex-related
medical care. However, it was not until
the mid-1970’s that a coherent body of
law emerged. Two legal principles now
exist: (1) Mature minors have a constitutional right to obtain reproductive
health services on their own consent,
and (2) all minors have a constitutional
right to have an alternative to parental
involvement in implementing their decision about such health care (Paul and
Pilpel, 1979). The Supreme Court recognized that minors have a basic constitutional right of privacy which extends
to their use of contraceptives as well as
to their obtaining an abortion.

Access to abortion and contraception
is related to the legal evolution of the
right of privacy. In the case of Griswold
v. Connecticut,? the Supreme Court
struck down a Connecticut statute making the use of contraceptives a criminal
offense as violating the constitutional

2A minor who is deemed sufficiently intelligent
and mature and who is able to understand the nature and consequences of his/her health problem
and the treatment prescribed is considered to be a
“mature minor.”

3Griswold v. Connecticut 381 U.S. 479 (1965).
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

142

right of privacy. The Court decision,
however, was directed toward the right
of privacy among married adults and
was concerned with the restriction on
use of contraceptives only. It was in
Eisenstadt v. Baird* that the Court resolved the issue of access to contraceptives by unmarried adults. It was held
that unmarried adults have the same
right to privacy as married adults and
the states cannot prohibit the sale of
contraceptives to single adults.

The Supreme Court took the same
rights enumerated in Griswold and
Baird and extended them to women
seeking abortion. In Roe v. Wade,” the
Court held that the right of privacy includes the right of a woman to terminate
her pregnancy free from state intrusion.
During the first trimester of a pregnancy, the decision to terminate the
pregnancy and to carry out an abortion
is a decision that must be made by the
woman and her physician. After the first
trimester, the state may adopt regulations for abortion that are reasonable
for the purpose of promoting the health
and well-being of the mother. In Doe v.
Bolton,® the Court ruled that a Georgia
law restricting abortions to state residents who have obtained approval from
a committee of doctors was unduly burdensome. Therefore, the Roe and Doe
decisions firmly established the right of
an adult woman to decide whether to
have an abortion or not without state interference.

The law regarding the right of a minor to consent to an abortion without
parental knowledge or consent was still
unresolved. Since teenage pregnancies
and childbirth involve greater medical

‘Eisenstadt v. Baird 405 U.S. 438 (1972).
5Roe v. Wade 410 U.S. 113 (1973).
*Doe v. Bolton 410 U.S. 179 (1973).

Finkel and Finkel

 

Social Biology

risks than do those of adult women, it
was felt that Roe v. Wade should be applied to unwed teenagers.

It was in the Supreme Court decisions of Planned Parenthood of Central
Missouri v. Danforth’ and Bellotti v.
Baird® that the principles that minors
have rights to access to sex-related
health care was firmly established. In
Danforth, both spousal consent and parental consent were held unconstitutional. The Bellotti decision invalidated
statutes requiring that parents be notified in al] cases before an abortion was
performed on their minor daughter.
That is, the Court ruled that a minor capable of giving informed consent may
obtain a court order without parental
consultation if state law requires parental consultation and consent. The Court
also ruled that the law permits a minor
incapable of giving an informed consent
to obtain an abortion without parental
consultation when it is shown that an
abortion is in her best interest. That is,
immature minors seeking abortion must
be provided with a “swift and confidential alternative” to parental involvement
if a court decides that the abortion is in
her best interest.

The Bellotti decision initially was
given a strict interpretation and the case
was appealed again to the Supreme
Court. In Baird v. Bellotti? (commonly
referred to as Bellotti II) the Court
made clear that the state laws which require parental consent for abortions for
minors are unconstitutional. The Bellotti II ruling is important because it
holds that mature minors have a right to
make their own decisions about abor
7Planned Parenthood of Central Missouri v.
Danforth 428 U.S. 52 (1976).

"Bellotti v. Baird 428 U.S. 132 (1976).

Baird v. Bellotti 99 S.Ct. 3035 (1979).

 

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 30, No. 2

tion and that no one can override that
decision. It also recognized that it was
the interests of the minor that must govern the decision whether an abortion
may be authorized for an immature minor. The sole criterion for an abortion is
whether it is in the immature minor’s
best interest or not.

In March, 1981, however, the Supreme Court ruled in H.L. v. Matheson! that a state may require a physician
to inform a teenage girl’s parents before
an abortion is performed if the daughter
is living at home and dependent on her
parents. The decision was limited in that
it applies only to a narrowly defined
group of minors, those minors living at
home and dependent upon their parents
for support, not to emancipated or mature minors. The Court did not address
the issue of whether a state may require
parental notification for minors who are
sufficiently mature to give informed
consent to abortion or who are emancipated. This issue is certain to reach the
Supreme Court within the next few
years.

In addition to clarifying the rights of
minors to seek an abortion without parental consent, the court has also ruled
on the constitutionality of minors to obtain nonprescription contraceptives
with their own consent. It would seem to
follow from past Supreme Court rulings
that mature minors have a constitutional
right to decide whether or not to use
contraceptives. In general, the Court
rulings have affirmed this right. For example, the State of Utah had required
parental consent for the distribution of
contraceptives to minors with particular
reference to the AFDC program (Aid to
Families with Dependent Children) and

10H, L. v. Matheson 101 S.Ct. 1164 (1981).

Adolescent Sexual Behavior

 

 

143

the Medicaid program. Both programs
are subsidized by federal funds and regulated under the Social Security Act of
1935. In Jones v. T. H.,!! however, the
Supreme Court held that Utah’s written
requirement of written consent by a minor’s parent before family planning
services could be dispensed was inconsistent with federal law. Indeed, it is
stipulated in federal law that states participating in AFDC or Medicaid programs must provide family planning assistance to program recipients which
includes sexually active minors who desire such assistance. Agencies providing
contraceptive services that receive funds
under Title XX (Social Services) and under Title XX of the Social Security Act
are required to provide such services to
eligible persons, minors included, regardless of age or marital status.

New York State, however, did have a
law which prohibited the sale of nonprescription contraceptives to anyone
younger than 16 years. In Carey v. Population Services International,!? the
Court ruled in 1977 that the state statute
which forbade nonphysicians (primarily
pharmacists) from distributing nonhazardous (nonprescription) contraceptives to anyone under the age of 16 was
unconstitutional. New York State argued that the free availability of nonprescription contraceptives would lead to
increased sexual activity among the
younger teenagers. However, the Court
ruled that New York State failed to
demonstrate that prohibiting the distribution of contraceptives to minors deterred them from having sexual intercourse. Moreover, New York State
conceded that there was no evidence

"Jones v. T.H. 96S. Ct. (1976).
!2Carey v. Population Services International 97
S.Ct. 2010 (1977).
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

144

that teenage sexual activity increases in
proportion to the availability of contraceptives.

Since the Court had ruled that a state
may not impose a blanket prohibition or
blanket requirement of parental consent
on the choice of a minor to terminate
her pregnancy, the Court held in the
Population Services case that blanket
prohibition against the distribution of
nonprescription contraceptives to minors was not permissable. The Population Services case gives minors the right
of access to nonprescription contraceptives regardless of their age or maturity.
The Court also held that any blanket
prohibition of advertising and/or display
of contraceptives was unconstitutional.

The Population Services case did not
deal directly with either the issues of parental consent or prescription contraceptives. However, following the Danforth and Bellotti II cases, it would seem
that at least a majority of justices on the
Court would agree that mature minors
have a constitutional right to seek and to
receive both prescription and nonprescription contraceptives without parental consent or notification. Indeed, the
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit in 1980 ruled in Doe v. Irwin that
parents do not have a constitutional
right to receive prior notice that their
minor daughter is getting birth control
information and contraceptives from a
State-operated family planning clinic.
This unanimous ruling reversed a U.S.
district court opinion that parents have a
constitutionally protected right to be notified that their minor daughter is seeking contraceptives services.

Even though parental consent is now
not required; in reality compliance with
the law can be easily circumvented. For

Doe v. Irwin No. 78-1056 (6th Cir.).

Finkel and Finkel

Social Biology

example, in Tennessee, adolescents can
obtain birth control services without parental consent, yet the state legislature
has not always appropriated enough
money to establish meaningful family
planning services. Moreover, the private provider who receives no public
funds is under no obligation to provide
sex-related services with or without parental consent.

In summary, very recent Supreme
Court decisions have made it clear that
minors do have constitutional rights regarding the provision of sex-related
health services. The Court recognized
that minors have a basic constitutional
right of privacy which extends to their
use of contraceptives as well as to their
obtaining an abortion. These decisions
are particularly important in that they
provide a framework for all laws and
regulations as well as invalidate numerous conflicting state laws (federal law
automatically supersedes any contrary
state law). Indeed, a number of states
have instituted policies which permit minors to make their own decisions about
sex-related health care and have provided safeguards or assistance to minors
which do not include any parental consent requirements. Court rulings have
generally upheld principles preserving
the interests of the individual adolescent. However, the New Right’s “‘profamily” philosophy has had an impact
on fertility-related state laws. More laws
relating to minors’ access to medical
care in general, and contraceptive and
abortion services in particular, were enacted in 1981 than in any year since 1972
(Donovan, 1982). Many of these laws
are clearly designed to discourage, restrict, or limit by parental notification or
consent requirements minors’ access to
abortion. Whether this trend will continue remains to be seen.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 30, No. 2

LEGISLATIVE AND EXECUTIVE
ACTIONS

The role of the legislative and executive branches also has become increasingly important and, to a certain extent,
more constructive in the 1970's than was
the case in the 1960’s. In the 1970's the
government began to assume a more active role in providing and financing sexrelated programs, particularly for the
adolescent population and for those
with low income. Of note is the passage
of Title X of the Public Health Services
Act of 1970 and Title V of the Social Security Act (passed in 1935 but amended
by the Child Health Act of 1967) which
led to a substantial increase in monies allocated for support of family planning
service projects. The Family Planning
Service and Population Research Act of
1970 authorized funds for the support of
new and better methods of birth planning, for manpower training, and for the
preparation of informational materials.
Since 1977, the emphasis has been to
create and expand accessibility to voluntary family planning services for adolescents.

The Adolescent Health Services and
Pregnancy Prevention and Care Act of
1978 (PL 95-626), was the first legislative initiative to deal explicitly with issues of adolescent sexual behavior. Passage of this legislation clearly indicates
the awareness of policy makers regarding the problems of adolescent pregnancy and teenage sexuality. In 1979,
the Office of Adolescent Pregnancy
Programs was established in the Public
Health Service to administer the Adolescent Pregnancy Prevention and Care
Program mandated by the Act of 1978
and to coordinate all programs in the
Department of Health and Human
Services concerned with various aspects

Adolescent Sexual Behavior

145

of adolescent pregnancy. Unfortunately, there are over 85 federal programs designed to assist adolescent parents and their children, and these
programs are uncoordinated and in
some cases duplicative.

The government has, then, assumed
a more active role in providing and
financing sex-related programs, particularly for the adolescent population and
for those with low incomes, Empirical
research has shown that government
policies are achieving their objectives.
Moore and Caldwell (1977) conducted a
study designed to test whether government programs had consequences other
than those officially intended. They
found that the availability of contraception and abortion did not seem to encourage teenagers to initiate sexual activity and that the availability of
subsidized family planning services did
apparently lower pregnancy rates, especially among black teenagers. The availability of abortion seemed to reduce
substantially the incidence of out-ofwedlock childbearing, especially among
the white adolescents. Moreover, the
level of Aid to Families with Dependent
Children (AFDC) benefits did not appear to serve as economic incentives to
childbearing outside of marriage for either the black or white teenagers. Previously, the availability of AFDC had
been thought to encourage teenagers to
become pregnant in order to form their
own households to escape parental control and/or conflict (Sklar and Berkov,
1974; Connolly, 1975).

SEX EDUCATION POLICIES
Although public policy has shifted
over the years from a “do nothing” attitude to one of substantial financial and
administrative involvement in the provision of sex-related services to the adolesDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

146 Finkel and Finkel

cent population, policy regarding the
dissemination of information (sex education) has not been as substantial. A
coherent policy regarding the teaching
of sex education to the teenage population has yet to be adopted. In fact, the
existence and the scope of sex education
have been challenged and questioned
on national, state, and local levels
(Kirby et. al., 1979). Sex education, as
used in this report, refers to the teaching
of the biological process of reproduction, contraception, human sexual development; sociocultural and psychosocial aspects of sexual behavior; and
interpersonal relationships.

The rationale behind formal sex education instruction is that increased
knowledge about human reproduction,
sexual behavior, and contraception
could dispel misconceptions, myths, and
half-truths while encouraging more informed, responsible decision-making
about individual sexual activity and behavior and helping to create satisfying
interpersonal relationships. Sex education programs are not intended to override or to replace the moral teachings of
the parents; rather, such instruction is
designed to provide the adolescent with
an understanding and knowledge of human sexual relationships.

The decision to offer a course or unit
on sex education has traditionally been
under the auspices of the state governments, which have the authority to regulate educational matters. Yet the approach of state governments to local
decisions varies from detailed policy
statements of guidelines to proclamations stressing the exclusive responsibility for local decisions in educational
matters. State government Boards of
Education may issue “guidelines” or
“policy statements” which are meant to
serve aS recommendations to local

 

Social Biology

boards and school authorities. In reality, such an arrangement often results in
haphazard, uneven policy. While state
guidelines tend to support sex education, such support is generally weak,
and local autonomy in policy-making
content and subject matter is strongly
encouraged.

While no state prohibits the teaching
of sex education (Louisiana was the last
state to repeal its law in 1979), Maryland, Kentucky, New Jersey, and the
District of Columbia are the only ones to
require courses in family life and sex education (Kenney and Alexander, 1980).
Six states!* encourage local school districts to offer family life and sex education courses but do not require it, and 22
states allow the decision to be made at
the local level. However, of those 31
states with policy statements, the content of what is taught and the number of
hours spent in class on the subject varies
considerably among local school districts. The remaining 20 states do not require family life and sex education
courses and have no policy statements.

The actual number of public school
systems offering sex education is difficult to assess. In 1973 the National Institute of Education (NIE) took a random sample of U.S. public high schools
and found that 36 per cent offered a
“separate course” in sex education (National Institute of Education, 1978).
However, this estimate has been judged
to be any unit on sex education within
any semester’s course. Moreover, the
percentage of schools is less than the
percentage of school districts offering
sex education, and since sex education is
usually not a required course, the number of students receiving sex education
instruction is a fraction of the total num
'4Delaware, Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Pennsylvania, and Utah.
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 30, No. 2

ber of students in each school. Moreover, Huether and Gustavus (1977) reported that the majority of sex
education “‘courses” are actually units
within another course and typically last
less than ten hours.

Not surprisingly, there is wide variation in the topics covered in sex education courses. A 1976 nationwide study of
high school teachers who taught any
population-related subject found that
only one-third of those polled taught
something about human reproduction
or about sex and abortion. Roughly 30
per cent reported teaching something
about birth control. The study showed
that three-quaters thought that human
reproduction and sex-related topics
were “controversial” subjects and that 9
out of 10 thought that birth control and
abortion were “‘very controversial” subjects (Gustavus and Huether, unpublished data).

In summary, while restrictive laws
have been modified or repealed by Supreme Court decisions and governmental policy has shifted from benign neglect to one of substantial financial and
administrative involvement, the teaching of sex education in the public
schools, in general, remains haphazard
and inadequate with state guidelines
and local autonomy creating variations
in the scope and content of the subject
matter taught. The hesitancy of school
officials to design and to implement effective curricula has yet to be overcome,
and parental involvement is minimal at
best.

EXTENT OF THE PROBLEM

In comparison to rates in other developed and developing countries, the proportion of births per thousand women
younger than twenty years is higher in

Adolescent Sexual Behavior

 

147

the United States than in any of the
Western European countries, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, and Canada.
The U.S. rate is about three times
higher than that of the Soviet Union and
is higher than the rate in developing
countries such as Tunisia. Only Thailand, Czechoslovakia, East Germany,
Yugoslavia, Romania, Hungary and
Bulgaria have higher rates (Demographic Year Book: 1978, 1979). These
high rates are believed to be the result of
adolescents engaging in sexual intercourse at earlier ages than was the case
in the early 1970’s.

Empirical studies on American adolescent sexual behavior, contraceptive
utilization, and knowledge of human reproduction show that teenagers are engaging in sexual intercourse at young
ages (< 15 years) and that the proportion of teenagers who have had intercourse has increased from the beginning
of the 1970’s to the mid to late part of the
decade (Zelnik and Kantner, 1977,
1978; Finkel and Finkel, 1975). Use of
contraceptives is still haphazard although more teenagers are using effective contraceptives at the end of the
1970’s than was the case during the beginning of the decade (Zelnik and
Kantner, 1977; Finkel and Finkel, 1978;
Shah et al., 1975). Zelnik and Kantner
(1979) for example, calculated that the
difference between “‘no use of contraception” and “‘always use of contraception” (by those who do not want to conceive) is roughly one _ million
pregnancies. Although crude, this estimate gives an indication of how many
premarital pregnancies could be prevented if policy-makers, educators, and
program directors could increase the
number of teenagers who use contraception regularly and effectively to prevent unintended conception. The Alan

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

148

Guttmacher Institute estimates that in
1976 had all sexually active teenagers
(who didn’t want a baby) used some
method of contraception consistently,
approximately 467,00 premarital pregnancies would have occurred. As it is, in
1976, 780,000 premarital pregnancies
occurred (Alan Guttmacher Institute,
1981).

From a medical, social, psychological
and economic perspective, teenage
pregnancies have negative consequences for both mother and infant
(Furstenberg, 1981). Yet, the most farreaching consequence is the interruption or curtailment of education. Most
teenage mothers never obtain a high
school diploma, and largely because of
educational deficits, teenage parents
have a harder time getting a job. Those
who do find employment are more likely
to have low-status, low-paying jobs.
Their income tends to be much lower
than their counterparts who have completed school and obtained occupational
skills.

More often than not, however, teen
parents are unemployed and are dependent on public welfare for support. In
1975, $4.7 billion in Aid to Families with
Dependent Children (AFDC) payments (or 49 per cent of the total $9.4
billion went to families in which the
woman had given birth before age 20.
Currently about one-fourth of the teen
mothers are receiving AFDC.

The cost of teenage childbearing to
society is felt in other ways. Teenagers
are more dependent upon the government to pay for deliveries than are
mothers over age 20. Medicaid, for example, is the source of funding for 19 per
cent of deliveries to teenagers, but 5 per
cent of births to females 20 years and
older.

Although most teenage girls want to

 

Finkel and Finkel

 

Social Biology

complete their high school education,
they are hampered by economic and
childcare problems. But social and educational programs cost money; just to
establish networks of existing programs
for teenage mothers would cost over
$150 million a year (Alan Guttmacher
Institute, 1981). Although there are a
growing number of special programs for
pregnant teenagers and teen mothers,
such programs are small in scope and
serve less than 20 per cent of the pregnant teenage population. Ironically, job
trainng programs could do much to reduce adolescent pregnancy and to break
the cycle of poverty.

THE ADOLESCENT MALE: THE
FORGOTTEN PARTNER

A review of the literature demonStrates that it is the adolescent female
who has been the subject of empirical
review. The paucity of data on the adolescent male’s sexual behavior was evident after several computerized literature searches were conducted
(Bibliographic Retrieved Services Inc.,
Cornell University Medical College
Computerized Literature Search;
Ogden, 1978; Beckstein, 1978; Oresky
and Ewing, 1978). Those studies which
have included the adolescent male in
their purview have shed comparatively
little light light on either sexual behavior
or on contraceptive use. This omission
becomes more serious when one realizes that a larger percentage of contraceptive use among teenagers is accounted for by methods used by the
male partner.

CHALLENGES FOR THE FUTURE

Reduction in federal assistance to
pregnant teenagers and adolescent

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

Vol. 30, No. 2

mothers went into effect October 1,
1981. Some contend that the budget cuts
will increase the dependence of adolescents on governmental entitlement programs such as welfare, food stamps and
medicaid. A study by the New York
City Task Force on Adolescent Pregnancy reports that these cuts will ultimately cost the government more than
they will save (New York City Task
Force on Adolescent Pregnancy, 1981).

Although laws and policies have become more responsive to the needs of
adolescents, the empirical evidence (in
the form of small-scale and nationwide
surveys) Clearly illustrates that much remains to be done to formulate more effective policies and programs. The prevalence of sexual activity among the
teenage population will not disappear
nor will teenagers’ haphazard use of ef
Adolescent Sexual Behavior

149

fective contraceptives reduce the rate of
premarital pregnancies among this cohort. While the hesitancy to teach sex
education in the schools is slowly being
modified, a much more effective policy
directive is needed in order to design efficacious curricula. To deny the need for
sex education instruction is, in the long
run, self-defeating.

Teenage pregnancy is not a problem
that can be solved through one or even
several publicly or privately funded programs. Only by experimenting with a
broad range of programs can we begin
to deal effectively with the issues. While
great progress has been made during the
past decade, particularly within the judicial system, much needs to be done to
provide sex-related services and information to the adolescent population.

REFERENCES

ALAN GUTTMACHER INSTITUTE. 1981. Teenage
pregnancy: The problem that hasn’t gone
away. Alan Guttmacher Institute, New
York.

BECKSTEIN, D. 1978. An annotated bibliography of selected materials concerning men
and family planning. DOCHMC, Clayton,
Mo.

BIBLIOGRAPHIC RETRIEVED SERVICES, INC, Cornell University Medical College computerized literature search. Ithaca, New York.

Conno Ly, L. 1975. Little mothers. Hum. Behav. 4:17-23.

DEMOGRAPHIC YEARBOOK, 1978. 1979. TABLE
11. United Nations, New York.

Donovan, P. 1982. Fertility-related state laws
enacted in 1981. Fam. Plan. Persp. 14:6367.

Dryroos, J. D., and T. HEISLErR. 1981. Contraceptive services for adolescents: An overview, pp. 394408. In F. Furstenberg et al.
(eds), Teenage sexuality, pregnancy and
childbearing. Univ. of Pennsylvania Press,
Philadelphia.

FINKEL, M. L., and D. J. Finxev. 1975 Sexual

and contraceptive knowledge, attitudes,

and behavior of male adolescents. Fam.

Plan. Persp. 7:256-60.

. 1978. Male adolescent contraceptive

utilization. Adolescence XIII:443-451.

. 1981. Public policy and adolescent sexual behavior in the U.S. Paper presented at
the population association of America Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C.

FURSTENBERG, F.F., R. LINCOLN, and J.
MENKEN. 1981. Teenage sexuality, pregnancy, and childbearing. Univ. of Pennsy!vania Press, Philadelphia.

Gustavus, S. O., and C. A. HUETHER. Unpublished data from the 1976 National Teacher
Survey as reported by the Alan Guttmacher
Institute.

KENNEY, A. M., and S. J. ALEXANDER. 1980.
Sex/family life education in the schools: An
analysis of state policies. Fam Plan/Pop Report 9:44-52.

Kirsy, E., et. al. 1979. An analysis of U.S. sex
education programs and evaluation methods, Final report #200-78-0804. DHEW,
PHS, CDC, Atlanta, Ga.

 

 
 

 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:39 08 December 2015

 

150

Moore, K. A.,andS. B. CALDWELL. 1977. The
effect of government policies on out-ofwedlock sex and pregnancy. Fam. Plan.
Persp. 9:164—-169.

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF EpucaTION. 1978. Unpublished data. Washington, D.C.

OapeNn, C. 1978. Adolescent fertility: Selected,
annotated resources for the international
community. International Clearinghouse
on Adolescent Fertility, Washington, D.C.

Oresxy, D., and E. Ewina, 1978. Review and
annotated bibliography of literature on
male involvement in family planning. National Institute for Community Development, Inc., Arlington, Va.

Paut, W. W., and H. F. Pivpe.. 1979. Teenagers and Pregnancy: The law in 1979. Fam.
Plan. Persp. 11:297-302.

SHAH, F., M. ZELNIcK, and J. F. KANTNER.
1975. Unprotected intercourse among un
Finkel and Finkel

Social Biology

wed teenagers. Fam. Plan. Persp. 1:39-44.

SKiaR, J., and B. Berxov. 1974. Teenage family formation in postwar America. Fam.
Plan. Persp. 6:80~90.

THE New York City TASK ForcE ON ADOLESCENT PREGNANCY. 1981. Impact of the
Reagan administration’s proposed budget
cuts on adolescent pregnancy programs.

ZELNICK, M., and J. F. KANTNER. 1977. Sexual
and contraceptive experience of young unmarried women in the United States, 1976
and 1971. Fam. Plan. Persp. 9:55-71.

. 1978. First pregnancies to women aged

13-19: 1976 and 1971. Fam. Plan. Persp.

10:11-20.

. 1979. Contraceptive patterns and pre
marital pregnancy among women aged 15 to

19 in 1976, pp. 289-305. In S. Gordon et al.

(eds). The sexual adolescent. Duxbury

Press, N. Scituate, Mass.

 

 
