Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Perceived contribution of children to marriage and
its effects on family planning behavior

Patricia L. Tobin

To cite this article: Patricia L. Tobin (1975) Perceived contribution of children to
marriage and its effects on family planning behavior, Social Biology, 22:1, 75-85, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1975.9988148

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1975.9988148

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 2

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

 
NY
=
i)
N

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December

Perceived Contribution of Children to
Marriage and Its Effects on Family

Planning Behavior

Patricia L. Tobin

Department of Sociology and Anthropology
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, North Carolina

In recent years there has been a great
deal of interest in the social factors involved in differential fertility control. Modern contraceptive techniques, by permitting
the voluntary disassociation of sexual
pleasure from reproduction, have made
childbearing more subject to rational control. While a number of fertility studies
have explored various factors related to
the decision to control fertility (including
the sociocultural environment of couples
and the structure of family relations), little
attention has been paid to the couple’s
assessment of the costs and rewards of
having children. One exception is a study
dealing with the feelings of personal restriction created by children and fertility
planning, but the findings from this study
proved inconclusive (Riemer and Whelpton, 1955). As parenthood becomes more
of a deliberate decision and less a matter
of exposure to biology, it seems imperative to determine whether family planning
behavior is influenced by a couple’s attitudes toward the role of children in marriage. In an attempt to understand birth
control actions as meaningful responses to
familial and marital orientations, the pres
75

 

ent research was designed to examine the
impact of the perceived consequences of
having children on a couple’s contraceptive
practices and the tendency to plan births.

THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

To the extent that procreation is a rational process, the decision to practice birth
control is, in part, dependent upon the
couple’s perception of the probability or
improbability that such behavior will lead
to desirable consequences. Mishler and
Westoff (1955, p. 132) suggest that “a
particular pattern of fertility performance
and control depends on the extent to which
having a child (or a certain number of
children) is compatible with other life
values, and interests... .” Although most
married couples take it for granted that
they will have children (even among voluntarily childless couples [Veevers, 1973]
only a minority make childlessness a stipulation of marriage), the possibility of postponing or regulating childbearing permits
evaluation of children in light of their implications for marital and personal gratification (Hoffman and Hoffman, 1973, pp.
46-47 and 52-53). Thus, parenthood be
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

76 Tobin

comes significant in terms of how it reflects
back on the marriage relationship and the
style of life established to that point. The
first and each additional birth affects not
only the parents but the family as a whole
by creating new role relationships and diffusing responsibility (Udry, 1974, pp. 382—
383). These consequences can be perceived
by a couple as either desirable or undesirable depending on whether children are
viewed as essential, inconsequential, or
detrimental to marital development and fulfillment.

Numerous studies have examined the effect of children on marital adjustment and
marital happiness. However, the research
bearing on the relationship between family
size and marital adjustment is somewhat
contradictory. Studies have reported both
an inverse relationship between family size
and happiness in marriage (Reed, 1947;
Burgess and Cottrell, 1939, pp. 258-259)
as well as a direct relationship (Popenoe,
1940, p. 268). Furthermore, Blood and
Wolfe (1960, pp. 262-263) found that
mothers with three children expressed more
satisfaction with their marriages than
women with fewer or more children. Interpretations of the effects of family size
become even more complicated when attitudes toward having children are considered. In this connection, Burgess and
Cottrell (1939, pp. 260-261) found that
the desire for children was positively associated with adjustment in marriage, regardless of whether the couple actually had
children.

Some of the contradictions in the research on family size and marital adjustment can be explained by examining the
family life cycle. The family life cycle
concept is significant in this regard because
the presence and ages of children are intrinsic aspects of its formulation; successive stages in the cycle are demarcated by
both the development (social aging) of

Social Biology

individual family members and changes in
family composition.

Two recent studies (Rollins and Feldman, 1970; Burr, 1970) have revealed that
marital adjustment varies with changes in
the family life cycle. In fact, a rather consistent pattern emerges. Couples express
their greatest satisfaction with marriage
between the prechild and early childbearing stages. Marital satisfaction is at a low
point when children are school-age (oldest
child is between six and thirteen years of
age). After the children have left home,
satisfaction increases almost to the level
characteristic of beginning marriages. Apparently, the presence of dependent children in the home creates pressures and
concerns, especially for the wife, which detract from positive companionship experiences with the spouse.

These findings seem to indicate that the
life cycle stage of the family—as reflected
by the presence and self-sufficiency of children in the home—is more crucial to variations in marital adjustment than actual
family size. However, Rollins and Cannon
(1974) caution that the explanatory power
of the family life cycle may have been
overstated. In a subsequent analysis, although the U-shaped trend between family
life cycle and marital satisfaction was confirmed, only a small amount of the total
variation in marital satisfaction was accounted for by stages of the family life
cycle.

While objective evidence suggests that
children do not uniformly contribute to
marital happiness, parenthood may subjectively provide the primary or only source
of marital satisfaction for some individuals.
If given a choice, many women prefer the
motherhood role as an alternative to extrafamilial roles or to idleness. Under these
circumstances, childbearing and childrearing become extremely attractive activities
(Rainwater, 1965, pp. 184-195). Moreover,
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 22, No. 1 Perceived Contribution of Children to Marriage

children represent a source of companionship and emotional security for some parents, even though satisfactory relationships
with children tend to vary over the family
life cycle (Burr, 1970, p. 36). In studying
happily and unhappily married couples,
Luckey and Bain (1970) found that children provided the greatest and only source
of common satisfaction among unhappily
married couples. In contrast, among the
happily married couples, the mutually rewarding aspects of their marriages were not
confined to children; companionship as
well as other aspects of the marital relationship provided areas of common satisfaction.
Not all couples view the prospects of having children as highly rewarding or essential
to the fulfillment of their marriage. Parenthood generally creates a change of focus
for a couple in the sense that childbearing
allows less time, freedom, and privacy for
the husband and wife to interact with one
another and to concentrate on their mutual
development (PohIman, 1969, pp. 90-96).
Moreover, pregnancy and child care are
viewed by some as detrimental to the
mother’s physica] health, attractiveness,
and emotional stability (Pohlman, 1969,
pp. 116-123). Emotional strain and loss of
physical attractiveness are especially costly
in marriages which place a premium on
sociability, vitality, and glamour. Indeed,
extensive family responsibilities are likely
to be seen as undesirable if confinement due
to childrearing interferes with the pursuit
of extra-familial activities which carry public recognition and prestige. Finally, children may represent a financial burden if
their presence (or number) is seen as depriving other members of the family of
certain material gains and advantages.
The importance of recognizing the different meanings placed on the role of children in marriage lies in understanding how
these anticipated consequences of having
children might affect the family planning

27

behavior of couples. It is the contention of
Mishler and Westoff (1955, p. 136) that
“the greater the extent to which children
are seen as potentially restricting the range
of desired experiences and activities, the
stronger the desire to prevent or postpone
a first pregnancy. (Of course, an opposite
effect may be expected if children are
visualized as expanding the range of experience.)” Following this line of argument,
the purpose of this study is to test the following hypothesis: The more important
children are to marital development, the
later the use of reliable contraceptive to
limit childbearing and the greater the tendency to have unplanned births. Thus, differences in the salience of parenthood are
expected to produce variations in the pattern of contraceptive use exhibited by
couples throughout their marital years.
Furthermore, couples who reveal a lack of
concern for either the timing or limitation
of pregnancies—as represented by a large
proportion of unplanned births—are likely
to be the same couples who welcome pregnancies and emphasize the rewarding consequences of having children over the costs.
- There is a possibility that the association between the evaluation of children
and family planning behavior varies under
varying family conditions. Fawcett (1970,
p. 110) has suggested that “children serve
different functions in different kinds of societies, as well as between strata within a
society ... .” A study of socioeconomic
status and maternal roles (Swinehart,
1963) indicated that women of different
socioeconomic statuses differ in their satisfaction with the maternal role and their
primary objectives in childrearing. Moreover, women who have been married longer
are likely to be more favorably disposed
toward the consequences of having children
than newly married women due to the current emphasis on female self-actualization,
independent of the homemaker role. HowDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

78 Tobin

ever, there is also some indication (Leslie,
1967, pp. 528-529) that initial pregnancies,
even if they are unplanned, are wanted by
most couples and create only minor upsets
in the marital relationship, while later pregnancies are most likely to result in negative
consequences, especially if the births are
unwanted. As a result of these findings, the
effects of length of marriage, social status
of the wife, and family size will be examined in conjunction with the basic hypothesis.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Data to test the hypotheses were obtained from interviews with 433 women
between the ages of 15 and 45 who were
married and residing with their husbands
at the time of the study.’ Restricting the
sample to married women permitted references to their perceptions of their husbands’ evaluation of children as well as the
husbands’ behavior with regard to conception control. The husband’s influence on
the wife’s behavior was felt to be important, but time and money did not permit a
survey of male attitudes. Married women
without children were included in the study
in order not to bias the findings against
those couples who had deliberately prevented pregnancy for a period of time after
marriage.

MEASUREMENT OF VARIABLES

A scale assessing the value of children
consisted of a series of items that were
developed to measure a couple’s perceptions
of the effects of large and small families
on the marital relationship and the family

1 The data for the present study were collected
as a part of a larger research project, the purpose
of which was to evaluate the effectiveness of a
family planning clinic located in a county in Kentucky. Households in the urban area of the county
were sampled randomly from the city directory,
while households in the rest of the county were
included by means of an area sampling technique.

 

Social Biology

situation in general. Respondents were
asked to indicate first whether they agreed
or disagreed with each statement, and next,
how they believed their husbands would
respond to each item. The following are
sample statements comprising the Value of
Children Scale:

“When children prevent a husband and wife
from really enjoying each other... , they
are better off without children.”

“A large family brings a husband and wife
closer together.”

“Having children will strengthen the family ... and give the parents companionship
as the ‘children grow older.”

. 2 couple should have only a few children in order to maintain a good standard
of living.”

There were six possible response patterns
corresponding to each item in the scale.
A wife could perceive her husband as sharing her views (both agreeing or both disagreeing with the statement); she could
perceive their views as dissimilar (wife
agrees/husband disagrees or wife disagrees/
husband agrees); or she would express her
own views, but be unaware of her husband’s
feelings.

A tally of the response frequencies for
each item indicated that very few respondents chose any but the two consonant
responses. Therefore, the dissonant husbandwife responses were grouped together into
a single category. A score of “7” was assigned to those responses reflecting positive contributions of children to marriage,
a score of “1” was assigned to responses
reflecting negative assessments of children,
and a score of “4” to any mixed responses.
The respondent’s scale score consisted of
the summated weighted responses of seven
items (a high total score represented a
positive evaluation of the consequences of
having several children).

An item analysis was performed on the
seven items to measure the extent to which
the statements differentiated the group of
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol, 22, No. I Perceived Contribution of Children to Marriage

subjects with the highest total scores from
the group with the lowest total scores (see
Edwards, 1957, pp. 152—156 for elaboration
of this method). Since some items differentiated the high and low groups more than
others, the seven items were tested for internal consistency. The alpha obtained was
equal to 0.43 indicating only a moderate
degree of internal consistency (for an explanation of alpha as a measure of reliability, see Guilford, 1954, and Bohrnstedt,
1969). Selective elimination of the less discriminating items only served to lower the
alpha coefficient; therefore, the original
seven items were retained as the final scale.

An index on contraceptive patterns was
constructed to reflect the reported pattern
of birth control practiced by a couple
throughout their marital history. In developing the index, only contraceptive methods
that were reported as “regularly used” were
considered. The methods reported by the
respondents were then divided into three
categories: A, reliable methods (intrauterine device, birth control pills, diaphragm); B, semireliable methods (foam,
jelly, cream, condom); and C, unreliable
methods (withdrawal, rhythm, suppositories, douche). The timing of contraceptive use was ranked into the following categories: (1) use never initiated (low), (2)
irregular use, (3) use only after the fourth
pregnancy, (4) use before the fourth pregnancy but after the first, and (5) use before the first pregnancy (high). Within the
last three categories, contraceptive classifications were arranged by reliability of the
methods. Respondents were classified according to when they started using the
most reliable method of all those they had
used. This index seemed to differentiate
reasonably well between different patterns
of contrdceptive use.

The correlation of contraceptive practice
and expected family size produced a gamma

79

of —0.604. Since expected family size is
one of the best indicators of fertility or
completed family size, it would appear that
the constructed index of effective contraceptive behavior was an adequate measure
of the intention or ability to limit family
size.

The degree of birth planning exercised
by a couple was measured in terms of the
proportion of total pregnancies that were
unplanned. In this survey a distinction was
made among (1) planned births, those
wanted at the time of conception, (2) accidental births, those that occurred despite
the fact the couple had been using something to try to prevent conception, and (3)
unplanned births, those that occurred when
a couple was neither trying to achieve nor
trying to avoid conception. An unplanned
pregnancy, then, was not an accidental
conception, but one for which there was no
prior planning or consideration one way or
the other concerning the possibility of having a child. If accidental pregnancies had
constituted all unplanned pregnancies, then
the measure would have been confounded
by those who had never used contraception.

A socioeconomic status index, based on
the husband’s principal occupation, his
level of education, and total family income
was used as a measure of social status. The
computation of the socioeconomic status
index was based on the measure developed
by the U.S. Bureau of the Census (1963).
The ranks associated with education, occupation, and income all ranged from a low
of 1 to a high of 7. A respondent’s socioeconomic status score was the sum of the
ranks assigned to the three separate indicators.

RESULTS

The association between variables was
measured by Goodman and Kruscal’s
gamma (Hays 1963, pp. 655-656) and
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

80 Tobin

partial gamma (Davis, 1967) .? Table 1 presents the zero order gammas between all
variables. It was hypothesized that positive evaluation of children would be negatively related to effective contraceptive

Social Biology

women who have been married longer and
women with larger families are somewhat
more likely to emphasize the positive consequences of having children.? On the other
hand, children are viewed as somewhat less

TABLE 1

ZERO OrpER ASSOCIATIONS* BETWEEN ALL VARIABLES

Variables X(2)
X(1) Value of children ......... —0.21
(—0.24)

X(2) Socioeconomic status ...... eee
X(3) Years married ..... woneee ad

X(4) Number of children ....... _—

X(5) Contraceptive pattern ...... sme

X(6) Proportion of unplanned ki «
PreQNANCleS ...ecacescceees

X(3) X(4) X(5) X(6)
0.19 0.23 —0.38 0.18
(0.13) (0.22) (—0.23) (0.08)
0.06 —0.13 0.33 —0,38
(—0.02) (—0.19) (0.28) (—0.31)
wee 0.61 —0.35 0.33
(0.53) (—0.19) (0.25)

wee was —0.56 0.47
(—0.33) (0.31)

wee . . —0.53
(—0.35)

eee eta eee eeoo

* Values without parentheses are gamma coefficients. Values within parentheses are Pearson correlation coefficients.

practices and positively related to proportion of unplanned pregnancies. The direction of both hypotheses was supported,
although the magnitude of the associations
differed considerably. A woman’s assessment of the advantages and disadvantages
of children in marriage was much more
closely related to the use of contraception
(gamma, —0.38), than to the tendency
to have unplanned pregnancies (gamma,
0.18). These findings were somewhat surprising since contraceptive pattern and unplanned pregnancies were thought to be
similar measures of the same phenomenon,
ie., family planning.

A further look at Table 1 reveals that

2 Gamma has been used as the primary statistic
for analysis in this paper because most of the
variables reflect ordinal relations among observations. However, for comparative purposes, Pearson correlation coefficients and partial correlations
were calculated as well. Except for lower magnitudes for some of the correlation coefficients, the
more sensitive statistics produced the same interpretation of the data as did the gamma coefficients,

rewarding by women from higher social
statuses. The three control variables also
show moderate to strong associations with
contraceptive pattern and proportion of
unplanned pregnancies, suggesting the need
to look at length of marriage, family size,
and socioeconomic status as conditions affecting, directly or indirectly, family planning behavior.

In order to determine the extent to which
the association between evaluation of children and family planning behavior is influenced by socioeconomic status, size of the
family, and length of marriage, the basic
relationship was examined again with the
latter three variables controlled. The find
3 The positive association that was found between family size and the evaluation of children
contradicts the observation made by Leslie (1967,
pp. 528-529) cited earlier. Tabular analysis revealed that about three-fourths of all couples with
three children or less felt that children created
some burdens or hardships for a marriage. However, Couples with more than three children were
almost equally divided in their assessments of the
costs and rewards of having children.

 

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 22, No. 1 Perceived Contribution of Children to Marriage

ings are presented in Table 2. Socioeconomic status and number of children (and
length of marriage, if correlation coefficients
are calculated) appear to explain most of
the association between evaluation of children and proportion of unplanned pregnancies. In each instance, when the test

81

or size of family is taken into consideration,
the tendency of some couples to place more
emphasis on the positive contributions of
children to marriage is manifest in less reliable patterns of contraceptive use (Table 2).

From the results in Table 2, it might

TABLE 2

PartTIAL CorFFICIENTS* RELATING VALUE OF CHILDREN TO CONTRACEPTIVE
PATTERN AND PROPORTION OF UNPLANNED PREGNANCIES
WITH SELECTED VARIABLES CONTROLLED

VARIABLES

Contraceptive pattern

eeoreseevetanateaeeavneaeensnae

Proportion of unplanned pregnancies

ee eewmaeenane

ContTror, VARIABLES

Zero Order Socioeconomic Years Number of
Coefficients Status Married Children
—0.38 —0.26 —0.36 —0.27

(—0.23) (—0.18) (—0.22) (—0.17)
0.18 —0.01 0.15 0.09
(0.08) (0.00) (0.04) (0,00)

* Values without parentheses are gamma coefficients. Values within parentheses are Pearson correlation coefficients.

variables are controlled, the gamma values
are reduced to zero. Hence, women of lower
social status are more likely to view children as essential to marriage and also to
have a relatively large proportion of unplanned pregnancies; but their evaluations
of children are not directly related to their
tendency to plan births. Similarly, the more
children a woman has, the greater the
probability that some of them will be unplanned. The direction of causation in the
link between the number of children and
evaluation of children is difficult to determine because attitudes toward children
may vary in response to change in family
size or, conversely, they may be a determining factor of family size. Only longitudinal analysis could adequately unravel
the causal sequence.

In contrast to the above findings, the
association between evaluation of children
and contraceptive practice is not completely eliminated when controls are made
for social status, length of marriage, or
number of children. Even when social status

appear that attitudes toward children occur as part of a sequence in which antecedent factors (socioeconomic status and
family size) stimulate varying assessments
of parenthood, and these attitudes, in turn,
lead to divergent family planning practices.
However, the perceived consequences of
having children clearly do not mediate the
effects of any of the antecedent factors on
contraceptive patterns or the proportion
of unplanned pregnancies (See Table 3).
Therefore, it cannot be established that a
causal sequence exists between the three
sets of variables. Because the relationship
between the assessment of children and
contraceptive pattern persists even when
socioeconomic status and family size are
controlled, it must be concluded that the
evaluation of children independently influences contraceptive practice, at least to
certain degree.

There is some evidence to suggest that
evaluation of children differs among social
status groups not only because of the salient
values of these groups but also because of
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

 

 

 

$2 Tobin Social Biology
TABLE 3
ParTIAL CoEFFICIENTS* RELATING SELECTED VARIABLES TO CONTRACEPTIVE PATTERN AND
PROPORTION OF UNPLANNED PREGNANCIES WITH VALUE OF CHILDREN CONTROLLED
VARIABLES Number of Children Socioeconomic Status Years Married
Contraceptive pattern ......... Smit eek a oe ~0.53/—0.56 0.32/0.33 —0.33/—0.35
(~—0.29/—0.33) (0.23/0.28) (—0.17/—0.19)
Proportion of unplanned pregnancies ..... 0.45/0.47 —0.38/—0.38 0.31/0.33
(0.31/0.31) (—0.30/—0.31) (0.24/0.25)

 

* Values without parentheses are gamma coefficients. Values within parentheses are Pearson correlation coefficients, Values

to the right of the slash are zero-order coefficients.

the alternatives to children that are available to satisfy these values. Hoffman and
Hoffman (1973, pp. 61-67) point out that
employment may be a true alternative to
children for highly educated women whose
qualifications enable them to obtain interesting jobs, but for less educated women
employment is likely to supplement motherhood and act as an alternative only to
housework.

Understanding the differences among
social status groups is facilitated by stratifying the basic relationship between evaluation of children and family planning
behavior for different levels of socioeconomic status. In Table 4 it is evident that
the strength of the association between the
evaluation of children and contraceptive

TABLE 4

VALUE OF CHILDREN AND FamMity PLANNING
BEHAVIOR BY SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS WITH
Years Marrrep ann Famiry Size

 

CONTROLLED
Value of Children Value of Children
Socioeconomic and Contraceptive and Unplanned
Status Pattern Pregnancies
Controlled for Years Married
Low ............ —0.34 0.04
Medium ........ —0.30 0.08
High ........... —0.36 0.19

Controlled fer Number of Children

Low .........2.- —0.33 —0.07
Medium een cceee —0.16 0.08
High evusmtevneseos —0.35 0. 16

 

pattern varies depending upon the level of
socioeconomic status of a couple. In fact,
regardless of whether length of marriage or
number of children is controlled, a rather
consistent pattern emerges. The assessment
of the advantages and disadvantages of
having children has the greatest impact on
the contraceptive practices of high status
wornen.*

If contraceptive practices are seen as deliberate activities, then the behavior of
high status women can be predicted by
their attitudes toward children, while the
behavior of lower status wives appears to
be predicted more by the number of children they already have. On the other hand,
the association between the evaluation of
children and unplanned pregnancies is virtually wiped out at all levels of socioeconomic status when length of marriage or
number of children is controlled. The differential effect of the value of children on
the two dependent variables is readily apparent.

The findings of some of the studies discussed earlier in the paper suggested that
during different periods of family development, parents have different attitudes to
4 Partial correlations reveal even greater distinctions between groups. The strength of the relationship for high socioeconomic respondents is
very close to the zero order value (—0.26 and
—0.21 when controlled for years married and family size, respectively). The lower and middle socioeconomic groups show values of —0.15 and
—0.14 when years married are controlled and
—0.12 in both cases when family size is controlled.
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 22, No. 1 Perceived Contribution of Children to Marriage

ward the consequences of having children.
In order to examine the conditions under
which the evaluation of children becomes
most salient in determining conception control, women were grouped according to the
number of children they had and the number of years they had been married (Table
5). Patterns of contraceptive practice re
TABLE 5

VALUE OF CHILDREN AND FAMILY PLANNING
BEHAVIOR BY FAMILY S1zzE AND LENGTH OF
MarRIAGE WITH SOCIOECONOMIC
Status CoNTROLLED

Value of Value of
Children and Children and
Contraceptive Unplanned

Pattern Pregnancies
Controlled Controlled
Variables for SES for SES
Number of children
O-]) wie nd OEE ORE RS —0.28 —0.14
2 owncpmnunssenseseniee 0.03 0.17
B cb cetiwssaedssemedore —0.70 0.19
4 or MOre ......eceeee —0.20 —0.03
Years married
Less than 5 years ..... —0.38 —0.14
Between 5 and 10
YOarsS seewees senwewn —=UL09 0.13
Between 10 and 16
VOATS csceseacucsasas —0.22 0.12
16 years plus .......... —0.27 0.10

flect the assessment of the consequences of
having children most clearly for women
who have had three children. Apparently,
the presence of at least three children represents a crucial turning point in differentiating the contraceptive practices of couples
who see children as central to marital development from the pattern of those who
see children as problematic or simply complementary to the marital relationship.
Moreover, the contraceptive patterns of
women who have been married more than
ten years reflect their attitudes toward children less than the patterns of women married for a shorter length of time. This
finding is difficult to interpret without
longitudinal data for two reasons, Either

83

the relationship between evaluation of children and contraceptive patterns is weak
for couples who have been married longer
than ten years because adequate contraception was not available during the initial
stages of childbearing for those who wanted
to plan their families, or attitudes toward
the consequences of having children generally change during the life cycle so as
not to reflect the attitudes which originally
give impetus to birth control practices.
Although the effects of stratifying women
in terms of the size of their family and
the number of years married do not produce clear-cut results, it is important to
note that views on parenthood have a varying impact upon contraceptive practices
depending upon the stage of family and
marital development.

The relationship between the evaluation
of children and birth planning does not
appear to vary in any consistent way when
stratified by the number of children in
the family or the number of years a couple
has been married (Table 5).5 These findings and the results found earlier when
family size was controlled suggest that the
meanings which couples attach to parenthood have no direct or independent impact
on the tendency to plan births.

SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

The purpose of this study has been to
determine the extent to which the percelved consequences of having children influence family planning behavior. Two separate measures of family planning were
utilized, contraceptive pattern and propor
5 An unexpected finding in Table 5 was the
negative association between favorable assessment
of children and tendency to plan births for women
who had been married for less than five years
and for those who were childless or had only one
child. In this case, the association is probably
confounded by women who view children as essential to marriage, but because they are recently
married, have no children and, therefore, no unplanned pregnancies.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

84. Tobin

tion of unplanned pregnancies. With regard to the first measure of family planning,
it was found that the more a woman viewed
children as an essential part of the marital
experience, the less likely she was to use
reliable contraception early in marriage.
This was most true of high status women
and least true of middle and lower status
women.

Factors other than the perceived contribution of children to the marital relationship appear to influence the contraceptive
practices of middle and lower status women.
Hoffman and Hoffman (1973) have suggested that such things as employment
of the wife and lack of sufficient help with
household tasks and child care are likely
to operate as “barriers” to childbearing
among these women. Furthermore, children may not be evaluated by these women
as either a strength or weakness of marriage, but as a source of personal reward
and affiliation for the individual parent
(Udry, 1974, pp. 381-382; Hoffman and
Hoffman, 1973, pp. 52~53).

The influence of the evaluation of children on contraceptive practices also was
contingent upon the number of children a
couple had had and the number of years
they had been married. Early years of marriage or the point at which a moderate size
family had been reached (3 children)
seemed to be important conditions through
which the consequences of parenthood became salient considerations for the practice
of contraception.

In terms of the second measure of family
planning, it was found that the differences
in incidence of unplanned pregnancies
among women was more a result of socioeconomic circumstances and the tendency
to have a large family (for whatever reason) than attitudes toward children. The
association between evaluation of children
and unplanned pregnancies appeared to be

Social Biology

spurious due to the mutual association of
these variables with family size and socioeconomic status.

It is apparent that in future studies of
family planning behavior the measure of
effective birth control should be selected
with care. If the findings of this research
can be accepted, then contraceptive practices and the tendency to have unplanned
pregnancies are products of somewhat different causal sequences. Consequently, the
use of different dependent measures might
lead to slightly different interpretations of
the impetus behind family planning. For
example, ranking low on early reliable contraceptive use is not necessarily the same as
ranking high on the tendency to have unplanned pregnancies. The former behavior
may refiect the desires and designs of the
couple, while the latter condition may be
a response to extrinsic aspects of the family
situation, such as limited access to power
and other resources in the society that
provide individuals with a sense of efficacy
and control over their lives and their environment.

Moreover, these two aspects of family
planning have different implications for
policy decisions. Changing the incidence of
unplanned pregnancies would entail attacking those structural conditions which
handicap couples in changing their life
circumstances. It would involve educating
them to the concept of family planning and
the techniques of birth control, increasing
their contact with various service agencies
and facilities, and generally broadening
their social and economic opportunities (see
Schorr, 1966). Changing contraceptive patterns, on the other hand, might involve encouraging alternative adult roles, especially
for women, and creating differential incentives for childbearing. Policies in the latter
instance would be more difficult to institute
because they would involve changing val
 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 22, No. 1 Perceived Contribution of Children to Marriage

ues, attitudes, and marital patterns of interaction. Such policies might also prove
to be undesirable if they limited individual

85

preference and choice by encouraging conformity to one family type.

REFERENCES

Brioop, RoBerT O., and DonaLtp M. Wotre. 1960.
Husbands and wives. The Free Press, New
York.

BoHRNSTEDT, GEORGE. 1969. A quick method for
determining the reliability and validity of multiple-item scales. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 34:542-548.

Burcess, Ernest W., and Leonarp S. Cotrrety.
1939. Predicting success or failure in marriage.
Prentice-Hall, New York.

Burr, WESLEY R. 1970. Satisfaction with various
aspects of marriage over the life cycle; a random middle class sample. J. Marr. Fam. 32:
29-37.

Davis, James A. 1967. A partial coefficient for
Goodman and Kruskal’s gamma. Amer. Statist.
Assoc. 62:189-193,

Epwarps, ALLEN L. 1957. Techniques of attitude
scale construction. Appleton-Century-Crofts,
New York.

Fawcett, James T. 1970, Psychology and population: Behavioral research issues in fertility
and family planning. The Population Council,
New York.

Guicrorp, J. P. 1954. Psychometric methods. Mc~
Graw-Hill, New York.

Hays, WILLIAM L. 1963. Statistics for psychologists. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York.
HorrMan, Lois W., and Martin L. Horrman,

1973. The value of children to parents, pp. 19~
76. In James T. Fawcett (ed.), Psychological
Perspectives on Population. Basic Books, New

York,

LESLIE, GERALD R. 1967. The family in social context. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

LucKEY, ELEANORE B., and Joyce K. Bain, 1970.
Children: A factor in marital satisfaction. J.
Marr. Fam. 32:43-44.

MIsHLER, Exttior G., and C. F. Wesrorr. 1955.
A proposal for research on social and psychological factors affecting fertility: Concepts and
hypotheses, pp. 121-50. In Milbank Memorial

Fund, Current Research in Human Fertility.
Milbank Memorial Fund, New York.

PoHitMAN, Epwarp. 1969. Psychology of birth
planning. Cambridge, Mass.: Schenkman Publishing Co., Cambridge, Mass.

PoPeNoE, PauL. 1940. Modern marriage. The
Macmillan Co., New York.

RAINWATER, Lee. 1965, Family design: Marital
sexuality, family size, and contraception. Aldine
Publishing Company, Chicago.

ReEeED, RoverT B. 1947. Social and psychological]
factors affecting fertility: The interrelationship
of marital adjustment, fertility control and
size of family. Milbank Mem. Fund Quart. 25:
383-425.

Riemer, RutH, and P. K. WHetprTon. 1955. Attitudes toward restriction of personal freedom
in relation to fertility planning and fertility.
Milbank Mem. Fund Quart. 33:63-111.

Rottins, Boyp C., and Kenneto L. Cannon.
1974. Marital satisfaction over the family life
cycle: A reevaluation. J. Marr. Fam. 36:271282.

Rotums, Boyp C., and Harotp Ferowcan. 1970.
Marital satisfaction over the family life cycle.
J. Marr. Fam. 32:20-27.

ScHorr, Atvin L. 1966. The family cycle and income development. Social Security Bulletin
(February): 14~26.

SWINEHART, JAMES W. 1963. Socio-economic level,
status aspiration, and maternal role. Amer. Sociol. Rev, 28:391-399.

Upry, J. Ricwarp, 1974, The social context of
marriage, 3rd ed. J. B. Lippincott, New York.
U.S. Bureau oF THE CENSUS. 1963. Methodology
and scores of socio-economic status. Working
Paper #15, U.S, Government Printing Office,

Washington, D.C.

VEEVERS, J. E. 1973. Voluntarily childless wives:

An exploratory study. Sociol. Soc. Res. 57:356—
6,
