Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

The health orientation scale: A measure of feelings
about sickle cell trait

Edna Q. Wooldridge & Robert F. Murray Jr

To cite this article: Edna Q. Wooldridge & Robert F. Murray Jr (1988) The health orientation
scale: A measure of feelings about sickle cell trait, Social Biology, 35:1-2, 123-136, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1988.9988694

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1988.9988694

 

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 9

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:42

 
The Health Orientation Scale:
A Measure of Feelings About Sickle Cell Trait

Edna Q. Wooldridge and Robert F. Murray, Jr.

Center for Sickle Cell Disease,
College of Medicine,

Howard University,
Washington, D.C.

WC

SABSTRACT: The Health Orientation Scale (HOS), a written self-report instrument, was
‘5s developed to objectively appraise the psychological implications of identification as a sickle cell
gene carrier (AS). The HOS uses the semantic differential technique and consists, of nine
osituations thought to be of importance in identification as a carrier. The instrument was
completed by respondents during the various phases of the screening and counseling process,
oo Discussion will focus on a comparison of carrier and noncarrier (AA) reactions to situations
which involve the diagnoses of sickle cell trait (AS), sickle cell disease (SS), cancer, and
st hypertension along with a comparison of feelings before and after counseling. Results suggest
“that noncarriers have more negative feelings about sickle cell than carriers. Further,
counseling, as it is currently practiced, does not contribute to any significant differences in
—feelings about sickle cell for either carriers or noncarriers. The attitudes and feelings of

 

Snoncarriers toward sickle cell trait and disease suggest that carrier identification is a stigma.

oo
O
—

1

Genetic counseling is a comprehen2sive and multidimensional process
¢ which involves transmitting information
‘gabout a genetically determined disor2 der. The genetic counselor provides the
‘ affected individual and family members
>with facts relative to the diagnosis, manifestations, management and recurrence
risks as well as information regarding
& the prognosis.

5 In addition to providing medical inA formation, the genetic counselor addresses the emotional and psychological
concerns of the counselee, particularly
the emotional impact of the discovery
that one has a particular genetic disorder or that one is the carrier of a gene associated with a particular disorder. In
order for counseling to be effective,
medical and genetic facts must be accurately communicated, received, and understood, and the counselee’s wellbeing, be it physical, social, or psychological, should be improved.

f

123

 

Antley (1979) points out that most
persons have not seriously considered
the possibility that they may carry ‘“‘abnormal” genes. Quite often, in genetic
counseling, the counselee enters the session feeling fine, but the nature of the information revealed in counseling may
cause him to believe that he is a different
person either physically and/or psychologically. It becomes important, therefore, to attend to both the content and
the affect of the client’s communication
about himself and his self image.

Further, the psychological impact of
the genetic diagnosis may interfere with
the cognitive processes necessary to understand and accept the genetic information. Targum (1981) speaks of “‘psychological readiness” as a necessary
state for comprehension and assimilation of the facts presented in genetic
counseling. Further, Hsia (1979) suggests that the emotional attitude of the
counselee will influence the way in

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

124 Wooldridge and Murray

which information is received. Such information may aggravate already existing feelings. Much has been written concerning the need to address the
psychological concerns of the counselee
as well as the factual content of counseling (Antley, 1979; Davis, 1979; Hsia,
1979; Kessler, 1979b, 1979c, 1979d; Targum, 1981). Focusing on medical facts
without giving ample attention to psychological issues conveys a sense that
the counselee’s feelings are inappropriate, unimportant, misunderstood, or
abnormal and does little to enhance psychological well-being.

Only a few studies have attempted to
evaluate the affective responses to identification as the carrier of a mutant gene,
such as sickle cell trait (AS). Clow and
Scriver (1977) evaluated the attitudes of
students toward screening for the TaySachs gene. For 15 per cent of the
group, the expectation of being tested
was “frightening.” Carriers, in contrast
to noncarriers, were first unsettled upon
learning their diagnosis, but subsequently adjusted to the new information. The study concluded that being
identified as a carrier resulted in a 10 per
cent chance of “diminished self-image,”
and noncarrier diagnosis presented a 10
per cent chance of improvement in feelings of “‘self.” A study by Childs et al.
(1976) found that noncarriers were relieved when they learned their test
result. In contrast, carriers of the TaySachs gene and their spouses who were
less than thirty years old were inclined to
be “upset” and reported “shocked surprise” at being singled out or being imperfect. Those who did not understand
what the carrier state meant expressed
anxiety, which was later relieved with
the appropriate information.

Other studies have addressed psychological issues in counseling carriers

Social Biology

of Tay-Sachs disease (Schneiderman,
1975), persons with Down syndrome
(M. A. Antley et al., 1973; Antley and
Hartlage, 1976) and cystic fibrosis (Patterson, 1973). There are very few studies that have been conducted concerning
genetic counseling for sickle cell gene
carriers. :

Stamatoyannopoulus (1974), studying sickle cell trait carriers in Greece,
found that screening resulted in the stigmatization of some people. Being identified as a carrier resulted in social embarrassment and restriction of marital
choices, especially for women. Parents
not only instructed their carrier children
to avoid marrying another carrier for
fear that the union would result in offspring with sickle cell disease, but surprisingly, 20 per cent of the normal parents (AA), asked their AA children to
avoid a carrier as a mate.

R.M. Antley (1973), in studying the
self-image of adults and/or their children with sickle cell trait (the carrier
state), found that this group exhibited
more anxiety, hostility, and depression
and lower self-concept than controls.
Antley found that counseling actually
intensified the ‘psychological barriers,”
and he was unable to determine whether
the persons responding to genetic counseling were either “more upset” than
people in general or whether the counseling itself was a contributing factor to
this upset.

The reactions to diagnosis as the carrier of a genetic defect are compounded
when one considers having children.
The carrier who mates with a carrier sets
up the potential for the birth of a child
with disease. Callahan (1973) and
Antley (1979) address the parental fear
of bearing a defective child. The child is
perceived as an extension of one’s self.
The birth of a child with some defect
—|
=
©
N
Some
oO
=
oO
oO
oO
A
Co
©
N
av.
om
=
—
CS
‘gt
wO
oN
—
ao
O
=
Cd
©
>
—
—
N
_
oO
>
os
c
=
va)
OQ
co
oO
ca
CS
©
—
c
S
©
A

Vol. 35, No. 1-2

may alter the parents’ self image. Further, Davis (1979) suggested that carrier
identification can be stigmatizing. She
found a carrier patient who believed
himself to be “unfit” for parenthood and
another who felt “unclean.”

With regard to carrier status, Sorenson (1974) points out that the significance of such an identification is more dependent upon the meaning of the status
for the individual. As a result of the perception, the potential exists for the development of disabilities which are not
the result of actual physical conditions,
but rather the result of the psychological
meaning of “carrier status” for the individual, e.g., change in self-perception.

These studies have identified a range
of feelings which may be brought on by
carrier identification or influenced by
genetic counseling. The effective counselor must be aware of the range of emotions that the client may experience.
These feelings may include hostility,
anxiety, depression, stigma, shock, denial, upset, blame, guilt, anger, shattered body image, lowered self-concept,
reduced desirability as a mate, questions
of parental capacity, and fear of disclosure (Antley, 1979; Kessler, 1979d;
Kessler et al., 1984).

Feelings and attitudes influence the
manner in which individuals understand
and use the information they receive. In
discussing decision-making in genetic
counseling, Antley (1979) says that feelings can be “alarming, motivating, or
paralyzing factors in subsequent decision-making” and therefore it is most
useful to help a counselee recognize the
impact of these feelings on his evaluation of life’s situation (p. 138). It is not
suggested that there will always be psychological reaction to genetic diagnosis
and counseling, but that persons should
be evaluated to determine the impact of

Health Orientation Scale

125

the genetic facts on their emotional
wellbeing. Kessler et al. (1984) concur,
pointing out that in order for counseling
to be effective and appropriate counseling strategies employed, an assessment
of the individuals psychological reactions is demanded.

The purpose of this study was to examine the psychological response to
identification as a carrier of the sickle
cell gene; to identify those life situations
most likely to elicit negative self-image
or stigmatization in persons with sickle
cell trait; and to evaluate the impact of
counseling on feelings about sickle cell
carrier status. An intermediate objective in achieving the ultimate goal of the
study was to develop the Health Orientation Scale (HOS) as a tool to identify
the psychological sequelae of carrier
identification and assess the impact of
genetic counseling.

No major study of the impact of identification as a sickle cell gene carrier on
self-image has been done nor has the impact of counseling on feelings about
sickle cell trait been evaluated (Antley,
1973). Following an extensive examination of the literature pertaining to the
psychological sequelae of genetic disorders, Gump (1973) suggested that learning that one is the carrier of the sickle
cell gene might lead to a revision of the
individual’s self-concept, a change in
self-image and accompanying feelings of
loss, depression, and stigma.

In an effort to assess the psychological reactions to identification as a carrier
of the sickle cell gene, Gump and
Brooks! initially developed the Health

Janice P. Gump, Ph.D. and Glenwood
Brooks, Jr., Ph.D., are psychologists who collaborated on the original design of the project instrument, the Health Orientation Scale. The content
has been extensively modified.

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

126 Wooldridge and Murray

Orientation Scale (HOS), a psychological test. The instrument was designed to
estimate, objectively, (1) feelings related to the possession of a defective
gene, the S gene (2) the degree of positive or negative self-image among sickle
cell carriers, and (3) to reveal some of
their attitudes about selected health
concerns. The developers also hoped
that the HOS would be useful for evaluating the psychological impact of genetic
counseling.

Stigma as “fall-out” from the diagnosis of genetic disease has been discussed
by several researchers (Kaback, 1974;
Murray, 1973b; Smith, 1972; Headings,
1975; Kelley, 1977). However, the major influence in the approach of Gump
and Brooks to the development of the
HOS has been the work of Goffman
(1974). In defining stigma, Goffman
(1974, p. 2) suggests:

While the stranger is present before us,
evidence can arise of his possessing an attribute that makes him different from
others in the category of persons available for him to be and of a less desirable
kind—in the extreme, a person to a
tainted, discounted one. Such an attribute is a Stigma especially when its discrediting effect is very extensive. . . .

Goffman (1974) divides the stigmatized into two groups based on the nature of the defect possessed: the “discredited,” whose defects are readily
evident, and the “discreditable,”’ whose
defects are neither known nor discernible. The sickle cell gene carrier, if stigmatized, would be placed in the “discreditable” group, since there are no
external manifestations of the carrier
state.

For the individual who carries the
sickle cell gene, the real issue is how he
deals with the information he receives
about himself—the diagnosis. In effect,

Social Biology

he has two identities—his real identity
and his social identity. When the individual possesses some characteristic that
makes him different from the rest of the
group and possibly less acceptable, Goffman (1974) points out that he may have
the added burden of uncertainty about
whether those around him will characterize him as unfavorable. Gump (1975)
suggested that deciding if and when to
reveal his real identity.may be a difficult
task for the carrier since he will be faced
with learning what others actually think
of him (social identify). The carrier has
no physical characteristics associated
with the S gene. Therefore, given the
nature of this concealed “defect,” any
psychological sequelae would have little
impact upon relationships with strangers, but might influence interactions
with intimates or others to whom the individual might disclose the information.
Accordingly, Goffman (1974) theorizes
that the stigmatized is a “perspective”
rather than an individual and is a product of the social situation in which an individual finds himself.

Gump (1975) suggested that reactions to being a sickle cell gene carrier
might differ depending upon the circumstances under which such a diagnosis is
learned and/or revealed to others.
There is reason to believe that “the
sense of stigmatization or of loss might
be greater in the context of marriage and
procreation than in the context of employment (Gump, 1975, p. 9).” Consequently, a number of situations which
were thought to produce differing reactions to carrier status were identified.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
DESCRIPTION OF INSTRUMENT (HOS)

The Health Orientation Scale (HOS)
uses the semantic differential technique

 
Vol. 35, No. 1-2 Health Orientation Scale 127
TABLE 1
SITUATIONS IN THE HEALTH ORIENTATION SCALE

Situation

AL eicasavesa pa I am in charge of 50 people who do different kinds of jobs. I learn that several of my
employees have sickle cell trait. I feel:

|; As the boss (in Item A above), I imagine that the sickle cell trait carrier might feel:

C ole c cece eee My doctor has just told me that I have sickle cell trait. I feel:

DP cee aos asane T have sickle cell trait. Over a game of cards, there is a conversation about sickle cell.
As I consider whether or not to mention that I have sickle cell trait, I feel:

| My spouse (husband or wife) and I have been diagnosed as sickle cell trait carriers.

ry

42 08 December 2015
mu @

° developed by Osgood et al. (1957). The
ssemantic differential is a_ well'S recognized, valid, and reliable method
for the general measurement of atti
2 tudes. Nunnally (1970, p. 420) points

> out:

+s out:

& Attitudes concern feelings about particu“ lar social objects, types of people, partics ular persons, social institutions, govern5 ment policies and others.

= As shown in Table 1, the HOS proy vides a measure of attitudes toward nine
a

3 situations, six of which address sickle
< cell trait and disease, two of which deal
= with more generally feared health con© cerns (cancer and hypertension), and
one which addresses self-concept. Each
situation is followed by (the same)
twelve bipolar semantic differential
scales which cover the basic dimensions
of semantic space identified by Osgood
et al. (1957). These are (1) the evaluative dimension (e.g., good-bad), (2) the
potency dimension (e.g., weak-strong)
and (3) the activity dimension (e.g.,
active-passive). The polarity and order
of the scales are randomized for each of
the nine situations (Table 2).

This means that we might have children with sickle cel] disease. As I consider the risk
we take should we have children, I feel:

Leu an we ae My doctor has just told me that I have sickle cell disease. I feel:
eee e ce eeeee My doctor has just told me that I have cancer. I feel:
ween eens My doctor has just told me that I have high blood pressure. I feel:

I pind eeontekes The following terms best describe me:

The bipolar scales provide a measure
of both the direction (positive or negative) and the intensity of feelings associated with each situation. Guilford
(1954) notes that the “attitude continuum’ is bipolar and the individual’s attitude influences his reactions to situations in a manner which can be judged as
favorable or unfavorable. Brammer and
Shostrum (1977) add that feelings are
generally seen as positive, negative, or
ambivalent. Feelings evaluated as positive are “ego-constructive”’; as negative,
“ego-destroying.”” Along the continuum, ambivalence, or the mid-point,
reflects feelings which are in conflict or
contrast. Scores obtained on the Health
Orientation Scale provide a measure of
feelings (bipolar score) and generalized
attitudes (situation score) along a continuum which can be broadly evaluated
as favorable, ambivalent, or unfavorable.

ADMINISTRATION

The Health Orientation Scale (HOS)
was administered to 199 persons (between 1979 and 1984) during three

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

128 Wooldridge and Murray

Social Biology

TABLE 2
HEALTH ORIENTATION SCALE

Below is a list of items which get at your feelings about sickle cell and some other health concerns.
There are no wrong or right answers, only information about how you feel. Please complete all the
items. Give your first response and do not go back over items already answered.

Indicate your feelings by placing an ‘‘X”’ in the middle of the space closest to the word which best de
scribes your feelings.

 

 

1. My doctor has just told me that I have sickle cell trait. I feel...
Bad 4a; _@ :. _@): _@: _©): Good
Afraid esl Se Unafraid
Not guilty _56) . 4. _@:; _@: _@: Guilty
Ashamed eC Unashamed
Strong pe Weak
Shocked ae ee CO Relieved
Sad mee mm es Happy
Unmarked ene ree Marked
Unable ee ee ee Able
Pleased mae eh Angry
Inactive ee ee Active
Sick ae Healthy

@ b Score for scale position.

phases of the sickle cell screening and
genetic counseling process—before
counseling, after counseling, and six
months after counseling. These analyses
reflect the responses of persons identified as carriers (AS) and noncarriers
(AA). Carriers (AS) had been screened
for sickle cell disease by electrophoresis
and found to have AS hemoglobin. Individuals characterized as noncarriers had
been screened and found to have AA
(normal) hemoglobin.

SUBJECTS

Of the one-hundred and thirty-six
(136) sickle cell carriers (AS) participating in the study, the HOS was completed by seventy-two subjects (53 per
cent) before counseling, twenty-five
subjects (18 per cent) after counseling,
and thirty-nine (29 per cent) in follow
up, six months after counseling. Of the
sixty-three noncarriers (AA), the instrument was completed by forty-four
subjects (70 per cent) before counseling,
five subjects (8 per cent) after counseling and fourteen (22 per cent), six
months after counseling.

The original intent of this design was
to assess the effects of both screening
and genetic counseling. The HOS was to
have been administered before screening, after screening (before counseling),
after counseling, and in follow-up, six
months after counseling. Because of the
small number of subjects in one category (noncarriers after counseling,
N = 5) and the difficulty in obtaining
subjects prior to screening, it was necessary to collapse categories for these
analyses. The redefined categories included a Before Counseling Group
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 35, No. 1-2 Health Orientation Scale 129
TABLE 3
ADMINISTRATION OF THE HEALTH ORIENTATION SCALE
Scale Administration Carriers (AS) Noncarriers (AA)

Before Counseling ............ cc ee eeeeee 72 (53%) 44 (70%)

After Counseling? ............00.ceeeeaee 25 (18%) 5 (8%)
Follow” « ana ae noone om pa own aes he oE4 39 (29%) 14 (22%)

Total oo. cece ccc ee ee eee eaee 136 (100%) 63 (100%)

2, > These categories collapsed into one group—After Counseling.

which consisted of either carriers
(N = 72) or noncarriers (N = 44) who
had been screened for sickle cell hemoglobin but had not received genetic
counseling and an After Counseling
Group consisting of carriers (N = 64)
and noncarriers (N = 19) who completed the HOS after counseling or in
follow-up (Table 3). Noncarriers who
received genetic counseling participated
in the sessions because a family member
(i.e., spouse or child) had been identified as a carrier of the sickle cell gene.

The majority of persons with sickle
cell trait (carriers) were female (67 per
cent), thirty years of age or younger (54
per cent), black (100 per cent) with
some college or a degree (51 per cent).
Seventy-six per cent of the carriers indicated that they knew someone else with
sickle cell trait, whereas only 50 per cent
knew someone who had sickle cell disease (SS). Among noncarriers, most (70
per cent) were thirty years of age or
younger and female (68 per cent), Sixty
per cent of the noncarriers indicated
that they knew someone with sickle cell
trait and 59 per cent knew someone with
sickle cell disease.

RELIABILITY

Reliability coefficients were computed for the Health Orientation Scale.
A Pearson product-moment correlation
coefficient of 0.82 was obtained for a
test-retest of the HOS, indicating that
the HOS is a stable measurement instru
ment. A coefficient alpha of 0.97 was
obtained for the entire HOS (all situations), and a subdivision of those situations addressing sickle cell only. An alpha of 0.93 was obtained for the remaining situations. These coefficients indicate that the reliability estimated for
internal consistency is very high.

VALIDITY

To assess the construct validity of the
HOS, a factor analysis was performed.
An inspection of the factor loadings revealed that variables clustered around
situations. The factorial composition of
the HOS suggests that subjects were responding to each situation as a whole
and that the factors defined for the HOS
are, in fact, the situations themselves
and not some other undefined factors.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Mean ratings and standard deviations
for all subjects on all situations were
computed. A 2 X 2 analysis of variance
(diagnosis xX counseling) revealed no
significant interaction effects on situation scores. A significant main effect of
diagnosis (AS vs AA) was revealed for
situations A, B, C, D, and E (Table 4).
Whether or not one had sickle cell trait
differentiated feelings relative to these
situations, with noncarriers reporting
significantly lower mean scores than carriers on these situations. These lower
mean scores indicate that noncarriers

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

130 Wooldridge and Murray

Social Biology

TABLE 4
SITUATION MEANS’, STANDARD DEVIATIONS AND ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE

Carriers (N = 136)

Before Counseling After Counseling
(N = 72) (N = 64)
SITUATION Mean $.D. Mean S.D!.
A ........ ALS 8.09 43 7.96
B sas ae ac 35 11.84 38 11.51
he cue nes we 39 10.21 39 TL
ore 41 11.16 41 11.83
EF ........ 32 10.16 31 11.29
E osuxwms ne 28 9.55 28 11.57
G........ 24 8.20 26 10.09
H........ 32 8.98 37 9.42
T sassas es 48 8.08 49 8.44

*Situation mean ranges from 12 to 60.

Noncarrigrs (N = 63)

Before Counseling After Counseling
(N = 44) (N = 19)

Mean S.D. Mean S.D. P>0.05°
37 6.51 38 7.04 D
28 8.63 32 10.84 D
30 10.05 35 11.09 D
33 11.71 36 12.19 D
27 10.29 31 11.11 D
28 11.12 3) 12.18 wae
24 10.89 25 10.09 Lae
34 10.32 40 7.79 Cc
48 7.39 49 8.15

’Results of a2 x 2 ANOVA with Diagnosis (AS v. AA) by Counseling (yes vs. no) as main effects and D x C as the

interaction.

©The interpretations below are provided for the situation mean scores:

Very Unfavorable Unfavorable

12 24

tended to select scale positions closer to
the negative pole of the bipolar continuum. (Higher mean scores are associated with positive or favorable ratings of
the situations and lower mean scores are
associated with negative or unfavorable
ratings.) A significant main effect of
counseling was obtained for Situation
H. Subjects after counseling had significantly higher mean scores. There were
no significant main effects of counseling
for the remaining situation scores, indicating that genetic counseling did not
differentially influence feelings about
these situations, especially those relative to sickle cell trait and sickle cell disease.

Where significant differences were
obtained, the noncarriers had consistently Jower mean scores than carriers
and hence more negative feelings about
these situations. These results indicate
that carriers and noncarriers had significantly different perspectives about
sickle cell trait. More specifically, feelings associated with reactions to the diagnosis of sickle cell trait, disclosure of

 

Ambivalent

Favorable
48 60

Very Favorable

carrier Status to friends, considering the
risk of the birth of a child with sickle cell
disease, and beliefs about how carriers
fee] about themselves (in a work setting)
were significantly more negative or unfavorable.

To facilitate the interpretation of situation mean scores for carriers and noncarriers, a series of t-tests were computed for each bipolar adjective pair for
each situation of the HOS. (This data is
available upon request.) Mean scores
for these bipolar scales ranged from 1 to
5. A mean score of 1 indicated an extreme left position (very negative/very
unfavorable rating) on the bipolar continuum. As example, on the scale “‘badgood” a mean of 1 indicated feeling very
“bad” with feeling falling in the very unfavorable range of the continuum. A
mean of 5 indicated an extreme right position (very positive/very favorable rating) on the continuum. On the bipolar
scale “‘bad-good,” a mean of 5 indicated
feeling very “good.” A mean of 3
reflected a central tendency to select the
midpoint of the continuum. Such feel 

Vol. 35, No. 1-2

ings were neither ‘“‘good” nor ‘“‘bad”’ and

suggested ambivalence or neutrality.

In general, the situation mean scores
provided little evidence that carriers believe that sickle cell trait is a stigmatizing
condition. The favorable ratings accorded those situations addressing
sickle cell trait and the very favorable
rating given self-concept demonstrate
how positively carriers felt about them
in selves. There was however, some suga gestion of stigma association with Situa8 tion D. As carriers considered their
€ feelings about telling friends that they
5 had trait, their selection of the scale
S “marked” fell in the unfavorable range
S along the continuum. A similar rest sponse was observed for “marked” and
rn — “guilty” in response to considering the
s risk associated with the birth of a child
5, § with sickle cell disease. It is of note that
‘< for these selected adjectives there were
= no significant differences between carti4 Fs and noncarriers, suggesting that feel2 ings associated with stigma were similar
% for both groups.

In contrast, the noncarrier reported
more negative feelings than carriers on
all of the situations where significant differences were noted. Of special concern
was the finding with respect to Situation
B. The significantly lower mean score

suggests that noncarriers believe that
carriers have unfavorable feelings about
themselves; more negative feelings than
carriers themselves believe others hold
for them. Reporting how the boss (a
noncarrier) believes carriers actually
feel, noncarriers said that carriers felt
very bad (¥ =1.80), very sad
(X = 1,98), sick (K = 2.28), marked
(x = 2.26), and unable (X = 2.77) (see
Figure 1). The implications of this finding in the work setting are important
suggesting that a noncarrier boss tends
to believe that his carrier employees fee]

of Mi

ewalaadee by [Universit

 

Health Orientation Scale 131

weak (x = 2.58) and unable. In contrast, the carrier’s feelings as measured
by the rating of these adjective pairs
were significantly more positive, suggesting that carriers might believe that
the boss senses that they have more favorable feelings about themselves.

It is important to Jook at those situations where no significant differences
were obtained, i.e., cases in which the
responses of carriers and noncarriers appear to be the same. Perceptions were
not significantly different for the two
groups as they considered how they
would feel upon learning that they had
sickle cell disease, cancer, and hypertension. Ratings of these situations were
generally unfavorable with cancer receiving the most negative evaluations.
This finding points out that regardless of
classification, as normal or carrier, feelings about disease states were very negative.

There were no significant differences
between carriers and noncarriers and
their choice of adjectives to describe
self. It appears that carrier status did not
differentiate or diminish feelings about
selfin general. Rather, both carriers and
noncarriers saw themselves in a very
positive light. Of note however, is that
there was no mention of sickle ceil trait
as a variable in the self-concept situation. When carriers were asked to react
to the discovery of sickle cell trait, they
felt “‘bad,’’ “‘sad,’’ ‘“‘angry,’’ and
“shocked.” When they considered parenthood with a carrier mate and disclosure of their diagnosis to friends, they
revealed some negative feelings and an
intimation of stigma. Surely, these reactions reflect feelings about self, suggesting that carrier identification does influence self-image and results in some
degree of stigmatization. However, it

should be noted that noncarriers gener
 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

 

132 Wooldridge and Murray Social Biology
BAD GOOD
SAD 4 CARRIERS HAPPY
SICK HEALTHY
INACTIVE NONCARRIERS ACTIVE
MARKED UNMARKED
AFRAID UNAFRAID
GUILTY NOT GUILTY
UNABLE ame
ASHAMED _UNASHAMED
WEAK STRONG
ANGRY _PLEASED
SHOCKED RELIEVED

1 Z 4 5

Fic. 1.—Comparison of noncarrier (N =-63) and carrier (N = 136) mean ratings on Situation B (“As
the boss in Situation A, I tmagine that the sickle cell trait carrier might feel . . .”). Underlined adjectives
show a significant difference between means (p = 0.05).

ally report more negative feelings than
carriers. Here lies the more serious
threat of stigmatization of carrier status.

In evaluating the impact of counseling on feelings about these situations,
there was only one significant difference
revealed, on Situation H (hyperten
 

sion). Subjects after counseling reported significantly higher scores than
persons before counseling. This is surprising since hypertension is not usually
discussed in counseling for sickle cell
trait or disease. It may be that subjects
altered their perception of hypertension
Vol. 35, No. 1-2

as a result of what they learned about
sickle cell trait and disease. How this occurs, we are unable to explain.

CONCLUSIONS AND
IMPLICATIONS

The HOS has identified certain hypothetical situations which may be associated with negative attitudes for both
groups. However, the results reported

were indicate that where there were
Rignificant differences in attitudes about
‘the situations, noncarriers or unaffected
‘Persons consistently reported signiFicantly more negative responses. DifGferences of this kind, in evaluating these
Situations, point to a potential problem
Gn relationships between carriers and
“honcarriers and a concern that carrier
adentification is a stigma.
= A significant frame of reference for
self can be reflected in the attitudes of
spines toward that individual and some
ttribute he possesses. If noncarriers
or example, as employers) believe that
‘earriers feel “marked,” “bad,” and
S*weak,” at what point will the carrier
‘Slaim such feelings as his own? Is this a
self-fulfilling prophecy? Will the non“carrier treat the carrier differently based
on such beliefs?
< Goffman (1974) notes that intimates,
An addition to assisting the “discreditCable person” in concealing the.stigmatizing attribute, may protect the individual by.leading him to believe that he is
more completely received as being normal than in truth is the case. Such individuals may be more aware of the “‘differentness”’ and any associated difficulties, than the affected person himself.
So the management of stigma is of concern to the stigmatized individual and
intimates.

Of the 63 noncarriers who partici
pated in the study, at least 19 were par
Health Orientation Scale

133

ents or spouses of carriers and received
genetic counseling on their behalf.
These persons were intimate associates
or significant others in the lives of carrier
persons, and they will undoubtedly play
major roles in the formation and/or
maintenance of personal identity. The
implications of their significantly more
negative attitudes are far-reaching and
underscore the need to further explore
the basis for noncarrier responses in
these situations.

Even though carriers are generally
more positive in attitude as regards
these situations, in some instances reponses fell around the mid-point of the
scale, indicating ambivalence. Goffman
(1974) observes that when an individual
finds out that he has some particular attribute that sets him apart from others,
he will in all probability experience
some sense of ambivalence. There will
be “oscillations” between feelings about
the group with which he must now
identify—in this case carriers and feelings about “‘normals.” Further, Goffman (1974) suggests that the stigmatized person receives a mixed message.
The stigmatized individual sees himself
as part of the wider group, but he and
those around him also believe him to be
someone “set apart’? or marked. These
feelings are self-contradictory and conflicting and Brammer and Shostrom
(1977) point out that it is important to
identify and help the client to accept and
address ambivalent feelings, as they can
be a source of personal conflict and tension for the individual.

These results suggest that the impact
of counseling on feelings about sickle
cell carrier status is insignificant. Kessler
(1979a) points out that counseling has
the potential for modifying feelings and
attitudes. If no significant difference in
feelings is produced with counseling,

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

134 Wooldridge and Murray

then how can counseling be considered
as effective? As measured by the HOS,
counseling does not appear to alter perceptions of these situations and would
therefore be considered ineffective.
Kessler (1979d) adds that genetic counseling must be in touch with the “psychological meanings” associated with
the concerns it addresses. In most
places, genetic counseling as presently
practiced places greater emphasis on the
communication of medical facts than on
identifying and addressing the psychological responses to the information revealed in counseling.

In general, the responses on the
Health Orientation Scale suggest the
following trends: (1) Carriers tend to
have a more positive perspective about
sickle cell trait and sickle cell disease
than do noncarriers. Noncarriers seem
to believe that carriers have a more unfavorable attitude about carrier status
than the carrier actually does. (2) On the
surface, diagnosis as a carrier of the
sickle cell gene does not appear to alter
feelings about self-image for carriers. In
comparing responses to the self-concept
situation with others of the HOS, selfconcept is evaluated more favorably.
When carrier identification is introduced as a variable, feelings appear to
be more negative. This finding tends to
support the hypothesis that the importance of carrier status and its associated
feelings may depend on the situation in
which it becomes a variable.

There is some suggestion of stigmatization reflected in feelings of being
“marked” when the carrier considers
disclosing the diagnosis of AS to friends,
and of fear and guilt upon considering
the risk associated with the birth of an
SS child. However, the greater potential
for stigmatization clearly appears to lie
with noncarriers who consistently reveal

Social Biology

more negative attitudes than carriers towards sickle cell trait and sickle cell disease and the capabilities of carriers.

These results strongly suggest that
there is a need to place greater emphasis
on the importance of addressing and
dealing with psychological concerns in
genetic counseling so that psychological
wellbeing can be improved. If counseling is to be most effective, it is expected
that there should be significant improvement in feelings after counseling, with a
positive shift toward a more favorable
attitude about sickle cell trait and sickle
cell disease. That is, persons who have
had the benefit of counseling should
have a different and more positive perspective than those who have not.

It is important to make sure that noncarriers and those who are closely associated with carriers, be they parents,
spouses, employers, etc., have an accurate picture of sickle cell disease and
sickle cell trait and that they are able to
distinguish between the two. Further,
since noncatriers are consistently more
negative in their attitudes and feelings
about sickle cell trait than carriers, the
need to involve them in genetic counseling is underscored. Because of the potential for noncarriers to stigmatize carriers, every effort should be made to
educate the general public about sickle
cell disease and its variants. Even
though the carrier presently seems to
have a generally positive outlook, others have the potential to make him or
her feel ‘“‘different,’’ and the carrier’s
feelings of ambivalence can become decidedly negative.

Further studies with larger and perhaps more generalizable samples are desirable. The Health Orientation Scale
should be administered to persons identified as carriers and noncarriers in other
sickle cell counseling programs in order
Vol. 35, No. 1-2

to establish the generalizability of these
findings. In addition, other counseling
models and populations need to be evaluated.

The original intent of this design was
to administer the HOS before screening
for sickle cell, before counseling, after
counseling, and six months after counseling. This format is necessary to fully
assess the potential for stigmatization

wand to measure any change in feelings or
attitudes for those who actually learn
otheir hemoglobin type. These data
would be reflected in a comparison of
Sresults before screening with results before counseling. It is recognized that the
Sresults reported here are for the indeSpendent variables of counseling and di“agnosis only.

The HOS, as with any paper-andSpencil self-report questionnaire has lim‘cited application. Are the feelings the
<subjects report on the HOS truly repre«sentative of “feelings”? Unfortunately,
Oo 7 .

zwe have no data which are an index of
‘govert behavior. However, Kiesler et al.
2(1969) suggest that attitudes foster overt
Sactions. They add: “If we hold the stimpilus constant, individual differences in
“behavior should correspond to individSual differences in attitude” (p. 17).

< The Health Orientation Scale does
Sreveal a difference in the self-assessed
Afeelings of carriers and noncarriers. The

] at 13

O

Health Orientation Scale

135

data reported here indicate that the
HOS has the potential to be a reliable
and valid tool for providing information
about the affective response of carriers
and noncarriers of the sickle cell gene
and for evaluating the effectiveness of
counseling. The HOS can be valuable in
identifying persons with strong negative
feelings or attitudes and these results reinforce the need to focus on the psychological aspects of counseling for such an
individual. Further, the HOS may be a
screening tool to identify stigmatization.
Even if only 5—10 per cent of such persons are identified, the HOS will have
proved its usefulness. Antley (1979)
notes “Not all counselees have psychological reactions which they need help
handling, but all need to be evaluated to
find out what meaning they are attaching to the facts and how upsetting that
meaning is to them” (p. 154).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors acknowledge the contribution of Drs. Janice P. Gump and Glenwood
Brooks, Jr., to the initial concept and design
of the Health Orientation Scale. Appreciation is also extended to Dr. Saundra Murray
for her helpful suggestions, constructive criticism and guidance with this project.

This work was supported by the National
Heart Lung and Blood Institute, National
Institutes of Health Grant Number HL
15160.

REFERENCES

ANTLEY, M.A., R.M. ANTLEY and L. C.
Har TvaceE. 1973, Effects of genetic counse}ing On parental self-concepts. J. Psychol.
83:335~338.

ANTLEY, R. M. 1973. Responses to genetic
counseling of positive families after sickle
cell screening. Amer. J. Hum. Genet.
25: 12a.

. 1979. The genetic counselor as facilita
tor of the counselee’s decision process, p.

137-168. In A. Capron, M. Lappé, R. F.

Murray, Jr. T. Powledge, S. Twiss, and D.

 

Bergsma (eds.), Genetic counseling: Facts,
values and norms. A. R. Liss, New York.

ANTLEY, R.M. and L.C. Harrtace. 1976.
Psychological responses to genetic counseling for Down’s Syndrome. Clin. Genet.
9:251~265.

CALLAHAN, D. 1973. The meaning and significant of genetic disease: Philosophical perspectives, p. 837. in B. Hilton, D. Callahan,
M. Harris, P. Condliffe, and B. Berkeley
(eds.), Ethical issues in human genetics.
Plenum Press, New York.
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

136 Wooldridge and Murray

CuiLps, B., L. Gorpis, M. M. Kapack, and
H. H. Kazazian. 1976. Tay Sachs screening: Social and psychological impact. Amer.
J. Hum. Genet. 28:550-558.

CLow, C., and C. R. Scriver. 1977. The adolescent copes with genetic screening: A
study of Tay Sachs Screening among high
school students. Prog. Clin. Biol. Res.
26:381-393.

Davis, J. 1979. A counselor’s viewpoint, p.
113-122. In A. Capron, M. Lappé, R. F.
Murray, Jr., T. Powledge, S. Twiss, and D.
Bergsma (eds.), Genetic counseling: Facts,
values and norms. A. R. Liss, New York.

GorrMan, E. 1974. Stigma: Notes on the management of spoiled identity. John Aronson,
New York.

GuILFrorD, J. F. 1954. Psychometric methods.
McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York.

Gump, J. 1973. The measurement of psychological sequelae to sickle cell trait identification. Unpublished manuscript.

Heapinos, V. E. 1975. Alternative models of
counseling for genetic disorders. Soc. Biol.
22:297~303.

Hsia, Y. E. 1979. The genetic counselor as information giver. In A.M. Capron, M.
Lappé, R. F. Murray, Jr., T. Powledge,
S. B. Twiss and D. Bergsma (eds.), Genetic
counseling: Facts, values and norms. A. R.
Liss, New York.

KasBack, M.M., M.H. Becker and M. V.
Rutu. 1974. Sociological studies in human
genetics: Compliance factors in a voluntary
heterozygote screening program. In D.
Bergsma (ed.), Ethical, Social and legal dimensions of screening for human genetic
disease. Stratton Intercontinental Medical
Book Corporation, New York.

KERLINGER, F. 1973. Foundations of behavioral
research. 2nd ed. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, Inc., New York. .

KESSLER, S. 19792. The counselor-counselee relationship, p. 53-63. In S. Kessler (ed.),
Genetic counseling: Psychological dimensions. Academic Press, New York.

. 1979b, The genetic counselor as psy
chotherapist. Jn A. M. Capron, M. Lappé,

R. F. Murray, Jr., T. Powledge, S. B. Twiss

and D. Bergsma (eds.), Genetic counseling:

Facts and norms. A. R. Liss, New York.

. 1979c. The process of communication,

decision-making and coping in genetic

counseling, p. 35—S1. In S. Kessler (ed.),

Genetic counseling: Psychological dimen
sions. Academic Press, New York.

. 1979d. The psychological foundations

of genetic counseling, p. 17-33. In S.

Kessler (ed.}, Genetic counseling: Psycho
 

 

 

Social Biology

logical dimensions. Academic Press, New
York,

KEssLerR, S., H. Kesscer, and P. Warp. 1984.
Psychological aspects of genetic counseling
III: Management of guilt and shame. Amer.
J. Med. Genet. 17:673-697.

KELLEY, P. 1977. Dealing with dilemma: A
manual for genetic counselors. Springer
Verlag, New York.

KIESLER, C. A., B. E. CoLiins, and N. MILLER.
1969. Attitude change: A critical analysis of
theoretical approaches. John Wiley, New
York.

Murray, R., Jr. 1973. Screening: A practitioner’s view, p. 121-130. In B. Hilton, D. Callahan, M. Harris, P. Condliffe, and B.
BERKELEY (EDs.), Ethical issues in human
genetics, Plenum Publishing Company,
New York.

NuNNALLY, J. C. 1970. Introduction to Psychological Measurement. McGraw-Hill, Inc.,
New York, New York.

. 1978. Psychometric theory. McGrawHill, Inc., New York, New York.

Oscoop, C. E., G. Suci, and P. TANNENBAUM.
1957. The measurement of meaning. University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois.

PATTERSON, P. B., C. R. DENNING, and A. H.
JUTSCHER. 1973. Psychological aspects of
cystic fibrosis. The Foundation of Thanatology, New York.

SCHNEIDERMAN, G. 1975. Tay Sachs disease and
carrier screening programs: Psychological
aspects. Prog. Clin. Biol. Res. 18:415-423.

SaiTH, S. H. 1972. The sociopsychological aspects of sickle cell anemia, p. 18~24. Jn Department of Health, Education and Welfare
(Pub. No. HSM 73-9141), First International Conference on the Mental Health As
 

pects of Sickle Cell Anemia. NIMH, Wash
ington, D.C.

SORENSON, J. R. 1974. Some social and psychological issues in genetic screening: Public
and professional adaptation to biomedical
innovation, p. 165~184. Jn D. Bergsma
(ed.), Ethical, social and Jegal dimensions
of screening for human genetic disease.
Stratton Intercontinental Medical Book
Corporation, New York.

STAMATOYANNOPOULUS, G. 1974. Problems of
screening and counseling in the hemoglobinopathies, p. 268-276. In A. G. Motuisky
and W. Lenz (eds.), Birth defects: Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference, Vienna, 1973. Excerpta Medica, Geneva.

TaRGuM, S. 1981. Psychotherapeutic considerations in genetic counseling. Amer. J. Med.
Genet. 8281-289.
