Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Report on the first annual meeting of the behavior
genetics association

To cite this article: (1971) Report on the first annual meeting of the behavior genetics
association, Social Biology, 18:3, 315-318, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1971.9987936

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1971.9987936

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal @
ail Article views: 1
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 1 View citing articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:32

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Behavior Genetics

 

Report on the First Annual Meeting
of the Behavior Genetics Association

The first annual meeting of the Behavior
Genetics Association was held April 7-8
at the University of Connecticut, Storrs,
with 65 participants from the United
States, Canada, and The Netherlands.

The morning session on April 7 was devoted to a round table discussion by students moderated by Ernst Caspari on “The
Future of Behavior Genetics.” Dr. Caspari
introduced the discussion with a brief review of the origins of behavior genetics in
work done in genetics, psychology, and
biology.

The business meeting was held during
the afternoon session with approximately
50 participants who heard reports from the
committee chairmen: R. Darrell Bock,
Constitution Committee; Richard J. Rose,
Communication Committee; Gordon Allen,
Membership Committee; Seymour Kessler,
Program Committee; and Irving I. Gottesman, Public and Professional Affairs Committee. The proposed constitution was
discussed and amendments offered from
the floor. The amended constitution, now
being prepared, will be submitted for approval to the charter membership.

On April 8 the morning session was devoted to “Trends in Human Behavior
Genetics Research,” moderated by Jerry
Hirsch. The afternoon session was devoted
to “Trends in Animal Behavior Genetics
Research,” moderated by James Wilson.
Abstracts of the papers presented follow.

TRENDS IN HUMAN BEHAVIOR GENETICS
RESEARCH

Evidence of Reduced Viability of Rh Incompatible Male Twins. R. Darrell
Bock and Michael Waller, University of
Chicago, and Steven Vandenberg, University of Colorado at Boulder.

Samples of 121 male and 182 female
dizygotic twin pairs in the Louisville Twin
Study were cross-classified according to
each of four blood systems: ABO, MNSs,
Rh, and Duffy. The resulting contingency
tables were examined to determine if there
exists a significant deficiency in the offdiagonal cells, that is, in the cells representing discordant twin pairs. This
examination was based on a statistical
model containing a parameter, w, the wastage coefficient, which is an index of the
deficiency. Two asymptotically equivalent
tests, one based on the likelihood ratio ?,
the other based on the asymptotic variance
of the wastage coefficient, were applied to
test the hypothesis @ =O against the alternative w > 0.

The results indicated that there is no
significant deficiency, due to discordancy,
for either like-sex males or like-sex females,
in three of the four blood systems. In the
Rh system, however, significant wastage
was found to exist in the male twin pairs,
but not in the female twin pairs. The

315
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

316 Behavior Genetics

maximum likelihood estimate of @ for
males was 0.678 + 0.127. The value 0.127
+: 0.275 for females was not significantly
different from zero.

This marked difference in viability of
Rh incompatible male and female twins is
suggested as a partial explanation of the
often observed deficiency in the total
number of dizygotic male twin pairs relative to female dizygotic twin pairs.

Other smaller samples of twin bloodgroup data presently available to us show
similar evidence of this type of wastage
among male twins.

Perspectives for Genetic Analysis of
Normal and Abnormal Behavier in
Man. Gilbert S. Omenn and Arno G.
Motulsky, Division of Medical Genetics,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.

Many studies have provided statistical
evidence for genetic components in normal
traits and in certain disorders of behavior.
Application of two major experimental approaches of biochemical genetics—electrophoretic screening for enzyme variation
and pharmacogenetic analysis—may provide clues to the mechanisms underlying
human individuality and various behavioral
phenotypes.

We assume that genetic information in
the brain, as in other tissues, flows from
DNA to protein products with structural
and enzymatic properties, though specialized sensory input and information
processing may be engrafted upon common mechanisms of gene action. Electrophoretic screening may uncover qualitative,
genetically-determined differences in key
enzymes that can be studied in detail for
functional consequences in the metabolic
pathway involved.

At present we are screening some 22
enzymes from pathways of energy produc
Social Biology

tion, myelin synthesis, and neurotransmitter metabolism. It is remarkable that the
entire sequence of 11 glycolytic enzymes
has no common variant enzymes in human
brain. By contrast, the mitochondrial
malic enzyme and pentose-phosphate shunt
enzymes have frequent variants. Pharmacogenetic screening of enzymes in neurotransmitter metabolism for susceptibility
to inhibition by specific psychopharmacologically active agents promises not only
to demonstrate differences between individuals, but also to point to enzymatic
bases for differences in treatment responses.

In search for clues to enzymes of possible importance to nervous system function, we have reviewed many inborn errors
of metabolism and distinguished specific
neurological or psychiatric symptoms from
a phenotype of gross mental retardation.
Also, we have noted those syndromes in
which the enzyme deficiency is intrinsic to
the brain. Finally, in assessing the large
gap between gene action and the complex
phenotypes of the nervous system, we have
noted extensive studies of the electroencephalogram by Vogel. Although the features of the normal EEG are determined
almost entirely by polygenes, certain common variants of the EEG are determined
by single autosomal dominant genes and
await psychometric, as well as biochemical, characterization.

Psychiatric Genetics—1971. Leonard L.
Heston, Department of Psychiatry, University of Minnesota.

Three main themes have dominated recent thinking and research in psychiatric
genetics.

The first of these is classification or, in
genetic terms, the delineation of traits. The
reliability of our assessments of phenotype,
now done mostly by clinical description

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Vol. 18, No. 3

and judgment, is barely tolerable today and
is quite inadequate to unravel the complexities sure to be encountered before our
discipline can advance much further. Clinical descriptive psychiatry has brought us
to a point where severely diminishing returns reward effort expended. We must
eventually develop a classification based on
chemical or physiological traits.

Meanwhile, efforts at refining our traits
continue. In affective psychoses, attention
has been directed toward the separation of
bipolar illness (both mania and depression)
from unipolar illness (depression) through
the study of families. In general, bipolar
probands have both bipolar and unipolar
relatives. Unipolar probands have unipolar
relatives. While loose ends remain, it is
likely that two separable forms of illness
will be defined.

Efforts at further subdivision of affective psychoses have not produced unambiguous results. In schizophrenia, attention
has been focused on abnormal but nonschizophrenic persons who have been found
in apparent excess among relatives of
schizophrenics. It seems unlikely that the
many problems and questions raised by the
presence of these persons can be settled
until the trait is defined biochemically.

The second main theme has been the
search for environmental factors entering
into the gene-environment etiologic mix.
Despite intensive research, not one environmental variable important in etiology
has been established and there are few
good leads. However, the concept of geneenvironment interaction has been widely
accepted.

The third main theme, reproduction,
has long been an issue in schizophrenia and
recently has been recognized as a problem
in affective illness. In both psychoses, the
reproduction of afflicted persons is significantly less than that of a normal population. Implicit in the study of reproductive

Behavior

Genetics 317
performance are broad ecological and evolutionary questions which will surely be
major themes in future research.

TRENDS IN ANIMAL BEHAVIOR GENETICS
RESEARCH

Genetic and Hormonal Regulatory Mechanisms in the Study of Territoriality:
A Move Toward Species Specific Analyses in Behavior Genetics. D. D.
Thiessen, Department of Psychology,
University of Texas, Austin, Texas.

It is essential that behavior genetics
moves toward a closer association with
other biological disciplines and casts its
experiments and interpretations within an
evolutionary context. In my opinion, behavior genetics has been too preoccupied
with the extent of genetic variability and
may, in many cases of high heritability, be
dealing with genetic junk. The species as
a unit of behavioral response, and as the
outcome of genetic polishing, deserves more
consideration. Adaptation is always the
crux of natural selection and offers the
best hope of understanding the evolution
of behavior and the restriction of genetic
variability. Moreover, it is essential to
understand the overwhelming significance
of regulatory mechanisms of gene action
in natural selection and relate these to
behaviora] speciation. Examples for these
arguments are discussed in the paper.

Genetic and Behavioral Studies of Neuroligical Mutants of Drosophila melanogaster. William D. Kaplan, Kazuo
Ikeda, W. E. Trout and Patrick Wong,
Division of Biology, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, Calif.

The neurological basis of the leg-shaking
action of Hyperkinetic!?, in response to
ether vapor, is a patterned activity observed in motor neurons located in three
pairs of regions in the ventral thoracic
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

318 Behavior Genetics

ganglion. The movement of the prothoracic
legs is governed by paired regions in the
prothoracic ganglion, the mesothoracic legs
by neurons in the mesothoracic ganglion,
and the metathoracic legs by neurons in
the ganglion of the metathorax. Studies
of mosaic flies show that the mutant patterned activity is autonomous for each of
the regions; the genotype of the head or
other parts of the thorax has no influence
upon the phenotype of the individual legs.

The frequency and amplitude of the legshaking have been monitored electronically.
Each mutant has a characteristic pattern
of shaking. The most active mutant, Hk??,
shakes not only faster than the others but
has longer bouts of shaking with fewer
quiet periods in a given interval of time.
When Hk!” or Hk?" is combined with Sh®
in a single chromosome, the double mutant
has a pattern which is closer to normal
than either mutant by itself. The same kind
of interaction occurs for other aspects of
the mutant phenotypes studied such as
aging, kinetogenic response, and spontaneous activity.

Experiments with Hk!” and Hk?" carried in females heterozygous for a deficiency for the hyperkinetic region in the
XX chromosome show that the mutant gene
is producing an altered gene product, or
less of the normal, since the deficiency
heterozygotes are more abnormal in their
expression than the homozygous mutants.

Some Applications and Limitations of
Extensive Biometrical Genetic Techniques for Behavioral Research. Norman D. Henderson, Oberlin College.

Extensive genetic techniques are defined
to include those designs that involve a wide

Social Biology

sampling of inbred lines and some or all
of the possible hybrid crosses between
them. Most common of these designs in
current behavioral genetic research is the
diallel cross, which can provide multiple
estimates of several important genetic
parameters without extending to Fe generations, and estimates of maternal influences on the behaviors studied. Valuable
“nongenetic” uses of these designs include
the establishment of base lines against
which one can examine the relative importance of various experimental manipulations, and the ability to use infinite
replications of the experimental material.
Purely genetic uses of such designs have
some limitations, however. The size of such
designs are sufficiently large to discourage
investigators from replicating them under
varying environmental conditions, thus
greatly limiting the value of genetic estimates with respect to making inferences
about the evolutionary significance of the
behaviors examined. Examples of the varying stability of genetic estimates under
different rearing conditions suggest that
Genotype X Environment interactions can
be large under certain conditions.

In addition to the size of the diallel cross,
the problem of the restriction of the gene
pool inherent in all designs based on inbred
derived laboratory populations is discussed.
More recently developed extensive designs
may provide solutions to both of these
problems. Modifications of the triple test
cross procedure, for example, allow a reduction of the number of crosses required
for genetic estimates and may allow the
introduction of wild genotypes into the
gene pool, while retaining the ability to
accurately estimate several major genetic
parameters.
