Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Quantitative approaches to detect the fourth
Stage of the epidemiologic transition

Sulaiman M. Bah

To cite this article: Sulaiman M. Bah (1995) Quantitative approaches to detect the
fourth stage of the epidemiologic transition, Social Biology, 42:1-2, 143-148, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1995.9988894

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1995.9988894

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 5

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:46

 
Quantitative Approaches to Detect
the Fourth Stage of the Epidemiologic

Transition

Sulaiman M. Bah

Population Studies Program
Department of Sociology
University of Zimbabwe
Harare, Zimbabwe
oS

N

 

an ‘

ABSTRACT: Widely diverse quantitative measures have been used to study the onset of the
ifferent stages of the epidemiologic transition, including the fourth stage. This report suggests

qadditional methods for detecting the fourth stage of the epidemiologic transition that are more

cparsimenious than those previously used. While these methods are not new, they have potential
or application in this area of research. An example of one of these methods is illustrated, using

Canadian data.

= In the late 1980’s works started apearing about the existence of the
aun stage of the epidemiologic tran‘Sition (Olshansky and Ault, 1986; RogSers and Hackenberg, 1987). Hitherto,
‘it was thought that mortality transiptions in developed countries reached
Yonly the third stage. While the two for-mulations of the fourth stage were
“slightly different, the views have been
preconciled and applied to Canadian
data with successful results (Bah and
Sernando, 1991). As theoretical descriptions of the fourth stage have been
edifferent, the quantitative methods
Fused to detect their onset have also
been different. This report aims to propose quantitative approaches which
can be used to detect the onset of the
fourth stage and to monitor its
progress.

_ THE FOURTH STAGE OF THE
EPIDEMIOLOGIC TRANSITION

The original formulations of the
fourth stage were those of Olshansky

and Ault (1986) and Rogers and Hackenberg (1987). Olshansky and Ault
(1986, p. 360) give the general characteristics of the fourth stage as including
the following:

(1) rapidly declining death rates that are
concentrated mostly at advanced ages
and which occur at nearly the same
pace for males and females; (2) the age
pattern of mortality by cause remains
largely the same as in the third stage but
the age distribution of deaths for degenerative causes are shifted progressively
toward older ages; and (3) relatively
rapid improvements in survival being
concentrated among the population in
advanced ages.

They remark (p. 361) that the major
characteristic that distinguishes the
fourth stage from the third is the unexpected shift in the age pattern of
mortality by degenerative causes for
the population in advanced ages. In
short,

In this fourth stage, the major degenerative causes of death that prevailed during the third stage remain with us as the
major killer, but the risks of dying from

143
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

144 Brief Reports

these diseases are distributed to older

ages.

They attribute the source of this
change to a combination of factors including shift in the age structure toward older ages, advances in medical
technology, provision of health-care
programs for the elderly and reductions in risk factors at the population
level.

The description of the fourth stage
by Rogers and Hackenberg (1987) is
more substantive. They focus on the
different propositions in Omran’s theory. One of Omran’s propositions is
concerned with the existence of mortality differentials among several population subgroups. For example, it is
proposed that the epidemiologic transition favors females over males, the
young over the old and, in the United
States, whites over nonwhites. Another proposition of Omran’s theory is
that infectious diseases will decline but
will not be entirely eradicated. Rogers
and Hackenberg (1987) provide evidence with data from the United States
to show that these propositions have
changed. They agree with Olshansky
and Ault that the leading causes in this
stage are still due to degenerative and
man-made diseases, but disagree with
them in identifying the source of this
change.

Rogers and Hackenberg argue that
the major source of this change is the
increasing influence of individual behaviors and new lifestyles on mortality.
This influence may either be positive,
in areas where measures of health promotion are effective, or negative, in
areas where potentially destructive
lifestyle practices are widespread. On
the negative side, individual behaviors
and destructive lifestyle practices in
 

Social Biology

clude sexual orientations and social
pathologies like accidents, suicides,
homicides, excessive drinking, and
smoking. Even though Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS) is
an infectious disease, Rogers and
Hackenberg consider it a disease belonging to the fourth stage because of
its direct relation to an individual’s behavior and lifestyle. They argue that
the root cause of these destructive lifestyle practices is ‘‘hybris’’—an excessive self confidence, a belief that one
cannot suffer and that one is invincible.
Hence, they refer to this fourth stage as
the “‘hybristic stage.”

Upon analyzing the Canadian epidemiologic transition, Bah and Rajulton (1991) argue that these two formulations of the fourth stage are not
exclusive of each other. Rather, they
reflect different aspects of this new
stage of mortality which is characterized by an interplay between the agecause patterns of mortality, microlevel determinants such as individual
behavior and social lifestyles, and
macro-level determinants such as
health care and health promotion
programs. In other words, while we see
the rise of certain causes of death
which are primarily determined by potentially destructive individual behaviors and lifestyles and of others which
are products of man-made environments, their effects are largely being
mitigated.

This mitigation is being achieved
mainly through the advances in medical technology which help to concentrate deaths at the very old ages and
through health promotion programs.
The health promotion programs help
reduce preventable deaths and morbidity primarily through modifications
Vol. 42, No. 1-2

of individual behaviors and lifestyles
and, in addition, they affect all ages,
not necessarily the oldest ages. The resulting effect is the lowering of mortality for all ages, but with individuals in
the old ages apparently gaining more in
terms of added years of life achieved.

REVIEW OF METHODS USED

‘© In order to determine the status of
ithe epidemiologic transition, age patSterns of mortality and causes of death
Estructures need to be analyzed. Differoent combinations of methods are availsable for doing so. Starting with preCfourth stage studies on epidemiologic
“transition, one takes the case of the de“tailed work of Nagnur and Nagrodski
5 (1990) on the Canadian epidemiologic
Stransition. In their study, they made
‘use of the following quantitative meaSsures: crude death rates, age standard‘ized rates, infant mortality rates, life
expectancies, survival probabilities,
Zentropy (H), potential years of life lost
Z(PYLL), and multiple decrement and
cause-deleted life tables. From the
zcause-deleted life tables they also comgputed “H” and PYLL values. The
‘Zanalyses of Nagnur and Nagrodski
<show without doubt that Canadian
=mortality had gone through the various
stages of the epidemiologic transition

and had already entered the third stage

by the 1950's.

In studies on the fourth stage, one
notes that in the work of Olshansky
and Ault (1986) the following quantitative measures were used: temporary
life expectancy, decomposition of life
expectancy, and median ages at death.
In the work of Rogers and Hackenberg
(1987), in accordance with their formulation, the incidence of AIDS was

Brief Reports

145

used. In addition, they also used agestandardized death rates for specific
degenerative diseases.

In the work of Bah and Fernando
(1992), the fourth stage had been described as a synthesis of the two existing descriptions, one of which emphasizes mortality in the young and adult
ages and the other emphasizes mortality in the older ages. This modification
required that the age pattern of mortality at young and middle ages be
considered in addition to patterns at
old age. For this reason, the eightparameter model of Heligman and Pollard (1980) was used. It was chosen for
its ability to reflect changes in young,
middle-age, and old-age patterns of
mortality simultaneously. In addition,
the shift in age patterns of mortality
were studied using survival curves and
median ages at death. The cause of
death structure was studied using simple percentage distribution of deaths
by cause and age-cause-specific death
rates and measures from cause-deleted
life tables.

PROPOSED ADDITIONAL
METHODS

This report does not seek to replace
the other quantitative methods that
have been used to investigate the epidemiologic transition. Rather, it seeks
to propose more compact methods
which are less arbitrary. Three methods are proposed for this undertaking:
first, for the study of the trend in oldage patterns of mortality; second, for
the study of the trend in causes of
death from degenerative diseases; and
third, for the study of the impact of
cause-of-death structure on old-age
patterns of mortality.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

146 Brief Reports

TRENDS IN OLD-AGE PATTERNS
OF MORTALITY

A parsimonious way of studying
trends in mortality is using the parametric approach. By representing the
trends by a few parameters, it 1s possible to capture the rate of change in
the trends as well as changes in the age
pattern of mortality. One such model is
the four-parameter “adaptive” model
proposed by Ewbank et al. (1983). The
model ts given as:

Y¥,= a+ BTU; % 4) )

where
p x—1
T(p; %) = —y— for p = 0.5
(2)
and
Pi»
1—-G—,)
T(p; %,\) = ay for p < 0.5.

(3)

The parameters a, B, x, and A have
been interpreted as follows: a gives the
level of mortality; B reflects the relationship of mortality below a pivotal
age (around 50) to that above it; x reflects changes in age pattern of mortality at the youngest ages; and J reflects
the changes in age patterns of mortality
at the oldest ages. The special interest
in this case is in the parameter A, and to
some extent f.. Increase in survivorship
in old age is reflected by decrease in i.

TRENDS IN CAUSE-OF-DEATH RATES
FOR DEGENERATIVE DISEASES

Again, the parametric approach can
be used to study trends in causes of
death. One convenient tool is the

 

Social Biology

cause-specific extension of Brass logit
model (Chackiel, 1990). In the Brass
logit model, an equation is given which
relates any life table to a standard life
table. The equation is given as: logit
(q(x)) =a+f6 logit (g*(x)) where
q(x) = 1 — 1(x) is the life table probability of dying before age x in any population; g*(x) is the life table probability of dying before age x in the standard
population; logit (q(x)) is defined as
logit (q(x)) = 0.5 * In (q(x —a(x));
and a and 6 are estimable parameters
which can be used to study trends in
mortality. |

In the cause-specific version, the
q(x) values would now be replaced by
q'(x) values for any cause of death i.
The difficulty encountered is in the
choice of the required standard rates.
It would be necessary to find standards
for the specific causes since the “‘general standard” of the Brass logit model
would not be suitable in this causespecific extension.

ESTIMATION OF THE INFLUENCE OF
DEGENERATIVE CAUSE-OF-DEATH
STRUCTURE ON OLD-AGE PATTERNS
OF MorTALITY

In order to describe the influence
of cause-of-death structure on age
patterns of mortality, the method employed is to related two measurable
quantities, one reflecting causes of
death and the other reflecting age patterns of mortality. According to Preston (1976), the two quantities which
can conveniently do this and which
are also mathematically related are the
life table death rate or its equivalent
measure, log(l,,,/1,), and the agestandardized cause-specific death rate
for cause 7, ASCDR'. Using Preston’s
logic, at least two regression models
Vol. 42, No. 1~2

are needed for the establishment of the
influence of causes of death in determining age patterns of mortality. First
is a bivariate regression model relating
survivorship and crude death rates,
given as:

log(,Px) = rAy + »By,ASCDR (A)

where ASCDR is the age-standardized

crude death rate. Second is a multi‘ovariate model relating survivorship to
qicause-of-death rates, given as:

log(npx) = Ay + >, (BL.ASCDR’)
(5)

where
A, = At (6)
and ASCDR' is the age-standardized

‘Sdeath rate for cause i (Preston, 1976).
According to Preston, the second
model would not improve upon the

‘first if the age patterns of mortality
Cvariation were the same from cause to

an] at 13:46 08 December

hig

5
E Bi=Bi=Bi=...BY. (7)

Sor if causes of death were always found

gin linear combination with one an
Sother. In short, if cause-of-death struc
<ture were not important, then the ex
Stension of the bivariate model to the

Amultivariate one might not make any
difference.

ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE

Using Canadian male data from
1961 to 1981, the model of Ewbank et
al. was fitted, and the results obtained
are given in Table 1.

The results reveal an interesting pattern. The monotonic increase in a values show that mortality levels have
been declining uniformly over the two

Brief Reports

147°

decades since 1961. The increase in B
values from 1961 to 1976 shows that
mortality below the pivotal age was improving faster than above that age.
This finding is confirmed again by the x
values which show increase over the
period 1961-76. This increase means
that there was steady gain in survivorship in the youngest ages. Over the
period 1961-~71, the A values show decrease which means increase in survivorship in old age. The major gains in
old age survivorship occurred over the
short period 1967~71. Over the period
1976-76 the trend in old-age survivorship experienced a slight disadvantage.
For the period 1976-81 there was a reversal in the declining trend of 6 values
and a stagnation in the A values. Taken
together, these values could mean that
while old age mortality was gaining relative to adult mortality, this gain uniformly applied to all the old ages so
that there is hardly any change in the
slope (A values) in old age mortality.
These trends in the parameters correspond to the observations of Bah and
Rajulton (1991) on Canadian mortality. They observed (uniform) gains in
male life expectancy for the older ages
above 65 for the period 1976-81. Using
other evidence, they concluded that
Canadian mortality for males could
have entered the fourth stage during
the period 1976-81.

The observation on old age mortality gives only one side of the picture. In
order to make more definitive statements about the onset of the fourth
stage, one first needs to study the
trends in degenerative diseases to see if
they are shifting to the older ages. This
shift Gf present) could be detected by
decrease in 8; values (from the causespecific extension of the Brass logit
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:46 08 December 2015

 

148 Brief Reports

Social Biology

TABLE 1

FiTTING THE MODEL OF EWBANK ET AL., CANADIAN MALES, 1961-1981

PARAMETER VALUES

YEAR a B * r
GGL sas cass engsequagesan 20 0.957 1.679 —0.607 -0,204
TY scx snarcmncenmmaneres wma as 8 0.974 1.734 ~0.470 —0.263
LOT oo. cecceceeeneeeenceees 0.999 1.762 —0.340 ~—-0.333
1976 os ceecceseesecseneneee 1.045 1.871 —0.207 ~-0.320
JOB L. ccces tee tsaaeans ras vaveis 1.139 1.854 ~0.156 —0.319

model) for degenerative disease i during the transition period. Second, using
the bivariate and multivariate regression models above, one can try to estimate the impact the degenerative
disease mortality might have had on
old age pattern of mortality. Lack of
Canadian cause-of-death data prevents one from testing these additional
propositions.

CONCLUSIONS

This report has suggested additional
methods for detecting the onset of the
fourth stage of the epidemiologic transition. The author does not claim originality for these methods, but rather

seeks to show that they hold potential
for application in this area of research.
One example has been illustrated in
the report. For the Brass method to be
applicable, time series cause-of-death
data should be collected and, from
them, age-cause-specific death rates
should be computed which would then
be converted to probabilities. For the
Preston method to be applicable, the
time series cause-of-death data would
need to be adequately regrouped
through standardization.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This article was written while the author
holds a Population Council post-doctoral
fellowship at the University of Zimbabwe.

REFERENCES

Ban, S., and R. Fernanpo. 1991. Has Canadian
mortality entered the fourth stage of the epidemiologic transition? Canad. Stud. Popu.
18(2):18~41.

CHACKIEL, J. 1990. Studies in causes of death in
Latin America: The current situation and future perspectives. Jn J. Vallin et al., Measurement and analysis of mortality: New Approaches. Clarendon Press, Oxford.

NacGnur, D., and M. Nacropski. 1990. Epidemiologic transition in the context of demographic change. The evolution of Canadian
mortality patterns. Canad. Stud. Pop. 17:
1-24.

OLSHANSKY, S. Jay, and A. Brian AULT. 1986.
The fourth stage of the epidemiologic transition: The age of delayed degenerative diseases. Milbank Mem. Quart. 64:355~391.

Omran, A. 1971. The epidemiological transition. Milbank Mem. Quart. 49:509-538.

. 1977. Epidemiologic transition in the

United States: The health factor in popula
tion change. Pop. Bull. 32(2):3-42.

. 1982. Epidemiologic transition. Jn International encyclopedia of population, Vol. 1.
Free Press, New York.

PRESTON, S. 1972. Influence of cause of death
structure on age patterns of mortality. Jn
Population Dynamics. Academic Press, New
York.

. 1976. Mortality patterns in national populations, with special reference to recorded
causes of death. Academic Press, New York.

Rocers, R., and R. HACKENBERG. 1987. Extending epidemiologic transition theory: A new
stage. Soc. Biol. 34:234-243.

 

 

 
