Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Selection intensities in mothers of twins and in
mothers of singletons

P. Philippe

To cite this article: P. Philippe (1988) Selection intensities in mothers of twins and in mothers
of singletons, Social Biology, 35:3-4, 285-292, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1988.9988707

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1988.9988707

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
Lg
Submit your article to this journal @
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 1 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:42

 
 

Selection Intensities in Mothers of Twins
and in Mothers of Singletons

 

P. Philippe

Department of Social and Preventive Medicine,
University of Montreal,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada

ber 2015

& ABSTRACT: Opportunity for selection was assessed in a group of mothers with twins and was
e 9 compared with estimates obtained in mothers who gave birth to singletons only from the same
a < population. Both groups were matched on a number of confounding variables in the framework
90 of a case/control methodology. Two time periods involving demographic changes were studied

< separately. After appropriate adjustment for the increased family size of mothers of twins,
+ results show that selection intensities are greater in twin-bearing mothers than in controls, The
ae — fertility component of the selection index is lower than that of mortality if childless women are
3 taken into account. However, the index of opportunity for selection is rather low by current
andes but, given the methodology used, should reflect genetic rather than environmental
énSelection. Notwithstanding, it would be difficult to explain the recent change in the twinning

 

-& rates in the population by the actual level of selection indices.

y of Michi

Any character is transmitted from a
‘7 generation to the next by way of “‘sucful” offspring, that is, the breeding
‘© progeny. For any given population, the
number of “successful” offspring is a
function of pre-reproductive mortality,
3 g celibacy, migration, and, of course,
& family size.
= The putative twin gene(s) is also ameA nable to this mechanism and should be
~ all the more prevalent in a population
that it was selected for in the past. Mothers of twins are suspected of being more
fecund than mothers of singletons (Allen, 1981; Record et al., 1978) and, inasmuch as this advantage is genetically determined, it could have a bearing on the
twin gene frequency. As a matter of
fact, fertility is genetic to a minimal extent (Imaizumi et al., 1970; Neel and
Schull, 1972; Philippe and Yelle, 1978).

y [Universit
Q
ao
Nn
A

 

285

Therefore, mothers of twins as a group
might experience different selective values in comparison with mothers of singletons from the same population that
could be of relevance to explain temporal variations in the twinning rates.

The current study on selection intensities was stimulated by a secular increase of twin births (presumably monozygotic according to Weinberg’s biometric method) in the population of
Isle-aux-Coudres (Philippe, 1981). Although the data are population-based,
the objective of the present study is to
compare opportunities for selection in
two matched groups of women, one
with at least one twin birth and the other
with singletons only. Accordingly,
results will not point to the opportunities for selection prevailing in the population but rather in subsets of it.

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

286

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The population and the data base of
the present study have previously been
described at length by the author (Philippe, 1981; Philippe, 1985; Philippe,
1986). The data base is composed of 77
twin pairs born in the isolated population of Isle-aux-Coudres (Quebec). Because of the sampling frame (to be discussed later), and in order to obtain
valid estimates of selection components,
we have truncated the sample so that
only twins born before 1921 are included. The number thus retrieved represents 59 twin pairs. Because the population fertility and infant mortality have
changed substantially since 1871 (Philippe, 1973) due to a relative abandonment of the practice of breastfeeding
(Philippe, 1979), twins born before and
after the cut-off point were considered
separately. The first time period is a
rather stable one in comparison with the
demographic changes that occurred after 1870. Contraception has not occurred in the population for the whole
time span covered by this study.

In order to allow comparison of selective values found in the group of twinbearing mothers, a control group of
women who had singletons only was
formed. Both groups were matched for
variables known to act as cofounders.
These are the birth order of the twin
pair, the maternal cohort (+ —3 years),
and the residence of parents of mothers.
The number of control mothers thus
available is equal to 58.

Crow’s index of intensity for selection (Jacquard, 1974) was computed according to the method advocated by
Hed (1984, 1986), account being taken
of the modification suggested by Neel
and Schull (1972). For both mothers of
twins and mothers of singletons, the

Philippe

Social Biology

family size was estimated. This represents the sibship size of childbearing
mothers. The mean (X,) and the variance (V,,) of family size had been computed. From the number of deaths prior
to age 16 years and that of single women
pertaining to the above sibships, the
proportion of deaths (Pz) and the proportion of unmarried women (P;.) were
also estimated. The proportion of surviving offspring (P;) and that of childbearing mothers (P,) were derived easily from the complement to one of the
previous proportions. This made it possible to compute the total index (J,) of
opportunity for selection as well as its
components, that is In, Lso, Ly, and ff,
such that:

1, = I,o + ly + In

where

Im = Pal Ps

I; = Ls a Is

Tso = Pso | (Pe + Ps)
and

Ly = Vol (Xs -P, - Py).

Thus, the two groups of mothers considered here belong to generation g
while the sibship size, the proportion of
pre-reproductive deaths and that of unmarried women rather belong to generation g + 1. This sampling scheme is unusual (Jacquard, 1974) and may impose
limits on the interpretation of our
results.

Working with mothers of twins and
mothers of singletons allows us to estimate sibship size of childbearing mothers. Therefore, married women with no
offspring are excluded from the computation of the mean and variance of family size. Further, these women could not
be grouped with single women. Thus

 
  

 

our data leave out a group of women
that, had it been available, could have
inflated J-and Io. However, the proportion of childless married women in comparison with that of single women is generally low in the population so that the
bias will remain small. Without knowledge of the true “successful” family size,
J; cannot be estimated directly. However, since J; is the sum of J,, and I
which can be estimated from the components of family size of childbearing
mothers, this poses no special difficulty.
Finally, mothers of twins and their
matched controls are selected for large
Q family size and high parity. Thus, family
& size must be considered as complete,
G and the estimation of J; is relatively de© void of the mortality component per= taining to childbearing ages.

  
    
   
   
 

ecember 2015

    
   
 

RESULTS

Table 1 presents the estimates of the
fertility parameters needed to compute
« the index of opportunity for selection in
-& cases and controls for the two time peri~_ ods. In order to ensure the validity of the
comparison between cases and controls,
gy the mean number of offspring and the
"3 percentages of deaths and single women
< were standardized, as the family size of
= mothers of twins has one offspring in ex© cess. Accordingly, we counted confinements instead of offspring. Percentages
were adjusted similarly (see Footnote 2

in Table 1).

Statistics were computed. As confinements in case and control mothers
followed a normal distribution according to the generalized normality test
(with 2 degrees of freedom), we felt justified to undertake F testing of the observed variances which proved highly

statistically different, at least in the first

of Michigan]

   
 
    
  
 
 
 
 
   
  
   
  
 

Vol. 35, No. 34 Selection Intensities 287

  
   

time period. As to percentages, they
were submitted to a likelihood-ratio
test. Results are presented in Table 1.

Table 2 yields the various components of selection for both the groups
and time periods, as well as for the total.
First, at any one time period the total
opportunity for selection is higher in the
group of mothers with twins than in
matched controls. The ratio is about
three to two. J, also increased over time
in both groups. Second, the overall fertility component, J;, is somewhat higher
than the mortality component (/,,), and
both increased over time. However,
when the sterility component, J,., is
added to that of mortality, the trend is
reversed with fertility having a lower impact. Third, the sterility component is
similar in cases and controls with a small
jump across time periods. Last, the
greatest contribution to J; is due to the
fertility component (J,-) of reproducing
mothers.

DISCUSSION

This study shows that the index of opportunity for selection is higher in mothers of twins than in a group of matched
controls from the same population. This
conclusion has been reached on the basis of a comparative approach, that is,
selection indices of the study group were
compared with those of a control group
closely matched for variables able to
elicit confounding and to introduce biases. The potential biases have been
controlled and the results, as far as we
are aware, are free from confounding.
This approach must clearly be favored in
studies where the objective is to test the
hypothesis of actual selection differentials in groups thought to be subjected to
different selective values such as those

  
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

 

 

 

 

TABLE 1
STATISTICS OF FERTILITY IN MOTHERS OF TWINS AND MOTHERS OF SINGLETONS
From COLONIZATION To 1870 From 1871 ro 1920
Case Mothers Control Mothers Case Mothers Control Mothers

COMPONENTS OF FERTILITY (N = 31) (N = 29) Statistics (N = 28) (N = 29) Statistics
Confinements per childbearing mother*

Mean (Xsr) ....eeeeeeeeeee 8.9 8.9 ns. 10.3 9.9 n.s.

Variance (Voz) ......0.000- 12.10 3.91 F=3,1(<0.005) 15.93 11.18 N.S.
Proportion of single women n (Pso)

(16 years andover)> ...... 1% 8% n.s. 1% 14% X*=9,5(=0.002)
Porportion of deaths (Pp)

(Oto IS years) ..........4. 20% 14% X?=3.2(=0.075) 28% 14% X?=15,2(=0.000)

“One was subtracted from the overall number of offspring in sibships of twins in order to allow comparison with sibships of singletons. This correction applies only to the
mean, the variance remaining unaffected by the procedure.
5 Adjustment was carried out by deleting from the case proportion the per cent ratio of the mean of the corresponding component to the overall mean number of offspring

in controls.

887

addiptyg

ABO]O1g [BOG
 

 

Vol. 35, No. 34 Selection Intensities 289
TABLE 2
OPPORTUNITIES FOR SELECTION IN MOTHERS OF TWINS AND MOTHERS OF SINGLETONS
COLONIZATION TO 1870 1871 to 1920 TOTAL
COMPONENTS OF SELECTION Twins Singletons Twins Singletons Twins Singletons
Mortality ([y) ......... 0.25 0.16 0.39 0.16 0.32 0.16
Sterility (Iso) .......2.- 0.09 0.10 0.10 0.19 0.11 0.14
Fertility Isr) .......... 0.21 0.06 0.24 0.15 0.22 0.11
Overall
fertility (Zr) ......... 0.30 0.16 0.34 0.34 0.33 0.25
Total
selection (7) ........ 0.55 0.32 0.73 0.50 0.65 0.41
_
S&S
N
a
oO
f=
5 characterized by genetic diseases. Fur- features if we are to pinpoint the selec
QAther, the case/control approach, beS cause of its reduced confounding, may
{ be amenable to more straightforward in< terpretations when the time comes to ass sess the basis, genetic or environmental,
‘Sof the variations in the observed selection indices. But this remains to be as= certained by future comparative analy7 Ses.
° Though our groups are highly com‘Z parable, the results also reflect in some
Sway the limits of the methodological
‘5case/control approach. For example,
‘>matching for birth order, and indirectly
~ for advanced maternal age at birth, has
3 imposed constraints on the mean and
& variance of family size. It is surmised
3 5 that the current statistical estimates of
A family size in both cases and controls
ought to be at variance with those from
the population as a whole. However, we
believe that this feature of the case/
control study which obviously limits
comparisons with other population
groups, offers a better opportunity to
address our problem in a more straightforward manner.

More specifically, mothers of twins
who are, for multiple reasons, a selected
group must be compared with another
similarly selected group with the same

 

tive pressures that can explain the particular genetic makeup of any one
group. Addressed in this way, the problem cannot be answered from population data, as the various sociodemographic features of a whole population
will interfere with the validity of the resulting comparisons. This poses the
problem of the comparability of groups
when one attempts to compare the selection parameters of a group of diseased people to those of the population
from which they were retrieved. A
choice has to be made; the best choice is
that which favors the objectives of the
study. Be this as it may, in spite of the
control imposed on the mean and variance of family size, and after appropriate adjustment, we were able to show
that both mothers of twins and mothers
of singletons are subjected to selection
due to fertility differences; yet, J;proved
to be greatest in mothers of twins.
Though the index is not amenable to
straightforward statistical testing, it nevertheless involves statistically different
demographic trends. As a matter of fact,
I,, (a component of J7) is based on prereproductive mortality which proved to
be statistically different between cases
and controls. Further, the proportion of

 

 
 

 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

290

single women (P,,) is statistically increased (X? = 7.8 with P = 0.005) in
controls in comparison to cases when
periods are combined. Part of these differences might be related to the heterogeneity of the group of twin-bearing
mothers that comprises both like- and
unlike-sex twins. Furthermore, the possibility of differences in the fecundity
potentials of mothers of twins was addressed in a recent study that suggested
differences ascribable to mothers of
like-sex twins (Philippe, ms.).
Similarly, selection by way of pre-reproductive mortality was largest in
mothers of twins even after standardization for increased family size. This is due
to the higher mortality of the group.
This difference is clearly statistically
significant in each time period as well as
for the total (X*=16.4 with
P = 0.000). This is not unexpected as
twin births have been related to malformations (e.g., Down’s syndrome)
within sibships (Allen, 1984). Again,
this is possibly due to the subgroup of
mothers with like-sex twins (Philippe,
1986). |
The validity of our results is further
strengthened by the similarity of the selection component of sterility in cases
and controls. This ought not to differ between the groups unless it is biologically
grounded. It rather seems that selection
in cases acts before reproductive age,
which is compatible with most hereditary and congenital diseases that take
their toll rather early in life. Once prereproductive selection has acted upon
mortality, it seems reasonable to hypothesize that sterility due to celibacy
might rather be social in origin. Nonetheless, a between-group statistical difference showed up which might reflect
social influence as the economic status

Philippe

Social Biology

of the population improved (time period
1870 to 1920).

Sterility of married women is a different problem and cannot be assessed
with the present data. Because of its
minimal role, at least in this population,
the bias remains small in comparison
with other sources of selection due to
mortality.

The between-periods change in selective intensities undoubtedly reflects the
demographic transformation of the population. As a matter of fact, the relative
abandonment of the practice of breastfeeding after 1870 turned out to increase
the fertility and infant mortality of the
population (Philippe, 1973; Philippe,
1979). Further, it has been suggested
that the causes of death also shifted from
a period of declining deaths to one with
higher death rates of infectious origin
(Philippe, 1979). Only twin-bearing
mothers seem to be affected by the
trend. This may be due to the relationship between breastfeeding and monozygotic twinning (Philippe, 1981). As to
mortality due to childless women, the
increase may partly be the result of an
artifact: better state of the information
in the more recent time period allowed
for a more complete identification of
single women. The between-time periods increase in the fertility component
of both groups is related to a higher
mean family size after 1870 due to a reduced postpartum period of sterility and
to acorrespondingly increased variance.
Because they reflect the impact of behavioral factors, all of these changes in
the vital rates have no relevance for
genotypic selection. It is thus surmised
that selection intensities prior to the demographic change are the most reliable.
Applying the Adams and Smouse
(1985) criteria for separating the demo 

Vol. 35, No. 3-4

graphic (J,< 0.5) from the genetic component, we find that mothers of twins
only are subjected to, admittedly low,
genetic selection.

To sum up, the opportunities for selection are definitely higher in mothers
of twins than in mothers who gave birth
to singletons only. It is not impossible
that some components of selection are
statistically different between the two

groups. Mortality has the largest role to
Siplay, the more so if the sterility compoSnent is left out from the computations.
Fertility differentials, however, exist
2 and are ascribed to the heterogeneity of
o the group of mothers of twins. Unfortunately, it is not possible to further break
>. down the data base to carry out separate
‘Studies of like- and unlike-sex twins.
CS ‘ . °

Acting mainly through mortality, the seSJection pressures against the twin
gene(s) and associated genotypes are
'S probably higher in twin-prone mothers;
‘6 but the fertility component of selection
of nearly equal strength happens to
compensate the rate of elimination of

ers

y [Univ

ADAMS, J., and P. SMouseE. 1985. Genetic consequences of demographic changes in human populations, p. 283-299. In R. Chakraborty and E. J. E. Szathmary (eds.), Diseases of complex etiology in small populations: Ethnic differences and research approaches. Alan R. Liss, New York.

ALLEN, G. 1981. The twinning and fertility paradox, p. 1-13. In L. Gedda, P. Parisi, and
W. E. Nance (eds.), Twin research 3: Twin
biology and multiple pregnancy. Alan R.
Liss, New York.

. 1984. Multiple births, p. 152-189. In
M. B. Bracken (ed.), Perinatal epidemiology. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.

Hep, H. 1984. Opportunity for selection during
the 17th-19th centuries in the diocese of
Linkoping as estimated with Crow’s index in
a population of clergymen’s wives. Hum.
Hered. 34:378-387.

Downloaded b

 

Selection Intensities

291

these genes, thus yielding stable gene
frequencies. Anyhow, the opportunities
for selection are rather low for both
groups and comparable to those found
in the Hutterite population (Jacquard,
1974). Because of the sampling scheme
used here, the reported selection indices
should reflect the genetic background of
the groups more closely, at least prior to
the demographic transition, than those
usually computed in descriptive studies
of populations. The comparison with
Hutterites may therefore be questioned.
At face value and without a specific
study of like-sex twins, it appears unlikely that the recently increased frequency of twin births in the population
can be ascribed to the greater selection
pressure prevailing in the group of twinbearing mothers.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I am grateful to Esther Létourneau for
the suggestion of the present study.

REFERENCES

 

. 1986. Selection opportunities in seven
Swedish nineteenth century populations.
Hum. Biol. 58:919-932.

Imaizumi, Y., M. Nei, and T. Furusuo. 1970.
Variability and heritability of human fertility. Ann. Hum. Genet. 33:251—259.

JaAcQuaRD, A. 1974. The genetic structure of
populations. Biomathematics, Volume 5, p.
321-330. Springer-Verlag, New York.

NEEL, J. V., and W. J. ScHULL. 1972. Differential fertility and human evolution, p. 363378. In T. Dobzhansky, M. K. Hecht, and
W. C. Steere (eds.), Evolutionary biology,
Vol. 6. Appleton-Century-Crofts, New
York.

PuHILiprE, P. 1973. Analyse statistique des intervalles protogenesiques et intergenesiques a
l’Isle-aux-Coudres. Etude de demographie
historique. Population 28:81—93.

. 1979. Community health aspects of the

 

 

 

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:42 08 December 2015

 

 

 

292 Philippe Social Biology

natural control of fertility in a French Canadian rural population. Canad. J. Publ. Hith.
70:171-178.

- 1981. Twinning and the changing pattern of breastfeeding: A possible relationship in a small rural population. Soc. Biol.
28:167-175.

. 1985. Genetic epidemiology of twinning: A population-based study. Amer. J.
Med. Genet. 19:97-105.

. 1986. Termination of menstrual life in
mothers of twins. Hum. Biol. 58:239-250.

 

 

. Conceptive delays in mothers of twins
and mothers of singletons: A demographic
epidemiologic approach. Ms.

PrHiurre, P., and L. YELLE. 1978. Heritability
of fecundity and post-partum sterility: An
isolate-based study. Hum. Biol. 50:1-14.

REcorD, R. G., E. ARMSTRONG, and R. J. LanCASHIRE. 1978. A study of the fertility of
mothers of twins. J. Epidem. Commun.
Hith. 32:183-189.
