Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

The genetics of mental illness: An overview

Barbara A. Cornblatt & Richard S. E. Keefe

To cite this article: Barbara A. Cornblatt & Richard S. E. Keefe (1991) The genetics of mental
illness: An overview, Social Biology, 38:3-4, 1-5, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1991.9988784

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1991.9988784

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 2

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:44

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

 

The Genetics of Mental Iliness: An Overview

 

Barbara A. Cornblatt and Richard S. E. Keefe

Department of Psychiatry
Mount Sinai School of Medicine
New York, New York

During the past decade, an explosive growth has taken place in the field
of medical genetics. Through the application of linkage analysis, the genes
for such illnesses as Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy, neurofibromatosis,
Huntington’s disease, and cystic fibrosis have been located on specific chromosomes. Yet, in contrast to the
progress for physical illness, the application of molecular genetic approaches
to mental illness has been mercurial.

The most dramatic linkage successes have been for relatively rare illnesses that are caused by a single major
gene. In comparison, most forms of
mental illness—like other common
chronic diseases such as heart disease,
cancer, and diabetes—are likely to
have a complex genetic etiology. Serious mental disorders such as schizophrenia or manic-depression, for example, do not follow Mendelian
patterns of genetic transmission. In
fact, little is known about the etiology
of most neuropsychiatric disorders.
There is a strong suspicion that these
illnesses have a genetic basis because
they tend to run in families. However,
for most, the mode of genetic transmission remains unclear. Questions such
as whether these disorders involve only
a few genes—each of which has a major effect—or many genes—all with
small effects—are unresolved. The latter issue is critically important because

linkage techniques cannot be applied
to polygenic illnesses.

Not only do the genetics of neuropsychiatric disorders appear to be
more complicated than in simple Mendelian illnesses, but the expression of
the phenotype may also be more complex. Most mental disorders are characterized by a wide range of symptoms
and levels of severity, considerable comorbidity with other major disorders,
and a consequent lack of clarity at their
diagnostic boundaries. Therefore, accurate diagnosis (i.e., identification of
true cases) is a major difficulty. This is
especially problematic because false
positives seriously compromise the
power of linkage analyses. In addition,
most neuropsychiatric genotypes are
not thought to be fully penetrant. For
example, an individual may carry a
gene for schizophrenia, but only express mild personality characteristics
that would not be considered a diagnosable disorder. Ignoring such cases
leads to a high rate of false negatives in
constructing pedigrees, yet including
them may increase the false positive
rate.

The series of papers in this special
section of Social Biology, ‘““‘The Genetics of Mental Illness,” will deal with the
specific concerns of applying linkage
techniques to the study of mental illness. This series of papers was first presented as part of a symposium on the
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

ii Cornblatt and Keefe

genetics of mental illness during the
1990 annual meeting of the American
Association for the Advancement of
Science (AAAS) that was held in New
Orleans (Cornblatt, 1990). There was a
great deal of interest in this symposium, fueled by the early linkage findings for Alzheimer’s disease, schizophrenia, and manic-depression. However, since the time that the symposium took place, considerable difficulties with many of the initial findings
have been reported. Most prominently, linkage between disease genes
and markers on chromosome 5 for
schizophrenia and chromosome 11 for
manic-depression now appear likely to
have been false positive results. On the
more positive side, a new molecular
technology for establishing linkage involving polymerase chain reactions is
expected to rapidly advance genetic
mapping and hopefully offset many of
the past problems.

In this special issue, the promise,
the problems, and the substantive findings in the field of neuropsychiatric genetics are discussed. Kenneth Kidd
opens the section by reporting on the
state of the art of neuropyschiatric
linkage research. Dr. Kidd briefly describes the molecular genetics methodology involved in linkage studies and
summarizes the current findings for
Tourette’s syndrome, schizophrenia,
and manic-depressive illness. Miron
Baron, in the next paper, presents a
detailed discussion of the evidence for
and against X-linkage in manicdepression, a saga that aptly illustrates
many of the vicissitudes of linkage
analysis when applied to mental illness.
Anne Bassett, whose discovery of a
family in which a partial trisomy on
chromosome 5 segregated with schizo
 

Social Biology

phrenia (Bassett, 1988) stimulated subsequent schizophrenia linkage studies,
discusses the status of the chromosome
5 finding and highlights a number of
the research modifications needed to
keep pace with the technological advances. The final chapter by Richard
Keefe and colleagues was not included
in the original symposium because it
represents an area that was only beginning to be conceptualized at that time.
This area is concerned with the development of phenotypic “markers” or
“indicators” as adjuncts to clinical diagnoses in identifying affected cases.
By identifying homogeneous  subgroups, this new approach provides a
strategy for dealing with both incomplete penetrance and genetic heterogeneity.

Despite differences in orientation
and specific illness of interest, several
themes are common to all of the papers
in this section and point to areas of vital importance to the development of
the field. These themes include:

1. Complexity of the Analyses. — As
the initial flush of success has given way
to reality, a more sophisticated understanding of the issues involved in applying linkage techniques to neuropsychiatric disorders has set in. All of the
authors in this section emphasize that
linkage analyses of complex mental
disorders are far more complicated,
will require more extensive replication, and will take much longer than
originally envisioned.

2. Larger sample sizes.—To date,
most reports of neuropsychiatric linkage findings—both positive and negative—have been based on small sample sizes. Increasing the number of
families in future studies is critical to
add to the statistical power of the analDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 38, No. 3-4

yses and to accommodate for heterogeneity within samples. However, as
pointed out by Dr. Bassett, studying
large samples is not easily accomplished for illnesses in which the symptoms themselves interfere with research. For example, in the case of

schizophrenia, lowered fertility re
duces family size and symptoms such as
suspiciousness limit the cooperation of
essential family members.

3. Improved gene mapping.—A
more complete and accurate map of
the genome than is currently available
will advance linkage studies in all medical areas and, in particular, will benefit linkage studies of neuropsychiatric
disorders. More complete mapping
will generate additional markers and
increase the extent to which families
are informative. Therefore, even with
the small samples discussed above, statistical power of the neuropsychiatric
linkage studies can be improved.
Greater accuracy, in turn, will reduce
false clues that have previously misdirected intensive linkage searches. Illustrations of the latter were given by Dr.
Kidd in his chapter. For example, following the discovery of the partial trisomy by Dr. Bassett, the search for
linkage with schizophrenia on chromosome 5 was further encouraged by the
mistaken notion that the glucocorticoid receptor gene, a logical candidate
gene for schizophrenia, was in the region of the trisomy.

There is reason for considerable optimism, here, however, since the introduction of new molecular techniques,
such as polymerase chain reactions, are
expected to provide more markers with
greater resolution.

4. Adjustment in the interpretation
of LOD scores.—As mentioned

 

The Genetics of Mental Illness iii

throughout the section, LOD scores of
3 are traditionally the cut-off for judging a linkage finding to be significant.
However, it has become increasingly
apparent that while this cut-off is appropriate for Mendelian disorders, a
more stringent definition of significance is needed for neuropsychiatric
illnesses that are likely to have a complex pattern of inheritance. While all
contributors agree that a considerably
higher LOD score is required, there is
no consensus on a specific alternative.

5. Heterogeneity. Heterogeneity
is a potential confound that has been
mentioned by all contributors. It involves the very likely possibility that
neuropsychiatric disorders each have
multiple causes—that is, that there
may be more than one genetic form of
the disorder and that there may be phenocopies (i.e., nongenetic forms) of
each illness as well.

During his symposium presentation,
Neil Risch (who was not able to complete a chapter for this issue) emphasized that nonreplication of a genetic
linkage finding does not categorically
indicate disease heterogeneity (Risch,
1990). Dr. Risch pointed out that heterogeneity is caused by different mutations, either in the same or in different locations, that produce a similar
clinical outcome. True heterogeneity is
frequently observed in simple genetic
diseases and can be indicated by distinct clinical syndromes that run within
families and differ across families. To
illustrate this point, Dr. Risch cited the
two forms of X-linked muscular dystrophy (MD), Duchenne and Becker’s.
Duchenne’s, the serious form of MD,
is caused by a severe mutation while
Becker’s, the milder form of the disorder, is due to a lesser mutation at the

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

iv Cornblatt and Keefe

same locus. These two forms show entirely independent segregation patterns, with the phenotype running true
in families. In no case will a family
have one member with Duchenne’s
MD while another member has
Becker’s.

This means of establishing heterogeneity is not, however, possible for
most neuropsychiatric disorders. Complex clinical pictures make it very difficult to distinguish among families on
the basis of distinct syndromes, and
specific symptoms rarely breed true in
families. Given the problem of establishing true genetic heterogeneity in
psychiatric disorders, therefore, Dr.
Risch warned against the current widespread tendency to view negative results as indicating heterogeneity rather
than false positive findings.

5. Diagnostic Dilemmas.—A final
concern voiced by all of the researchers
included in this section is the need for
improved diagnosis—that is, the need
to improve the way the affected phenotype is defined for linkage studies.
There are at least two important considerations here. First is the need to refine diagnosis. Identification of affected cases is now based entirely on
standard diagnoses which are difficult
to make and rely predominantly on
clinical judgement (even when using
structured assessments). The second is
the need for long-term clinical followup. The importance of the latter is
highlighted by Dr. Kidd, when he describes the way in which the onset of
iliness in two family members after
linkage analysis had been completed
invalidated the initial Amish study
finding of a link between manicdepressive illness and chromosome 11.

A new Strategy in psychopathology

Social Biology

may overcome several of the difficulties described above by focusing on the
phenotypic expression of a diseaserelated gene. This strategy is concerned with mild clinical variants and
neurocognitive “indicators” of a given
disease gene and is discussed in detail
in the last chapter of the series by Richard Keefe and collaborators. To
date, this approach has been primarily
applied to schizophrenia; however, as
pointed out by Dr. Baron at the end of
his paper, there is a need for such clinical neurocognitive indicators in studies of affective illness as well.

The primary function of phenotype
refinement is to establish homogeneous subgroups with a common etiology, thus greatly facilitating linkage
analysis. Clarification of the phenotypic expression of a disease gene simultaneously addresses the problems
of heterogeneity and imprecise diagnoses. False positive identifications
based on misleading clinical characteristics could be eliminated by only considering cases to be affected if they also
display the requisite neurocognitive indicators. Conversely, subjects with
partial clinical features who have the
specified indicators can be added. Reducing both false positives and false
negatives will add precision to pedigree
analysis and will serve to distinguish
homogeneous subtypes of illness that
involve specific deficits or subclinical
traits.

Finally, improved understanding of
the phenotypic expression of disease
genes has considerable potential to
provide information about underlying
mechanisms and contribute to treatment. As stressed by Dr. Kidd in the
first chapter, finding the gene is only
the first step. It is then necessary to dis
 
CY
=
©
N
mei
oO
=
oO
oO
oO
A
Co
©
=—
av.
om
=
—
CS
‘'S
ws
oD
=
oo
O
S
Ce
©
>>
—
=
N
mi
oO
>
—
c
~.
va
Oo
vo
oO
co
CS
©
—
c
Ss
©
A

Vol. 38, No. 3-4

cover what the gene does. The identification of specific subclinical phenotypic indicators can act as a bridge
between identification of a disease
gene on the molecular level and the observation of the gene’s clinical consequence. Moreover, specific indicators

 

The Genetics of Mental IHness v

such as neurocognitive deficits may
eventually provide information about
effective treatment strategies. Thus,
this burgeoning area of psychopathology research may provide a major contribution to the progress of neuropsychiatric genetics.

REFERENCES

Bassett, A. S., B. C. McGILivray, B. Jones,
and J.T. PANTzar. 1988. Partial trisomy
chromosome 5 cosegregating with schizophrenia. Lancet 1 799-801.

Cornstatt, B. 1990. Organizer and Presidor of
symposium “New Developments in the Genetics of Mental IlIness,”” Annual Meeting of
the American Association for the Advance
ment of Science, Saturday, February 17,

1990.

RiscH, N. J. 1990. The role of genetic linkage
Studies in psychiatry, presented in symposium ‘‘New Developments in the Genetics
of Mental Illness”, Annual Meeting of the
American Association for the Advancement
of Science, Saturday, February 17, 1990.

 
