Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

A short history of genetic counseling

Sheldon C. Reed

To cite this article: Sheldon C. Reed (1974) A short history of genetic counseling, Social Biology,
21:4, 332-339, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1974.9988131

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1974.9988131

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

ee
(g Submit your article to this journal @
all Article views: 61

»
Q View related articles @

wa Citing articles: 35 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

A Short History of Genetic Counseling

Sheldon C. Reed

Dight Institute for Human Genetics,
University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota

Genetic counseling was not called that in
the beginning. The practice had flourished
long before the word “genetics” was invented. Mothers-in-law have probably often
made invidious comments about the hereditary characteristics to be expected in their
grandchildren, and no doubt fathers-in-law
also engaged in this aggressive activity at
times. The emotional aspects of genetic
counseling have probably been its greatest
weakness. Furthermore, the counseling was
done without the benefit of Mendel’s laws.
Everyone knew that some traits were familial and that children frequently show the
same defects as some of their relatives.
While the mythology was vague and often
erroneous, it was widely accepted (and
dreaded) by expectant parents. It was a
pervasive part of every culture.

Genetic counseling in the past centuries
depended upon the general cultural concepts of heredity. Observations of heredity
in plants and animals must have influenced
the thinking of the old-time genetic counselors, such as witch doctors, priests, chiefs,
and others who gave advice. The Egyptians
left carvings which demonstrated the differences between improved and unimproved
cattle; but it wasn’t until Robert Bakewell
(1726-95) that accurate breeding records
were kept and experiments such as inbreed
 

ing were consciously attempted. The first
Shorthorn Cattle Herd Book was published
in England in 1822, and other breed societies for the promotion of horses, cattle,
sheep, and swine were established. The
animal breeders began publishing extensive
pedigrees and became interested in calculating the intensity of inbreeding in their
animals. The discovery of Mendel’s laws
put the discipline of heredity on an acceptable scientific basis, and the modern
biological revolution burst into being.

In the United States, Sewall Wright began using more complicated arithmetic for
animal breeding studies. His methods have
been modified by Newton Morton and others for use in human genetics as the basis
of pedigree analysis and the formal genetics
of mankind. But this was not in the direct
line of descent of genetic counseling.

It is my contention that Sir Francis
Galton was the fountainhead from which
modern genetic counseling developed. He
was the first to study, in an adequate way,
the contributions of heredity and environment in the development of human traits,
He compared identical and fraternal twins
without the insight of Mendel’s laws, yet
arrived at a reasonable concept of the fundamental basis of heredity in the development of human behavior. No doubt he over
332

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 21, No. 4

emphasized the importance of heredity
which reflected the attitudes of the Victorian era regarding race and class, His
contribution to the lineage of genetic counseling results from his involvement in the
eugenics movement from which genetic
counseling evolved. In 1865 (p. 165) he
stated that, “if a twentieth part of the
cost and pains were spent in measures for
the improvement of the human race that is
spent on the improvement of the breeds of
horses and cattle, what a galaxy of genius
might we not create.”’ Galton’s 1865 article
really set the scene. The genetic improvement of the mind and body was considered
both desirable and possible.

The discovery of modern genetics in the
early years of the twentieth century seemed
to be all that was needed to nurture the
eugenics movements which were developing
around the world. It didn’t work out that
way, because the chickens were counted
before they were hatched. The concept
of the eugenics movement was attractive
because it seemed to provide a biological
solution for practically all social problems.
The eugenics movement failed because it
was so easily perverted in its youth, long
before it had sufficient scientific underpinnings to permit it to stand alone or to resist seduction. Even Mendelism has had
some serious growth pains and is just now
recovering from the corruption of Lysenkoism.

It is easy today to see how foolish the
eugenicists were, but this type of derision is
rather gratuitous, as it reveals the same
type of superiority complex upon which
they foundered. Ludmerer (1972, p. 34)
points out, “Until around 1915 one of the
remarkable features of the American eugenics movement was the high degree of
enthusiasm and participation it engendered
among experimental geneticists.” Ludmerer
also states, “Every member of the first editorial board of Genetics (1916)—a group

History of Genetic Counseling 333

which included such respected geneticists
as T. H. Morgan, William E. Castle, E. M.
East, H. S. Jennings and Raymond Pearl—
participated in or gave support to the eugenics movement at some point during the
movement’s early history” (p. 34). There
is no question but that the basic concept of
eugenics was, and is, valid; it was the misguided attempts at implementation which
led to disaster.

C. B. Davenport laid the foundations for
the Eugenics Records Office at Cold Spring
Harbor in 1904. He was perhaps an overzealous disciple of Mendelism, in comparison with T, H. Morgan, who was deriding
Mendelism at that time and did not become converted until 1909. Davenport undoubtedly did some bona fide genetic counseling during the next forty years, though
he didn’t use that term.

I have received the impression from some
young geneticists that they think of Davenport as some kind of stupid racist propagandist for eugenics. In actuality, he was
not a propagandist, or a racist (see Ludmerer, 1972), or stupid. He was a brilliant
scientist and pioneer in human genetics and
respected by geneticists of all types. T. H.
Morgan and C. B. Davenport were the
American elected members of the Permanent International Committee on Genetics
and Davenport was Chairman of the Organization Committee which set up the
Sixth International Congress of Genetics
in 1932. Davenport was also Chairman of
the Finance Committee for the Congress
and Chairman of the August 26, 1932
Plenary Session on “Mutations.”

Laurence H. Snyder learned much from
Davenport and dedicated each edition of
his popular genetics text to Davenport.
Snyder did considerable genetic advising
at Ohio State University as did Madge
Macklin, M.D.

My Ph.D. advisor, Professor W. E.
Castle, did not do much genetic advising,
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

334.

although he was interested in human genetics and all four editions of his respected
text were entitled Genetics and Eugenics.
They were published by the prestigious
Harvard University Press between 1916
and 1930.

One of the early eugenists, not a professional geneticist, was a physician, Charles
F. Dight, who in his will of March 1, 1927,
left his estate to the University of Minnesota for the following purpose: “To Promote
Biological Race Betterment—betterment
in Human Brain Structure and Mental Endowment and therefor in Behavior.”
Numerous stipulations as to how this program was to be carried out included the
instruction that the University “maintain
a place for consultation and advice on heredity and eugenics and for rating of people, first, as to the efficiency of their bodily
structure; second, as to their mentality;
third, as to their fitness to marry and reproduce.” Clearly this was to be genetic
counseling, but bound in eugenic shackles.
This was a reasonable concept in 1927.

Denmark is a country where eugenics
might be expected to succeed because it has
a small, homogeneous, highly literate population. Denmark passed a law in 1929
which permitted the sterilization of patients for genetic reasons. In the thirteen
years from 1929-42 about two thousand
patients were sterilized. These sterilizations
were voluntary from a legal point of view,
but in some cases it is quite conceivable
that they represented a trade-off between
the person’s basic attitudes and the gains
obtained by freedom from further pregnancies, from future supervision, and from future troubles in general. As far as I know,
there has been no popular clamor to have
the sterilization law repealed, and my impression is that the law now merely provides for the legalization of generally
acceptable medical-social practice without
any eugenic considerations, However, this

Reed

Social Biology

was not the case in 1929 and for some time
thereafter. In Tage Kemp’s book (1943)
Arvelighedslaere, an elementary text of
human genetics, the final section is on genetic hygiene. This section includes what
Kemp called genetic-hygiene advice and
genetic prognosis. To Kemp, genetic counseling was undoubtedly a eugenic tool. The
chapter in which his seventeen counseling
cases are presented as examples of the
technique is entitled “‘Genetic-Hygiene Laws
in Denmark.” The seventeen examples include mental retardation, psychosis, convulsive seizures, muscular dystrophy, aniridia,
deaf-mutism, ichthyosis vulgaris, and diabetes mellitus. In all these examples there
was a consideration of therapeutic abortion,
sterilization, or both. The final sentence of
Kemp’s book is: “Medical genetics in connection with the associated advice and registration create the necessary scientific
foundation for carrying out measures aimed
at preventing hereditary diseases” (p. 313).
This kind of program is negative eugenics.

The Dight Institute for Human Genetics
began to function on July 1, 1941, and during its first year there were numerous requests from families for consultation with
the first Director, Professor C. P. Oliver.
These consultations were considered to be
more the basis for future studies than
a simple effort to be of assistance to the
family making the request. There were certainly no attempts to benefit society as a
whole in dealing with these families. This
consultation program was not thought of
as a program of eugenics. Professor Oliver
left Minnesota in 1946 to return to the
University of Texas.

On a more personal note, I arrived at the
Dight Institute on Monday, August 18,
1947, to begin my duties. During the morning, I was summoned to the Pediatrics Outpatient Department to give genetic advice
to a family in which four out of five children had some type of eosinophilia. In the

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 21, No. 4

afternoon, there was a request for information on first cousin marriages. The next day
I was asked to come to Pediatrics again to
advise a family in which five of eight children had an heredomacular degeneration. I
have kept a daily log of the counseling
cases ever since. I could not see that these
consultations had much to do with eugenics, at least not in the case of individual
families.

There was no generally accepted name
for what I was doing, although the terms
“senetic consultation” and “genetic advice”
had been used in the Dight Institute Bulletin, Number 1, 1943, by Professor C. P.
Oliver. I did not like Kemp’s term “genetic
hygiene,” because the popular concept of
the word “hygiene” in the United States
had to do with the use of tooth pastes,
deodorants, and other irrelevant items. The
term ‘“‘genetic counseling” occurred to me
as an appropriate description of the process
which I thought of as a kind of genetic
social work without eugenic connotations.
I am still completely uncertain as to
whether the net effect of genetic counseling
is eugenic or dysgenic. It is my impression
that my practice of divorcing the two concepts of eugenics and genetic counseling
contributed to the rapid growth of genetic
counseling. Genetic counseling would have
been rejected, in all probability, if it had
been presented as a technique of eugenics.

On December 2, 1947, I offered the term
genetic counseling to the Dight Institute
Advisory Committee for comments. The
Committee was not overly enthusiastic
about the term, but the discussion did not
support any other term. Consequently, the
first of the Dight Institute Bulletins to be
written by me, a report of progress for
1947-49, Bulletin Number 6, included a
Separate and extensive article entitled
“Counseling in Human Genetics.” The next
Bulletin of the Dight Institute, Number 7,
contained the next installment on ‘“Counsel
History of Genetic Counseling

335

ing in Human Genetics, Part II,” while
Bulletin Number 8 contained Part III, the

last part of the series.1 The material in

these three Bulletins was extended for publication in 1955 as the first edition of
Counseling in Medical Genetics. -The
change in title to “medical” genetics from
“human” genetics was anticipated in the
first bulletin of the counseling series as exemplified in the following quotation (Bull.
No. 6, p. 8): “The function of a counselor
in human genetics has been inherited
mainly by the physician, which is as it
should be, for the problems are very often
medical as well as genetic.” However, the
idea that only physicians can do genetic
counseling is erroneous because not all genetic counseling is related to medical traits.
There are several other reasons why genetic
counseling should not necessarily be done
only by physicians.

In 1951, there were ten genetic counseling centers in the United States, as listed
in the Dight Institute Bulletin, Number 7.
Some of the persons doing counseling at
these centers were J. V. Neel, C. N. Herndon, F. J. Kallmann, F. E. Stephens, and
A. G. Steinberg. It is impossible to include
everyone who did counseling, particularly
those individuals in other countries. The
growth in numbers of such centers between
1941 and 1961 was rapid in terms of the
past, but was slow indeed compared with
the subsequent “explosion” of counseling
clinics. In 1959, in Heredity Counseling
(p. 63), L. R. Dice opined:

Human heredity actually is a phase of
public health. The heredity of the population
should be of at least as much concern to
each commonwealth as are infectious diseases. I look forward to the time when heredity counseling will be available in every
large center of population. Such a development, however, is not likely to be achieved
in the near future.

1 All Dight Institute Bulletins are available on
request and without charge.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

336 Reed

Little did he realize that the 1974 International Directory of Genetic Services
(Bergsma and Lynch, 1974) would list 387
centers in the United States and a total
world-wide count of 890 human genetics
units. Naturally, the 890 units vary in the
services provided, but the Directory at least
provides the name of a person to whom the
public may turn for preliminary genetic
orientation.

Genetic counseling has been developing
rapidly in many countries. It is not appropriate to try to outline this progress, country by country; but perhaps the reader is
curious about the one country in which
eugenics became a highly visible national
policy. In Nazi Germany, an attempt was
made to use human genetics for the benefit
of the state, even though it resulted in the
destruction of millions of innocent bystanders. Not only was the science of human genetics misused, but all civil liberties
and political institutions were destroyed.
Genetic counseling, in my concept at least,
is a type of social work entirely for the
benefit of the whole family without direct
concern for its effect upon the state or
politics. This latter concept is certainly
shared by present-day human geneticists
in West Germany as exemplified by the
text Genetic Counseling, by Fuhrmann and
Vogel (1969).

Most genetic counseling will not be done
as a function of the state, but by the family
physician who will often be the first person
to see the baby with a congenital defect.
However, a human genetics counseling unit
with an independent identity was established in the Minnesota State Board of
Health in 1959. Lee Schacht, Ph.D., has
been in charge of this human genetics unit
and has provided outstanding counseling
to many Minnesota families.

Until about 1959, genetic counseling had
been pretty much an epidemiological, empirical-risk type of exercise. The discovery

Social Biology

by Lejeune et al. (1959) that children
with Down’s syndrome (Mongolism) had
three members of the 21st pair of chromosomes instead of just two was the event
that finally brought human genetics to the
attention of ordinary physicians. In fact,
chromosome study became synonymous
with medical genetics in the minds of many
physicians. With the “discovery” of human
chromosomes, genetic counseling also came
of age, became public property, and turned
out to be a concern of ethicists in particular. The number of unqualified “instamatic” human geneticists who suddenly
appeared was astonishing.

The rediscovery of Sir Archibald Garrod’s work (1902) on inborn errors of metabolism and the early books of Haldane
(1954) and of Harris (1959) on human
biochemistry were of the greatest significance for genetic counseling. The promise
and the practice of such biochemical techniques rest upon the detection of persons
who carry a recessive gene in a concealed
state and in the detection of homozygous
conditions both before and after birth.

The biological revolution now in progress
may be of greater importance than was the
industrial revolution. Naturally, one does
not comprehend the significance of a revolution during its early stages. One of the
fascinating features of the early stages of
the biological revolution is the ongoing
development of the technique of amniocentesis. This permits the detection of both
chromosomal and biochemical defects in
the fetal cells and provides the option of a
therapeutic abortion for those who wish to
exercise the option. Obviously, genetic
counseling should be involved both before
and after the amniocentesis is performed.
The impact of such new techniques has
been widespread, and these techniques are
viewed as aids to genetic counseling. Newspapers and magazines publish frequent articles with such titles as “Genetic Counsel
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

Vol. 21, No. 4

ing is Wave of the Future.” The reader
interested in a sound scientific treatment
of the subject of amniocentesis is referred
to the book edited by Dorfman (1972).
There is a large even more recent literature
on the subject.

The World Health Organization cannot
direct any of its member countries to initiate any kind of program, but it can volunteer information helpful to any country. It
has produced a series of reports on many
subjects, of which Technical Report Number 416 is devoted to Genetic Counselling
(1969). It was my privilege to provide the
agenda for the 1968 meeting which led to
this report. This conference in Geneva,
chaired by Professor J. A. Book, was perhaps the milestone at which genetic counseling became “official” on a world-wide
basis.

While I have followed up many of my
counseling cases and have published the
results of some of them (Reed, 1949; Reed
and Nordlie, 1961; Reed, 1963), the first
publication of a follow-up of a fairly large
complete sample was that of Carter et al.
(1971). They point out, “The first genetic
clinic in the British Isles was established at
the Hospital for Sick Children in 1946” (p.
281). The historical significance of their
follow-up was, in part, the strong indication
that the parents of affected children were
influenced by what they learned from the
genetic counselor. That is, two-thirds of
the high-risk parents were deterred from
planning further children. There is no way
of knowing whether they would have behaved in the same way without the counseling. The evidence is clear that most people
are grateful for genetic counseling, but I
still would not hazard a guess as to whether
the net result is eugenic or dysgenic. The
best attitude would still seem to be that
the counseling is a social service which is
carried out entirely for the benefit of the
family involved, that the consultation should

History of Genetic Counseling

337

be free of charge so there is no financial
barrier, and that eventually its availability
will be universal. The previous attitudes of
a person will determine whether he or she
wishes to request genetic counseling when
it is available. Obviously, only genetic counseling which results from personal motivation is likely to be of value to the client.

An interesting contribution to our comprehension of how genetic counseling works
is the paper of Leonard et al. (1972) which
shows that the decisions parents make depend more upon the prospective burden of
the defective child than upon the risk of
its appearance. They worry more about
their own possible future distress caused by
the defective child than about the distress
that will be suffered by the child. The
parents do not state the situation in quite
these terms, but this is what experienced
counselors have realized on an impressionistic basis for many years. At the Dight
Institute, there is an occasional parent
whose willingness to offer the defective
child for research purposes is greater than
one would expect if the child were less of
a burden. Other parents insist that the burden of the defective child has contributed
to the development of their characters,
which we hope is the case.

The way in which genetic counseling will
be delivered in the immediate future seems
to be coming into view. The family physician and the genetic counseling centers will
function more efficiently, and in addition
there will be many satellite genetic counseling units revolving about a well-established
center. These satellites in neighboring cities
where no regular center exists will be visited
weekly or monthly by one or more genetic
counselors and diagnosticians. With the
cooperation of local referring physicians,
the counseling and tests will be provided
at the satellite unit. As examples, there are
presently numerous satellite units in Pennsylvania and New Jersey centered around
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

338

the genetic counseling center in Philadelphia. In Colorado, the medical genetics center in Denver manages three satellite units
in Wyoming as well as several in Colorado.
The proper spacing of these satellites in
various countries is probably the way in
which genetic counseling will be provided
for a significant part of the world population which could benefit by a genetic
counseling service.

In the past, persons usually requested
genetic counseling from their physician or
went to a genetic counseling center. A new
dimension has been added to genetic counseling as a result of various massive screening programs which have been initiated. In
the screening programs, the counselor may
approach the persons detected and offer genetic counseling. Such screening programs
Open a new panorama of problems related
to the invasion of privacy, the psychology
of the “screened” person, and the economics of the process, to name a few. The future history of genetic counseling will
certainly be of the greatest interest, particularly in relation to ethical concepts.

FINAL COMMENTS

Present-day genetic counseling is gradually acquiring the techniques and information responsible for shifting it from the
mythological to the precise probability situation in which, in many cases, the genetic

Reed

Social Biology

or biochemical or chromosomal constitution
of the early fetus may be determined with
great accuracy for specific traits. The astonishing improvement in the reliability of
the techniques and the predictions permitted by the techniques require that the genetic counselor not only be highly trained
in regard to these techniques, but also be
highly sensitive to the attitudes of the various categories of people in his geographic
area who may come for counseling.

There is considerable interest in genetic
counseling as it relates to genetic engineering, cloning, and other possible future technical developments. There is no need to
predict the future while writing a short history of the past. The biological revolution
is probably only beginning, which means
that its future course is very difficult to
predict. It is possible that genetic counseling, as such, will continue to evolve much
more slowly than has been the case during
the last two decades. It is my hope that
genetic counseling will continue to be of
help to the individual family and that it
will not become the tool of any governmental population program. Population
policies and programs will become of the
greatest importance very soon, but they
should be carefully separated from the
practice of genetic counseling. Humanity
cannot afford the costs of political perversion of the principles of genetics.

REFERENCES

BercsMA, D., and H. T. Lynecn (eds.). 1974.
International directory of genetic services. The
National Foundation-March of Dimes, New
York,

Carter, C, O., J. A. FRASER RosBerts, K. A. EVANS,
and A. R. Buck. 1971. Genetic clinic, A followup. Lancet i(Feb. 6.):281-285.

Dice, L. R. 1959. The structure of heredity counseling services, p. 60-64. 7x H. G. Hammons
(ed.), Heredity Counseling. Hoeber-Harper, New
York.

Dorrman, A. (ed.). 1972. Antenatal diagnosis.
Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago and London.

FUHRMANN, W., and F. VoceL. 1969. Genetic
counseling, A guide for the practicing physician.
Springer-Verlag, New York.

GALTON, F. 1865. Hereditary talent and character.
MacMillan’s Magazine 12:165.

Garrop, A. E. 1902. The incidence of alkaptonuria:
A study in chemical individuality. Lancet
1i: 1616.

HALDANE, J. B. S. 1954. The biochemistry of
genetics. Macmillan, New York and London.

, H. 1959. Human biochemical genetics.
Cambridge Univ. Press, London.

Kemp, TAGE. 1943. Arvelighedslaere. Ejnar Munksgaard, Copenhagen,

LeyEuNE, J.. M. Gautier, and R. Turpin. 1959.
Etude des chromosomes somatiques de neuf
enfants mongoliens. C.R. Acad. Sci. (Paris)
248:1721-1722.

Lronarp, C. O., G. A. CHASE, and B. Cuitps. 1972.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 21, No. 4 History of Genetic Counseling 339

Genetic counseling: A consumers’ view. N.E.
J. Med. 287:433-439.

LupMERER, K. M. 1972. Genetics and American
society. A historical appraisal. The Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, Baltimore and London.

Reep, S. C. 1949. Counseling in human genetics.
Dight Institute, Bull. No, 6. Univ. of Minnesota
Press, Minneapolis.

. 1951. Counseling in human genetics, Part

II. Dight Institute, Bull. No. 7. Univ. of Min
nesota Press, Minneapolis.

. 1953. Counseling in human genetics, Part

III, Dight Institute, Bull. No. 8 Univ. of

Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.

. 1955, Counseling in medical genetics. W.

B. Saunders, Philadelphia and London.

. 1963. Counseling in medical genetics. 2nd
ed. W. B. Saunders, Philadelphia and London.

Reep, S. C., and E. B. Norptrm. 1961, Genetic
counseling: For children of mixed racial ancestry. Eugen. Quart. 8:157-163.

Worrtp HEALTH ORGANIZATION. 1969. Genetic
counseling, Tech. Rep. No. 416. World Health
Organization, Geneva.

 

 
