Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Physical development of interracial children in the
first year

Alfred F. Naylor & Lee Willerman

To cite this article: Alfred F. Naylor & Lee Willerman (1979) Physical development of interracial
children in the first year, Social Biology, 26:1, 7-15, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1979.9988357

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1979.9988357

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lal Article views: 4

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

Physical Development of Interracial Children

in the First Year

Alfred F. Naylor and Lee Willerman

 

National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland; and Department of Psychology, University of Texas, Austin, Texas

ABSTRACT: Interracial children of white mothers and black fathers were compared to interracial
children of black mothers and white fathers on growth rates during the first year of life. Results
indicate that interracial children of white mothers gained less weight between birth and four
months of age than did interracial children of black mothers or monoracial black or white
children. By one year of age, catch-up growth appears to have occurred, and there is little
evidence for lasting effects of the growth retardation during the first four months of life.

All too often when comparing human
races in terms of either physical or intellectual measures, we must concede that differences observed could be due to either
genetic or environmental influences or
some combination of the two. Provided
that certain preconditions are met, the offspring of interracial matings open the possibility of untangling some of the genetic
and environmental influences on traits
that may have been found to differ between races. The crucial precondition is
that the respective midparent averages for
the traits in question or other relevant
traits do not differ by mating type, i.e.,
midparent scores of white mothers and
black fathers do not differ from midparent
scores of black mothers and white fathers.
If these midparent factors are either
equivalent or statistically controlled, then
observed differences between the two mating types ought to be attributable to environmental influences (in the absence of sex
linkage).

The purpose of the present study is to
report on growth during the first year of

Address requests for reprints to: Alfred F. Naylor,
Federal Building, DNB, NINCDS, NIH, Bethesda,
Maryland 20205.

life of interracial children of black and
white parentage. First we compare the
growth of such children as a function of
parental racial combination, and then we
compare the growth of the interracial children to “monoracial” black and white controls. We readily acknowledge that the
designation of race is somewhat arbitrary
given the substantial degree of admixture
amongst American blacks of genes more
characteristic of whites (Reed, 1969) and
that the racial designations employed here
have a large social component.

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Comparative growth studies on whites,
blacks, interracials and East Indians have
been conducted both in Mozambique by
da Costa Martins (1971) and in Pretoria,
South Africa, by Levine (1972). Whites
grew most rapidly of the four groups in
both locations. Levine found East Indian
growth to be most similar to that of whites
and attributed the black and mixed differential to both genetic and environmental
causes. However, da Costa Martins found
the mixed group to parallel whites most
closely, although all four were approxi
 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

8 Naylor and Willerman

mately equal in size at maturity. In Cuba,
Laska-Mierzejewska (1970) observed that
blacks and mulattoes were actually taller
at maturity than whites.

Davenport and Steggerda (1929) believed that they found a possible instance
of negative heterosis when they reported
the browns of Jamaica weighed less and
were shorter than samples of whites and
blacks from that island. Shapiro (1961)
pointed out that the three groups were
hardly comparable since the browns included a higher proportion of males between 16 and 20 years of age who had not
yet attained full adult stature. Gedda
(1967), in studying crosses of American
black fathers and European mothers,
found some increase in stature in children
when compared to a sample of Italian
children. This, of course, is doubtful evidence of heterosis since the American
blacks were soldiers who had been selected to exceed minimal height.

Among secondary school children of
similar socioeconomic status in Kingston,
Jamaica, Ashcroft et al. (1966) observed
that the stature and weight of Africans,
Afro-Europeans and Europeans were
similar, indicating that in that environment the size potential of blacks and interracials equalled that of whites. Comparing
data on black children from private practice born in the District of Columbia to
published white norms, Scott et al. (1950)
also found no differences. In three separate studies, Barr et al. (1972) in California, Owen and Lubin (1973) in Ohio, and
Garn et al. (1973) in Michigan found that
while black babies may be smaller at
birth, within a year or two they overtake
and become larger than socioeconomically
matched white children. In another large
scale study from California, Wingerd et al.
(1971) present results which are quite consistent with the above three studies, although the authors summarize their data
so as to de-emphasize the larger size of

Social Biology

black children at later ages. Remarkably,
Garn et al. (1972) found postnatal ossification proceeded more rapidly in blacks than
whites even though the whites were at
considerable socioeconomic advantage,
confirming older findings of Hess and
Weinstock (1925).

We have noted that within the Collaborative Perinatal Project black pregnancies tend to terminate sooner and
yield lighter babies than white or interracial pregnancies. Fujikura and Froehlich
(1972), using project data, found that at
about 35-weeks gestation the weights of
black babies begin to lag behind whites.
Erhardt et al. (1964), Freeman et al.
(1970), and Bergner and Susser (1970) had
also reported this phenomenon. The latter
authors reviewed dietary studies and concluded only that the effect of maternal nutrition on birth weight is an open question
and that a fresh experiment using dietary
supplements is called for.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The data to be reported come from the
Collaborative Perinatal Project which has
followed approximately 56,000 children
from the time of the mother’s pregnancy
through eight years of age in twelve collaborating hospitals throughout the country. These children have been given batteries of neurological, psychological, and
other tests at various prescribed intervals
during the course of their growth. In the
entire Collaborative Study the racial distribution is “approximately 46 per cent

‘black, 45 per cent white, and the rest

mainly Puerto Rican. Details of the sampling frames in each hospital and other
hospital characteristics can be found in
Broman et al. (1975).

There were 214 black-white interracial
pregnancies identified within the Collaborative Study. During registration of
the pregnancy, the mother was asked
about the race of the father, and her reply

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 1

is the source of our interracial definition.
Psychological test data from this sample
have been previously used to examine the
relation of race of mother to intellectual
performance in interracial children (Willerman et al., 1970, 1974). The present
study focuses on physical measures,
namely, weight and length at birth, four
months, and one year of age as obtained
during routine pediatric and neurological
examinations.

RESULTS

In our studies of intellectual performance within this sample, the most interesting analyses involved contrasting the
effect of race of mother on four-year IQ.
The IQ’s of interracial children of white
mothers (and black fathers) averaged
about nine points higher than the IQ’s of
children of black mothers (and white
fathers) although genetic intellectual potential, as judged from socioeconomic
variables, seemed about equal in the
white-black and black-white matings.
Another finding of interest was that interracial children of black mothers obtained
significantly higher scores at eight months
of age on the Bayley scale of Mental Development than did interracial children of
white mothers. No significant difference
was observed on the Bayley Scale of
Motor Development administered at that
time.

The results of these studies were interpreted as indicating early postnatal environmental influences on the mental development of the children, the effects of
which were detectable as early as eight
months of age. It should be noted, moreover, that the interracial children of black
mothers performed significantly better at
eight months of age and significantly
worse at four years of age. In general,
there is a positive, but low relationship of
mental test scores at eight months and four
years of age within both black and white

Interracial Children 9

groups of children (Broman et al., 1975).
The reason for this reversal was not clear,
although we will have more to say about
that in the Discussion section of this report.

COMPARISONS BETWEEN INTERRACIAL
GROUPS

Because of special interest in the longitudinal characteristics of the growth
process during the first year of life, the
interracial children must have been measured at birth and four months of age to be
included in the analyses that follow. Of
the original group of 214 interracial children, only 144 of them had been measured
on either height or weight at both birth
and four months of age. Forty-five cases
were lost because of failure to keep
follow-up appointments; others were lost
because the child was delivered at a different hospital or was not a liveborn. Use of
one-year physical measurements required
that previous measurements also be available. Thus, the interracial sample includes
those who were measured at both birth
and four months and may have also been
measured at one year as well. No children
measured at one year, but lacking either
birth or four month data, are included in
the interracial growth analyses that follow.

Table 1 gives the means and standard
deviations for a variety of descriptive
characteristics for the two interracial mating groups—those composed of white
mothers and black fathers, and those
composed of black mothers and white
fathers. The two groups do not differ significantly on any of the variables shown.
Means and standard deviations for the
two mating types are practically identical,
except that a nonsignificantly larger proportion of the black mothers who came for
four-month follow-up appointments were
married. Since the mean and standard de
‘viations were so similar for the two mat
 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

10 Naylor and Willerman

Social Biology

TABLE 1

CHARACTERISTICS OF THE INTERRACIAL PREGNANCIES

WHITE MOTHER

VARIABLES Mean
Socioeconomic index ..............5: 47
Gestation (weeks) .............0000- 39.6
POU a ww ng ned ge Og SE BN BA be ed Bn Be SZ 1.6
Maternal age ........... cece eeu cee 24
Prepregnant weight (kg)............. 59
Maternal height (cm.)............... 162
Per cent male offspring ............. 52
Per cent married ................... 72

ing types, it seemed unnecessary to adjust
for all the slight differences in the analyses
to follow which compare the two groups.

Table 2 presents the means and standard deviations for the weight and height
measures taken at birth, four months, and
one year of age for the two mating types.
The pattern of means for weight and
length are very similar. At birth the interracial children of white mothers are
slightly heavier and longer, but by four
months of age the pattern is reversed and
the interracial children of black mothers
are now heavier and taller. By one year of
age the differences between the infants are
relatively less, although the height and
weight advantage for the interracial children of black mothers is still maintained.

Table 2 also compares the interracial
children of black and white mothers after
adjustments have been made for sex of
baby and marital status. Data from a child
were used for a weight or a height analysis
only if they were recorded at both birth
and four months; use of data at one year
also required the availability of the earlier
data. The qualitative dichotomies of race
of mother, sex of baby, and marital status
can be quantified by using the scores 0 and
1 and assigning (arbitrarily) the value 1 to
having a white mother, to being female
and having parents who were married.
Multiple regression of the physical measures on the scores were then performed.
The regression constant for race effect is

BLACK MoTHER

sp No Mean sp No

20 109 46 18 32
2.9 112 39.4 2.8 31

1.6 112 1.9 2.2 32

5.8 112 25 5.9 32

12 106 57 8.9 32
6.4 102 161 7.8 31

oe 112 A7 wee 32
112 84 e@s 32

thus an adjusted estimate of the difference
in measure between children of white and
black mothers.

None of the differences in Table 2 is
significant when compared to its standard
error. While the data cannot be regarded
as conclusive as to whether or not differences exist, Table 2 does suggest that interracial children of white mothers were
larger at birth than interracials with black
mothers, but were decidedly smaller at
four months and at one year.

As a second procedure, the data for
weight and height were independently
subjected to analyses of variance with race
of mother and sex of child entered as between subject variables and weight or
height at the three ages as a within subject
variable. The computer program used to
analyze the data was a modification of the
BMDO8V program. This modified program has the advantage of providing unweighted means solutions for unequal cell
sizes (Marston, 1974).

When the weight data were analyzed
including the one year measurements, no
significant main effect for race of mother
or sex of child were observed, nor was
there a significant interaction between
race of mother and weight of child. When
the weight data were reanalyzed after
excluding the one year weight, however,
the race of mother < weight of child interaction was now statistically significant
(Piao = 4.32, p < 0.05). This” result

 

 
 

Vol. 26, No. 1 Interracial Children II

means that the interracial children of

6, NNR NNO
zp roe em white mothers had gained significantly less
weight between birth and four months of
age than did the interracial children of
f S55 black mothers. There was also a sigs} *}5ge se° nificant sex X weight interaction. Boys
S gained more weight between birth and
® 9 four months than did girls (Fy 1449 = 4.81,
p < 0.05). Unlike the weight interaction
fs cluauw aad involving race of mother, however, there
: s oe “wn was no cross-over of the means between
a a birth and four months. Boys were heavier
S 5 both at birth and at four months of age.
9 3 Similar analyses were applied to the
5 . g ie mine length data and no significant main effects
9 ae ase oof or interactions were observed. The results
A bd 5 g S| H{ HHH HHH were not affected when one-year data
S : gE ¢ g] HBS were excluded from the analyses.
cn ms 52m oor
o 5 g “TT - COMPARISONS WITH MONORACIAL
2 a CONTROLS
& . z The difference in weight gains for the
5 = z glans Sés children of the two mating types raises a
S = me major question. Is the apparent reversal in
+S fs size advantage due to accelerated growth
2 z ; ene in interracial children of black mothers or
f z : el asto aoe is it due to retarded growth in children of
2 e = OAN white mothers? The interracial sample is
5 < E ~ small as a whole, and the size of the sub2 * = sample born to black mothers particularly
S & discourages elaborate analyses. Therefore,
oO o ome . .
3 z sl2oe Sax we decided to seek answers to this ques= ° a) Nae tion by making controlled comparisons be5 4 tween children of interracial and “monoA i ee racial” matings.
3 P33 In order to be eligible for inclusion in
= cos : the statistical analyses, the monoracial
ots ; children had to have weight and length
Gl it: - measurements at all three ages. This was
Y Sf ris iit not the case for the interracial children,
s a #2 a =F _ who were only required to have measure~S2 S25 ments at birth and four months of age.
Ee, gue There were 11,835 monoracial white chilse E25 dren and 12,320 monoracia] black chilE é 5 E é s dren eligible for the analyses.

Two multiple regression models were
applied, the predictive variables chosen

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

12 Naylor and Willerman

being those that had a high probability of
being recorded and were intended to reflect, directly or indirectly, socioeconomic,
obstetric (or intrauterine), and genetic
influences on growth. Both models included terms for sex of baby, marital
status, actual presence of the father in the
home, age of the mother, gestational age,
prepregnant weight and height of the
mother, and squares of some of those
terms.

The first alternative model also included
terms for parity, and socioeconomic index
(SED, as well as squares and crossproducts between terms. The SEI is a
simple index based on percentiles of income, education of head of household, and
occupation of head of household (Myrianthopoulos and French, 1968). The index
incorporates major items of socioeconomic
information, but does not correct for
numbers of persons and age composition
of the household.

The second alternative model included
as additional terms family income, education of the mother, number of adults in the
home, number of children less than five
years of age, number older than five, and
squares and cross-products of many of
these terms. It was found that the models
were indistinguishable in predictive value.
Each accounted for 21 per cent of the variability in birthweight and 18 per cent in
length at birth. Since the first model had
fewer variables, and previous work (Warburton and Naylor, 1971) had suggested a
rational basis for a parabolic relation between parity and birth weight, the first
model became the basic one for adjustments of physical measurements.

In performing calculations on measurements at birth, we used the regression
model as described. However, at four
months and at one year, physical size at
birth was itself added to the predictive
model. Also, since postnatal examinations
were not always performed precisely on

Social Biology

schedule, actual age at examination and
its square were also used in the predictive
model. As a consequence, 46 per cent of
the variability in four-month weight was
accounted for.

Table 3 presents the adjusted differences for weight and length between interracial children and monoracial controls
using the first model. The results in Table
3 rather decisively answer the question of
whether the reversal in weight is due to
retarded growth among the interracial
children of white mothers or accelerated
growth among the interracial children of
black mothers. From the first two columns
of adjusted differences for weights, it is
clear that the white interracials suffered
growth retardation relative to controls
even though at birth they had shown an
insignificant advantage over white controls and a substantial one over black controls. By one year of age, catch-up growth
seems to have occurred, and adjusted
weight differentials appear to have been
eradicated. The length differentials are all
nonsignificant and neither strongly support nor contradict the conclusions drawn
from the body weight analyses.

DISCUSSION

The most important finding in the present study was that interracial children
with white mothers gained less weight between birth and four months of age than
did interracial children of black mothers.
We are inclined to attribute the fourmonth weight deficit to transference from
mother to child of the temporary disorganization resulting from having broken a
very strong taboo. Contributing to this
disruption may be the fact that the interracial child of a white mother more obviously shows that a mixed mating has occurred than does the interracial child of a
black mother. Furthermore, review of the
nonpsychiatric medical records of white

 

 
Vol. 26, No. 1 Interracial Children 13

wos interracial mothers suggested that they
3 | One see tended to have more psychological probES al aaar oH 44 lems, but the evidence is too weak and
23\ § TAS various to justify summary here.
a tan OOO ‘os
omm A supplementary hypothesis is that the
R | mother-infant interactions involving the
Be z & white unmarried mothers would be more
é zZE subject to disruption and therefore asso5 e* nom ciated with reduced weight gains in the
Sy | mom SGS children. Although the limited available
z El] a) ae data demonstrate trends clearly consistent
10 z os . one vee with this expectation, the results cannot be
S = z =| 6lio.6 Soe regarded as conclusive.
3 z yaa tl The interracial children of white unF Zz married mothers weighed 3,199 gm. at
9 es birth and gained only 2,862 gm. during
= 5 the first four postnatal months. The interS 9 Oo racial children of white married mothers
a 3 « | |S8e ¢e¢ weighed 3,242 gm. at birth and gained
= 4 eel al age HHH 3,022 gm. during this same period. These
s a _ 3 5 Sag values can be compared to the birth
S ” = | a eae one weight of 3,301 gm. (unadjusted) for the
= 4 all é | monoracial white controls and a weight
S a z gg gain of 3,152 gm. during the first four
oS - all 2§ months. Thus, the interracial children of
> SS E * ene white unmarried mothers gained 160 gm.
Z Z| > nen 208 less than the corresponding married
S a zo} ef *°S group, and both groups gained less than
5 z og; Hp HHH RMA the white monoracial controls.
> es 2714) oo. 222\2 Reduced weight gain for the interra=. o ~ “aT by i]s cial children of the white mothers does not ap3 = : pear due to the generally observed nega< Zz Di aa : tive correlation between birth weight and
3 i es a , weight gain during the first four months
A Z es 71) (ry = —0.30). First, the white monoracial
a Pfiooftths controls weigh more at birth than the
5 Foe ot a white mother interracials; and second, the
= ze) cli! 5 negative correlation between birth weight
@ eof cit fils and weight gain during the first four
E. c Sforiioi:: Z months is slightly stronger among the
= BEE #Es 3 interracial children of black mothers
a Lee g (y = ~0.34) than among the interracial
“B08 Sms - children of white mothers (vy = ~0.27).
: a B25 2 The growth retardation of white inter2 Ek 2 BE « racials at four months seems to have had
Mea Mda

no serious long-range consequences. Not
only is there catch-up in later physical

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

14 Naylor and

growth, but by four years of age these
children showed an IQ distribution that
would be normal for children of two white
parents (Willerman et al., 1970, 1974).
This change means, of course, that the
specific maternal behaviors associated
with reduced weight gain early in life must
be different than those associated with intellectual performance at four years. Unfortunately, we have no information bearing on this speculation.

As background to interpreting these results, it should be noted that the Collaborative Perinatal Project collected its
data from 1959 to 1966, and the social and
economic influences operating at that time
are the ones to be considered. We surmise
that when their interracial babies were
born, white mothers found themselves in
direct conflict with a powerful miscegenation taboo. Disapproval by the black
community against race mixing seems to
have been weaker, although in recent
years such pressures may have intensified.
It seems reasonable to infer that white
mothers of interracial babies found themselves under greater tension-inducing social pressures than did black mothers.

The fact that the interracial children
gained less weight during the first four
months of life may help to explain our
previous finding that interracial children
of white mothers obtained lower scores
when tested on the Bayley Scale of Mental
Development at eight months of age (Willerman et al., 1974). Perhaps childrearing
conditions in the homes of the interracial
children of white mothers were sufficiently
deleterious to depress the behavioral performance as well as to reduce weight gains
in the children. Glaser et al., (1968) observed that children hospitalized for failure to thrive recovered spontaneously
when returned to favorable home environments. We have too little information
about the early home environments to
confidently pursue this argument, but it

Willerman Social Biology
does seem plausible that many of the interracial children of white mothers may not
have gotten their normal quota of “mothering.”

Confirming this impression is the
finding that when extremely small weight
gains between birth and four years were
observed, they were much more frequent
among the interracial children of white
mothers. Taking a value of less than 2,500
grams as indicative of low weight gain
between birth and four months of age, we
find that about 24 per cent of the interracial children of white mothers and 6 per
cent of the interracial children of black
mothers had gained less than this amount
(x? = 4.0, » < 0.05, corrected for continuity). If we arbitrarily use 4,000 grams
as indicative of good growth between birth
and four months, about 8 per cent of the
interracial children of white mothers and 6
per cent of the interracial children of black
mothers exceed this amount. Thus, we are
led to conclude that while a substantial
proportion of interracial children of white
mothers show especially small weight
gains between birth and four months,
there is no strong evidence that this
growth retardation is consistently characteristic of interracial children of white
mothers in general.

In summary, our results indicated that
interracial children of white mothers
gained less weight between birth and four
months of age than did interracial children
of black mothers or monoracial black or
white children. By one year of age,
catch-up growth appears to have occurred, and there is little evidence for lasting effects of the growth retardation during the first four months of life.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The Collaborative Study of Cerebral Palsy,
Mental Retardation, and Other Neurological

 
 

—|
=
©
N
~
oO
=
oO
oO
oO
a
Co
©
oo
nm
nN
=
—
3
‘g
Ss
oN
aon
O
3
Cd
©
>>
—
—
N
~
oO
>
os
c
~.
ve
Oo
vo
oO
co
CS
©
—
c
S
©
OQ

 

Vol. 26, No. 1

and Sensory Disorders of Infancy and Childhood is supported by the National Institute of
Neurological Diseases and Stroke. The following institutions participate: Boston Lying-In
Hospital; Brown University; Charity Hospital,
New Orleans; Children’s Hospital of Buffalo;
Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia; Children’s

Interracial Children

15

Medical Center, Boston; Columbia University;
Johns Hopkins University; Medical College of
Virginia; New York Medical College; Pennsylvania Hospital; University of Minnesota; University of Oregon; University of Tennessee;
Yale University; and the Perinatal Research
Branch, NINCDS.

REFERENCES

ASHCROFT, M. T., P. HENEAGE, and H. G.
LOVELL. 1966. Heights and weights of Jamaican
schoolchildren of various ethnic groups. Amer. J.
Phys. Anthrop. 24:35-44.

BARR, G. D., C. M. ALLEN, and H. R. SHINEFIELD.
1972. Children of three skin colors. Amer. J. Dis.
Child. 124:866-872.

BERGNER, L., and M. W. SUSSER. 1970. Low birth
weight and prenatal nutrition: An interpretative
review. Pediatrics, 46:946~-966.

BROMAN, S. H., P. L. NicuHois, and W. A. KEnNEDY. 1975. Preschool IQ: Prenatal and early developmental correlates. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.

Da Costa Martins, D. 1971. Height, weight and
chest circumference of children of different ethnic
groups in Lourenco Marques, Mozambique, in
1965 with a note on the secular trend. Hum. Biol.
43:253-262.

DAVENPORT, C. B., and M. STEFFERDA. 1929. Race
crossing in Jamaica. Washington: Carnegie Institution of Washington, Publication No. 395.

ERHARDT, C. L., G. B. Josui1, F. G. NELSON, B. H.
KROLL, and L. WEINER. 1964. Influences of
weight and gestation on perinatal and neonatal
mortality by ethnic group. Amer. J. Pub. Heath.
54:1841~1855.

FREEMAN, M. G., W. L. GRAVES, and R. L.
THOMPSON. 1970. Indigent Negro and caucasian
birth weight-gestational age tables. Pediatrics.
46:9-15.

FUJIKURA, T., and L. A. FROEHLICH. 1972. Birth
weight, gestational age, and renal glomerular development as indices of fetal maturity. Amer. J.
Obstet. Gynecol. 113:627-631.

GaRN, S. M., D. C. CLarK, and F. L. TrowBRIDGE. 1973. Tendency toward greater stature in
American black children. Amer. J. Dis. Child.
126: 164-166.

GARN, S. M., S. T. SANDUSKY, J. M. Nay, and
M. B. McCann. 1972. Advanced skeletal development in low-income Negro children. J. Pediat.
80:965-969.

GLASER, H. H., M. C. HEAGERTY, D. M. BULLARD,
and E. C. Prvcnixk. 1968. Physical and psychological development of children with early failure to
thrive. J. Pediat. 73:690~698.

Hess, A. F., and M. WEINSTOCK. 1925. A comparison of the evolution of carpal centers in white and

Negro newborn infants. Amer. J. Dis. Child.
29:347~354.

LASKA-MIERZEJEWSKA, T. 1970. Morphological and
developmental differences between Negro and
white Cuban youths. Hum. Biol. 42:581-597.

LEVINE, E. 1972. The skeletal development of children of four South African populations. Hum.
Biol. 44:399~412.

MarsTON, P. T. 1974. Instructions for analysis of
variance programs BMDO8V and Orth. 2. Psychology Department, University of Texas at Austin.

MYRIANTHOPOULOS, N. C., and K. S. FRENCH.
1968. An application of the U.S. Bureau of the
Census Socioeconomic Index to a large, diversified
patient population. Soc. Sci. Med. 3:283~299.

Naytor, A. F., and N. C. MyriANTHOPOULOS.
1967. The relation to ethnic and selected socioeconomic factors to human birth-weight. Ann.
Hum. Genet. 31:71-83.

Owen, G. M., and A. H. LUuBIN. 1973. Anthropometric differences between black and
white preschool children. Amer. J. Dis. Child.
126:168-169.

REED, T. E. 1969. Caucasian genes in American
Negroes. Science 165:762-—768.

ScoTT, R. B., W. W. Carpozo, A.DEG. SMITH,
and M. R. DELILLY. 1950. Growth and development of Negro infants. J. Pediat. 37:885-—893.

SHAPIRO, H. L. 1961. Race mixture. Jn Race and
Science, General Conference of UNESCO. United
Nations, New York.

WARBURTON, D., and A. F. Naytor. 1971. The
effect of parity on placental weight and birth
weight: An immunological phenomenon? A report
of the Collaborative Study of Cerebral Palsy.
Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 23:41-54.

WILLERMAN, L., A. F. NAyYtor, and N. C.
MYRIANTHOPOULOS. 1970. Intellectual development of children from interracial matings. Science
170:1329-1331.

. 1974, Intellectual development of children
from interracial matings: Performance in infancy
and at four years. Behav. Genet. 4:83-—90.

WINGERD, J., E. J. SCHOEN, and I. L. SOLOMON.
1971. Growth standards in the first two years of
life based on measurements of white and black
children in a prepaid health care program. Pediatrics 47:818~825,

 

 

 
