Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Discussion: Man's evolutionary past session II

Stanley M. Garn

To cite this article: Stanley M. Garn (1972) Discussion: Man's evolutionary past session II, Social
Biology, 19:2, 180-184, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1972.9987982

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1972.9987982

fe Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

aul Article views: 2

»
Q View related articles @

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:32
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

Discussion: Man’s Evolutionary Past

Session II

Stanley M. Garn

Center for Human Growth and Development
The University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, Michigan

Back before the most recent era, human
evolution had little past, scant present, and
apparently no future. There were fossils, of
course; but fossils attributed to genera
other than Homo, and so no relatives of
ours. There were races, of course; but apart
from linguistic drift into “ethnic groups”
no one had ever seen a race evolving.
People were mixing and dying, some nations were increasing, but such commonplace activities were scarcely seen as evolution in man.

Reluctance to accept evidence of evolution, sixty and eighty years after the
Origin, has been explored by Bateson
(1922) and others, but not for the human
scene. Even today it is difficult for many to
accept as Homo forms not patently
sapiens, to admit to “Our Crowd” forms
very different from us. Even today, our
line of evolution is pictured as paralleled
by the greatest cast of evolutionary dead
ends ever assembled.

The reason why recent and continuing
evolution lay long rejected was the discovery of the rubric “culture.” Culture
(in its 89 definitions) was viewed as man’s
umbrella against nature. Culture provided
food for the hungry, so that none starved,
a bed for the weary, so that none fell
exhausted. It was a refuge against the cold

 

and insulation against the heat, solace for
the sick, and a stout stick for the infirm.
Given culture, man’s defense against nature, no Eskimo froze, no Tuareg dehydrated, and no tupe-wearer developed protein-calorie malnutrition. One used forks
rather than fangs, slings rather than
strength, and natural selection stopped dead
in its evolutionary tracks, slain by culture.

I would not labor these points of example were they less pertinent to the
papers of this day. It really was taught
and believed and accepted that, since culture, man ceased to evolve. It really was
taught and believed and accepted that
human behavior was either the antecedent
or the consequence of being human; and
besides, anthropology was not that kind of
behavioral science. It was really asserted
that races were unchanging units, genetically speaking, however plastic in response
to environment. It never occurred to most
that the last Mohegan, or the last Tasmanian, marked evolutionary events. The
cause was less fundamentalist opposition
to the notion that man is still in the process
of evolution than it was the belief that
culture had neutralized natural selection.
Perhaps evolution seemed too grand, and
man too minuscule to participate. Perhaps
most social scientists disliked the notion

130

 

 
Vol. 19, No. 2 Discussion:
that man was a part of nature, that there
were forces other than social forces.

So we had races without origins, except
by admixture, and that not viewed as
authentic evolution. Given the bias against
change, except by admixture (though with
some extermination for good measure),
consider the impasse. All races had to be
either unbroken lines or formed by admixture of previous races, entirely without
genetic innovation or change. How fortunate we now are with polymorphisms of
obvious evolutionary importance, with
enough hemoglobin, haptoglobin, and transferrin variants to occupy our intellectual
lifetimes. What a discovery to discover so
many defects like wheat-gluten sensitivity
and lactase deficiency and favism and egg
and bovine milk allergies that would not
have been disadvantageous in a pre-agricultural and prebovine past, and allergies
that may be cancer protections today.

ichigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

‘S Now the evolution of human behavior
‘ is both the grandest and the most frustrat= ing of evolutionary studies, long stifled by
the ethnocentric notion that only man has
learned ways of behaving. But status can
~ be socially inherited in a primate group,
and bad mothering can be disadvantageous
below our species and genus. Peer-group
3 play behavior is imitative learning for
"e many primate young, and sticks and stones
8 are tools well below our evolutionary level.
2 simply by excluding (by definition) what
other primates presumably could not learn
to do, we created a behavioral gap between
them and us. It is reminiscent of the
“taxonomic chasm” between fossils and us,
set by definition, that does not exist in
true fact.

We are primates with a certain degree of
sexism built-in, not so much as some primates (with greater dimorphism) and more
than others—such as Symphalangus. I am
totally fascinated by the human sex differ
ers

>

ni

Session II 181
ences in early behavioral development, one
way for girls (earlier language development), and the other way for boys (advancement in certain gross motor and
manipulative skills). You must forgive me
for that kind of sexism, but are other
primate girls ahead in language and other
primate boys advanced in gross motor skills
and finer manipulation?

In the grand scheme of evolution from
warmed reptiles to us, the evolution of our
species has involved so many historical
accidents. Just take the potato, which made
Boston the second capital of Ireland and
made Prussia a part of Deutschland. Consider also the effect of maize on population
expansion in Africa, the covering of the
Fleet River to population growth in London, and the peculiarities of lactase deficiency and lactose intolerance. Consider
the history of Greece, both classical and
modern, as an essay on hemoglobin S$; both
the African and the Middle Eastern forms
of thalassemia, and G6PDD, as a true
meeting of genes as well as of cultures.

An accident of drift, an accident of
migration, an accident of breeding may
together account for Tay-Sachs disease
among Jews from near Vilna. The genes
for brachymesophalangia-5 are an accident
of Asiatic expansion into the Americas,
and maize-centered agriculture, too; but
affected individuals are shorter, they may
be at a selective advantage, and this is not
sheer accident in human evolution.

Recent evolution in living man has the
most going for it as evolutionary study.
Subject numbers range into the billions,
as against meager boxfuls of fossils. We
can see people in situ, plot their migrations,
study their histories, and determine who
survives and who does not. We can number
living progeny, and the genetic load, and
pose such questions as whether the sicklecell trait is less frequent in the old because
of selective survival or because the migraDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

182 Garn

tions bring in young with higher trait and
gene frequencies. We can study total
populations numbering as small as a hundred and have concern over their unlikely
genes.

How we have come to behave as human
beings is least easy to answer, one problem
being what is distinctively “human,” and
the other being what nonhuman primate
model we genuinely have. The Piaget model
is not a model for cross-species comparison;
and if we ask how human children learn,
how do we measure chimpanzee learning
behavior?

But it is no small step for humanity that
we retrace today. The fossils are our fossils,
despite a profusion of generic labels. The
races are our races, below the species level,
though some might be called subspecies by
the rules applied to prosimians. The behaviors are our behaviors, and I have seen
squirrel monkeys release their closer friends
from laboratory cages. The genes we have
lost by genocide and the genes we have
gained by technological advances are our
genes, speaking for all humanity.

Who said evolution came to an end once
man labeled his father’s sister’s son? In
its 89 definitions, culture has speeded evolution, not relaxing selection pressure
(which would simply spread population
variance) but creating new directions, new
modes, and new adaptive plateaus, unto
the second and third generation thereof.

COMMENT ON DR. BIRDSELL’S PAPER

Much of what I have said is abundantly
clear in Dr.Birdsell’s paper. In what other
genus but Homo could an investigator explore a series of contiguous semi-isolates,
knowing the size of each, the boundaries
of each, and with at least reasonable control of his sampling conditions? In what
other species could an investigator explore
fluctuations in gene frequency in contigu
 

Social Biology

ous semi-isolates with a total population
size of five hundred each, and an effective
breeding number of but 75 pairs each?
And in what other context but that of
modern man would one ever even dream
of considering the taxonomic implications
of clines for a series of alleles at a single
locus at so many steps below the species
level?

What Dr. Birdsell describes so well (and
which reflects his early technical training)
can be documented in other world areas,
New Guinea for example, and in the
Yanomama Indians of South America. Under situations where D? statistics show that
“senetic distance” and geographic distance
bear a reasonable relationship for dimensions we can measure in the metric system,
gene frequencies for some of the serological
loci evidence spots and dots and varied
clines that demand other explanations.

There are possible reasons we can all
venture to suggest. Soil minerals and trace
elements show clines of this description,
often unrelated to surface features. Other
directions of selection may be adduced.
The environment is rarely as uniform as
the geography. The founder effect and the
grandfather effect are handy quasi-explanations, as are all nondirected causes of
fluctuations in gene frequency. Whatever
the explanation, consider the wonder at
working at the micro-micro-micro evolutionary level, and the fact that it can be
attempted at all.

COMMENT ON DR. HULSE’S PAPER

Now it is good of Dr. Hulse to remind us
that the major portion of Darwin’s Descent of Man dealt with sexual selection,
an emphasis not fully appreciated in his
own time, and scarcely yet in ours. It is
easy to find fault with the thesis at the
very small population level (of the kind
described by Birdsell) and in the great
breeding populations of our modern na
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 19, No. 2

tions. At the small end of the 2N wedge,
the individual can scarcely select for teats
and tonsures; but the man of distinction
gets the prize for fatherhood. At the largepopulation levels, mate selection is often
so circumscribed by social proscriptions as
to question sexual selection and romantic
love, and both together.

Yet something has maintained sexual
dimorphism in man at a 3:2 ratio for fatfree weight and caloric intake, a 4:3 ratio
for skeletal mass, a 104:100 ratio for
mesio-distal crown size. Knowing this, we
cannot neatly relate crowns to calories;
and we still have to explain why and how
the sex difference in body mass is maintained. Even where nice large women are
ostensibly preferred as bed-warmers or when
large wives are seen as better farm hands
or superior baby-producers, the men are
still bigger and eat half again as much.
Beards and balding are decorative trivia,
but we can not dismiss the far higher male
hemoglobins and differences in stomach
acidity, nor sexual selection, until we know
what these are all about (and not just as a
legacy from a past we know little as yet).

COMMENT ON DR. WASHBURN’S PAPER

Dr. Washburn well knows (and so did
not need to say so) that early descriptions
of primate behavior were based on bored
zoo residents and projected our interests
and not their behaviors. Asking peoplequestions of rats, birds, or primates does
not answer how they behave. So we cannot
learn, from the wrong questions, the right
answers about hominid behavioral evolution.

Chimpanzees long ago mastered pelting
and prying, given stones or other things
to throw, and sticks or even crowbars with
which to pry. They can assemble bamboo
joints, perhaps not regularly. Anatomically
they are well suited to bicycles, automobiles, drawing and scribbling, to hand
Discussion:

 

Session II 183
clapping and knee-holding, and they even
have some approximation of axillary hair.
Dr. Washburn may forgive me for thinking
that the living chimps may be the intellectually-poorer relatives of a line that
once rivaled ours in brilliance.

J take seriously the biochemical measures that unite the chimpanzee and us not
so far back in the time of ancestral division. Whether we assume a linear rate of
change in hemoglobins and albumins, or
any exponential function, we no longer
need to entertain the explanation of anatomical convergence from ancestors separate back to the shrews or tarsiers. We and
Pan may have to celebrate Grandfather’s
Day together, and one not snub the other.

Behavior being partially anatomy, and
the surgical techniques quite within reason,
why not bone-graft chimpanzee legs to be
longer, and surgically cut or staple epiphyses to make some arms shorter. We
should be able to produce chimpanzees
with more manlike proportions, and so
having altered anatomy early, test the behavioral consequences in turn.

A GENERAL COMMENT

All in all, we are closer to putting our
line (or lineage) into temporal place than
ever before. Instead of running out of
ancestors a scant million years ago, the time
span has surely been increased. Big front
teeth apparently go back further than we
might have imagined. Maybe Homo does
have antecedents twice as far back as we
dared hope. Maybe Australopithecus is
definitely NOT Homo. Maybe we and they
never competed directly (so that our success was not a true test of superiority).

We now accept ongoing evolution in
contemporary man as a feature of this
minute, not terminated by culture, but
sped by culture at an accelerating rate.
Sheltered in some ways, we are far more
exposed to selection in other ways. After

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:32 08 December 2015

184 Garn

all, what pre-sapiens form was faced by
the error of blood-group mismatching, or
sought treatment for red-cell enzyme defects, or experienced splenic infarcts above
an altitude of 9,000 feet.

I sometimes have to remind my fossilophilic friends that Homo is alive and well
on terra, subject to more and more selective

Social Biology

pressures, and evolving at a rate unimaginable before Weidenreich’s death. DDT is
capable of undoing generations of selection
for hemoglobin S. Milk powder may have
been a tremendous selective agent. Think
of what Concorde may be able to do for
future gene flow! Credit ethanol and cannabis both as active evolutionary agents.
