Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

Attitudes toward and knowledge of sociobiology
among college science professors

Ben Cathey & Frankie Brown

To cite this article: Ben Cathey & Frankie Brown (1986) Attitudes toward and knowledge
of sociobiology among college science professors, Social Biology, 33:1-2, 148-152, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1986.9988633

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1986.9988633

 

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:41

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

Attitudes Toward and Knowledge of
Sociobiology Among College Science Professors

Ben Cathey and Frankie Brown

Department of Natural Science
Michigan State University
East Lansing, Michigan

 

 

ABSTRACT: It appears that there is currently a great deal of renewed interest in the area of sociobiology. It therefore seemed appropriate to assess the attitudes and knowledge of college science
professors who are primarily charged with disseminating information in this field. To this end,
the present study was undertaken to determine the concepts and opinions held by scientists in
various disciplines at the university level. Information was gathered from 79.3% of the 111 sample questionnaires sent out (i.e., 88 questionnaires returned). Respondents were familiar with
one or more sociobiologists and felt that sociobiology was indeed a science, although a highly
controversial one. A majority expressed the opinion that this science applies to other organisms,
but has very limited application to the human species.

Is sociobiology a credible science?
Should it be taught in colleges and universities? This topic has caused much
discussion in the past, and debate has
been vigorously renewed in recent
years. According to Harvard zoologist
E. O. Wilson, the leading proponent of
sociobiology, it is a well-established discipline of biology and has been for over
25 years. The general public, however,
and even most scientists have not been
aware of its stature and growing influence until the last few years.

Since the major thesis on the subject,
Sociobiology: The New Synthesis was
published in 1975 by E. O. Wilson, he
and others have outlined basic definitions and descriptions of sociobiology
which suggest that much human behavior is programmed in genes we have inherited from other primates. According
to Wilson (in a 1978 Smithsonian Debate with Harris, Professor of Anthropology at Columbia University), sociobiology involves the inheritance of all
aspects of social behavior in all kinds of
organisms. He believes that the behavioral characteristics of modern man con
tinue to evolve and are passed on from
generation to generation. There have
been several interpretations or modifications of Wilson’s definition. However, all of these involve the systematic
study of the biological basis of all social
behavior and, more specificallv, the reJationships between genes and culture.
To paraphrase Lumsden and Wilson’s
(1981) work, this area of study is all
about genes, culture, and evolution.
Ray Bohlin (1981, p. 17), has noted that
the understanding of sociobiology could
be based on three concepts:

“First, human social patterns are said to
be shaped by evolutionary processes acting on genes. Put another way, our genetic make-up influences our behavior
and that behavior is subject to natural selection just as physical characteristics
may be. Second, we must grasp what sociobiologist Robert Wallace, in his 1979
book, The Genesis Factor, calls a reproductive imperative. This imperative implies that the ultimate goal of any organism, including the human organism, is to
produce as many offspring as possible.
Within the evolutionary system, the species strives to avoid extinction. It accomplishes this through survival and repro
148

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 33, No. i-2

duction. The third concept is that, within
evolutionary time, the individual is meaningless. This is because species, not individuals, evolve. The individual reproduces and dies, but its genes persist into
the next generation. Therefore, the genes
become the driving force of the reproductive imperative.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

In spite of the lack of widely disseminated information on the topic of sociobiology, those individuals professing
some knowledge in this area are not
without strong opinions. These opinions
most often appear to center around the
long-standing “‘nature vs. nurture” controversy or the roles played by heredity
and environment in determining human
behavior. According to Bohlin (1981),
those who stress the biological factor
(heredity) are often referred to as biological determinists. In 1851, Herbert
Spencer suggested that starvation and
poverty were nature’s way of cleansing
society of the unfit and, in 1940, the German writer Konrad Lorenz used his theories to call for eliminating certain parts
of the society deemed “undesirable.”
The environmentalists, on the other
hand, of whom an extremist would be
B. F. Skinner (1938), see human beings
as extremely malleable. He maintains
that we need only to determine the kind
of society we desire and then create an
environment that will foster it. This view
contrasts sharply with sociobiology.
However, Lumsden and Wilson (1981),
as principal proponents of sociobiology,
have alternately suggested that culture
can be viewed as a particulate phenomenon with units called “‘culturgens” (e.g.,
particular marriage customs, a religious
belief, preference for sweet vs. bitter
tastes, etc.). These culturgens, they believe, are under the influence of natural
selection.

 

Brief Reports

149

Trivers (1977) further proposes that
many cultural disciplines may be affected. He says that sooner or later political science, law, economics, psychology, and anthropology will be branches
of sociobiology. Conversely, and as expected, there are numerous opponents
of sociobiology who denounce what
they call “‘so-so-biology”’ as a reactionary political doctrine disguised as science. Criticisms as summed up by biologist Roger Lewin (1981) and shared by
others call attention to “‘a disturbingly
loose fit between the model and the
world it is meant to reflect.” William
Irons (1978), an anthropologist at
Northwestern University, is very skeptical about whether culture can be modeled as a particulate phenomenon. He
points out that people move between societies and change their behavior radically, which conflicts with the idea that
their behavior is genetically guided in
any important way.

Because of these varying points of
view, it seemed appropriate to ascertain
the knowledge of and opinions about sociobiology among college science professors who may have the major responsibility for disseminating information in
this area.

In the present study, a survey on sociobiology was conducted at Michigan
State University. Professors in the departments of Anthropology, Social Science, Sociology, Psychology, Natural
Science, and Zoology were sampled.
These departments were chosen because of their closer relationships to sociobiology. One hundred eleven questionnaires were sent out; 88 were
returned, representing approximately
an 80 per cent return rate. Individuals
were requested to respond to ten questions.

Table 1 is a summary of responses to
the survey.

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

TABLE 1
SURVEY ON ATTITUDES TOWARD AND KNOWLEDGE OF SOCIOBIOLOGY

 

QUESTION 1.

QUESTION 2.

QUESTION 3.

QUESTION 4.

QUESTION 5.

QUESTION 6.

Dr. E. O. Wilson’s definition of sociobiology is that it is a study of all aspects of social behavior in all kinds of organisms up to and including human beings. It is not a specific theory about human behavior. The inheritance of these behavioral characteristics of modern man
continues to evolve and passes these characteristics from generation to generation.

1. Agree—15 (51) = 29.41%

2. Disagree—-22 = 43.14%

3. Strongly agree—O

4, Strongly disagree—9 = 17.65%

5. Have no opinion or not sure—S = 9.8%

Do you think sociobiology is a science, a discipline within biology?
1. Yes—31 (59) = 52.54%
2. No—19 = 32.20%
3. Not sure—9 = 15.25%

Do you think sociobiology is a controversial area of study, as it applies to humans?

1. Yes——32 =72.73%
2. No—8 = 18.18%
3. Not sure—4 = 9.09%

List the names of prominent scientists with whom you are familiar, who are associated with sociobiology.

Responses generated a listing of 39 individuals. As expected, Wilson received most responses (22). A number of professors (13) did
not know any prominent scientists in the field. Responses were such that, in most cases, only a few (approx. 1 to 2) professors listed
the same scientists associated with sociobiology.

Do you believe the study of sociobiology can be applied to humans, as it applies to other organisms, such as insects and birds?

1. Yes—19 = 39.58% 5. Probably—5 = 10.42%

2. No—6 = 12.5% 6. No comment—4 = 8.33%

3. Undecided—S = 10.42% 7. Genetically determined—2 = 4.17%
4, To some extent—S = 10.42% 8. Perhaps—2 = 4.17%

Do you know of any “human data” which has been compiled that would support sociobiology? If yes, please list the sources.
Most individuals did not know of any human data supporting sociobiology or very little or nonspecific. Those responding affirmatively suggested the data collected on birds, mammals, social insects, etc. may be analogous to humans. Furthermore, it was felt
by 5 of the respondents that data on twins, physical and chemical alterations, including drugs and electrical stimuli, may support
sociobiology.

i

spoday pug

ABojo1g [e1D0§
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

QUESTION 7.

QUESTION 8.

QUESTION 9.

QUESTION 10.

List any level(s) of social organization that islare similar for humans and other animals. What level(s) of social organization would be
different?
Most suggested that man shows some social grouping similar to other animals such as distinct territories, dominance, hierarchies,
family units, tribes, cultural, religious, or political units. Some respondents didn’t know of any levels or had no comment, while a
few (5S) respondents thought there were too many to list.

Do you think “innate” behavior is common in humans? In other primates?
Half of the respondents were neutral or did not know, Another large proportion was either very skeptical or did not think it applies
to humans. A small number thought there are innate behavior forms such as sexual, protective, and maternal behavior, and that this
idea of innate behavior may be a worthwhile concept if it can be experimentally demonstrated.

Do you think altruism exists in all primates?

A major number of respondents agree that altruism exists to some degree in all primates. A number of individuals also feit that
altruism is a human value. Some said that altruism could not be demonstrated in humans and others did not know if it could be
demonstrated in primates at all.

Does the gene theory influence your ideas and concepts of inheritance of behavior?
Most respondents said yes, the gene theory had some influence on their ideas of inheritance of human behavior. According to some,
it provides very little, if any, evidence in humans or in higher primates. Very few responded by saying that the theory had no influence on human behavior.

 

7-T “ON “EE “IOA

syoday jolig

IST
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:41 08 December 2015

152 Brief Reports

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

While over half (54.5 per cent) of the
respondents felt that sociobiology is a legitimate scientific discipline in biology,
although controversial (72.7 per cent),
close to half of them (43.1 per cent) disagreed with Wilson’s actual definition of
sociobiology. Reasons for the disagreement were not immediately clear, as a
majority of the respondents felt that this
concept could be applied to humans, at
least to some extent, although for the
most part they were not familiar with
data on humans which would support
sociobiological ideas. There seemed to
be such ambivalence about innate behavior, since half were neutral or did not
know while a few thought “maybe”’ for
sexual, protective, and maternal behavior.

Similarly, responses about altruism
were also mixed. While many felt that
this individual self-sacrificial behavior
that benefits the population as a whole
probably exists in all primates, as well as
in other species, there were about equal

Social Biology

numbers of responders who maintained
that altruism is a human characteristic
versus half who felt that this trait could
not really be demonstrated in humans.
Perhaps one of the problems of altruism
involves the inability to recognize this
activity as a product of conscious behavior. Some humans may have a concept
of aiding ailing individuals (both conspecific or not). Are other animals conscious Of their “altruistic behavior’’?

Clearly, we have much to learn about
genetic factors affecting animal and social behavior. David Barash (1982, p.
86) says “‘there is not, at present, a science of human sociobiology.” Research
in this area is barely beginning, he says,
and the results “tend to support the biases of those who do it.” In his view, sociobiology allows scientists to go beyond
the nature-nurture controversy, since by
now, everyone knows that both nature
and nurture play important roles in development and ask why nature and nurture interact the way they do (cited by
Maya Pines, 1978).

REFERENCES

BARASH, D. 1982. Genes and destiny. Science
Digest, March, p. 86.

Boum, R. 1981. Sociobiology: Cloned from the
gene cult. Christ. Today 25: 15-19.

Evans, R. J. 1975. Konrad Lorenz: The man
and his ideas. Harcourt-Brace Jovanovich,
New York.

Harvey, P. et al., 1947. Readings in sociobiology. W. H. Freeman & Co. San Francisco.

Irons, W. G. etal., 1978. Evolutionary biology
and human social organization. Duxbury
Press, Scituate, Mass.

Lewin, R. 1981. Cultural diversity tied to genetic differences. Science 212: 908-10.

LumspEN, C.J., and E.O. Wirson. 1981.
Genes, mind, and culture. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

Pines, Maya. 1978. Is sociobiology all wet?
Psychol. Today, May, p. 23-24.

Sxinner, B. F. 1938. The behavior of organisms: An experimental analysis. AppletonCentury Company, New York.

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTE. 1978. Radio debate
between E. O. Wilson and Marvin Harris;
Ann Carroll, moderator. New York Times,
February 26, 1978, p. 18.

SPENCER, H. 1851. The comparative psychology
of men. Carnegie Institute, Washington,
D.C.

Trivers, R. L. 1977. Why do you do what you
do? Sociobiology: A new theory of behavior. Time Magazine, p. 38-42.

WALLACE, R. 1979. The genesis factor. Morrow, Inc., New York.

Witson, E. O. 1975. Sociobiology: The new
synthesis. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

. On human nature. Chap. 7. Harvard

University Press, Cambridge.

 
