Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Evolution of genetic structures of small
populations

Albert Jacquard

To cite this article: Albert Jacquard (1969) Evolution of genetic structures of small populations,
Social Biology, 16:3, 143-157, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1969.9987815

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1969.9987815

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lal Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:53
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Evolution of Genetic Structures

of Small Populations

Albert Jacquard

Institut National D’ Etudes Démographiques
Paris, France

To demonstrate the Hardy-Weinberg law
describing the stability of the proportions
of various genotypes in a population, it is
necessary to assume that the population is
in a state of “perfect panmixia’’; its
behavior and the milieu in which it exists
are such that there is no mutation, no migration, no selection, that successive generations are distinct, and that cross-breeding
occurs by chance. Furthermore, it is necessary to assume that the population number
is sufficiently large so as to be considered
infinite.

This last condition is fulfilled: (a) by
equating the frequency of a genotype with
the probability of its occurrence in the population (the variance over the probable value
is nil, if N is infinite); (0) by assuming that
two nonidentical genes are independent (any
relationship between two genes occurring
only as a result of the probability of their
identity, in which case they would pertain
to an unlimited population).

Here we shall study the effect of limitation of the size of a population upon its
evolution, the other conditions of randomness remaining the same. In the first part
we shall define the various concepts employed, in particular, the genotype structures as well as the notations. The second

 

part will deal with the evolution of dependence among genes in a given population, in
accordance with the recurrence formulae established by G. Malécot (1966). Finally,
the third part will relate these recurrences
to genotype structures, and the results obtained will then be applied to the particular
case of ‘‘sib-mating.”’

CONCEPTS AND NOTATIONS

In considering individuals or populations
with regard to the genes they possess in a
“locus,’’ the Mendelian theory of heredity
ascribes a discrete ‘‘beaded” structure to
the biological information carried by chromosomes and transmitted from cell to cell
or individual to individual. The elementary
unit of this information is the locus; its
content is the gene.

In the same locus an individual possesses
two genes—one transmitted from the father,
the other from the mother. The individual is
homozygous or heterozygous, depending upon whether or not these two genes carry the
same information in representing two distinct “alleles.”

Within a population, however, the number of different alleles present within a locus
can be extremely high. For reasons of simplicity, a population geneticist generally

143
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

144 Jacquard

assumes a case in which only two alleles, a;
and da, can occur in any given locus; but
this hypothesis does not agree very well
with reality. Loci carrying more than ten
known alleles are not rare. Henceforth, we
shall assume a case in which a given locus
has # number of alleles:

a , eee 9 ai, e+ Qn,

GENETIC STRUCTURES

The genetic inheritance of a population
comprised of N individuals is composed of
two N genes for a given locus. In order to
define this inheritance, one must establish
the number of each of the 1 alleles (a,), or,
in other terms, their frequencies (w;).

The » numbers, w;, constitute a vector
which we call the gene structure of the population which may be written;

The N individuals who constitute the
population can have $n(n + 1) genotypes
for a given locus—n homozygous genotypes
(a;a;) and 4n(m — 1) heterozygous genotypes (a,a;). In order to define the population in terms of the associations of the genes
which are present, we have only to establish
the number of each of these 42(n + 1) genotypes, or, in other words, their frequencies,
Ttj
The $n(m + 1) numbers, z;;, constitute
a set which we define as a “trimat,’”’ which
we designate as the genotype structure of
the population with the notation:

 

THE TRIMATS

In general, a trimat, AT, is a set of
3n(n + 1) numbers, each number (;;) being

Social Biology

described by two indices, 2 and 7, the order
of which is not significant. By convention,
these numbers are arranged along a triangle
of x rows and columns; the numbers in
which the two indices are identical (¢;;) are
arranged along the hypotenuse of the triangle, while the numbers in which the two
indices are different (¢,;) are situated at the
intersection of the rows and columns containing ?¢,;; and ¢;; respectively.
The trimat

 

is represented symbolically by AT.

These trimats can be easily defined in
terms of elementary algebra (see Jacquard,
1968). Two algebraic operations can be
used to relate the vectors with the trimats.

The condensation of a trimat. By definition, the “condensed vector” 1 of a trimat
AT is such that

“= cond AT = Y; —
ui = Sita t+... Qt +... Ht lin].

Each unit (2;) of # is equal to half the sum
of all the units of AT having the z index,
the unit ¢;; being counted twice.

The crossed product of two vectors. We
designate the trimat AT as the “crossed
product” (or more simply “‘crossing”’) of
two vectors, 2# and v, of # components, This
trimat is defined by

AT=uPDrv=r1> uy,
tig = Ui; ,
ViV; 41,

Li; = U,0; + UjV5 »
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Vol. 16, No. 3

In the case where v = u, AT is the “crossed
square”’ of # and is written

AT =7.

At first these notations seem quite tedious,
and thus one can pass over them quickly;
but they do allow a considerable economy
of words. Many explanatory examples will
be given later in the text.

It is noteworthy that according to the
definition of the condensation of a trimat
the gene structure of a population is equal
to the condensed vector of its genotype
structure:

s = cond AS.
STRUCTURES IN PROBABILITY

The gene structure s and genotype AS
which we have defined correspond to the
case where enumeration of the various genes
and genotypes of the population is possible
or where their frequencies are precisely
known. However, most often, the available
information is incomplete, the population
being inaccessible either in size (only a
portion of the population is known) or in
time (we wish to define its structure in the
future).

In order to characterize a population for
which we possess only fragments of information, a probability, P,;, is allotted to the
various genotypes possible (a,;a;). Thus, we
put forth the definition: The genotype structure in probability AY of a population, present or future, 1s the set of the probabilities, depending upon the available information, of
the various genotypes which pertain to an
individual selected randomly from this population.

Similarly: The gene structure in probability s of a population is the set of the
probabilities, pi, of the various alleles contained within a locus selected randomly
within an individual of the population.

It is evident that for structures in probability, as for real structures,

s = cond AY.

Genetic Structures of Small Populations

 

145

These definitions, given for a total population, can easily be transposed for the case
of the individual. The set of the probabilities, aP.;, such that an individual A has
the genotype (a,a;) (or af;, that a gene
taken from A be of type a;), constitutes a
trimat AYa and a vector sa, called “genotype structure and gene structure in probability of A.”

Suppose, for example, that we randomly
select an individual A from a completely
known population of genotype structure
ASp. The a priori probability that this individual possesses the genotype (a,a;) is equal
to the frequency 7,; of this genotype within

AYa = ASo °

Similarly,
SA = So.

REFERENCE STRUCTURES

Wecan show that in a panmictic situation
the genotype structure in probability of a
generation is equal to the crossed-square of
the genetic structure of the preceding generation:

2
AY, = Sp-1
Furthermore, if the population is infinite,
the gene structure remains constant and
we have

a relationship which expresses the wellknown panmictic Hardy-Weinberg law.

When a population is not panmictic, its
genotype structure AS can obviously be in
any proportions. We shall see that, in order
to characterize AS, it is beneficial to compare it with two reference structures: the
structure, pAS,, of a panmictic population
having the same gene structure; and the
structure, cAS, of a population composed
entirely of homozygous individuals and having the same gene structure, s.

In other words:

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

146 Jacquard

PAS =

 

 

pAS is designated as the “equivalent random structure of the population” and cAS
as the “equivalent homozygous structure.”

INDIVIDUAL COEFFICIENTS OF KINSHIP
AND OF CONSANGUINITY

Whatever the nature and complexity of
the kinship ties between two individuals, A
and B, the effect of these ties upon their
genetic constitutions results from the probability for the genes of A and the genes of B
to be the replicas of the same gene from one
of their common ancestors. Whenever two
genes thus arise by successive duplication
from generation to generation from the same
ancestral gene, they are said to be identical.

Knowing the genealogy of two individuals A and B, it is possible to calculate the
probability of their genes being identical.
As for all probability determinations, this
result corresponds to a certain body of
information and is modified if new information is obtained. Moreover, a genealogy, by
definition, cannot be entirely known, and
thus the calculated probabilities can only
reflect the known portion of the genealogies
of the individuals concerned.

In a precise fashion, the genetic relationship between A and B is measured by the
“coefficient of kinship” (¢ap) which is defined by G. Malécot (1966) as follows: “The
coefficient of kinship (an) of two individuals
A and Bis the probability that a gene random
 

Social Biology

ly selected from A is identical to a gene
randomly selected from B.”

In the case of the son F of two individuals A and B, the two genes which he
possesses were randomly obtained, one from
A and the other from B; they are thus
identical with probability gan. Malécot has
given the name “coefficient of consanguinity” to the probability of having two
identical genes in one individual. It follows
that: “The coefficient of consanguinity of an
individual is equal to the coefficient of kinship,
d, of his father and his mother.”

MEAN COEFFICIENT OF CONSANGUINITY
OF A POPULATION

The concept of the coefficient of consanguinity defined thus for an individual
can easily be extended to a total population
(on the condition that the total population
be defined in terms of size and time, i.e.,
that it constitutes a “circle’”’). Thus: The
coefficient of consanguinity for a population
is the probability that the two genes of an
individual randomly selected from a population are identical.

If the individuals, whose coefficient of
consanguinity is equal to f., represent a
proportion A, of the population, the coefficient of consanguinity a of the population will be equal to the average value of
the individual coefficients:

a= Lire fe . (1)

a is generally called ‘“‘Bernstein’s coeflicient” of the population.

Similarly, for the “coefficient of kinship,” ¢, defined for two individuals, it is
possible to develop an average coefficient of
kinship 8 for the total population: f is the
probability that two genes belonging to
two different people randomly selected
from the population are identical.

In panmictic populations (where marriages between individuals of the same generation occur by chance), there is a relation
 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 16, No. 3

ship between the coefficients a and @ of successive generations; in effect, the two genes
of an individual from generation g were
randomly obtained from two individuals
(the father and mother) from generation
g — 1; the probability that the two genes
of the individual are identical is thus equal
to the probability for identity between two
genes belonging to two different individuals
randomly selected from the preceding generation, and it is written as:

Gy = Boi. (2)

EVOLUTION OF THE INTERDEPENDENCE
OF GENES IN A SMALL POPULATION

In the second part of our study, we shall
refer to the recurrences established by G.
Malécot for the rate of consanguinity.

EVOLUTION OF THE RATE OF CONSANGUINITY
IN A SMALL POPULATION

Let us consider, for each generation g, a
population which comprises Ni(g) men
and N2({g) women.

An individual A belonging to generation
g possesses, in a given locus, two genes
which are, respectively, the replica of one of
two genes of his father (P) and one of two
genes of his mother (M). As can be seen in
Figure 1, the former is the replica of one of
the four genes belonging to the paternal
grandfather (PP) and the paternal grandmother (MP); the latter is the replica of
one of the four genes belonging to the maternal grandfather (PM) and the maternal
grandmother (MM).

The two genes belonging to A could have
been transmitted to him in the following
ways: (a) both genes through his grandfathers (the probability being 4); (6) both
genes through his grandmothers (the probability being 3); (c) one gene through a
grandfather and the other through a grandmother (the probability being 3).

In the first case, assuming random mating without consideration of kinship, it ts
possible that the two grandfathers were the

Genetic Structures of Small Populations

147

same person. This eventuality has a probability equal to 1/Ni(g — 2).! Similarly, in
the second case, the two grandmothers
could have been the same person, with a
probability equal to 1/Ni(g — 2).

Finally, the probability that A’s two
genes were transmitted to him from the
same individual of generation g — 2 is

1 1 1
4Ni(g — 1) © 4N2(g— 2) N(g — 2)’

where N is the harmonic mean of 2N; and
2Ne, that is, the harmonic mean of the

PP PM MP MM

g-2 =

eS

6

A

Fic. 1.—Derivation of two genes in a given locus
for individual A in generation g.

number of 2N; and 2N2 which the population would have had if it contained: (@) as
many women as it contained men; (5) as
many men as it contained women. N is
generally described by the term “effective
population.”

The various possible combinations for
the origins of A’s two genes can be classified
in two groups:

1. With probability 1/N(g — 2), these
two genes come from the same ancestor of
generation g — 2. These two genes could
therefore be identical, either because they
reproduce the same gene of this ancestor

1Jn effect, this consideration excludes all relationships between A’s two grandfathers. With the
first grandfather remaining constant, all the individuals from the group of Ni(g—2) men of generation
g—2 have the same probability of being the second

grandfather. The probability that the two grandfathers were the same individual is thus equal to

1/Ni(g—2).
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

148 Jacquard

(probability being 4), or because they reproduce the two genes of this ancestor (the
probability being 4), these also being identical (the probability being a,», according to
the definition of a).

2. With probability 1— 1/N(g — 2),
these two genes come from two different
ancestors of generation g— 2. They are
thus identical if the two genes of which
they are replicas were themselves identical
(probability 8,2, according to the definition
of B).

In total, the probability that A’s two
genes are identical is

1 1 1
% = NG —2) [3 + 345-2]

1

— pes,

+[4 Ng-D

which, in accordance with formula (1), can
be written

 

 

1 1
“Nga *l'~N@=a!
(3)
1

X ag-1 + IN(g = 2) 2-2?

a recurrence equation which permits us to
calculate the coefficients a,, if one knows
the value of a for the first two generations
and the series of numbers N(g). The evolution of the average consanguinity value for a
population is thus determined by these
numbers.

A CONSTANT SMALL POPULATION
If N remains constant from one generation to another, equation (3) is an equation
of linear recurrence which can be solved
easily when one recognizes that it can be
written in the form

1-a,= (1-5) - a»)

1
+ oN (1 — age).

 

 

Social Biology
The solution to the equation is
1l-—a=af+on, (4)

where a and 6 are parameters defined by the
initial conditions, that is, by the values of a
for generations 0 and 1, and where ),; and
de are the roots of

1 1
2 (41—--—),-—-—=
» (1 x) 2N 0;

1 _
M = py (N-1-V1+N’),

or

1 a
w= oy (N-1+ vit N%).

The roots, of which one (A;) is negative
and the other (Az) is positive, are both
smaller than 1 in absolute value.

With succeeding generations when the
index g increases, Aj and \$ approach zero;
1 — a, also approaches zero and a, approaches 1.

At equilibrium the population is thus
composed of individuals whose two genes
are identical and who are thus all homozygotes.

On the other hand, the relation 8); = a,
demonstrates that 8 also approaches 1; the
genes of two different individuals are always
identical.

At the limit, a single allele thus subsists
in the population. One can therefore state:
A population of a constant small size, the
other conditions ensuring perfect panmixia
being respected, approaches total homogeneity
for each locus.

In the case where ap = a, = 0, we can
determine the constants a and 6 of equation
(4); we obtain

1—a,

1 9
= de _ 1 [Ae — 1)At
(S)

= (1 ~~ A) A] °

We can see from this equation that the
convergence toward the homozygous equiDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 16, No. 3

librium is very slow, when N is somewhat
increased. In effect, if 1/N? becomes negligible before 1/N, and if g is large enough,
we can write

1—=(1 +5) (1— ax)

1
~ —_—~ —~g f2N
~(1+s5)e° ‘

The number of generations for approaching total homogeneity is thus of the same
order of magnitude as the size of the population: 1 — a, is divided by two (in other
words, half the loci which are still polymorphic becomes mono-allelial) in a number
of generations G, such that e-S/°N = 4, or
G = 2Nlg2—~1.4N.

For example, in a population where the
permanent count is 50 men and 50 women
of mating age, or where N = 100, it would
take 140 generations, or three to four
thousand years, to eliminate the moiety
which is polymorphic (in the absence, of
course, of mutation and of selection).

POPULATIONS OF VARIABLE SIZES

The recurrence equation (3) permits us
to determine a, only if we know the function
Nv) describing the size of the population
during successive generations.

G. Malécot (1966, p. 130) has shown that
a, approaches 1, if N remains finite or if N
increases as a linear function of g. In other
words, a population of variable size can conserve a multiplicity of alleles at each locus for
a very long term, only tf the variation between
the sizes of two successive generations is also
increasing.*

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SPOUSES IN
A LIMITED POPULATION

We know that the relationship between
two married individuals A and B can be
measured by their ‘coefficient of kinship,”
d@ap, defined as the probability that two
genes randomly selected, one from A and
the other from B, are “identical.”

 

Genetic Structures of Small Populations

149

The calculation of ¢ap is generally derived from the formula

gan = Dog) PPL + fei) ;

where the sum is extended to all of the
different chains of kinship uniting A and B,
the chain 7 having ; links between A and
the common ancestor C; and #; links between B and the ancestor C,;, this ancestor
having a coefficient of consanguinity equal
to fc: However, this formula is valuable

P M
g—le
g ©
F S

Fyc. 2.— Derivation of identical genes for brother
F and sister S as offspring of unrelated parents P and
M in a limited population.

only if the various common ancestors C; are
not related amongst themselves; this formula cannot be applied if these ancestors
belong to a population of limited size.

Let us consider, for example, a brother F
and a sister S, offspring of parents P and M
without any known kinship ties between
them. In spite of the apparent absence of
ties, P and M possess genes which have a
certain probability of being identical, providing that they belong to a limited population (see Fig. 2). This probability was
previously designated by 8-1, g being the
generation of F and S.

2 This result can seem contradictory to Lotka’s
theory which states that in a stable population the
probability of extinction of a name is equal to 1 only
if the population is stationary, that is, of constant
size. Thus, a constant increase corresponds, at the

limit, to a nil rate of increase, and the two results
coincide,

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

150 Jacquard

Calculating the coefficient of kinship ¢rs
of F and S, we find

ogrs = 4(2 + 3fe) +26 + Sf) + 280-1 ,
z[1 + 2a, “—- Q-1] }

because fp = fx, = @g—1 and B,-1 = ay.

Similarly, if we consider two first cousins
C and G belonging to generation g of a
limited population, we get

ofca = 4,-1¢rs + 38,-1,

—

or
ca = zit + 12a, + 209-1 + Q5-2] )

and between double first cousins D and C,
we get

o?po = 45-1¢Fs + 385-1

a [1 + Aa, + 209-1 + Og-2] °

Let us examine, for example, the case of
a population in which the breeding size is
about 100 individuals during a thousand
year period, or about 40 generations. The
mean coefficient of consanguinity is given by

— 40
200

~~

=1-(1+,i,)e

1/5
_ (2)! = ons.
é

In this population the coefficients of kinship between first cousins become

3.7 0.9
¢écq = 167 4°

 

and between double first cousins,

2.3 1.15
epg = FE

In other words, the genetic relationship is
almost as strong between first cousins in
such a population as between brother and
sister in an infinite population (for which
¢érs = 1); it is stronger for double first
cousins.

This example illustrates that the coefficient of kinship for a couple is not an in
Social Biology

trinsic characteristic of this couple. It depends upon the information gathered on
the couple. As in all cases of probability, a
coefficient of kinship is the translation of
information; thus, it is necessarily partial,
and the calculated coefficient simply reflects an extension of the knowledge which
could be obtained.

EVOLUTION OF THE GENOTYPE STRUCTURE OF A LIMITED POPULATION

In order to characterize a population
with regard to associations among genes
possessed in a certain locus by the individuals comprising the population, it is necessary and sufficient to define the frequencies
(2:;) of the various genotypes (a,a,). If the
number of alleles in this locus is 2, the set
of the 42(” + 1) frequencies 7; constitutes
a “trimat” which was defined as the genotype structure of the population AS.

In a population of limited size, the average coefficients of consanguinity a and of
kinship 6 approach 1, as generations are
succeeding. Whatever the initial genotype
structure (ASo), the population approaches
an equilibrium structure (-AAS) which no
longer includes homozygotes all possessing
the same allele. AS, is thus a trimat in
which all the units are zero, except for one
of the units on the hypotenuse which is equal
to 1. For example, in the case where only two
alleles A and a are present initially, and
where only one allele A remains at equilibrium, we write

1

cAS = 0 0.

We shall now try to ascertain by which

pathway the population departs from the

structure ASp to this equilibrium structure
cAS.

RECURRENCE RELATIONSHIP OF GENOTYPE
STRUCTURE IN PROBABILITY

Let us consider a population in which the
numbers N; and Nz of men and of women

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Vol. 16, No. 3

are constant from one generation to another.
As we have seen in the first part, an individual A belonging to generation g can have
genes arising from either (a) the same
grandparent of generation g — 2, with probability
1 1 1
4N, °° 4N, N’

where N is the “effective population”; or
(b) two different grandparents, with probability 1 — 1/N. In the first case, A’s two
genes are replicas either of the same gene
or of two different genes of the grandparent
(each with probability 3). If they are
replicas of the same gene they are therefore
identical, and A has the homozygous genotype (a,a;) with a probability equal to
pi-2, probability of the allele a; in generation g — 2. If they are two different genes
of the grandparent, A therefore has the
same genotype as this grandparent. The
probability that this genotype is (@,a;) is
equal to P”_», which is the probability of
an individual of generation g — 2 having
this genotype.

In the second case, A’s two genes were
randomly selected from two different individuals of generation g — 2. The probability that they constitute the association
(a;a;) is thus the same as the probability of
finding the genotype (a;a;) in the generation
g — 1, being Po.

Finally, the probability that A is homozygous (a;a;) is

1

PE onl T Pie!

1
——)Pu;
+ (1-5) Ps,

and that A is heterozygous (a,a;) is

(6)

_ 1p. 1\ p..

These equations can be written in a condensed form:

 

Genetic Structures of Small Populations 151

1 1
HAY, = aN cL\ Sg-2 + IN A Yq-2

(8)
+ ( ~ =) AY,-1;

where -AS,~2 is the ‘“‘equivalent homozygous structure” for the probable gene structure of generation g — 2: s,2, which was
defined earlier.

Equation (8) permits us to determine
AY, step by step, if we know probable
genotype structures of generations 0 and 1,
as well as the probable gene structure of
successive generations Sy.

Assuming a known initial structure, we
have AYo = ASo.

The genotype structure, in probability, for
an individual randomly selected from a generation 1 is equal to the crossed product of the
gametic structures of his father and his
mother. Assuming random marriages, these
latter individuals both have a probable
gene structure equal to 59; thus

AY: = vo = pASo ’ (9)

according to the definition of the ‘‘equivalent panmictic structure” ,ASo.

Thus, we must discover how the probable
gene structure s, is evolved. In calculating
the ‘‘condensed vector” of each of the terms
of equation (8), we find

1 1 1
So = oN 80-2 1 Oy 80-2 ( 7 x) et
hence

1
Sg — Sg1 = (- 7) (Sg-1 — Sg_2)

1\7}
= (- N (sy _ So) ‘
But according to the relationship presented
in (9), s = So. It follows that

Sg = Sg—1 = So .

Thus, the gene structure in probability
remains equal to the initial structure, and
we deduce that
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

152 Jacquard

cL\Sq-2 = cA\So ’

which permits us to write equation (8) in
the form

AY,— — AS = (i-= (AYp-1— eA\So)

1
+ IN (AY,-2 —_ eA\So) ry

an equation for which the solution is

AS, = -ASo + AAM + ABN, (10)

where AA and AB are defined by the
initial conditions and where A; and Az are
the roots of

1 1
~(1-Z)»-5y-0.

We again find that A; and Az have the
values obtained for the recurrence of the coefficient of consanguinity a, studied in the
second part of this paper. The two roots,
both being less than 1 in absolute value,
7 and \%, approach zero, and AY, approaches -ASo. The genotype structure, in
probability, approaches the equivalent homozygous structure of the initial population. This
confirms the result obtained in the first part
of this paper.

INTERMEDIATE GENOTYPE STRUCTURES
On replacing AA and AB in equation
(10) by their values as a function of the
initial conditions ASo and AS; = ,ASo,
this equation becomes

 

_ i(1 — D2) —AzZ(1 — Ar)
AS, =[1+ SUMS |. ASo
(11)
hoy — AAt AI— de
+[ he — Mt ]Aso+ dy Pe

Referring to equation (5), we note that
the coefficient of -ASo in this equation is
actually a,, assuming that the population is
not consanguineous initially.

Furthermore, if we say

ASo = pASo “f LA ?

Social Biology

where A Aorepresents the difference between
the initial structure and the equivalent
random structure, equation (11) becomes

ASg= ag eASo+ (1—ag) pASo+¥,AAq (12)

where

Ag x
<M +

 

yy

is a coefficient characterizing the influence
of the initial structure ASo upon the structure AY,. It is called the ‘‘coefficient of reduction” of the initial deviation from panmictic structure.

It should be mentioned that +, satisfies
the same recurrence equation as 1 — a,;

1 1
= (1 _ x) Yo-1 + aN Ye-2»

but with the initial conditions yp = 1 and
v1 = 0.

It can be seen from equation (12) that at
any given moment the structure in probability of a population can be divided into
three components: (a) the equivalent homozygous structure -ASo in the initial structure; (6) the equivalent panmictic structure
pASpo in the initial structure; (c) the difference AAo between the initial structure
ASp and the equivalent panmictic structure.

The probable structure of the generation
g is thus a function of the “weight” placed
on these three reference structures, or
a, 1 — az, and Yy.

We have seen that if N is sufficiently
large so that 1/N? becomes negligible before
1/N, then 1 — a, approaches zero as

1
_*_) p-ofN
(tax)e .

Similarly, we find that

1 _
Yo ™ on ° Gant

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Vol. 16, No. 3

and consequently, if g is large enough,

1% Jon 41,

Yo
This demonstrates that the part of pASo
which is present in AY, quickly becomes
more important than that of AAo.

SUCCESSIVE PHASES OF EVOLUTION

Finally, the evolution of a population of
limited size occurs in the following phases:
1. Starting with a given initial structure ASo,

the population attains, after the first generation, the equivalent panmictic structure

Oe

2. in the second generation, the “remembrance”
of the initial structure brings the probable
structure AS, toward So.

3. This “remembrance” fades progressively
and, depending upon the number of generations which have passed, AS, approaches
pASp; but, simultaneously, the average coefficient of consanguinity increases and approaches 1. When the effect of this increase
of a, brings it to the “forgetting” of ASo,
AS, departs from the random structure pASo
in order to approach the homozygous structure -ASo.

This evolution can be schematically represented as shown in Figure 3. It can be seen
that the limitation of size has two consequences: (a) a progressive tendency toward a homozygous structure; (b) a progressive ‘‘forgetting” of the initial structure, which “forgetting” is complete after
the first generation in a random population
of infinite size.

When the initial structure conforms to
the genotype proportions of the panmixia
AA = 0, we can write, in this case, and
this case only, equation (12) as

AS, = ag eZ\So +- (1 _ Og) pL\So } (12a)

which is known as Sewall Wright’s relationship (see Fig. 3). However, we can see that
this relationship is not true for the general
case of a given initial structure.

One could have been tempted to establish
this relationship (12) by the following reasoning. If we randomly select a member of

Genetic Structures of Small Populations

 

153

generation g, the person’s two genes are
identical with probability a, and nonidentical with probability 1 — a,. In the first case,
the person is homozygous and has the
genotype (a,a;) with probability w; the
frequency of the allele a;. In the second case,
the genes are independent and the individual has the homozygous genotype (a,a;)
with probability w{ and the heterozygous
genotype (a,a;) with probability 2w,w;. All
this is expressed in a condensed fashion by
equation (12a).

 

cASo pASo

Fic. 3.—Schematic representation of the evolution of a population of limited size.

This reasoning is faulty, because it assimilates nonidentical genes with independent genes. This assimilation is possible
only in populations of infinite size. When
the size is limited, a relationship of dependence exists among genes, even if they
are not identical—a relationship resulting
from the initial structure. This dependence would disappear only in the case
where the initial structure had the same
genotype proportions as it would have had
if it had resulted from a paired association
of independent genes, that is, in the case
where ASo = »,ASo.

SIGNIFICANCE OF THE GENETIC DERIVATION

Depending upon the number of generations which have passed, the existence of

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

154 Jacquard

increasingly strong dependency among the
members of a population of limited size is
often the subject of erroneous interpretations.

The fundamental equation

AY, = Qg cL\So
(12)
+. (1 ~~ Ag) rpASo + ygAAo ,

where a, tends to 1 and y, to0 as g increases,
indicates how the probability structure of
successive generations evolves—probabilities which are defined as a function of the
information possessed on generation 0.

In other words, AY, characterizes the
set of all the possible eventualities for the
population, g generations after it had been
observed. But if, in a given generation we
measure the actual frequencies of the various genotypes, that is, if we measure the
real structure AS,, it is inno way permissible to apply the fundamental equation,
in assimilating AS, and AY,, which would
be nonsense. In the language of probability,
we can say that AS, is “the result of an
experiment,” consisting of allowing g generation to elapse; this particular result can
not confirm or negate the “law of experiment.”

In particular, if, at any given moment,
we measure the frequencies of the genes of
generation g, or in other words if we know
Sg, we have

AYou1 = % = pASz 5

and the proportions corresponding to Hardy-Weinberg’s law are respected. However,
on occasion, certain authors have tried to
demonstrate a deviation from the proportions of panmixia within a limited population. Whenever such deviations exist, they
do not arise from the effect of consanguinity
brought about by the limitations of size;
they occur only when the conditions of
panmixia (random marriages and the absence of selection) are not respected.

 

Social Biology

Similarly, the relation
AY, —> cA\So

signifies that the population approaches a
structure which is comprised of homozygotes of the same type exclusively; the
probability that these homozygotes all are
(a:a;) is equal to the initial frequency ow; of
the allele a,.

For example, in a generalized, simple
case where there exist only two alleles @ and
a’ of initial frequencies » and q, the population approaches with probability » toward
an equilibrium in which it has only homozygotes (aa); and with probability g, toward an equilibrium in which it has only
homozygotes (a’a’):

p> it °
0 walt oto 4°

In other words, the parameters p and g
represent frequencies when dealing with
the initial population, but they represent
probabilities when dealing with the final
population at equilibrium (at which time the
frequencies can be only 0 or 1).

A Vo ASo =

 

DISAPPEARANCE OF HETEROZYGOTES

When w,; and w; represent the frequencies
of the alleles a; and a; in the initial population, and Ho(i7) the frequency of heterozygotes (a,a;) in this population, then equation (12) demonstrates that their probability in generation g is

P, (ij) = (1 —~ ag — Yo) (13)
X 2wiw; + YoHo(is) 
In defining H, as the probability that an
individual of generation g is heterozygous
(no matter of which genotype the person
might be), Ho as the proportion of heterozygotes in the initial generation, and pH» as
this proportion in a panmictic population of
the same genetic structure, we then have,
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 16, No. 3

summing up term after term the 32(#2 — 1)
equation (13):

H, = (1 — ag — Yo) pHo + eH. (14)

But we have previously seen that the
values of a, and y, are given by
—
de — Ay

X [Ae — 1a + (1 — AAR,

l—a,=

[AAT — AAS] ,

_ i
Ym

where i and \2 are the roots of equation

1 1
- (1-9) ay

But, the positive root A: has an absolute
value which is always larger than that of
the negative root \1; whenever g increases,
, rapidly becomes negligible before \%,

and the relationship (14) can be written
H,=

g
—S [pHo — MH “~~ AMY

Az
Between two successive generations the
probability that an individual possesses a
heterozygous genotype is thus reduced as

ost
H,

 

1 ___
=’ =oy (N-1tv1it+N’).
This relationship is valuable for sufficiently
elevated values of g, no matter what are the
numbers N, and Ne of men and women in
the population, numbers for which the harmonic mean is N/2,

When the numbers are such that 1/N?
can become negligible before 1/N, the relationship (14) becomes
Ao41 1

~1—-—.

H, 2N ° (15)

Thus, in a limited population the probability of encountering a heterozygous individual undergoes with each generation a
relative diminution equal to 3N.

 

 

 

Genetic Structures of Small Populations 155

THE CASE OF SIB-MATING

Populations comprised of two individuals, a man and a woman, represent the
absolute minimal size necessary for the
survival of the group, at least along sexual
lines. Many geneticists have studied the
evolution of such populations which correspond to a systematic brother-sister mating (sib-mating).

This problem is generally presented in
the case where a given locus carries only
two alleles and where the initial structure
presents certain particulars which simplify
the calculations: absence of homozygotes
or absence of heterozygotes.

When N = 2, the roots of equation

1 1
-(1-x) ay =

1+V5
—{T

are
1—v5

M = 4

and Ae =

The parameters a and b in equation (4),
assuming the hypothesis that ap = a, = 0,
are

ge 8Y5 ang po DSS,

10 10.’

from which is deduced

a, ~ 5a 3v8 1— v5
Cy
4 SSNS (LA SY

and similarly
~itV5 1— v5
Oy on

45= V5 (: + vs

10 4 ,
values which, applied to equation (12),
permit us to calculate AY,.

In order to calculate the values of a, and
Y, pertaining to the first generations, it is

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

156 Jacquard

simpler to note that the equation giving
1 — a, is written

1 — ag = 3(1 — Q-1) + #(1 _ Gg_2) ’
and similarly,
Yo = 2Yo-1 > 4Y0-2 3

recurrence formulae for which the solution
is known as Fibonacci’s series. The successive terms can be calculated easily (see
Table 1), when one observes that the g term

TABLE 1
BROTHER-SISTER MARRIAGES

CoEFFICIENTS

GENERATIONS 1~—ay ag vo

| a 1 0 1

does pe pene ue 1=2/2 0 0

Ze ccc cee eeee 3/4 1/4 1/4

Bee e ce eens 5/8 3/8 1/8
re 8/16 8/16 2/16
B. uu uae ee we 13/32 19/32 3/32
21/64 43 /64 5/64
| 34/28 94/128 8/128
Bo... cc ee eee 55/256 201/256 13/256
Doce cee eee 89/512 423/512 21/512

10........... ia/l ,024 880/1 ,024 34/1 ,024

has the form A,/2°, with A, = Age -+ Aj.
Thus, after the fifth generation of brothersister marriages, the equivalent homozygous structure, -ASo, occurs for nearly twothirds of the probable structure, AS,, whereas the initial deviation from the panmictic
structure occurs only for less than a tenth.
At the tenth generation, these proportions
reach 86% and 3%, respectively.

PARTICULAR CASES

If the initial population is comprised of
heterozygotes (aa’), then
Hy=1, w= Wy = },
hence
H, = 3(1— a, + 7%) But equations (16) and (17) show that

1—agtyg = 1 — a5-1;

 

Social Biology

hence,
Hy = 3(1 — ay-1) .

If the initial population is comprised of
homozygotes exclusively, then

Hy = Q ;
hence,

H, = (1 — ag — Yq) X 2wiw; ;
but equations (16) and (17) show that
1 — ag — Yo = 3(1 — ay»)

so that
H, = (1 — Ap-2) WW; ®

It is noteworthy that in these two cases
H, can be expressed as a function of a,, and
that y, seems to disappear; but it only appears to be thus, since the phenomenon of
“recall” of the initial structure plays a
particularly concrete role. In the first case,
it shifts the decrease of H, in relation to that
of 1 — a, one generation back; in the second case, two generations.

CONCLUSION

By introducing the probability rationale
into the study of the evolution of a population of limited size, G. Malécot created
concepts permitting a rigorous definition of
the rules of this evolution. We have attempted here to apply a similar rationale
not only to gene structures of successive
generations but also to their genotype structures. We can easily see that the set of the
probabilities of various genotypes in a
future generation (which we call its ‘‘genotype structure in probability’) is a linear
combination of three reference structures:
(a) the initial structure ASo; (6) the equivalent panmictic structure ,ASo; (c) and the
equivalent homozygous structure -ASo.

Thus, we state that the respective
“weights” of these three reference structures are a function of not only the “average
coefficient of consanguinity” which progressively approaches 1 for succeeding generaDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:53 08 December 2015

Vol. 16, No. 3

tions, but also the “coefficient of reduction”
of the initial deviation from panmictic structure, a coefficient which approaches zero.
Having introduced this latter factor, we
can describe in terms of probability the evolution of a population whatever its initial
structure.

Finally, in specifying the significance of
our results, we would like to take this
occasion to correct a misinterpretation of
the notion of ‘‘genetic drift.” Limitation of
the population size carries with it an increasing level of consanguinity, as measured by
the ‘“‘mean coefficient of consanguinity.”
This coefficient is involved in the probability
structure of the population, but it does not

Genetic Structures of Small Populations

 

157

occur in the observed structure, at least in a
panmictic situation. The proportions described by Hardy-Weinberg’s law are affected only from the perspective of probability. On the other hand, they remain unaltered in all real populations, whatever the
level of consanguinity, so long as the consanguinity level is due to the limitation of
the population only. Often considered as a
paradox, this statement becomes evident if
we take care to define cautiously the concepts employed.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Miss Jeni Smoly provided the careful translation of this article from French,

REFERENCES

Jacquarn, A. 1968. Liaison génétique entre individus apparentés. Population 23:93-128.

. 1968. Evolution des populations d’effectif
limité. Population 23:279-300.

Li, C. C. 1955. Population genetics. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Mattcot, G. 1966. Probabilités et hérédité.
I.N.E.D., Paris.

 

 

 

Waicnt, S. 1951. The genetical structure of population. Ann. Eug. 13:323-354.

. 1965. The interpretation of population
structure by F statistics, with special regard to
system of mating. Evolution 19:395-420.

YasupA, H., and N. E. Morton. 1966. Studies on
human population structure. Proceedings of the
Third International Congress of Human Genet
ics. Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore.

 

  

 
