Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Intrauterine diagnosis and genetic counseling in
psychiatry

Gilbert S. Omenn

To cite this article: Gilbert S. Omenn (1976) Intrauterine diagnosis and genetic counseling in
psychiatry, Social Biology, 23:2, 142-157, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1976.9988220

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1976.9988220

i Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lal Article views: 5

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:36
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

 

Intrauterine Diagnosis and Genetic
Counseling in Psychiatry

Gilbert S. Omenn

Division of Medical Genetics
Department of Medicine
University of Washington
Seattle, Washington

 

 

ABSTRACT: Genetic counseling has an important place in the care and follow-up of patients and
families with disorders of mental development and of mental function. Amniocentesis, obtaining
a small amount of amniotic fluid with fetal cells for biochemical and chromosomal tests, has
greatly advanced the precision of genetic counseling for a growing list of testable conditions.
Currently, the major indications are the Down syndrome (trisomy 21), numerous rare inborn
errors of metabolism, and neural tube closure defects in “high-risk” families. In the future,
additional behavioral syndromes associated with abnormal chromosomes or biochemical markers
may be suitable for such very early detection. The social and psychological problems arising in
testing and counseling for genetic and chromosomal diseases require wider recognition.

There are many psychological burdens
associated with pregnancy, one of the
most distressing being the fear of bearing a
deformed or defective baby or a child who
will develop psychiatric illness. Approximately 3 per cent of all live births will be
severely retarded in mental development
or wil] have serious congenital malformations. For the family in which a child or
another relative already has been affected,
the risks may be much higher. In the past
two decades, genetic counseling clinics
have been established to deal with the
medical, genetic, and emotional aspects of
such disorders.

The first requirement for genetic counseling is precise diagnosis in order to predict the course of the illness. Determination of the risk of recurrence in subsequent
children requires clear differentiation of
heterogeneous causes of similar syndromes, relying upon the detailed family
history and upon various laboratory
analyses such as_ radiologic studies,

chromosome karyotypes, and enzyme assays.

Even with the most detailed evaluation,
families usually can be provided only with
a statistical statement. For examples, the
risk of recurrence in subsequent children is
about 1 per cent for most cases of the
Down syndrome (mongolism), about 5 per
cent for many birth defects, 25 per cent for
inborn errors of metabolism inherited as
autosomal recessive disorders, or 50 per
cent for autosomal dominant conditions.
Often, however, counseling is complicated
by the variable severity of the illness, uncertainty of diagnosis, or the possibility
that the affected child had a fresh mutation.

For many common disorders, including
schizophrenia and depression, there is
good evidence of genetic factors of unknown mechanism. However, all that can
be offered is an empirical risk figure based
upon reports of the frequency of recurrence in large series of families. It must

142

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

Vol. 23, No. 2

always be stressed that these risks for spe
cific disorders are in addition to the approximately 5 per cent of mental retardation or birth defects that every couple
takes when having a child.

In the past few years, there has been a
dramatic development in counseling for
some genetic disorders. For a small but
rapidly increasing number of diseases, it is
now possible to diagnose the condition in
utero early enough in pregnancy to permit
selective abortion of affected fetuses (Nadier and Gerbie, 1970; Milunsky et al.,
1970; Bergsma and Motulsky, 1971). Unfortunately, treatment is unsatisfactory for
so many conditions, especially those affecting mental development, that prevention of birth of an affected child appears
highly desirable to many parents and to
their physicians. Diagnosis depends on
specific determination of chromosome
karyotype or enzyme assays in cells of fetal
origin obtained from the amniotic fluid
around the fetus and grown in tissue culture medium in the laboratory. While
there is much speculation about the potential feasibility of “genetic engineering” by
manipulation of the DNA in cells, many
specific disorders can be prevented already by what might be called “reproductive engineering” (Omenn, 1973).

PRENATAL DIAGNOSIS:
AMNIOCENTESIS

Amniocentesis is a procedure for obtaining amniotic fluid, which contains fetal
cells desquamated from respiratory and
urinary tract endothelia and from skin and
amnion. A small gauge “spinal” needle is
inserted through the abdominal and
uterine wall into the amniotic cavity. The
procedure is done “blindly,” so the success
depends upon the skill and experience of
the obstetrician. The time at which amniocentesis is carried out must be a com
promise. The more advanced the preg-.

Intrauterine Diagnosis and Genetic Counseling

143

nancy, the more fluid and greater likelihood of obtaining an adequate sample for
study. On the other hand, amniocentesis
must be carried out early enough so that
laboratory studies can be completed and
abortion can be safely (and legally) done if
termination of pregnancy is indicated. The
best time for amniocentesis is at 13 to 14
weeks of pregnancy, and laboratory tests
usually require three additional weeks.

The major current indications are the
Down syndrome (trisomy 21), numerous
rare inborn errors of metabolism, and
neural tube closure defects. The latter include anencephaly, meningomyelocoele,
spina bifida, and hydrocephalus. A test for
the normal fetal protein alpha-fetoprotein
in amniotic fluid has become a routine
diagnostic measure for defects of neural
tube closure. Presumably, the serum protein leaks out through the neural tube defect. Early efforts even indicate the feasibility of screening maternal serum for
transplacental alpha-fetoprotein levels
above normal, with follow-up testing of
the amniotic fluid (Brock et al., 1974).

The hazards of amniocentesis are not
yet fully evaluated. Reports of more than
1,600 procedures (Milunsky, 1973) are remarkably free of serious immediate complications. There are no known cases of
severe maternal bleeding, infection, or
uterine rupture; no induced miscarriages;
and no increase in the number of congenital malformations in the offspring. Potential long-term hazards of amniocentesis
are much more difficult to evaluate. The
effect, if any, of disturbing the volume and
possibly the dynamics of the amniotic fluid
is simply unknown.

It would be a tragedy if normal babies
later suffered mild depression of IQ levels
or some other subtle damage because of a
diagnostic procedure aimed at detecting
an abnormal fetus. For this reason, in
pregnancies with less than 1 per cent
recurrence risk for a given disease, parents
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

144 Omenn

at this time are being counseled that the
risk of the procedure may be sufficient
that amniocentesis should not be carried
out. Depending on how abhorrent the particular disorder is to the parents, they may
agree to forego amniocentesis or they may
insist on accepting the risk of the procedure, or else they may elect to have no
more pregnanticies.

Since amniocentesis is still considered
an investigative procedure, current
knowledge about the procedure and the
tests required for prenatal diagnosis are
discussed as fully as possible with the parents. They are asked to read and sign a
consent form containing the following
major points (Epstein et al., 1970; MacIntyre, 1971).

1. There is an unknown but apparently
quite low risk to mother and fetus.

2. More than one amniocentesis may be required to obtain sufficient fluid.

3. Cell cultures may fail to grow, and two or
three weeks will have passed before this result is known.

4. Chromosomal or biochemical analyses
may be unsuccessful.

5. In vitro laboratory results may not reflect
the status of the fetus, especially if a twin
pregnancy is sampled.

6. Normal chromosomal or biochemical results on the tests that are performed cannot
eliminate the possibility of birth defects
and/or mental retardation from other causes.
Any condition not ruled out by a specific test
can be expected to occur with a frequency
similar to that in the general population.

TYPES OF BEHAVIORAL SYNDROMES
SUITABLE FOR PRENATAL DIAGNOSIS

By far the greatest progress in prenatal
diagnosis has come in the area of those
chromosomal and metabolic disorders that
grossly disrupt the normal processes of
neurological and mental development in
the central nervous system. The reason is
simple. The “phenotype” of mental retardation has been sorted on clinical and laboratory grounds into numerous specific
etiologic mechanisms, for which specific

Social Biology

diagnostic tests can be applied. I strongly
believe that similar processes of sorting
out of multiple mechanisms will be essential to our understanding and to our diagnostic approach for the other common behavioral phenotypes, including schizophrenia, affective disorder, and perhaps
even addictability to drugs.

CHROMOSOMAL DISORDERS CAUSING MENTAL
RETARDATION

The single most important disorder
suitable for prenatal diagnosis is the Down
syndrome (mongolism) (Down, 1866; Penrose and Smith, 1966; Smith and Wilson,
1973). One of every 660 births is a child
with the Down syndrome, recognizable at
birth by the clinical features of hypotonia,
slanted palpebral fissures, flat facial profile, speckling of the iris, single crease in
the palms, and congenital heart defects.

The risk of mongolism increases strikingly with age of the mother, from about
1/2,000 at age 20, to 1/500 at age 35, 1/100
at age 40, and 1/40 at age 45. More than 95
per cent of cases are due to trisomy 21,
meaning that 47 chromosomes are present,
with the No. 21 set occurring in triplicate
rather than as a pair. The mechanism of
trisomy 21 is nondisjunction, i.e., the pair
of No. 21 chromosomes in the mother’s
egg failed to separate normally. The single
No. 21 chromosome added from the
father’s sperm produces a fertilized egg
with three No. 21 chromosomes.

Nearly one-half of all the babies with
mongolism are born to mothers over 35
years old. The number of children born
with the Down syndrome could be decreased simply by social practices that reduce the average age of mothers or that
discourage women from having children
after age 35. Alternatively, it is feasible for
those couples who accept selective abortion to prevent the birth of such children
by monitoring pregnancies of older women
for trisomy 21. The age for monitoring

 

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

Vol. 23, No. 2

pregnancies is now arbitrarily set at age 38
to 40, but is expected to fall to age 35 as
genetics centers develop the capacity to
handle more cases and if evaluation of the
potential hazards of amniocentesis indicates that the risks of the procedure are
sufficiently small.

There are other circumstances in which
amniocentesis should be carried out for the
Down syndrome. If the family has already
had one child with the Down syndrome
due to trisomy 21 and the parents appear
normal, the recurrence risk is estimated to
be about 1 per cent. The level of risk combined with the emotional, social, and financial impact of one child already affected with the Down syndrome usually
leads the parents and physicians to seek
prenatal diagnoses of subsequent pregnancies.

About 2 to 5 per cent of children with
the Down syndrome have a chromosome
karyotype with “translocation pattern,” 46
chromosomes that include a structurally
abnormal chromosome. The “extra” No.
21 chromosome is attached to one of
the “normal” chromosomes, making the
equivalent of a triplicate of the No. 21
chromosome. When a translocation pattern is found in the child, it is imperative
to study the chromosomes of the parents.
If one of the parents carries the translocation in a balanced form, the risk for the
Down syndrome in live-born children may
be anywhere from 5 per cent to as high as
100 per cent (in certain rare translocations). These abnormalities of translocation can be recognized reliably in the cultured amniotic cell chromosome karyotype. Therefore, prenatal diagnosis is
quite feasible for the translocation type of
the Down syndrome.

The mean IQ for older patients with the
Down syndrome is 24, with an upper limit
of about 50 (Smith, 1970). Many children
and most adults require institutionalization; in many states, the Down syndrome

Intrauterine Diagnosis and Genetic Counseling

145

accounts for almost half the adult patients
in institutions for the mentally retarded.
The annual cost to society for custodial
care is so high that extensive prenatal
diagnostic screening and abortion for
trisomy 21 could be justified on a cost/
benefit basis alone.

Other chromosomal disorders of the autosomes occur much less frequently or are
lethal early in life and need not be discussed further here. We should note, however, that seemingly harmless chromo- .
somal translocations and chromosomal
variations are found among “normal” individuals. Sometimes the abnormality is
found first in a mentally retarded or
psychotic child, but then the same
chromosome abnormalities are identified
in cells of his unaffected siblings or parents. Several such variants of uncertain
significance have been discovered already
while testing amniotic fluid specimens for
trisomy 21 or for inborn errors of metabolism. Unfortunately, given the pressure of
time to make a decision either to allow the
pregnancy to proceed or to terminate the
pregnancy, these complicating findings
can be very distressing.

INBORN ERRORS OF METABOLISM

More than a dozen enzyme deficiencies
inherited as autosomal recessive or
X-linked recessive diseases have been
demonstrated in amniotic fluid cell specimens, allowing abortion of affected fetuses
(Omenn and Motulsky, 1975). Most of
these disorders are associated with mental
retardation. Analogous enzymatic assays
are feasible for many other conditions
(Milunsky et al., 1970). For several of
these disorders having a recurrence risk of
25 per cent, pregnancies at risk (meaning
that a previous child was affected) have
been monitored, and parents were correctly informed, on the basis of normal enzyme
assays, that the fetus would be unaffected.

As we noted earlier, one can never
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

146

guarantee that the child will be “normal”
because of all the other untested disorders
which may occur. Testing for inborn disorders of metabolism, each of which is
rare, is ordinarily restricted to families in
which a case has already been diagnosed.
In the past, without the option of prenatal
diagnosis, most families faced with a 25
per cent risk of a serious genetic disorder
have elected to forego further pregnancies
(Casey et al., 1966). Prenatal diagnoses
and abortion make it possible for such
parents to have a normal child without
fear of recurrence of that disease.

However, certain autosomal recessive
conditions are not rare, especially when
one considers particular ethnic or racial
groups. Three examples are cystic fibrosis,
which occurs in 1/2,000 Caucasians;
Tay-Sachs disease, which occurs in
1/4,000 Ashkenazi Jews; and sickle-cell
anemia, which occurs in 1/400 Blacks in
the United States. Prenatal diagnosis is
not yet feasible for cystic fibrosis, since
there is no suitable test. By contrast,
Tay-Sachs disease, which causes severe
mental and neurological disintegration
and death by the age of 4 years, is due to
deficiency of an enzyme which is demonstrable in cultured amniotic cells. In fact,
this enzyme can be measured accurately in
human blood serum samples, allowing detection of the heterozygous carriers.

As a result, extensive screening of
Jewish populations in the Baltimore
Washington, Los Angeles, and Philadel-.

phia areas has been initiated. High frequency of the gene in the Jewish populations there has been confirmed, and young
couples in which both spouses are carriers
have been identified and have been offered the option of prenatal monitoring for
Tay-Sachs diseases during pregnancy.
Extensive screening is also under way in
many cities for carriers of the sickle
hemoglobin trait. The carriers are healthy;
but if two carriers marry, their children

 

Omenn

Social Biology

have a 25 per cent risk of sickle-cell
anemia. In this case, carrier detection is
technically very reliable, but no method is
available to obtain fetal blood cells for
prenatal diagnosis. The educational imperative to distinguish between a sicklecell trait carrier and a person with the
disease and the complicated issue of family
planning in the Black population have led
to quite emotional controversies about the
sickle-cell screening programs.

One rare X-linked recessive disorder
which merits special discussion here is the
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, consisting of elevated uric acid in the blood, choreoathetoid involuntary movements, and a
compulsive self-mutilating behavior (Kelley and Wyngaarden, 1972). These boys
bite their lips and fingertips until the
structures are destroyed. I have seen such
a youngster with sufficient intelligence to
ask that he have his arms restrained even
after his teeth were extracted, so that he
would not impulsively poke his own eyes.

The behavior somehow results from a
metabolic defect due to deficiency of
the enzyme hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl transferase (better known as
HGPRT). The highest activity of the enzyme in normal individuals is found in the
basal ganglia of the brain, providing an
excellent correlation with the major
neurologic abnormality of this syndrome—the involuntary movements. But
the basis for the impulsive behavior is
beyond understanding at present. There is
no very effective therapy, though uric acid
production can be controlled to prevent
damage to the kidneys from uric acid
stones. It is likely that understanding of
this disorder might provide some clues to
other impulsive and violent behaviors.

The Lesch-Nyhan syndrome can be detected in utero by testing amniotic fluid
cells for HGPRT enzyme activity (DeMars
et al., 1969). Since the gene is carried on
the X-chromosome, only boys will be toDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 23, No. 2

tally deficient in HGPRT; girls may be
normal or be carriers of the abnormal
gene.

PSYCHOPATHIC AND SOCIOPATHIC
PERSONALITY

There is no doubt that familial and social milieu contribute importantly to personality disorders and criminality. Nevertheless, in similar environments there is
remarkable individual variation in personality and in likelihood of getting into
trouble with the law. Twin studies
(Shields, 1962) indicate that even for indices of personality and temperament genetic factors are involved, though the genetic
component seems much smaller than has
been demonstrated for IQ measures.
Among men imprisoned for criminal behavior, chromosomal screening has identified individuals with sex chromosomal
abnormalities at frequencies much higher
than those in the general population
(Jacobs et al., 1965; Casey et al., 1966).
Considerable controversy about the medical and legal interpretation of such findings has been generated with the XYY
syndrome, even though little attention was
paid to the more frequently found XX Y or
Klinefelter syndrome.

The Klinefelter syndrome consists of
testicular atrophy and infertility, occasional gynecomastia, tall eunuchoid appearance, and variable behavior; patients
range from altogether normal men
through individuals with mild to moderate
mental deficiency to those with psychopathic and criminal problems. Screening
for the XXY karyotype can be carried cut
simply with smears of the buccal mucosa
and staining for the sex chromatin or Barr
body, indicating an extra X chromosome.

Among 942 mentally abnormal inmates
with a tendency toward criminal behavior, 1.3 per cent were found to have
the XX Y karyotype and 0.7 per cent had
the XYY karyotype, compared with 0.2

Intrauterine Diagnosis and Genetic Counseling

147

per cent and 0.02 per cent respectively in
the general population (Jacobs et al.,
1965). It has been suggested that the
psychopathology is secondary to mental
deficiency or to hypogonadism, rather
than an independent result of the
chromosomal abnormality.

Rather than sampling a prison or
psychiatrically abnormal population, Nielsen evaluated hypogonadal male patients
with normal 46 XY karyotype and with
47 XXY karyotypes from a sterility
clinic in Denmark (Nielsen et al., 1969;
Theilgaard et al., 1971). The XXY patients had significantly more psychiatric
symptoms and were particularly differentiated from the XY patients by signs of
immaturity, insecurity, boastful and selfassertive behavior, and record of legal offenses. Differences in testis size, gynecomastia and IQ were not related to the
indices of psychopathology.

The overall frequency of XXY births is
1 in 450 males, so we are sure to find some
cases of XX Y syndrome as we continue to
screen pregnancies. It is likely that a family in which amniocentesis is done and an
XXY karyotype is found would seek an
abortion, given the likelihood of mild
mental retardation and the approximately
five-fold increased risk of psychopathology, plus the infertility.

The story of the X YY syndrome is one
of the most curious in the genetics of behavior. XYY karyotypes were first reported in association with a variety of
gonadal abnormalities. In 1965, an excessive incidence of XYY males was described from screening among very tall
men in maximum-security prisons in Scotland (Jacobs et al., 1965). Presumably because males are considered more aggressive than females and because an extra Y
seemed intuitively to be a reasonable basis
for greater height and greater aggressiveness, stories from Australia and France
about accused murderers having X YY
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

148 Omenn

karyotypes made front-page news in the
United States.

Behavior geneticists took increased interest in the X YY syndrome for another
reason. A psychosocial evaluation with
family data on 9 XYY and 18 XY prisoners at the maximum-security prison at
Carstairs in Scotland indicated that X YY
criminals could be distinguished from XY
counterparts by a lack of broken families,
a lack of criminal records among their siblings, a tendency to get into trouble with
the law earlier in their teens with crimes
against property rather than people, and a
greater lack of concern about their criminal behavior (Price and Whatmore, 1967).
In other words, such individuals seemed
to represent chromosomal accidents that
made them “black sheep” of otherwise upstanding families.

The analogy to mental retardation syndromes was obvious: A severely mentally
retarded child in a family of normal parents and siblings is often the result of a
particular chromosome or metabolic abnormality, while a mildly or moderately
retarded child in a family with parents and
siblings of a similar IQ usually reflects the
interplay of multiple genetic and environmental influences.

Unfortunately, subsequent studies have
failed to confirm this striking differentiation between XYY and XY criminals
(Money et al., 1970). Furthermore, population screening by the laborious preparation of full chromosomal karyotypes has
demonstrated that approximately 1/800
male births is XYY, many times the frequency of tall criminals in Western society. At present, it appears that the XYY
karyotype is associated with a small but
definitely increased risk of psychopathology and criminality (Hook, 1973). No particular populations are known to have an
increased risk of producing XYY children. However, while screening women of
age 40 or older for the Down syndrome,

Social Biology

Nadler (1971) encountered one case of the
XYY syndrome.

Should a family desperately want a
baby or disapprove of abortion, the
knowledge that the child is born with an
XYY karyotype may interfere seriously
with normal attitudes toward childbearing. It is obvious that moral, ethical, and
legal problems arise from such situations
especially when our knowledge of the
natural history of the chromosomal syndrome is incomplete or derived from
biased data. What do we tell the parents in
such situations, when we are uncertain
ourselves of the consequences of a particular test result?

DISORDERS OF SEXUAL DIFFERENTIATION OF
BEHAVIORAL INTEREST

Genetic and chromosomal disorders
have been described that affect every stage
of differentiation and function of the
gonads and the tissues responsive to sex
hormones. Several excellent reviews are
available (Federman, 1967; Rimoin and
Schimke, 1971). Patients range from true
hermaphrodites (containing functioning
ovarian and testicular tissue) to those with
less severe disorders. Evidence in rats,
guinea pigs, monkeys, and man demonstrates that sex hormones have important
influences in the development of attitudes
and many specific behaviors in addition to
those directly involved in reproductive
behavior (Goy, 1970). Money and his colleagues (Money and Ehrhardt, 1972) have
investigated in detail a variety of
chromosomal disorders and inborn errors
affecting sexual development, as well as
other behavioral patterns for which no
biologic basis is yet known (homosexuality, trans-sexuality).

The most intriguing findings are those
from studies of patients with gonadal
dysgenesis or the Turner syndrome (Alexander et al., 1966). These girls have short
stature (almost always less than 5 feet),

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 23, No. 2

lack functioning ovarian tissue, and hence
lack menstruation or breast development.
Nevertheless, they have essentially normal
intelligence and normal female gender
identity. IQ testing revealed that scores for
verbal performance regularly exceeded
those for nonverbal subtests, but the difference lay in the tests of space-form perception, in which at least 80 per cent of
these girls are remarkably deficient. They
draw bizarre and poorly formed outlines
on the figure copying and Draw-a-Person
test. At the clinical level, many of these
girls have difficulty finding their way in
and out of the maze in our own outpatient
clinic.

It is not at all clear how a chromosomal
abnormality present in all the cells (45
XO) could so strikingly affect one particular cognitive function. The 45 XO karyotype can, of course, be recognized in amniotic cells; however, nearly half of the
cases of gonadal dysgenesis are mosaics,
leading to problems in diagnosis. A
couple’s decision about a pregnancy witha
45 XO fetus will be influenced by their
attitudes about abortion and their willingness to accept a “less than perfect” child.

Another interesting category of disorders is congenital adrenal hyperplasia, due
to enzyme deficiencies at one of the several
steps in the biosynthesis of cortisol. Stimulation of the adrenal by pituitary ACTH
leads to high levels of cortisol precursors,
including androgenizing compounds that
cause the external genitalia of a female
fetus to become masculinized. Often such
female babies are mistakenly identified as
boys. When the metabolic abnormality is
recognized, sex should be reassigned to
female.

In one study, 15 girls with the adrenogenital syndrome who had been treated
early with cortisone and raised as girls
were compared with a control group
matched for age, sex, IQ, and father’s occupational level (Ehrhardt et al., 1968).

Intrauterine Diagnosis and Genetic Counseling

149

The girls with the adrenogenital syndrome
had a much higher incidence of interest in
masculine-associated clothing and toy
preference and very little interest in infant
care and feminine-associated clothing and
toys. They considered themselves and
were considered by others to be tomboys.
It was postulated that the tomboyish traits
are a product of androgenization of the
hypothalamus or related areas of the brain
in utero. There was considerable individual variation, suggesting an interplay of
social conditioning and fetal androgenic
effects. Although these patients were reported to have higher than normal IQ’s
(Money and Lewis, 1966), our own studies
have demonstrated that the IQ’s of such
female patients do not exceed the values
predicted by a family study of the IQ’s of
parents and. siblings (McGuire and
Omenn, 1975).

Since the enzymes responsible for this
disorder are not normally expressed in fibroblasts or amniotic fluid cells, direct
assay in early pregnancy for these enzymes
is not feasible. However, treatment is
quite effective and reasonably simple, so
many families would be willing to accept
the birth of an affected child, especially if
diagnostic and therapeutic measures were
instituted promptly. Other families, in our
experience, have decided against further
pregnancies, because they would not consign 25 per cent of their children to lifelong
treatment with cortisone.

Yet another instructive syndrome is testicular feminization (Rimoin and Schimke,
1971). These genetic males have a 46 XY
karyotype, two intra-abdominal testes,
and produce testosterone, but their target
tissues are “insensitive” to the action of
testosterone. Phenotypically, these males
appear at birth and through puberty to be
females, then seek medical attention in
their teens for lack of menstruation or for
infertility. The external genitalia are those
of a normal female. The vagina ends
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

150

blindly. Breast size varies as in normal
women. Psychologically, a series of ten
such patients showed unmistakably feminine behavior and outlook with regard to marriage and maternalism. For
four married patients, interviews of the
husbands confirmed these conclusions
(Money et al., 1968).

The treatment of choice is to inform the
“woman” that she is infertile, that the
“gonads” (not “testes”) in the inguinal hernia should be removed because they are
not functioning normally and may become
malignant, and that any difficulty with
intercourse may be improved by plastic
surgery procedures. It is unwise in the extreme to advise such a person that “she” is
cytogenetically a male, since physiologically, psychologically, socially, and legally
she is a female. This seems to be one of
those rare situations where the physician
can clearly justify withholding detailed
medical results.

If the syndrome of testicular feminization is recognized in a family, it is possible
for a couple to avoid having affected children. Since the trait is inherited as an
X-linked or sex-limited disorder, affecting
only males, amniocentesis and determination of the fetal sex from the chromosomes
would permit the parents to abort male
fetuses (which have a 50 per cent risk of
being affected) and allow female fetuses to
be born.

PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS NOT NOW
FEASIBLE FOR PRENATAL DIAGNOSIS

Let us turn briefly to some of the more
common psychiatric phenotypes and look
ahead in the hope that there will be progress in our understanding, treatment, and
prevention of these disorders.

DEPRESSION (AFFECTIVE DISORDERS)

There is considerable evidence from
twin and family studies that depression

Omenn

Social Biology

and especially manic-depressive psychosis
is conditioned by genetic factors (Winokur
et al., 1969; Gershon et al., 1971). Among
the relatives of a patient with manicdepressive psychosis, approximately 10
per cent of parents, 10 per cent of children, and 12 per cent of siblings have affective disorders. At present, there is considerable excitement among some psychiatrists with family studies that seem
to indicate linkage of a putative gene for
manic-depressive illness to known genetic
markers on the X-chromosome. Thus, ina
number of selected families it has been
possible to infer linkage either to color
blindness (Mendlewicz et al., 1972) or to
the blood group Xg marker (Reich et al.,
1969; Mendlewicz et al., 1973).

To us as geneticists these findings are
most surprising, because color blindness
and Xg loci are not detectably linked to
each other on the X-chromosome (Sanger,
1970). Therefore, the gene postulated for
manic-depressive illness would have to lie
between these two markers in order to
show linkage to both of them; and there
would have to be a sizeable distance between the manic-depressive gene and the
marker gene, leaving a substantial risk of
recombination in the female, who has two
X chromosomes.

As a result, it may be hazardous to predict the transmission of the manicdepressive gene from the transmission of
color blindness or Xg blood group
phenotype. Furthermore, we must note
that neither colorblindness nor the Xg
phenotype can presently be determined in
utero. On the other hand, it would be a
tremendous boost to biochemical research
in manic-depressive illness if genetic
studies can indicate that a single gene abnormality carried on the X chromosome is
responsible for at least some cases of
manic-depressive illness.

Also, there is growing evidence that
biogenic amine metabolism may be altered

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 23, No. 2

in depression (Bunney et al., 1972). As
more knowledge is gained about the
biochemistry of depression, it may become
possible to assay specific enzymes or to use
pharmacologic challenges in in vitro systems to identify healthy individuals or
even fetuses at higher-than-normal risk of

developing depression later in life
(Omenn, 1973).
SCHIZOPHRENIA

Statistical analyses of family and twin
data and comparisons of the incidence of
schizophrenia in biologic and adoptive
relatives of probands who were adopted
early in life suggest a major role for genetic
factors also in schizophrenia. The exact
mechanism(s) of inheritance is unknown,
and no specific metabolic abnormalities
have been discovered as the basis of such a
predisposition in the vast majority of
cases. Therefore, genetic counseling for
relatives of a schizophrenic patient rests
on empirical risk figures (Rosenthal and
Kety, 1968).

One sure sign of heterogeneity is the
mimicking of schizophrenia by specific inborn errors of metabolism, such as the
adult form of metachromatic leukodystrophy (Austin et al., 1968). At least two
dozen patients with this rare disease have
been recognized, with diagnosis after age
21 years, in whom mental and emotional
changes were so severe that the patients
were institutionalized with a diagnosis of
schizophrenic illness. Only years later did
neurologic deterioration become manifest
and lead to pathologic demonstration of
storage of sulfatides in the brain. Probably
these patients have a less severe deficiency
of the same enzyme, cerebroside sulfatase,
that is deficient in the infantile form of
metachromatic leukodystrophy.

It would not be surprising if many other enzymes whose complete deficiency
grossly disrupts the development of central nervous system function were found to

 

Intrauterine Diagnosis and Genetic Counseling

151

be involved in late-onset neurological dysfunction and psychoses, either as a result
of a different mutation causing less severe
deficiency or because the patient was a
half-deficient heterozygous carrier of the
gene causing infantile onset. Very few
studies of the parents or siblings of children affected with autosomal recessive inborn errors of metabolism have been
made. Let us note, however, that a disease
like phenylketonuria, in which the abnormality lies in a liver enzyme and effects
on the brain are secondary to accumulated
toxic metabolites, would not be a good
choice for such studies. Instead, a disorder
in which the affected enzyme normally has
high activity in the brain should be
selected for study.

Such a disorder is homocystinuria, in
which there is deficiency of cystathionine
synthetase (Mudd et al., 1970). Cystathionine is normally present in remarkably high concentrations in brain, though
its function is unknown. It is one of many
amino acids now considered possible
neurotransmitters. Individuals affected
with homocystinuria have skeletal abnormalities, ectopic lens, marked tendency to
venous and arterial thromboses, and about
half are retarded. Why only half are retarded is not at all clear. Those who are
considered of normal intelligence might
have had higher IQs if not for the
homocystinuria. Among the unaffected
relatives in certain families, an apparent
excess of schizophrenia has been noted,
but no systematic studies have been performed with carriers of the homocystinuria gene. Homocysteine and methionine
are involved in methylation reactions in
the brain, offering possible connection
to schizophrenia if methylated neurotransmitter metabolites are really involved
in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia.

The enzyme deficiency of cystathionine
synthetase can be demonstrated in amniotic fluid cells, and recent studies of stimu
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

152 Omenn

lated peripheral lymphocytes in our department make detection of heterozygotes
by blood test feasible (Goldstein et al.,
1972). Even for this rare recessive disease
(frequency about 1/40,000), the frequency
of heterozygous gene carriers is 1 per cent
in the general population.

Another rare autosomal recessive condition that can present with schizophreniclike symptoms in the early stages is progressive myoclonic epilepsy, UnverrichtLundborg syndrome (Slater and Cowie,
1971). Centrencephalic epilepsy with petit
and grand mal seizures is accompanied by
deposition of amyloid-like Lafora bodies
in the brain, retina, nerves, muscle, heart,
liver and fibroblasts. This condition
should become diagnosable in utero when
the biochemical abnormality is elucidated.

AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT DISORDERS

It is characteristic of dominantly inherited conditions that the clinical manifestations vary considerably from patient to patient, and their appearance may be delayed even for decades into middle life.
Unfortunately, the biochemical basis for
these disorders is still unknown. Autosomal dominant diseases that may produce mental retardation or less gross psychopathology include neurofibromatosis,
tuberous sclerosis, and myotonic dystrophy. Genetic counseling depends on
making the diagnosis, and then informing
an affected parent that his children have a
50 per cent risk of receiving the abnormal
gene. Among those with the abnormal
gene, about 10 per cent will be retarded,
and probably a larger proportion will have
other psychopathology.

Prenatal diagnosis for these conditions
must wait for the development of specific
biochemical tests or for the discovery of
linkage of the gene for the disease to another marker gene, whose product can be
detected in utero. One application of the
linkage approach can be cited (Schrott et

Social Biology

al., 1973). It is possible to predict the inheritance of myotonic dystrophy from the
secretor status of the amniotic fluid, since
the gene for this disease is closely linked to
the gene that determines secretion of the
ABH blood group substances.

Two of the dominantly inherited disorders can present with depressive psychoses, suggesting genetic heterogeneity
for affective disorders. Acute intermittent
porphyria is a metabolic disorder of heme
biosynthesis in the liver (Marver and
Schmid, 1972). Episodes of colicky abdominal pain with constipation occur together with variable central nervous system involvement, including paralysis,
agitated and paranoid depression, or
schizophrenic behavior. Biochemical diagnosis during an acute attack is highly
reliable. There is increased production
of delta-aminolevulinic acid and _porphobilinogen due to partial deficiency of
uroporphyrinogen I synthetase (URO-S) in
the liver. Several commonly utilized drugs
induce higher activity of the rate-limiting
enzyme (ALA synthetase), causing attacks
in predisposed individuals. These drugs include barbiturates, certain sulfonamides,
and the anti-fungal agent griseofulvin.
The liver enzyme involved (URO-S) can be
demonstrated in amniotic cells.

The second condition is Huntington’s
disease, a degenerative neurologic and
psychiatric disorder that is one of the
major problems in counseling in medical
genetics. Over a period of ten to twenty
years, the affected person undergoes progressive deterioration of personality and of
mental function, eventually requiring institutional care because of psychotic behavior or dementia or both. Irresponsible
social behavior may lead to psychiatric
evaluation and a diagnosis of affective
or schizophrenic processes before the
neurologic signs become manifest, or before the importance of the family history is
appreciated.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 23, No. 2

The age of onset of involuntary movements is usually in the 30’s or 40’s, but
may be delayed even longer. Thus, individuals at risk (50 per cent risk if a parent
was affected) have the dual misery of not
knowing whether they will be transmitting
the disease to their children and of worrying that any twitches or behavioral problems may be early signs of the disease in
themselves.

The pathophysiology of this disease is
uncertain, and no specific diagnostic test is
yet available. The use of L-dopa as a provocative test (Klawans et al., 1970) raises
crucial ethical questions, since the patient
is able to see the test result in a mirror. In
the absence of treatment, individuals at
risk for this disease differ in their desire to
know or not to know whether they will
become affected later.

ANTICIPATED TECHNICAL DEVELOPMENTS

As enzymatic assays are adapted to micromethods, the delay between the time of
amniocentesis and the report of results
should be shortened, relieving some of the
tension of the wait. As biochemical mechanisms of more diseases are elucidated, the
list of conditions for which prenatal diagnosis will be feasible should continue to
grow. Detailed evaluation of the potential
hazards of amniocentesis will make more
exact the patients’ and physicians’ balancing of benefit and risk in undertaking amniocentesis for disorders of low frequency.
It is hoped that better methods of terminating pregnancies in mid-gestation
may be developed.

For the common psychiatric phenotypes, it is expected because of heterogeneity that the mass of cases will be attacked
only gradually, as has been our experience with mental retardation syndromes.
Promising approaches include the application of new staining methods for abnormal
chromosomal banding patterns, the evaluation of heterozygous carriers of genes

Intrauterine Diagnosis and Genetic Counseling

153

that cause mental retardation in the
homozygous state, the possibility of demonstrating linkage to easily tested genetic
markers, and the development of in vitro
methods for pharmacogenetic differentiation of cell responses. Many biochemical
functions of responses that are characteristic of the nervous system may not be expressed in amniotic fluid cells. Progress
must then depend upon “turning on” the
unexpressed genes in the amniotic cells or
upon safe methods for biopsy of superficial
tissues or organs of the fetus.

Certain neurological conditions may be
associated with congenital anomalies visible through a fiberoptic amnioscope or
even visualized by X-ray of the fetus. We
have recently used radiography of the
forearm bones for intrauterine diagnosis in
a family where thrombocytopenia and absent radii had been inherited by a previous child and thrombocytopenia had led to
a devastating intracerebral hemorrhage
(Omenn et al., 1973).We may expect more
widespread monitoring of pregnancies and
population screening for heterozygous carriers, possibly requiring computerized
data evaluation and regional or national
networks for counseling of family members.

SPECIAL ISSUES INVOLVING THE
PSYCHIATRIST IN GENETIC
COUNSELING

STRESSES OF MONITORING A PREGNANCY

With popularization of amniocentesis
and prenatal diagnosis in lay magazines,
many families have initiated contact with
their physicians or counseling centers with
the unfortunate expectation that tests can
assure them of a normal baby or that
many specific conditions can be tested for
which no tests are available. Sometimes a
couple has tried for years to have a child or
has waited many years after an affected
child for the possibility of such prenatal
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

154

monitoring. The many weeks of waiting
until amniocentesis can be performed and
until test results are available can be exceedingly stressful, especially when the
hazards of a late abortion loom as a distinct possibility and the couple realizes
that mistakes can be made in the testing
procedures. Occasionally a couple will
seek amniocentesis in the hope that something will be found to be wrong with the
baby, so that they can justify to themselves terminating the pregnancy.

It is highly desirable that counseling be
provided before the woman is pregnant.
Sometimes extensive arrangements for
specific enzymatic assays must be made or
complicated testing of the woman for possible carrier status with regard to an
X-linked disorder must be carried out. In
any case, the stress is bound to be less if
the couple can consider the genetic information and plan the pregnancy in advance.

SEVERITY OF DISEASE AND THE INDICATIONS
FOR ABORTION

If the risk of recurrence is high and the
disorder severe, most couples will desire
amniocentesis, unless they seek no more
children. But when the risks are low, as in
the case of advanced maternal age or previous trisomy 21, the couple must decide
whether to take the high probability (about
99 per cent) that the fetus will not have
trisomy 21 or whether to take the unknown risks associated with the procedure. Couples differ in their responses to
this predicament. Therefore, it 1s important that detailed genetic counseling be
offered before the obstetrician performs
the amniocentesis.

In one series, 27 of 83 couples decided
against amniocentesis after receiving
counseling (Epstein et al., 1970). Many
were reassured by the low recurrence
risks; in three cases, the condition could
not be detected by available tests; in one

Omenn

Social Biology

case, the woman had no Gesire to have her
pregnancy terminated whatever the outcome; and in another, there was not time
to do all the necessary tests because of the
advanced state of the pregnancy at which
the woman presented.

With the behavioral disorders of adult
onset, the definition of “genetic disease”
and of tolerable severity is complicated.
The available information from population, family, twin, and adoption studies
suggests that genetic factors predispose to
affective disorders or to schizophrenia but
do not define the probability of such a
predisposed person developing severe disease.

Similarly, in the cases of sex chromosomal abnormalities for which prenatal
detection is already feasible, most men
with X YY karyotypes are not psychopathic criminals and most individuals with
XYVY or XXY or XO karyotypes do not
suffer serious mental impairment. Is the
infertility associated with XXY or XO
karyotypes a basis for the parents to insist
upon abortion? Or the possibility of behavioral problems associated with X YY?
The problem is vexing, because firm data
on the absolute risks of such behavioral
problems are not available, and there is no
basis for predicting which offspring will be
affected later in life.

By analogy, the discovery of Huntington’s disease in a patient brings a pall
over the family, because there is no treatment for the disease and no advantage of
early diagnosis except the prevention of
further offspring and the establishment of
a diagnosis that saves the family fruitless
medical inquiry. On the other hand, vigorous investigation of the family with
polyposis of the colon is considered essential, since prophylactic removal of the affected colon will prevent fatal carcinoma.

Although genetic counselors seek to
provide detailed information and meaningful advice, the responsibility for de
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 23, No. 2

ciding the course of action rests with the
individual couple. It is our impression that
families fear behavioral disorders even
more than somatic anomalies and that the
majority of families would request abortion of a XYY or XXY or XO fetus, if
informed of the results of the chromosomal
tests.

Abortion nowadays is discussed by
some people as a simple and innocuous
matter. Psychologically, of course, it is
not; each couple must be evaluated sympathetically. Also, there may be technical
options about the type of abortion or legal
obstacles in the state where the couple
lives.

SCREENING FOR HETEROZYGOUS
CARRIERS

An alternative to selective abortion of
affected fetuses is detection and counseling
of unmarried teenagers and young adults
who are heterozygous carriers for such
diseases as Tay-Sachs and_ sickle-cell
anemia. These young people could avoid
the birth of affected children by avoiding
marriage with carriers for the same disease. Most authorities agree that a massive
educational effort would be required to
affect mating patterns. It is not known
whether the knowledge that one is a carrier for such a disease would influence a
person to avoid marrying someone who is
also a carrier, and it is not known how
such an educational effort should be
mobilized to properly inform, and yet not
frighten, these healthy carriers.

SOCIETY’S POSITION WITH REGARD TO GENETIC
DISEASE

With the decrease in deaths from acute
infections and the recognition of so many
specific inherited conditions, the medical

Intrauterine Diagnosis and Genetic Counseling

155

profession and lay people are becoming
increasingly aware of the nature and variety of genetic diseases that require hospitalization, cause deaths, and influence
the lives of people in contact with those
affected with the disease. Until recently,
society has disapproved of abortion as a
means of preventing unwanted children.
Now most people approve of abortion, at
least to prevent the birth of defective children. Will amniocentesis be required for
women above a certain age, just as testing
for phenylketonuria is required by law in
almost all states? How will society look
upon the couple who refuses abortion and
delivers a child with severe mental retardation who is dependent upon the society for
his existence? We should emphasize that
amniocentesis is usually a life-saving procedure, reassuring a couple that the fetus
is unaffected by a disease, the high risk for
which might have led that couple to demand termination of all pregnancies.

Many of our questions transcend the
realm of medicine. It is likely that such
questions will be most distressing and
emotional in the area of psychiatric disorders. We must hope to bring the advancing frontier of research into meaningful
contact with practicing physicians and
psychiatrists in the community so that
there will be better understanding within
the profession and better communication
with patients as we seek to serve their
needs in the future.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Supported by Grant 15253 and by a Research Career Development Award (GM43122)
from the United States Public Health Service.
This paper was prepared for a conference on
Genetic Counseling in Psychiatric Disorders:
State of the Science and the Art, May 17, 1973,
at the University of Indiana, Indianapolis.

REFERENCES

ALEXANDER, D., A. A. EHRHARDT, and J. MONEY.
1966. Defective figure drawing, geometric and

human, in Turner’s syndrome. J. Nerv. Ment.
Dis, 142:161~167.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

156

AUSTIN, J., D. ARMSTRONG, S. Foucn, C. MITCHELL, D. Stumpr, L. SHEARER, and O. BRINER.
1968. Metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) VII.
MLD in adults; diagnosis and pathogenesis. Arch.
Neurol. 18:225-241.

BERGSMA, D., and A. G. MoTuLsky (eds.). 1971.
Symposium on intrauterine diagnosis. Birth Defects: Original Article Series 7:1-36.

Brock, D. H., E. BOLTON,
SCRIMGEOUR. 1974. Prenatal diagnosis of spina
bifida and anencephaly through maternal
plasma-alpha-fetoprotein measurement. Lancet
1:767-769.

BUNNEY, W. E., Jr., F. K. GOODWIN, D. L. MurPHY, K. M. House, and E. K. Gorpon. 1972.
The “switch process” in manic-depressive illness.
II. Relationship to catecholamines, REM sleep,
and drugs. Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 27:304—-309.

Casey, M. D., L. J. SEGALL, D. R. K. STREET, and
C. E. BLANK. 1966. Sex chromosome abnormalities in two state hospitals for patients requiring special security. Nature 209:641-642.

DEMars, R., G. SARTO, J. J. FELIx, and P. S.
BENKE. 1969. Lesch-Nyhan mutation: Prenataldetection with amniotic fluid cells. Science
164:1303-1305.

Down, J. L. H. 1866. Observations on an ethnic
classification of idiots. Clinical Lecture Reports,
London Hospital 3:259.

EHRHARDT, A. A., R. EPSTEIN, and J. MONEY.
1968. Fetal androgens and female gender identity
in the early-treated adrenogenital syndrome. Johns
Hopkins Med. J. 122:160-167.

EPSTEIN, C. L., E. L. SCHNEIDER, F. A. CONTE,
and S$. FRIEDMAN. 1970. Prenatal detection of
genetic disorders. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 1:267296.

FEDERMAN, D. D. 1967. Abnormal] sexua) development: A genetic and endocrine approach to differential diagnosis. W. B. Saunders, Philadelphia.

KLawans, H. C., G. W. PAULSEN, and A. BARBEAU. 1970. A predictive test for Huntington’s
chorea. Lancet 2:1185-1186.

GERSHON, E. S., D. L. DUNNER, and F. K. GoopWIN. 1971. Toward a biology of affective disorders. Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 25:1-15.

GOLDSTEIN, J. L., B. K. CAMPBELL, and S. M.
GARTLER. 1972. Cystathionine synthase activity in
human lymphocytes: Induction by phytohemaglutinin. J. Clin. Invest. 51:1034—1037.

Goy, R. W. 1970. Early hormonal influences on the
development of sexual and sex-related behavior, p.
196-206. In F. O. Schmitt (ed.), The neurosciences, second study program. Rockefeller Univ.
Press, New York.

Hook, E. B. 1973. Behavioral implications of the
human XYY genotype. Science 179:139-150.
Jacoss, P. A., M. BRUNTON, M. M. MELVILLE, R.
P. BRITTAIN, and W. F. MCCLEMONT. 1965. Aggressive behavior, mental subnormality, and the

XYY male. Nature 208:1351-1352.

KELLEY, W. N., and J. B. WYNGAARDEN. 1972.
The Lesch-Nyhan syndrome. In J. Stanbury, J.
Wyngaarden, and D. Fredrickson (eds.). The metabolic basis of inherited disease. 3rd_ ed.
McGraw-Hill, New York.

McGutir_, L., and G. §. OMENN. 1975. Congenital
adrenal hyperplasia (adrenogenital syndrome). I.
Family studies of IQ. Behav. Genet. 5:165-173.

MACINTYRE, M. N., 1971. Chromosomal problems of

Omenn

and E..

Social Biology

intrauterine diagnosis. Jn D. Bergsma and A. G.
Motulsky (eds.), Symposium on intrauterine diagnosis. Birth Defects: Original Article Series 7:20—21.

MARVER, H. S., and R. SCHMID. 1972. The porphyrias, p. 1087-1140. In J. Wyngaarden and D.
Fredrickson (eds.), The metabolic basis of inherited disease. 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill, New York.

MENDLEWICZ, J., and J. L. FLErss. 1974. Linkage
studies with X chromosome markers in bipolar
(manic-depressive) and unipolar (depressive)
illnesses. Biol. Psychiat. 9:261-294.

MENDLEwICczZ, J., J. L. FLEeIss, and R. R. FIEVE.
1972. Evidence for X-linkage in the transmission
of manic-depressive illness. J. Amer. Med. Assn.
222:1624-1627.

MILUNSky, A. 1973. Analyses of amniocentesis
samples. In L. G. Jackson and L. A. Peris (eds.),
Symposium on prenatal diagnosis, W. B. Saunders, Philadelphia.

MILUNSRY, A., J. W. LITTLEFIELD, J. N. KAUFER,
E. H. KoLtopny, V. E. SHIH, and L. ATKINS.
1970. Prenatal genetic diagnosis. New Eng. J.
Med. 283:1370-1381, 1441-1447.

MONEY, J., and A. A. EHRHARDT. 1972. Man and
woman, boy and girl. Johns Hopkins Univ. Press,
Baltimore.

MONEY, J., and V. Lewrs. 1966. IQ, genetics, and
accelerated growth: Adrenogenital syndrome.
Bull. Johns Hopkins Hosp. 118:365~373,

Money, J., A. A. EHRHARDT, and D. N. Masica.
1968. Fetal feminization induced by androgen insensitivity in the testicular feminizing syndrome:
Effect on marriage and maternalism. Johns Hopkins Med. J. 123:105-114.

MONEY, J., R. J. GaSKIN, and H. HuLv. 1970.
Impulse, aggression, and sexuality in the XYY
syndrome. St. John’s Law Rev. 44:220-235.

Mupp, S., W. E. HARLEY, P. M. Loes, M. S.
Brown, and L. Laster. 1970. Homocystinuria
due to cystathionine synthase deficiency: The effect of pyridoxine. J. Clin. Invest. 49:1762-1773.

NADLER, H. L. 1971. Indications for amniocentesis
in the early prenatal detection of genetic disorders.
In D. Bergsma and A. G. Motulsky (eds.), Symposium on intrauterine diagnosis. Birth Defects:
Original Article Series 7:5-9.

NADLER, H. L., and A. GERBIE. 1970. Role of amniocentesis in the intrauterine detection of genetic
disorders. New Eng. J. Med. 282:596-599.

NIELSEN, J., and A. SORENSEN, A. THEILGAARD,
A. FROLAND, and S. G. JOHNSEN. 1969. A
psychiatric-psychological study of 50 severely
hypogonadal male patients, including 34 with
Klinefelter’s syndrome, 47, XXY. Acta Jutlandica
4.1:1-183.

OMENN, G. S. 1973. Genetic engineering: Present
and future, p. 48-63. Jn R. H. Williams (ed.), To
live and to die: When, why, and how. SpringerVerlag, New York.

OMENN, G. S., and A. G. MOoTULSsky. 1973.
Psychopharmacogenetics, p. 5-26. Yearbook of
drug therapy. Yearbook Med. Publ., Chicago.

OMENN, G. S., and A. G. MoTULSKY. 1975. Intrauterine diagnosis and genetic counseling: Implications for psychiatry in the future. Jn D. A. Hamburg and H. K. H. Brodie (eds.), American handbook of psychiatry, Vol. 6. 3rd ed. Basic Books,
New York.

OMENN, G. S., M. M. FIGLEY, C. B. GRAHAM, AND

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:36 08 December 2015

Vol. 23, No. 2

W. L. HEINRICHS. 1973. Prospects for radiographic intrauterine diagnosis—the syndrome of
thrombocytopenia with absent radii. New Eng. J.
Med. 288:777-778.

PENROSE, L. S., and G. F. SMITH. 1966. Down’s
anomaly. Little Brown, Boston.

PRICE, W. H., and P. B. WHATMORE. 1967. Criminal behavior and the XYY male. Nature 213:815.

REICH, T., P. J. CLAYTON, and G. WINOKUR. 1969.
Family history studies: V. The genetics of mania.
Amer. J. Psychiat. 125:1358—-1369.

RIMOIN, D., and R. N. SCHIMKE. 1971. Genetic
disorders of the endocrine glands. C. V. Mosby,
St. Louis.

ROSENTHAL, D., and S. S. KETYy (eds.). 1968. The
transmission of schizophrenia. Pergamon Press,
London.

SANGER, R., and R. R. RACE. 1970. Towards mapping the X chromosome, p. 241-266. In A. E. H.
Emery (ed.), Modern trends in human genetics.
Pergamon Press, London.

Intrauterine Diagnosis and Genetic Counseling

 

157

ScHROTT, H. G., L. Karp, and G. S. OMENN. 1973.
Prenatal prediction in myotonic dystrophy:
Guidelines for genetic counseling. Clin. Genet.
4.:38-45.

SHIELDS, J. 1962. Monozygotic twins brought up
apart and brought up together. Oxford Univ.
Press, London.

SLATER, E., and V. CowlrE. 1971. The genetics of
mental disorders. Oxford Univ. Press, London.
SMITH, D. W. 1970. Recognizable patterns of human
malformation. W. B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
SMITH, D. W., and A. A. WILSON. 1973. The child
with Down’s syndrome (mongolism). W. B. Saun
ders, Philadelphia.

THEILGAARD, A., J. NIELSEN, A. SORENSEN, A.
FROLAND, and S. G. JOHNSEN. 1971. A
psychological-psychiatric study of patients with
Klinefelter’s syndrome, 47, XXY. Acta Jutlandica
53:1-148.

WINOKUR, G., P. J. CLAYTON, and T. REICH. 1969.
Manic-depressive illness. C. V. Mosby, St. Louis.
