Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Predicting immediate outcome of genetic
counseling following genetic screening

Lawrence Fisher , Peter T. Rowley & Mack Lipkin Jr.

To cite this article: Lawrence Fisher , Peter T. Rowley & Mack Lipkin Jr. (1979) Predicting
immediate outcome of genetic counseling following genetic screening, Social Biology, 26:4,
289-301, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1979.9988387

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1979.9988387

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB ann | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
ali] Article views: 1
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 1 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Predicting Immediate Outcome
of Genetic Counseling
Following Genetic Screening

BECOWAE TIAMAT MIEN EEIC moony IE CORRES RR MAMMEREAD OO eR
Pa Tee a Fi 1. .
“4 %, os >
2 Po sca = = s

%
LAE IEME 0? 214d" n
ra = we
ne
reams

*Lawrence Fisher, }Peter T. Rowley, and {Mack Lipkin, Jr.

*Department of Psychiatry, t Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine and Division of Genetics,
and {Departments of Psychiatry and Medicine, University of Rochester Medical School,
Rochester, New York

ABSTRACT: Because genetic counseling provides potentially stressful information to the patient, it
is important for the screener of genetic disorders (1) to create effective counseling strategies sensitive
to groups of patients at risk for stressful outcome and (2) to identify and scale variables to designate
such groups prior to counseling. In this study, patients in a health maintenance organization were
screened for thalassemia trait as part of regular health care. Positive individuals were randomly
placed in one of two counseling groups. One group received information from a videotaped program; the second, from a lecture in person by a physician. Four domains of potential outcome predictor variables were identified and quantitatively scaled: demographic, attitudinal, personality,
and intellectual. These variables were then used to predict knowledge gained and mood change
immediately after counseling. No variable or variable domain reliably predicted short-term outcome. These findings were consistent across counseling method. These data indicate that prospective genetic counseling leads to no untoward immediate outcomes when undertaken in a primary
health care setting and that audiovisual procedures can be used effectively to provide relevant infor
mation.

In the last ten years there has been an
increased recognition of the genetic basis
of many disorders, and improved methods
of detection have been developed. As a
result, large-scale public screening has
been proposed for the identification of
carriers of genetically transmitted disorders so as to prevent the birth of defective
children. Several such programs have already been undertaken, e.g., for sickle
trait (Satcher, 1976) and Tay-Sachs trait
(Kaback et al., 1974). Because genetic
counseling for identified carriers provides
potentially stressful information (Kenen

 

*Present address: Department of Psychiatry,
University of California, San Francisco, Fresno-San
Joaquin Medical Education Program, Veterans Administration Hospital, 2615 E. Clinton Ave., Fresno,
California 93703.

and Schmidt, 1978), it is incumbent upon
the screener (1) to identify individuals on
whom genetic counseling may have a negative effect, (2) to identify variables which
will designate such individuals prior to
counseling, and (3) to determine whether
alternative methods of counseling reduce
the risk for such individuals.

The present study was designed to investigate which demographic, personality, attitudinal, and intellectual variables
assessed prior to genetic counseling for
thalassemia trait predicted amount
learned and/or changes in mood response
immediately following counseling when
such counseling occurred in a primary
health care setting. In addition, the study
aimed at developing scales which would
assess these variables for use in both im
289
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

290 Fisher et al.

mediate and long-term outcome studies of
genetic counseling.

Knowledge of which individuals are at
risk for favorable or unfavorable outcome
prior to counseling would be helpful in
choosing the most effective and appropriate counseling strategy. For example, for
certain types of patients, several authors
(Pearn, 1973; Falek and Britton, 1974)
have suggested a series of counseling sessions (Emery et al., 1972) rather than just
one.

In studies of outcome of genetic counseling following the birth of a defective
child, Emery (1972) reported that a large
majority of counseled women understood
the genetic information communicated
during counseling; Carter (1975) reported
similar results. On the other hand,
Leonard et al. (1972) found that very few
parents understood recurrence risks after
counseling. Sibinga and Friedman (1971)
reported that only a small portion of their
sample could adequately recount information on follow-up. Thus, there is little untformity of outcome with respect to learning as a result of counseling.

A possible explanation for this variability has to do with psychological factors in
retaining newly learned information.
Meyerowitz and Lipkin (1976) postulated
that the defense mechanism of denial often impairs the retention of information
provided during counseling. Such denial
often causes major cognitive distortions or
a rejection of the information. They likened the dental following counseling to
the denial of heavy smokers or drinkers
who know the risks but keep them out of
mind.

Several other representative studies
(Pearn, 1973; Ingall et al., 1973; Reiss and
Menashe, 1972) and reviews (Shaw, 1971)
also reported mixed results, but the consensus of two recent overviews (Meyerowitz and Lipkin, 1976; Antley, 1976) was

Social Biology

that the psychological mechanisms of denial or grief limit the ability of counselees
to process the new information and hence
reduce the likelihood of a favorable outcome in terms of effective decision making. .
Pearn (1973) pointed out that an
individual’s reaction to counseling and his/
her subsequent reproductive behavior
reflect a personality characteristic which
might be similar to the concept of locus of
control. Under stress, some individuals
feel that they have no power or control to
effect change and cast their fate to the
wind, whereas others take a more active
stance and reevaluate plans in light of the
new information.

A number of other papers have dealt
with the psychological implications of
genetic counseling, although many are reports of anecdotal information or surveys
rather than tightly controlled empirical
studies. Salk and Hilgartner (1972) and
Sorenson (1974) reported an increase in
marital disruption following counseling
with some increase in divorce rate. This
result is consistent with anecdotal findings
of increased divorce rates among parents
following the death of a child. Salk and
Hilgartner also reported an increase in
neglect of other children with resulting
grief and resentment. Antley and Hartlage (1973) described increased anxiety,
hostility, and depression in couples who
recently had a child with Down’s syndrome. Antley and Hartlage demonstrated a decrease in these symptoms and
a slight increase in self-concept in these
couples after genetic counseling. Tips et
al. (1964) reported an increase in hypochondriacal tendencies in patients following counseling, and others have reported
similar findings as a result of the counseled
patients’ increased stress and greater concentration on bodily processes. Consequently, how much one learns or how one

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 4

reacts to genetic counseling is related not
only to intellectual ability, but also to psychological and attitudinal factors.

Most of the studies reported above are
based on retrospective or probandoriented genetic counseling (Rowley et
al., 1979) in which counseling occurs following the identification of a symptomatic
individual. This type of study has the
difficulty of matching patient samples
prior to counseling as well as that of interpreting the influence of powerful emotions, for example, such as those occurring
following the birth of a defective child. A
second type of study, however, employs a
prospective design, i.e., the identification
of individuals at risk prior to the appearance of symptoms in an offspring. This approach, which is the one employed in this
project, has the advantage of making
available larger samples of patients having
varying experience with the disease.

Within the prospective counseling
strategy, one can screen individuals by
various techniques of public recruitment
or as part of primary health care. Public
recruitment, however, often raises concerns about potential stigmatization, and
various degrees of prior knowledge, experience, and interest make the creation of
matched groups and generalizability of
findings more difficult. Unlike those in
previous studies, the subjects in the
present study (1) were not preselected for
interest and (2) were not preconditioned
by illness, but (3) were screened and counseled as part of their primary health care
as described below. Consequently, these
data are based on a somewhat different
population of patients from which generalizations about the efficacy of genetic
screening and counseling within the context of primary health care can be made.

Previous reports (Rowley et al., 1979;
Fisher et al., 1979, ms.) have demonstrated four important findings. First, he
 

Outcome of Genetic Counseling 291

terozygous carriers, not aware prior to the
results of screening that they were being
checked for beta-thalassemia trait, demonstrated a significant increase in knowledge following genetic counseling when
compared to uncounseled nontrait patients. Second, following counseling, patients also demonstrated significant
changes on the Nowlis Mood Adjective
Checklist: increased Surprise, decreased
Deactivation, decreased Skepticism, and
a moderate increase in Depression. Third,
two methods of counseling were compared—counseling in person by a physician and counseling through a videotaped
program. The two were equally effective
in teaching about both thalassemia and
genetics. Fourth, changes in mood following counseling were similar in each of the
two counseling groups.

The present study was undertaken with
two goals. The first was the identification
of and development of scales for a broad
range of potentially predictive variables.
While several authors had refiected on the
potential relationship between a variety of
variables, such as religiousness (Kenen
and Schmidt, 1978) and outcome of
genetic counseling, no systematic effort
had yet been undertaken to both identify
relevant predictors and develop logistically useful instruments for their assessment. The second goal was to determine
which of these variables, individually or in
combination, significantly predicted outcome when used in a multiple regression
model.

We studied members of a health maintenance organization (HMO) who were
screened for beta-thalassemia trait as part
of a multiphasic health evaluation. These
individuals expected to be screened for a
variety of unspecified disorders as part of
preventive health care. Consequently, the
patients detected were not self-selected by
response to public recruitment or by the
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

292 Fisher et al.

birth of a defective child. This approach
differs from those of other recent studies
in which counselees had some prior
knowledge of or experience with the disorder, having volunteered to be screened
or having experienced the birth of a defective child. It should again be noted that
this approach represents a distinct difference between data generated by this and
by the majority of previous studies. Our
aim was to learn more about the incorporation of genetic screening and counseling in primary health care.

Transmission of thalassemia follows
simple Mendelian genetics. Any given
offspring of two beta-thalassemia-trait
parents has a 25 per cent chance of having
beta-thalassemia major (Cooley’s anemia). This disorder is caused by the
deficient synthesis of the beta chain of
adult hemoglobin (hemoglobin A). Children display severe anemia, delayed
growth, and abnormal facies and generally require regular transfusions to maintain life. The disorder is not accompanied
by intellectual retardation, but individuals
live only to the second or third decade. At
present, there is no curative treatment.
While present in most ethnic groups in the
United States, beta-thalassemia trait is
found in 4 per cent of Italian-Americans
(Neel and Valentine, 1975) and in 5 per
cent of Greek Americans.' Individuals
with beta-thalassemia trait usually have
no symptoms, although at times they may
have a mild anemia. Since the carrier 1s
generally asymptomatic, identification of
the trait condition often comes as a surprise. The birth of a beta-thalassemia major child places a heavy burden on the
family and society. Consequently, prevention may have considerable value, and the
benefits and burdens of genetic screening
in the context of general health care deserve careful assessment.

‘Pearson; W. Personal communication, 1977.

Social Biology

MATERIALS AND METHODS
SUBJECTS

The Genesee Valley Group Health Association (GVGHA) is an HMO in northwestern New York State with approximately 36,000 members. All patients
18-65 years having a phlebotomy for any
reason were screened. Each patient having a mean cell volume <77 and a hemoglobin A2 = 3.5 per cent was diagnosed
as having beta-thalassemia trait. Each was
invited by mail to come in for an explanation of his/her hemoglobin results.

Of 15,534 patients screened, 128 were
identified as having beta-thalassemia trait.
The physician requested that counseling
not be undertaken in 4 cases due to the
presence of other medical problems (e.g.,
terminal cancer). In 4 additional cases, the
patient contacted the physician and was
informed by him. Of the remaining 120
patients, 110 came in for an appointment
and 10 are awaiting scheduling. Of the
110, 93 agreed to participate in the study
and were counseled; 3 were used as pilot
subjects; 7 claimed sufficient knowledge; 3
were non-English speaking; 2 did not desire information; 1 requested counseling
without participation; and 1 refused participation with no reason given. Therefore,
the study had a 91 per cent participation
rate which increases the generalizability of
the findings to similar populations.

Patients were then assigned on a
stratified basis either to the group viewing
the videotape or the group counseled in
person by a physician so that the groups
were demographically similar. The demographic characteristics of each group are
presented in Table 1, and there were no
significant differences on any demographic variable by group. Although the
vast majority of the carriers were married,
no spouses were included in the present
sample.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 4

Outcome of Genetic Counseling 293

TABLE 1
DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS OF PATIENT SAMPLE

Characteristics

Programmed Conventional
Counseling Counseling
41 3
4.83 4.40
1.48 1.29
be 26
19 27
4 12
34 38
3 3
38.27 35.60
12.80 13.72
3.29 3.37
0.90 0.88
1.63 1.43
1.50 1.68

*Social class was assessed using the Hollingshead and Redlich scale.

DESIGN

Details of the research strategy and design have been presented elsewhere
(Rowley et al., 1979). Briefly, patients
were asked to participate in a study aimed
at developing “better methods of communicating health information.” Consequently, they were asked to participate in
the project without prior knowledge of the
disorder for which counseling was to be
provided. Following informed consent,
patients underwent a two-hour battery of
attitudinal and personality tests, along
with precounseling measures of thalassemia knowledge, genetic knowledge, and
mood.” They were then counseled by one

*The Nowlis Scale was administered twice during
precounseling assessment: after informed consent
and immediately prior to counseling. Change scores
reported here are between mood scales administered
at the beginning of the assessment and after counseling.

of two methods: a physician communicating in person a standardized body of information on thalassemia and genetics or a
videotape of a physician communicating
the same information followed by an opportunity to question a physician in person. In both cases the aim was to inform
the patient of the genetic condition, along
with accompanying risks, without specifically recommending changes in family
planning or testing of other family members. After the forty-five minute counseling session, patients completed the thalassemia and genetic knowledge questionnaires and the mood measure to assess
change.

IDENTIFICATION AND SCALING OF
VARIABLES

An important goal of the study was to
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

294 Fisher et al.

Social Biology

TABLE 2
POTENTIAL PREDICTOR VARIABLES WITHIN EACH MEASUREMENT DOMAIN

 

Demographic Attitudinal Personality Intelligence
Domain Domain Domain Domain
Age Number of Physical Self Concept IQ
Complaints Variables
Sex Marital Adjustment Personality
Variables
Marital Frequency of
Status Sexual Activity
Social Class Sexual Satisfaction
Education Frequency of Change in Sexual Activity
Number of
Children Attitude Toward Contraceptives
Childbearing
Status Attitude Toward Abortion .

Attitude Toward Risk Taking

Frequency of Use of Contraceptives
Type of Change in Sexual Beltavior

Experience with Abortion
Knowledge of Abortion
Religiousness

 

identify variables which were potentially
predictive of counseling outcome in terms
of learning and mood change as assessed
immediately after counseling. A total of
23 such variables were identified from the
literature and from our prior experience.
These variables were grouped into four
measurement domains: demographic, attitudinal, personality, and intellectual, as
shown in Table 2.

In the demographic domain, social
class was assessed by the Hollingshead
and Redlich Scale. The upper limit of
childbearing status, or the potential for
bearing additional children, was arbitrarily set at age 39. In the attitudinal domain,
scales were developed to assess each of the
variables with the exception of marital adjustment for which the Locke-Wallace
Scale (Locke and Wallace, 1959) was
used. Within the personality domain, selfconcept was assessed by the California

Personality Inventory (CPI) (Gough,
1948). The Shipley-Hartford Intelligence
Scale (Shipley, 1940) was utilized to assess
IQ

Factor analyses were then undertaken
in each measurement domain to reduce
the number of potential predictor variables and to create a series of more reliable
and inclusive dimensions for analysis of
predictive data.

PREDICTION OF OUTCOME

The dimensions within the demographic, attitudinal, personality, and intelligence domains were used to predict
learning and mood change following
counseling. Change scores for knowledge
of thalassemia, knowledge of genetics,
and five mood change scores derived from
the Nowlis Mood Adjective Checklist
were used as outcome variables. Each of

 

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 26, No. 4

Outcome of Genetic Counseling 295

TABLE 3
Factor ANALYSIS OF NOWLIS Moop ADJECTIVE CHECKLIST INTO FIVE DIMENSIONS

Nowlis Scales

Dimension

Per Cent of
Test Variance

Social Affection

Pleasantness Factor 1: Sociability 26.7%
Nonchalance

Deactivation

Depression I Factor 2: Depression 16.3%
Depression II*

Anxiety

Skepticism Factor 3: Fear 11.4%
Startle

Aggression

Egotism Factor 4: Defensiveness 9.6%
Concentration Factor 5: Active 7.5%
Activation Concentration

*Depression II is not an original Nowlis Scale but was added to reflect more severe aspects of clinical depression.

the four predictor domains predicted each
of the outcome measures using both simultaneous and step-wise multiple regression equations. Counseling method was
also entered as a predictor dimension in
each equation so as to assess whether one
counseling method was more effective
than the other for patients with given
characteristics.

Multivariate procedures maximize outcome and capitalize on chance due to the
fact that the weight statistically selected by
the multiple regression format optimizes
predictability to the criterion. To control
for this potential statistical inflation due to
chance, it is common practice to adopt a
replication strategy. If one can demonstrate similar findings in two independent
subject groups, then one can be more reasonably assured that false positive outcomes are not occurring. With this in
mind, the sample was randomly divided
into two replication groups, balanced for
equal numbers of patients from the two
counseling groups. Analyses were run
separately for the total group and for each
of the two replication groups.

RESULTS
OUTCOME MEASURES

The outcome measures for the study
consisted of two measures of learning and
five mood-change dimensions.

1. Knowledge. The thalassemia knowledge questionnaire is a 21-item true-false
scale assessing understanding of thalassemia major and minor, including symptoms, manifestations, and inheritance patterns. The genetic knowledge questionnaire is comprised of 8 true-false
items assessing understanding of simple
Mendelian genetics. Both scales were
tested on samples of nontrait patients to
insure an adequate distribution of scores.

2. Mood. The Nowlis Mood Adjective
Checklist, used to assess mood, is comprised of 12 brief scales (plus an additional
scale to assess severe depression) which
were factor analyzed on independent samples using a principal components factor
analysis with varimax rotation into five
mood dimensions.? The scales and result
Details of all statistical analyses can be obtained
from the first author.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

296 Fisher et al.

 

Social Biology

TABLE 4
PREDICTOR DIMENSIONS WITHIN THE ATTITUDINAL DOMAIN

Variables

Frequency of Sexual activity
Sexual satisfaction
Frequency of change in sexual activity

Religiousness
Attitude toward contraceptives
Attitude toward abortion

Frequency of use of contraceptives
Type of change of sexual behavior

Experience with abortion
Knowledge of abortion

Predictor Dimensions*

Sexual Behavior (23.8)

Attitudinal Response (21.3)

Consistency of Sexual Behavior (13.5)

Abortion (10.2)

Health Check List
Locke-Wallace Marital
Adjustment Inventory
Attitude Toward Risk Taking
Counseling Method

“Numbers in parentheses refer to per cent of variance accounted for by factor.

ing dimensions are presented in Table 3.
Each of the twelve scales plus the five dimensions demonstrated substantial variability within the sample.* The five factors accounted for 71.5 per cent of the
variance. Consequently, the two knowledge-change variables and five moodchange variables constituted the outcome
measures for the study.

PREDICTOR MEASURES

1. Demographic variables. The factor
analysis demonstrated that the seven demographic variables were relatively independent of each other with the exception
of an expected correlation between social
class and education (r=0.64). Therefore,
education was omitted from the list of predictors and, along with counseling
method, the remaining six demographic
variables were included in the multiple regression analyses.

“The standard deviations of predictor and outcome measures are available from the first author.

2. Attitudinal variables. The thirteen
attitudinal variables underwent a principal components factor analysis with varimax rotation and the resulting dimensions
are presented in Table 4. Ten of the thirteen original scales showed sufficient redundancy to be legitimately grouped into
four dimensions—Sexual Behavior, Attitudinal Response, Consistency of Sexual
Behavior, and Abortion—accounting for
68.8 per cent of test variance. The Health
Checklist (a measure of number of physical complaints), Locke-Wallace Marital
Adjustment Inventory, and Attitude Toward Risk-Taking Scale maintained sufficient independence from the rest of the
scales to warrant inclusion in subsequent
analyses as individual predictors. Hence,
these seven scales plus counseling method
were used as predictors within the attitudinal domain.

3. Personality variables. The Tennessee Self-Concept Scale and the California
Personality Inventory (CPI), used to
assess several broad personality dimen
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 4

 

Outcome of Genetic Counseling 297

TABLE 5
PREDICTOR DIMENSIONS WITHIN THE PERSONALITY DOMAIN

CPI Variables

Responsibility, Socialization
Self Control, Tolerance

Good Impression, Achievement
via Conformance

Dominance, Sociability
Self Acceptance

Achievement via Independence
Psychological Mindedness
Flexibility

Predictor Dimensions*

Responsibility and Maturity (44.5)

Interpersonal Adequacy (15.4)

Sensitivity and Intellectual Efficiency (8.7)

Total Self-Concept (Tennessee Scale)
Total Variability (Tennessee Scale)
Counseling Method

*Numbers in parentheses refer to percentage of variance accounted for by factor.

sions, were selected because they were
standardized on nonpsychiatric populations and were designed to assess variations within the normal range of behavior.
The Tennessee Self-Concept Scale yields
a number of subscales of which 21 were
subjected to a principal components factor analysis using varimax rotation. The
results of the initial correlation matrix plus
the factor analysis indicated that the total
self-concept score and a measure of variability of self-perception across several
areas of self-concept (physical self, moral
self, etc.) accounted for most of the test
variance. Consequently, these two scores
were used to indicate overall self-concept.

The CPI yields 18 scaled dimensions
which were submitted to a principal components factor analysis with varimax rotation. As presented in Table 5, a threefactor solution accounted for a substantial
percentage of variance (68.6 per cent).
Hence, the two Tennessee Self-Concept
Scales, the three CPI scores, and counseling method were used as predictors in the
personality domain.

4. Intelligence variables. The ShipleyHartford IQ test is a brief intellectual scale
highly correlated with longer intellectual

measures. The total IQ score plus counseling method were used as predictors in this
domain. Consequently, these analyses
permitted the establishment of four domains of predictor variables, each with
relatively independent dimensions for use
in predicting outcome of genetic counseling.

PREDICTION OF OUTCOME

1. Simultaneous analyses. For each of
the four domains, all predictors including
counseling method, were entered into the
multiple regression equation simultaneously to predict each of the seven criterion variables. As shown in Table 6, the
findings indicate that only three R’s
reached statistical significance. However,
the importance of these findings is reduced due to the fact that equally
significant R’s did not occur in the two replication subgroups.

2. Step-wise analyses. The various precounseling predictors within each domain
were permitted to enter the equation
freely in this series of analyses, and counseling method was stepped-in at the end.
The goal of these analyses was to see if any
individual predictors or groups of predicDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

298 Fisher et al.

 

Social Biology

TABLE 6

SIMULTANEOUS MULTIPLE REGRESSION COEFFICIENTS
OF PRECOUNSELING VARIABLES ON OUTCOME*

Knowledge
Thalas
PREDICTORS semia Genetic
Demographic............... 0.33 0.21
Personality «4.000005 <2 4s a0> 0.23 0.31
Attitudinal ................. 0.40 0.32
IQ woe ccc ccc eee ce tees 0.13 0.11

OvuTCOME VARIABLES

Mood

Active
Soc. Depr. Defens. Concen. Fear
0.35 0.28 0.30 0.32 0.16
0.29 0.26 0.21 0.38 0.26
0.32 0.31 0.28 0.46* 0.18
0.20 0.334 0.22 0.12 0.39§

*None of the three significant coefficients reported were found to reach statistical significance in the two replication groups. Multiple regression coefficients are nondirectional and imply only amount of covariation. The cut-off points to reach statistical significance
depend on the degrees of freedom which, in turn, depend on the number of predictors and the Nin each equation. Since the number of
predictors vary among the several equations reported above, cut-off points for statistical significance at the three levels reported above

are not uniform across equations.

fp =0.05.

tp = 0.025.

§p =0.001.
tors significantly and reliably predicted
outcome as well as to determine the
specific role of counseling method. The results indicated that in several cases the first
and/or second predictor accounted for a
significant percentage of variance, but the
ordering of variables was inconsistent
across replication groups and little consistency of findings emerged. This variability
is illustrated in Table 7 where the ordering
of variables from several illustrative equations is presented. While some variability
of outcome is to be expected, the noticeable inconsistency in ordering of entrance
as well as the lack of replication of statistical significance reduces the impact of the
data.

DISCUSSION

As mentioned earlier, it is incumbent
upon the screener of a genetically transmitted disorder to identify subgroups of

- patients for whom information about trait

states may have untoward effects. Using
demographic, personality, attitudinal,
and intelligence variables which many

have assumed to have some discriminative
value, we found no predictive utility was
demonstrated when these variables were
utilized in a prospective counseling setting
as part of primary health care. In fact,
even using multivariate techniques which
maximize outcome and capitalize on
chance phenomena, we found these vartiables were not predictive, singly or in combination, of immediate post-testing outcome. In addition, the type of counseling
did not interact with any of the predictor
variables such that patients with given attitudes or attributes benefited more from
one type of counseling than another.
These findings differ from those of
several other studies, described earlier,
which demonstrated an unfavorable outcome for some groups. There are several
differences between previous studies and
the present research which might explain
the apparent discrepancy. First, previous
research most often was based on counseling as a result of public recruitment or
birth of a defective child where issues of
public stigmatization and guilt can come
into play. The patients in this study were

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 26, No. 4

Outcome of Genetic Counseling 299

TABLE 7
ORDERING OF ENTRANCE OF PREDICTOR VARIABLES IN ILLUSTRATIVE EQUATIONS*

EquaTION

Demographic — Predicting
Change in Thalessemia

Total Group

PS, Sex, MS, Age,

ORDER OF ENTRANCE

Replic. No. 1 Replic. No. 2

Sex, PS, Age,MS, Age, MS, PS, Sex,

Knowledge ...... 0... cee eee eee SES+ SES SES

Personality — Predicting Change TV, CPI-1, CPI-3 TV, CPI-2, CPI-3, CPI-2, CPI-1, TP,
in Genetic Knowledge........... TP, CPI-24 CPI-1, TP CPI-3, TV

Attitude — Predicting Change A, CSB,HCL,MA, CSB,SB,HCL, MA, AR, SB, RTA,
in Genetic Knowledge........... RTA, SB, AR§ RTA, AR,A,MA  CB,A,HCL

*Italicized scales entered equation with significant (p<0.05) per cent variance. Replication groups were run to reduce the risk of
false positive findings due to the tendency of multivariate procedures to statistically maximize outcome.

tPS = Parental Status; MS = Marital Status; SES = Social Class.

#TV=Tenn. Scale Total Variability; CPI scales 1, 2,3; TP =Tenn. Scale Total Positive.
§A = Abortion; CSB = Consistency of Sexual Behavior; HCL = Health Checklist; MA = Marital Adjustment; SB = Sexual Behav
ior; RTA= Risk Taking Attitude; AR = Attitudinal Response.

assessed prior to counseling and hence
were naive at point of contact. Also, other
studies utilized groups which by the nature
of their identification represented a somewhat restricted range of patient characteristics, hence reducing the flexibility of
assessment, group composition, and immediacy of counseling possible in a prospective research strategy. Second, because of this greater freedom in our
subject selection and study design, we
were able to utilize more uniform evaluation procedures, quantitatively scaled and
statistically tested in a more highly controlled manner. Third, the counseling in
this study was undertaken as part of regular health care and was delivered in a familiar setting.

Three points are worthy of note. First,
it could be postulated that differences
were not obtained because the precounseling and outcome variables were not reliably assessed. It is unlikely, however,
that characteristics of the scales themselves substantially contributed to the
findings since (1) the constructed scales
were related to existing standardized
measures in the expected direction, and

(2) all scales demonstrated susbstantial
test variance.

A second possibility is that the immediate postcounseling assessment occurred
before psychological mechanisms could
affect learning. The distribution of mood
change scores, however, indicated a range
of mood reactions from relatively minor to
extreme. Evidently, some patients did
have sufficient time to react psychologically. The influence of psychological
mechanisms in altering retention will be
assessed in a follow-up study now in progress.

Third, although these variables were
not reliable predictors of immediate postcounseling outcome, they may account for
significant variance at long-term followup. With this in mind, all patients will be
assessed at two and ten months after counseling, and the results will be the subject of
future reports.

The findings demonstrate that it may
not be necessary to assess patients prior to
genetic counseling on attitudinal, personality, demographic, or intellectual variables in order to maximize immediate
outcome. We found these variables to be
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

300 Fisher et al.

unrelated to immediate reactions to
genetic counseling. Both programmed
and conventional counseling proved
equally effective, demonstrating that
audiovisual techniques can be effective
communication aids.

This analysis demonstrates the value of
controlled studies of genetic counseling
using empirical methods. It further indicates that simple effective genetic counsel
Social Biology

ing methods can take place in primary
health care settings.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Supported by NIH Grant No. ROIHL17456 and New York State Health Research Council Grants No. 146 and 664. Appreciation is expressed to Mrs. Starlene Dick
for her competent assistance throughout the
course of this project.

REFERENCES

ANTLEY, R. M. 1976. Variables in the outcome of
genetic counseling. Soc. Biol. 23: 108-115.
ANTLEY, R. M., and L. C. HarTLaGE. 1973. The
effects of genetic counseling for Down’s syn
drome. Ped. Res. 7: 345-353.

CarTER, C. O. 1975. Comments on genetic counseling. Jn J. F. Crow and J. V. Neel (eds.),
Proceedings of the Third International Congress of Human Genetics. John Hopkins
Univ. Press, Baltimore.

Emery, A. E., M. S. Watt, and E. R. CLark.
1972. The effects of genetic counseling in Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Clin. Gen. 3:
147-150.

FALek, A., and S. Britton, 1974. Phases in coping: The hypothesis and its implications. Soc.
Biol. 21: 1-7.

FIsHER, L., M. Lipkin, and P. T. Row .ey. 1979.
Effects of genetic counseling method on
knowledge and mood: Videotaped instruction
vs. live physician counselor. Unpublished
manuscript.

Fitts, W. H. 1965. Manual, the Tennessee Department of Mental Health Self-Concept
Scale. Department of Mental Health,
Nashville.

Gouau, H. G. 1948. A new dimension of status:
I. Development of a personality scale. Amer.
Sociol. Rev. 13: 534-537.

INGALL, E. J., P. M. PETerson, and S. E.
CARDWELL. 1973. Genetic counseling delivery: Is it adequate? Amer. J. Hum. Genet.
25:35 A.

Kapack, M. D., R. S. ZEIGER, L. W. REYNOLDS,
and M. SonnEBorN. 1974. Approaches to the
control and prevention of Tay-Sachs disease.
Prog. Med. Genet. 10: 103~104.

KENEN, R. H., and R. M. Scumipt. 1978.
Stigmatization of carrier status: Social implications of heterozygote genetic screening programs. Amer. J. Publ. Hlth. 68: 1116-1120.

LEONARD, C. O., G. A. CHase, and CHILps. B.
1972. Genetic counseling; A consumer's view.
New Engl. J. Med. 287: 433-439,

Locke, H. J., and K. M. Wattace. 1959. Short
marital adjustment and prediction test: Reliability and validity. Marr. Fam. Living 21:
251-255.

MEYEROWITZ,S., and M. Lipkin. 1976. Psychosocial aspects of prevention of developmental
disorders. Jn R. L. Brent and M. I. Harris
(eds.), Prevention of embryonic, fetal, and
perinatal disease. Fogarty International Center Series on Preventive Medicine, 3. DHEW
No. 76-853.

NEEL, J. V., and J. Witson. 1973. Acute
Werdnig-Hoffman disease: Acute infantile
spinal muscular atrophy. Arch. Dis. Child. 43:
425-430.

NEEL, J. V., and W. N, VALENTINE. 1975. The
frequency of thalassemia. Amer. J. Med. Sci.
209: 568-572.

PEARN, J. H. 1973. Patient’s subjective interpretation of risk offered in genetic counseling. J.
Med. Genet. 10: 129-134.

Reiss, J. A., and V. D. MENASHE. 1972. Genetic
counseling and congenital heart disease. J. Pediat. 80: 655-656.

Row ey, P. T., H. L. FisHer, and M. Lipkin,
1979. Screening and counseling for Bthalassemia trait in a population unselected
for interest: Effects on knowledge and mood.
Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 31: 718-730.

SALK, L., and M. HiILtGarTNER. 1972. The psychosocial impact of hemophilia on the patient and
his family. Soc. Sci. Med. 6: 491-505.

SATCHER, D. 1976. A critical look at genetic counseling for sickle cell trait and disease. Jn R. Cabannes (ed.), La drepanocytose sickle-cell
anemia. Editions de l’Inserm., Paris.

SHaw, M. W. 1971. Review of published studies
of genetic counseling: A critique, p. 35-52. In
H. A. Lubs and F. de la Cruz (eds.), Genetic
counseling. Raven Press, New York.

SHIPLEY, W. C. 1940. A self administering scale
for measuring intellectual impairment and deterioration. J. Psychol. 9: 371-377.

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 26, No. 4 Outcome of Genetic Counseling 301

SIBINGA, M. S., and C. J. FrigEDMAN. 1971. Complexities of parental understanding of phenylketonuria. Pediatrics 48: 216-224.

SORENSON, J. R. 1974. Genetic counseling: Some
psychological considerations, p. 61-68. In

Lipkin and P. T. Rowley (eds.), Genetic responsibility. Plenum Press, New York.

Tips, R. L., G. S. Smitn, and H. T. Lyncu. 1964.
‘Whole family” concept in clinical genetics.
Amer. J. Dis. Chld. 107: 67-76.
