Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Women's role orientations and expected fertility:
Evidence from the Detroit area, 1978

Susan De Vos

To cite this article: Susan De Vos (1980) Women's role orientations and expected
fertility: Evidence from the Detroit area, 1978, Social Biology, 27:2, 130-137, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1980.9988414

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1980.9988414

 

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 2

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:38

 
 
 
 

  

 

 
 

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

 

Susan De Vos

Population Studies Center
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, Michigan

Women’s Role Orientations and Expected Fertility:
Evidence from the Detroit Area, 1978

 

ABSTRACT: The paper investigates whether there is empirical evidence to support the hypothesis
that women’s attitudes toward traditionally female family roles affect their expected fertility net of
the much-discussed link between women’s employment and fertility. Along with several sociodemographic variables, the study uses a nonwork related attitude variable comprised of a motherhood role attitude measure and a housekeeping attitude measure. The study uses a probability sample of white, fecund, once-married women under 35 living with their husbands in the Detroit

- Metropolitan Area in 1978. Findings suggest that nonwork related attitudes have a significant effect

on fertility expectations net of labor force participation. They also suggest that general fertility surveys could benefit from including questions on nonwork related role orientations.

One of the more plausible explanations
for the decline in United States fertility
since the late 1950’s is that, rather than being due to a constant family size desire
coupled with better contraception, the decline was due to economically and socially
motivated change in desired family size
(see Blake and Das Gupta, 1975; Easterlin, 1978). There is a large difference of
opinion, however, over the causative importance of structural versus attitudinal
change. By structural factors, I mean objective conditions such as the cost of
children or women’s employment and the
resulting time constraint. By attitude, I
mean evaluation of or orientation toward
behavior or a relationship, for instance,
the ‘‘correct” behavior of motherhood or
the “‘value”’ of marriage. Without arguing
against the importance of structural factors, this paper provides some evidence
that attitudes too may have an effect, including attitudes about nonwork related
family roles of women.

One of the most important structural
factors affecting recent fertility desires has

130

been the increased employment of married women outside the home, including
women with small children (U.S. Bureau
of the Census, 1975, 1979). On a crosssectional individual level, researchers
have consistently found strong negative
relationships between women’s labor
force participation and expected fertility,
although the direction of causality has
been subject to debate (Cramer, 1980;
Terry, 1979). Presumably labor force participation competes with childbearing for
women’s time, interest, and energy
(Goldberg, 1960). However, on the gross
level, labor force participation of women
with young children increased with fertility during the post-World War II years
(U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1975, 1979),
suggesting that other factors, perhaps attitudes or economics, may also have been
important. Unfortunately, data on sex
role attitudes before 1964 are sparse, and
it is an empirical question whether attitudes became more traditional preceding
and during the baby-boom years than earlier when fertility was lower.

  
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 2

There is some evidence that attitudes
toward the married woman’s role within
the family have changed since the early
1960’s (Mason et al. 1976; Thornton and
Freedman, 1979). Women have become
less likely to subscribe to traditional family norms, including those surrounding
motherhood. Fertility also fell during that
time. There is debate, however, over
whether sex role attitudes affect fertility.
Bumpass (1977) and Scanzoni (1975) provide some evidence on a cross-sectional
micro-level that role attitudes may affect
fertility. On the other hand, Mason et al.
(1976) argue that the rise in labor force
participation, a change in marriage opportunities, or some other factor could have
led to both attitudinal change and the decline in fertility.’ If this were true, we might
expect to find attitudes to have little effect
on fertility after controlling for labor force
participation, marital status, and age at
marriage. This study does not find such a
result.

Surprisingly perhaps, most investiga
’For several important exceptions, see Goldberg,
1975; Coombs and Freedman, 1979; and SmithLovin and Tickamyer, 1978. Findings from the first
two studies pertain to very different societies at different points in the industrialization process and in
which married women typically do not work outside
the home.

The findings of the Smith-Lovin and Tickamyer
study could be at odds with the finding of this study.
However, it is difficult to compare the findings of the
two studies because the Smith-Lovin and Tickamyer
study controlled for more background factors and
did not differentiate between the timing of the various controls. That is, the study controlled for
mother’s decision-making power within the family of
origin, the mother’s educational attainment, and the
respondent’s religious participation in high school, in
addition to respondent’s own educational attainment. These background factors were found to affect
sex role attitudes. The problem with the analysis
from our point of view is that it controls for all these
factors simultaneously when looking for an effect of
attitudes on fertility. There could conceivably be a
relationship in the data between attitudes and expected fertility after controlling for the relevant
simultaneous sociodemographic variables. In turn,
the background factors mentioned above could help
explain the formation of the attitudes and why the attitudes are related to expected fertility.

 

 

Women’s Role Orientations 131

tions of the possible importance of attitudes on fertility have focused on attitude
toward work (see, for instance, Bumpass,
1977). There has been little exploration of
the possible effect of nonwork related attitudes on fertility. The conventional wisdom appears to be that if attitudes affect
fertility they do so by way of or because of
labor force participation. This is despite
the fact that most married women do not
work because they want a “‘career”’ but because they want to supplement the family
income. Researchers have found that except for college graduates, attitudes toward having a “career” or occupation
have little effect on women’s labor force
participation (see, for example, Campbell, 1976). One might conclude from this
finding that women’s role orientations
should not have much effect on fertility.
But attitude toward work hardly captures
the gamut of role orientations. Attitudes
toward male and/or parental authority, toward the sex-typing of tasks, or toward
housekeeping and mothering responsibilities could conceivably have an impact on
fertility (Goldberg, 1975). This study investigates the possible effect of attitude
toward housekeeping tasks and mothering
responsibilities. It asks: Do nonwork related attitudes have an effect on fertility
expectations controlling for labor force
participation and other relevant sociodemographic variables?

Why ask these questions, given that
structural constraints and opportunities
often seem to overwhelm attitude-related
behavior? First, even if the relationship
were only a social undercurrent, it is still
important to know about for purposes of
fertility theory. Second, if policy makers
sought to encourage childbearing by easing structural constraints without due recognition of the effect of underlying orientations, their policy would probably have
little impact on fertility, at least in the
short term. Even if attitudes are, in part,

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

132 De Vos

adjustments to underlying structural con
ditions, attitudes do have a life and effect
of their own.

Finally, the study asks whether wife’s
education helps account for the attitudeexpected fertility relationship. As a major
socializing agent, education could be a primary cause. Conceivably, education could
influence a woman’s attitudes and expectations concerning life style, family roles,
and social and interpersonal relationships
(Westoff and Ryder, 1977a, pp. 287-289).
While the study does not explore this speculation in depth, neither does it find much
evidence in support of the idea.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The study posits that a woman’s attitude
toward housekeeping and mothering roles
affects her fertility net of age at marriage,
labor force participation, age, ever use of
contraception and husband’s income. This
may be written in the form of Equation (1):

FERT = 5b, + 6, (Attitude) +
b, (Work) + b, (Age at marriage) +
b, (Age) + b, (Contraception) +
b, (Husband’s income). (1)

Second, the study posits that wife’s education influences the relation found in Equation (1). This may be written as:

FERT = g, + g, (Attitude) +
g, (Work) + g, (Age at marriage) +
g, (Age) + g, (Contraception) +
g, (Husband’s income) +
g, (Education). (2)

Presumably, the less traditional a womanis,
the fewer children she will expect. In Equation (1), b, is expected to be significant,
while g, is expected to be insignificant in
Equation (2).

The model does not formally include a
Catholic-non-Catholic measure because

 

Social Biology

recent research suggests that little difference now remains in the fertility preferences or behavior of younger American
Catholics compared to their non-Catholic
counterparts (Jones and Westoff, 1979).
Indeed, we found a Catholic dummy variable to be unrelated to either expected fertility or the attitude measure. Still, for the
sake of thoroughness, we do briefly examine the possible effect of being Catholic
on the attitude-expected fertility relationship.

The study controls for age at marriage
because previous research suggests that
age at marriage may have a significant independent effect on fertility after controlling for relevant sociodemographic variables (Bumpass and Mburugu, 1977). The
study controls for husband’s income out of
deference to economic theory, which
states that there should be a relationship
between income and fertility. Husband’s
income is a better measure of income than
is family income because the latter is
directly related to the wife’s labor force
participation.

The attitude variable is a composite of
answers to two questions concerning the
mothering and housekeeping roles:

1. Now I would like to get your opinion on
some matters concerning family life. I will
read you some statements, and I would like
you to tell me if you strongly agree, agree,
disagree, or strongly disagree. . . . Itis perfectly all right for a mother to be very active
in clubs and other outside activities before
the children are grown up.

2. When you consider your feelings about
household chores, such as the ones we just
talked about (chores such as cooking,
cleaning, shopping), would you say that you
liked all, most, a few or none of them?

The first question tries to measure the
degree to which a woman perceives the
mother role as compatible with involvements outside the home. While the question does not explicitly exclude work, the
question suggests social activities. There
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 2

could admittedly be some element of the
work dimension tapped in the question,
but a statistical examination suggests this
problem to be negligible. The second
question measures a woman’s Satisfaction
with traditional wife functions.

Answers to the two questions were
combined to form a three-category “‘Attitude” variable in which women were
coded as “traditional,” “intermediate,”
or “‘nontraditional.’’ Those who gave traditional responses to both questions were
given a value of 1. Those who gave nontraditional responses to both questions were
assigned a value of 3. Those who gave
mixed responses were given a value of 2.
The fact that Attitude is necessarily a
“squishy attitudinal measure” does not
diminish its conceptual importance.

Labor force -participation was
measured in two ways. The first and preferred measure was the proportion of a
woman’s married life spent employed outside the home. While statistically easy to
use, this measure has the problem that the
potential values are constrained differently depending on the number of years
a woman has been married (the denominator). Women married less than a year
had to be excluded altogether. We
checked results using this variable by substituting for the ratio the number of years
in the labor force since first married and
the number of years married. The result of
this substitution supported the use of the
ratio variable.

Age at marriage was measured in
months. Education and age were
measured in terms of completed years.
Use of contraception was measured as a
dichotomous variable based on answers to
the following question: ‘‘Many couples do
something to plan the number of children
they have or the time at which they have
them. Have you or your husband used any
method or rhythm to limit the number or
plan the spacing of your children?”’

 

Women’s Role Orientations 133

Husband’s income in the previous year
was measured rounded to the nearest
thousand dollars.

We measured fertility in three ways.
First, we used expected fertility, a composite of children already born and additional children expected. Expected fertility is basically the same as “intended”
fertility, a measure which has been found
to be considerably more reliable than fertility ‘desires’? (Ryder and Westoff,
1971). The advantage of using expected
fertility in a cross-sectional analysis of this
type is that while the respondents are at
different points in their childbearing careers the variable gives us some measure
of completed fertility. Expectations are
not always fulfilled but researchers have
found fertility expectations to be fairly
good predictors of future fertility (see
O’Connell and Moore, 1977; Westoff and
Ryder, 1977b).

We also measured fertility in terms of
additional children expected and children
ever born. This allowed us to see whether
any relationship between women’s attitudes and expected fertility was primarily
due to a relationship with future expectations, with past behavior, or with both.

The data came from a probability sample of 650 married women, husband
present, living in the Detroit Metropolitan
Area in 1978. Gathered by the Detroit
Area Survey of the University of Michigan, the 650 cases represent a response
rate of 80 per cent. This study used a subset of these women, 132 once-married
white women under the age of 35 who reported themselves and their husbands as
physically able to bear children.

The age criterion used to select the subsample attempted to place attitudes and
control over fertility in as nearly the same
time frame as possible. By omitting
women who were in subfecund marriages
or who were married more than once, we
hoped to reduce extraneous ‘“‘noise”’
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

134 De Vos

which could obfuscate a true relationship.
One result was, of course, a reduced sample
size. A probable second cost was reduced
variation in the sample’s fertility measures
because many subfecund couples become
sterile to avoid having more children
(Mosher, 1980). Unfortunately, there was
no way to distinguish these couples from
the other subfecund. It should be noted
that a reduced variance makes our findings more conservative.

The investigation used multiple regression. This was justified given the nature of
the variables.

RESULTS

Over three-fourths of the respondents
in 1978 expected a total of either two or
three children; 15 per cent expected one
or less. Less than 10 per cent expected
four or more. The limited variation suggests that the correlations found between
expected fertility and other variables
should be taken seriously; the chance of
their existing randomly is low.’ Also given
the discrete nature of the data, the maximum possible correlation (r) between
many variables is less than one.

Over a quarter of the sample had not
yet had any children; over a third had only
one child. Sixty per cent of the sample expected to have at least one additional
child. Almost a quarter expected at least
two additional children.

On first examination, we found the attitude measure to be reasonably related to
expected fertility. Traditionally oriented

The distribution also suggests that a primary
difficulty in explaining individual variation in present
day fertility lies in the fact that there is relatively little
variation to be explained. American women are becoming increasingly homogenous with respect to
their fertility and fertility preferences, and crosssectional studies may be losing their ability to discern
fertility determinants or test fertility-reflated theory,
especially theory related to changes over time. However, there is still sufficient variation in our sample to
warrant an investigation.

 

Social Biology

women on the average expected 0.9 of a
child more than non-traditionally oriented women. Differences in fertility expectations by educational attainment, labor
force participation, and age at marriage
were also marked. On the average, college graduates expected one child less
than did women with less than a highschool education. The average difference
in fertility expectations between women
having worked little and those having
worked most of their married lives and between women marrying before 20 years of
age and those marrying at 24 or older was
0.9 and 0.7 of a child, respectively. There
was little relationship between expected
fertility and husband’s income, but expected fertility was mildly associated with
age. Women under 25 years of age on the
average expected 0.3 more children than
did women 30-34. Since the sample was
biased with regard to age at marriage, the
relationship might be accounted for at
least partly by the fact that younger marriers tend to expect more children.
Finally, Catholics were found to expect on
the average only slightly more (0.3)
children than non-Catholics.

The correlations between expected fertility and other variables were what we
would expect given the differentials mentioned above. The female role attitude
measure, age at marriage, work since marriage, and education were all moderately
related to fertility expectations while a
dummy variable for being Catholic, age,
and husband’s income were not. The zero
order correlations between attitudes and
additional children expected and children
ever born were significant and in the same
direction as the correlation between attitudes and total expected fertility. However, the correlation between attitudes
and children ever born was rather mild.
Finally, we found the nonwork attitude
measure only mildly correlated with work
since marriage and age at marriage.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 2

Table 1 shows regressions of total expected fertility, additional fertility expected, and children ever born on the nonwork role attitude variable, controlling for
the other variables. Each row of
coefficients constitute one of a pair of
stepwise nonstandardized regressions.
The first regression in the pair measures
the effect of the attitude measure without
controlling for wife’s education. The second regression adds a control for education.

Looking first at total expected fertility,
the figures in Equation (1) suggest that the
attitude measure is significantly related to
expected fertility net of the effects of work
since marriage, age at marriage, age, ever
use of contraception, and husband’s in
come. Adding education in Equation (2)

reduces but does not eliminate the
significant effect of the attitude measure,
nor does the addition of a Catholic—nonCatholic dummy variable alter the situa
Women’s Role Orientations 135

tion (figures not shown). Thus, the reason
for the attitude effect remains unexplained. The substitution of years worked
since marriage and number of years married for their ratio (because of the potential problem mentioned earlier) gave the
same results.

The “‘expected”’ part of total expected
fertility is the addition of future expected
fertility to past fertility behavior. Does the
attitude variable influence future expectations? Equations (3) and (4) suggest that it
does. The relationship between nonwork
role attitudes and future fertility expectations is remarkably similar to its relation
with total expected fertility. Similarly,
education fails to explain much of the relationship between nonwork attitudes and
fertility expectations.

Interestingly, the work coefficient is
positive, suggesting that net of other factors, the larger proportion of married life
worked, the greater the additional fertility

TABLE 1

UNSTANDARDIZED REGRESSIONS OF THREE MEASURES OF FERTILITY ON
SEX ROLE ATTITUDES CONTROLLING FOR OTHER VARIABLES*

Dep. Var. Constant Attitude Work
Expected Fertilityt
Equation (1)... 5.064 —0.32+ al)
(5.29) (-—2.64)  (-2.68)
Equation (2)... 5.55¢ —0.25 —0.61§
(5.64) (-—2.05)  (-—2.13)
Additional Fertility exp.
Equation (3)... 2.484 —0.25+t 0.28
(3.30) (-2.88) ( 1.17)
Equation (4)... 2.964 —0.19§ 0.35
(3.87) (-—2.09) ( 1.48)
Children ever born#
Equation (5)... 1.944 -0.11 1.17}

(2.80)  (-1.22)  (—5.82)
Equation(6)... 2.27  -0.06  —1.08t
(3.19) (0.70) (5.20)

*Numbers in parentheses are ¢-statistics. N= 132.
¢+Controlling for age and ever use of contraception.

¢ P=0.01

§ p =0.05

lp =0.10

#Controlling for age, ever use of contraception, and parity.

Age Marr. Husb. Inc Educ R? Sig.
—0.73-38 0.12-3 -.. 0.21 0.000
(—1.99) ( 0.24) ee a
—0.52-3 0.40-3 —0.09] 0.23 0.000
(—1.35) ( 0.75) (-1.86) ...
0.62-38 0.22-3 ... 0.38 0.000
( 1.91) ( 0.56) a _
0.78-38 0.49-3 -0.09§ 0.40 0.000
( 2.37) ( 1.20) (-2.37) ...
—0.17-2  -0.62-4 ... 0.53 0.000
(-6.21) (—0.16) a Lae
—0,15-24 0.12-3 -0.06{ 0.54 0.000
(—5.44) ( 0.32) (-1.75) ...
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

136 De Vos

expected.? The net relationship between
age at marriage and additional fertility expected is also positive.

Equations (5) and (6) regress past fertility on the attitude variable. In this case,
the attitude variable did not have a
significant effect. The meaning of this
finding is ambiguous. First, it could mean
that while attitudes are important in predicting other attitudes, 1.e., future fertility
expectations, they are not important in
predicting actual behavior; it could mean
that structural factors such as work history
and age at marriage are more important.
Second, it could mean that attitudes are a
rationalization of past fertility; that fertility causes attitudes rather than the reverse. While this is possible, it is unlikely.
There are other more plausible explanations for the findings.

First, although additional fertility expected is an attitude measure, researchers
have found the variable to be fairly good
in predicting future fertility (see
O’Connell and Moore, 1977; Westoff and
Ryder, 1977b). We can reasonably expect
attitudes to have an effect on future behavior. Second, over half the respondents
had less than two children at the time of
the survey although 85 per cent expected
to eventually have two or more births.
Low parity women constituted a heterogenous group whose present parity meant
little in terms of their future fertility behavior. Third, Equations (5) and (6) relate
present attitudes to past behavior although we have argued that attitudes have
undergone significant change.

CONCLUSIONS

The changing role of women within the
family has been one of the more important

*Since we are not focusing on developing a sophisticated measure of work, the reader should be
cautioned against taking the nonsignificance of the
coefficient too seriously.

Social Biology

explanations advanced to account for the
secular decrease in family size in the
United States for the last two hundred
years as well as for the shorter term decline in fertility since the late 1950’s. Attitude change as well as structural change
may be an important factor. Although a
relationship between variables across time
need not be the same as their relationship
across individuals at any given point in
time, evidence of a cross-sectional relationship between women’s attitudes toward traditionally female family roles and
their expected fertility would support the
hypothesis. Along with the hypothesis’s
theoretical importance, the issue is important for projecting future fertility trends.

In a probability sample of fecund oncemarried white women under the age of 35
living with their husbands in the Detroit
Metropolitan Area in 1978, we found a
scaled nonwork role attitude measure to
be significantly related to expected fertility net of a wife’s work history and other
social and demographic variables commonly employed to explain fertility expectations. Questions of measurement and
causality always remain in a crosssectional analysis of this type, but the finding suggests at least two things:

First, scholars should continue to entertain seriously the notion that women’s
orientations toward the wife and mother
roles affect individual fertility expectations and, perhaps, society-wide fertility
changes as well.

Second, while education, age at marriage, and labor force participation are potential role orientation variables available
in many fertility surveys, they cannot substitute for additional questions regarding
attitude toward the wife and mother roles.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The author wishes to thank David Goldberg, principal investigator of the 1978 Detroit
 

 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:38 08 December 2015

Vol. 27, No. 2

Area Survey, for permission to use the DAS
data and for critical comments on earlier drafts
of this paper. Thanks go also to Barbara
Entwisle and an anonymous reviewer for their

Women’s Role Orientations 137

helpful suggestions. The research was conducted at the Population Studies Center of the
University of Michigan and was funded in part
by a training grant from NICHD.

REFERENCES

BiakE, JUDITH, and PrirHwis Das Gupta. 1975.
Reproductive motivation versus contraceptive technology: Is recent American experience an exception? Pop. Develop. Rev.
1(2):29-49.

Bumpass, Larry. 1977. Fertility differences by
employment patterns and sex role attitudes.
Chapter 11. In Charles Westoff and Norman
Ryder, The contraceptive revolution. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, N.J.

Bumpass, LARRY, and EpWARD MBuURUGU. 1977.
Age at marriage and completed family size.
Soc. Biol. 24(1):31-37.

CAMPBELL, ANGUS. 1976. Women at home and at
work, p. 112-123. In Dorothy McGuigan
(ed.), New research on women and sex roles.
Univ. of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, Mich.

Coomss, LOLAGENE C., and RONALD FREEDMAN.
1979. Some roots of preference: Roles, activities and familial values. Demography
16(3):359-376.

CRAMER, JAMES C. 1980. Fertility and female employment. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 45(2):167-190.

EASTERLIN, RICHARD A. 1978. What will 1984 be
like? Socioeconomic implications of recent
twists in age structure. Demography
15(4):398-4372.

Goldberg, David. 1960. Some recent developments in American fertility research. In National Bureau of Economic Research, Demographic and economic change in developed
countries. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton,
N.J.

. 1975. Socioeconomic theory and differential fertility: The case of the LDC’s. Soc.
Forc. 54:84-106.

JONES, Exist F., and CHar_es F. WestorF. 1979,
The end of “‘Catholic’”’ fertility. Demography
16(2):209-218.

MAson, KAREN O., and Larry Bumpass. 1975.
U.S. women’s sex-role ideology, 1970. Amer.
J. Sociol. 80(5):1212-1219.

 

 

Mason, KareEN O., JOHN CZAJKA, and SARA ArBER. 1976. Change in U.S. women’s sex-role
attitudes, 1964-1974. Amer. Sociol. Rev.
41(4):573-596.

MOsHER, WILLIAM. 1980. Reproductive impairments among currently married couples:
United States, 1976 Advancedata No. 55, Jan.
NCHS, Washington, D.C.

O’CONNELL, MARTIN, and Maurice J. Moore.
1977. New evidence on the value of birth expectations. Demography 14(3):255—264. 
Ryper, NorMaAn B., and CHARLES WESTOFF.
1971. Reproduction in the United States,
1965. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, N.J.

SCANZONI, JoHN. 1975. Sex roles, lifestyles and
childbearing. Free Press, N.Y.

SMITH-LOvIN, LYNN, and ANN R. TICKAMYER.
1978. Nonrecursive models of labor force participation, fertility behavior and sex role attitudes. Amer. Rev. Sociol. 43(4):541-557.

Terry, GERALDINE B. 1979. Rival explanations in
the work-fertility relationship. Pop. Stud.
29:191—210.

THORNTON, ARLAND, and DEBORAH FREEDMAN.
1979. Changes in the sex role attitudes of
women, 1962-1977: Evidence from a panel
study. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 44(5):831-842.

WESTOFF, CHARLES F., and NoRMAN B. RyDer.
1977 a. The contraceptive revolution. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, N.J.

. 1977b. The predictive validity of reproductive intentions. Demography 14(4):431454.

UNITED STATES BUREAU OF THE CENSUS. 1975.
Historical statistics of the United States. Colonial times to 1970. Part 1. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

. 1979. Statistical abstracts of the United

States, 1978. Government Printing Office,

Washington, D.C.

 

 
