Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Trials and tribulations in the search for genes
causing neuropsychiatric disorders

Kenneth K. Kidd

To cite this article: Kenneth K. Kidd (1991) Trials and tribulations in the search for
genes causing neuropsychiatric disorders, Social Biology, 38:3-4, 163-178, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1991.9988785

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1991.9988785

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB ann | ei
Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 3
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 1 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:44

 
 

 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Trials and Tribulations in the Search for
Genes Causing Neuropsychiatric Disorders

Kenneth K. Kidd

Department of Genetics
Yale University School of Medicine
New Haven, Connecticut

During the past decade, the field of
psychiatric genetics has become an
amalgamation of three sciences: psychiatry, molecular biology, and genetics. The complexities of the problems
in psychiatric genetics are illustrated by
a quote attributed to Emerson Pugh to
the effect that if the human brain were
so simple that we could understand it,
we would be so simple that we
couldn’t. While that may prove to be
the case, the hope is that we can understand the human brain, and the
neuropsychiatric disorders are clearly
disorders of the human brain. They are
disorders that, in the classic tradition
of genetics, may be useful in attempts
to understand the normal function of
this very complex organ/system. Such
attempts are, not surprisingly, not
without their trials and tribulations.

One approach to psychiatric genetics is the one used so successfully in
modern molecular human genetics to
identify and clone the genes for genetic
diseases such as cystic fibrosis (Riordan
et al., 1989; Rommens et al., 1989;
Kerem et al., 1989) and fragile X mental retardation (Yu et al., 1991; Oberlé
et al., 1991). This approach has often
been called “reverse genetics,” inappropriately, as noted by Botstein
(1990). Figure 1 illustrates the distinction between the biochemical ap
 

 

proach to cloning disease genes and the
modern genetic approach, more commonly referred to today as positional
cloning. Previously, researchers could
study the biochemistry of the disorder,
find the missing enzyme or defective
protein, and then ultimately identify
and clone the gene itself. That is not
possible for disorders of unknown etiology. The genetic approach, previously applied to experimental organisms but not possible in humans, uses
the fact that there is a gene that can be
mapped. Once its position is known,
researchers can use molecular biological techniques to clone the gene, find
out what protein it produces, and ultimately understand both normal function and the pathophysiology leading
to the genetic abnormality. For complex human disorders, knowledge of
both normal function and the pathophysiology are essential before one can
effectively and optimally intervene to
prevent the illness or treat the symptoms.

Linkage mapping is made possible
by the organization of DNA into long
strands within the chromosomes and
the behavior of that DNA during meiosis, the genetically relevant part of gamete formation. In the formation of
gametes there are recombination
events during which parts of a paternal

163

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

164 Kidd Social Biology
Biochemical Genetic
Genetic Genetic
Map Protein/ Map Protein/
Position Function Position Function
Ne mn / 7 J)
&RNA &RNA

Fic. 1.—A simplified representation of the two approaches to cloning a gene. The more biochemical approach starts from the known protein product while the more genetic approach Starts
from the known location in the genome. This genetic approach, because of its ‘‘reverse”’ direction
with respect to the biochemical approach, was initially mislabeled “reverse genetics.” It is more
appropriately called positional cloning. Figure adapted from Kidd and Simpson (1990).

chromatid actually interchange and
join up with parts of the homologous
maternal chromatid; the product coming out has a block of genes from that
individual’s mother and a block from
that individual’s father. The process is
exceedingly precise and the recombined chromosome still has exactly one
copy of all the genes; only the ancestral
origins of those genes are shuffled.
Whenever there is normal genetic variation in part of the DNA we can use it
to follow transmission of a particular
ancestral copy; loci showing such variation are called markers. There are
now enough markers on most chromosomes to use them in arrays along a
chromosome. If they are close together, a whole set of markers is usually transmitted intact. Other times we
can see that there has been a crossover
event, and the sperm cell from the father has genes in one region that derive

from his father’s chromosome and in
an adjacent region from his mother’s
chromosome. That type of data reveals
the precise order of genes and provides
a measure of the distances between
them. Genes tend to travel in blocks,
but these recombination events allow
shuffling in a probabilistic way. Ifa disease gene of interest is located somewhere along a chromosome, its pattern
of transmission could be followed
through families if there were markers,
i.e., normal variation that would flag
nearby positions on the chromosome.
When those markers were close
enough to the disease gene, the patterns of transmission through families
of the disease and the marker would be
virtually identical.

Human genetics prior to 1978 can be
called the dark ages of modern human
genetics. In 1978, the first DNA polymorphism, identified directly in the

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Vol. 38, No. 3-4

DNA molecules, was discovered by
Kan and Dozy (1978). This was a reStriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP), a term which refers to
the particular technology for visualizing these differences (Botstein et al.,
1980). As discussed later, there are
now additional technologies for detecting DNA polymorphisms which cannot
be called RFLP’s. Until 1978, there
were no known DNA polymorphisms;
by 1981 there were 23 loci with known
DNA polymorphisms. By the time of
the summary at the Tenth Human
Gene Mapping Workshop in 1989
(Kidd et al., 1989), the number of
DNA marker loci that were mapped
and cataloged was almost 2,000. The
number has now increased to above
2,400 (Kidd, 1991). During the last decade, the total has increased 100 fold
from two dozen to more than 2,400 of
these normal genetic variants (markers) in Homo sapiens that are identifiable in the DNA. Today human geneticists can follow through families
virtually any part of any chromosome
to observe exactly how it has been
transmitted; we can easily answer
questions such as which grandchildren
inherit which genes from which of the
grandparents.

Some interesting scientific history is
preserved in the differential increases
of known polymorphisms, chromosome by chromosome (Figure 2). In
the summer of 1985 (at HGM8) chromosome 4 and the X chromosome had
more markers than any others (Willard
et al., 1985). Chromosome 4 had such
a disproportionate number because
just a year before the gene for Huntington’s Disease had been mapped to
chromosome 4 (Gusella et al., 1983),

 

Genes and Neuropsychiatric Disorders

 

165

and research efforts were already being
focussed on finding more markers specifically on 4. The X chromosome had
always been the subject of specific research because of the several important genetic diseases known to be
X-linked, such as Duchenne Muscular
Dystrophy (DMD), fragile-X mental
retardation, among many others. The
totals two years later at HGM9 (Pearson et al., 1987) show a disproportionate increase for chromosomes 7 and 17.
The increase on 17 reflects the mapping of neurofibromatosis to that chromosome in the intervening years (see
Wallace et al., 1990). The mapping of
cystic fibrosis in 1985 (Tsui et al., 1985)
motivated a huge increase in research
on chromosome 7. Just prior to HGM9
the gene for one form of inherited cancer (MEN2A) was mapped to chromosome 10 (Mathew et al., 1987; Simpson
et al., 1987), which prior to that had
been one of the most poorly mapped
chromosomes. Several laboratories immediately jumped in, and by HGM10
in 1989 (Kidd et al., 1989) there had
been an almost three-fold increase in
the number of markers known on human chromosome 10. Science continues to drive the increases since
HGM10, and some _ chromosomes
show large increases (e.g., 3, 5, 11)
while others show very little increase
(e.g., 9 and 14), but all of the chromosomes show an increase. All of the
chromosomes are becoming better
mapped, better covered with DNA
markers (Stephens et al. 1990; Kidd,
1991). It has become easier and easier
to do linkage studies of genetic diseases, and this strategy is now a very
powerful and useful tool in medical research.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

166 Kidd Social Biology

TRENDS IN DNA POLYMORPHISMS

 

250 :
KX]
ay RS
ix
~~ x
Q = ses
Q BS RS
[4 Se] BH
© 150 ee) Oo
Ro | ee)
o i nS — be
al 9 NX Ro) RY
= “054 Sef \ Ry \
> Rx S29 \ | 5M NY
> Rx x} Tc BO BO
10 F BI _) IRL ON x Bars N
2 SI INBIGN RS Slee K
ome ox) a SS 3 \ | @. x) eS] \
O NR DS RH KS Oy ad tN
P SILINNEIN BIN Ni g
50 NSININISING IS aN [ Be
\ cl \ N N Bo Ba \ 55d PS NN RO RS Se
NNR NNNNEE BRINN ORS OBS
NNEBNNNNSBRNQBBNNENOWE
X XQ NJ "a", ie
RESINS] (SPINS) ISSISISINISISISE] |S
123 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 X Y XY

CHROMOSOME
HB cms. ascesy KA uGmo 987) B&iuomi0 (1989) L_]san,1991

Fic. 2.—Trends in discovery and cataloging of DNA polymorphisms. For each locus the histogram shows the total number of mapped and cataloged DNA polymorphisms known on that chromosome as of four different dates. The height of the bar at the top of each shaded area gives the
number at the corresponding time. Thus, for Chromosome 1, only about 10 DNA polymorphisms
were known in 1985, 80 were known in 1987, 121 were known in 1989, and 148 were known as of
January 1991. This figure is an update of the figure in Kidd and Simpson (1990) using data in Kidd
(1991) for the January 1991 totals.

TABLE 1
POPULATION HETEROZYGOSITIES”

Mean Numbcr of
Population Heterozygosity Systems
Mixed, EU rOp@a ns .ce snes axe scnsneas wns acne nna ana eae on 0.373 100
CRINESE........ccecececeeeccceseeneneeecscncnseaeesceseceqesenes 0.340 100
C.A.R. Pygmies .....0.ccccccecseceneeeeeceeseeencnseeceroeee 0.313 100
Zaire PYGMIES ........c.csccecessecssceecncsscvscvsevenseseees 0.304 100
Melanesians ..........cecsscsscsccvessceseeensesesceceeceseess 0.267 100
Karitiana
(Amazon Basin Amerindians) ...............ssceseeseees 0.274 30
R. Surui
(Amazon Basin Amerindians) ................secseereeee 0.312 29
Campeche Mayans
(Yucatan Amerindians)..............ccsssscesceseereseeees 0.358 29

“This summary of randomly selected DNA polymorphisms is based on data from studies by Bowcock et al. (1987, 1991) and Kidd et
al. (1991). Even the most isolated populations (e.g., Melanesians and Amazon Basin Amerindians) show nearly as much genetic
variation as Caucasians of mixed European ancestry.

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Vol. 38, No. 3-4

Table 1 is a summary that shows
these DNA markers are not limited to
Caucasians (Bowcock et al., 1987;
Kidd et al., 1991). Most markers have
been studied only in Caucasians because most have been discovered in research labs located in North America
and Western Europe; by default the
families and unrelated individuals
studied are primarily Caucasian. Despite this form of ascertainment bias,

_ African Pygmies, Melanesians, Chi
nese, and Amerindians all have reasonably high levels of heterozygosity
for these same markers. The markers
summarized in Table 1 are a sample
chosen at random. More recent unpublished data show that these markers are
pervasive throughout the human species; they are usable in any population.
There is nothing unique about Caucaslans.

Human geneticists are very gradually putting together the maps of all human chromosomes from family data
with many markers. Initially most of
the markers were RFLP’s, but researchers are not limited to RFLP’s
any longer. The Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) is anew molecular tool of
great power. PCR allows molecular biologists to duplicate a specific small
DNA segment in the test tube. The
great power comes from being able to
cycle the reaction simply by changing
the temperature and to make two identical copies of each existing molecule at
every cycle. After 30 cycles, there are
2° copies of the original DNA molecule. In fact, researchers can start from
a single DNA molecule in the test
tube—a single sperm cell (Arnheim et
al., 1990) or a single molecule from
DNA taken from one cell (Ruano et
al., 1990)—and make millions and mil
Genes and Neuropsychiatric Disorders

167

lions of identical copies, enough copies _
to study. The increased power of this
method is illustrated by the polymorphism at APOB. The protein product
of this gene is quite important in lipid
metabolism, and certain defects in this
gene cause heart disease in some cases
(Boerwinkle et al., 1989; Ludwig et al.,
1989). In Figure 3, samples from A frican pygmies and Melanesians from
near New Guinea illustrate one of the
polymorphisms. In the Pygmies there
are many different forms of the gene,
but in the Melanesians there appears to
be no or very little variation. However,
the actual sizes are hard to resolve using this RFLP technology. Using PCR
to amplify just the small piece of DNA
that shows this size variation, we can
actually determine the number of repeat units that give rise to this length
variation, measure it precisely, see
much finer grades of variation, and in
fact see that there are two different
forms in the Melanesians, whereas before that was highly questionable. The
new molecular techniques are providing more markers all the time, and the
individual markers are becoming easier to deal with, have greater resolution, and have, hence, greater power in
looking at how genes have been transmitted through families.

REQUIREMENTS FOR A
LINKAGE STUDY OFA
COMPLEX DISORDER

What conditions must be met in order to justify a linkage study to find a
gene by scanning the genome? When
dealing with a complex disorder, where
we know there is genetic involvement
but are not absolutely certain what the
mode of inheritance is, we must have
168

Kidd

Social Biology

APOLIPOPROTEIN B (APOB) POLYMORPHISM
IN TWO HUMAN POPULATIONS

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

PYGMIES

   

NASIOI

PROBE: pABi1 from J. Scott
ENZYME: MspI

Fic. 3.—an APOB polymorphism by RFLP technology. The bands are fragments of DNA that
migrate to different positions as a function of the length of DNA. In the size range of the polymorphic
fragment (2.0~2.5 kilobases), resolution of different alleles is poor. Nonetheless, it is clear that there
are several different alleles in the Pygmies. Some of the Melanesian samples in this figure suggest
there are distinct but very similar alleles, but are not clear enough for a definite conclusion using this

RFLP technology.

what I would call a disbelief in
polygenic inheritance. If many different genes are involved and each of
them has a very small effect, none of
them could ever be found. Thus, researchers must have either disbelief in
the polygenic mode of inheritance or
some evidence that the actual mode of
inheritance is not polygenic in order to
make the investment in effort required
of a linkage study. For most neuropsychiatric disorders, there is no proof
that.they are NoT polygenic. One can
never prove a hypothesis; one can only
disprove hypotheses. There is some evidence for compatibility, at least, with
major locus inheritance. However,
even when the pattern of inheritance is

compatible with a major locus, that
does not prove a major locus is responsible. However, compatibility does
provide some rationale for continuing
to try to find by linkage what would
amount to proof of a major locus. A
final condition is absence of a clear etiology for the disorder. A linkage approach is a fairly expensive and timeconsuming one. If there is a very clear
etiologic hypothesis, another approach
may be much better—the biochemical
approach in Figure 1 or something else
directed to a particular gene. Unfortunately, in the neuropsychiatric disorders, the problem is not lack of hypotheses on genetic etiology; it is the
plethora of hypotheses on etiology,

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Vol. 38, No. 3-4

with almost none supported any better
than another. No hypothesis stands out
as being especially noteworthy of pursuit from a more biochemical point of
view.

What resources are needed in order
to undertake a scan of the genome for
a disease gene? Genetic linkage of a
complex disorder is inherently a multidisciplinary study, as examples to be
given later will illustrate, and so resources from several disciplines are
necessary. Most important, it is essential to have good diagnosis and nosology for the disorder under study. This
requires involvement of good clinicians
and good diagnosticians because diagnosis and nosology are ongoing areas
of research in the neuropsychiatric
disorders. It is also essential to have
family material with several affected
individuals in each of the families. Fortunately, those types of families do exist in which good diagnostic evaluations can be made on the family
members. In contrast to a decade ago,
sufficient genetic markers now exist,
and more markers and even better
markers are being discovered all the
time, as summarized earlier. Finally,
statistical approaches must be able to
utilize both the multiple genetic markers and a very sophisticated understanding of the nature of the disorder.
Such methods exist, and some of them
are discussed by Risch (1990).

What does one do once a linkage is
found? That is when the really challenging and exciting research (the fun)
begins. Finding and mapping a gene
that contributes to a complex neuropsychiatric disorder is just the first
step; the ultimate aim of such research
is to be able to understand the cause
and development of the disorder, to be

Genes and Neuropsychiatric Disorders

169

able to offer genetic counseling, to be
able to offer proper medication to affected individuals, and ultimately to
clone the gene. Finding the linkage 1s
really just the beginning of a whole series of other studies.

THE CANDIDATE GENE
APPROACH

The linkage approach discussed
above is a broad scanning of the genome, testing for linkage section by
section; as noted, genes for cystic fibrosis, neurofibromatosis, and many
other genetic diseases have been
mapped by that approach. An alternative linkage strategy exists for some
neuropsychiatric disorders for which
we may suspect involvement of specific
genes. If a traditional biochemical approach cannot be used to test the relevance of this gene or its protein product, possibly because the gene product
cannot even be detected in vivo, it is
still possible to use linkage with DNA
polymorphisms detected by the cloned
gene to test for its involvement. Several situations in  neuropsychiatry
would be appropriate for this strategy.

Many of the neurotransmitters and
some of the receptor molecules in the
brain exist in such minute quantities
that they cannot even be studied in
post-mortem material; one certainly
cannot biopsy a living individual to do
an assay on part of the brain. Many of
these neuropsychiatrically relevant
genes and their products are being
cloned and mapped. Even if some of
the proteins can be detected using a radioimmune assay or a fluorescently
tagged monoclonal antibody for in situ
studies, such methods are antigenic assays, not functional assays. In situaDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

 

tions where adequate amounts of gene
product are detected by these methods, it may be, nonetheless, a nonfunctional or otherwise abnormal product.

As another example, consider situations in which the enzyme can be
identified and its activity assayed, but
only in other tissue, such as peripheral
blood, not in brain. There are multiple
examples of duplicate genes producing
essentially identical enzymes but in different tissues; in general, even if only a
single gene, the functioning is regulated differently in different tissues,
For example, catechol-O-methyl transferase (COMT) can be assayed in red
blood cells, but its red cell activity may
be irrelevant to whether or not there is
normal activity in the central nervous
system (CNS). Thus, COMT could be
functioning normally in the red cells,
but be absent or otherwise not functioning appropriately in the CNS. In all
of the above situations, a linkage paradigm can mark the DNA region that
encompasses the gene and, using normal variation in that region, allow a
“yes” or “no” answer to the question
of whether something in the DNA
around the gene ts related to presence
or absence of the illness. This is a much
simpler paradigm than sequencing the
gene from affected individuals to see
whether there is a genetic abnormality
in the gene itself.

A cautionary note to the candidate
gene approach using linkage is illustrated by the recent discovery that the
gene for the amyloid precursor protein
is the cause of Alzheimer’s disease in
several families (Goate et al., 1991). A
linkage study had previously excluded
this gene based on obligate cross-overs
in some families. Genetic heterogeneity or simple diagnostic errors may

 

 

Social Biology

have been the explanation for those
data but, whatever the explanation, direct sequencing of the gene from patients finally identified the defect.

EXAMPLES OF “PROGRESS”
IN STUDIES OF SPECIFIC
DISEASES

TOURETTE SYNDROME (TS)

Tourette syndrome is one of the
neuropsychiatric disorders for which
pedigree analysis provides quite strong
support for a single gene, autosomal
dominant mode of inheritance (Pauls
and Leckman, 1986). Some uncertainty still remains about the precise
nosology. Some individuals with the
same genetic predisposition may manifest symptoms that fall into other diagnostic categories, such as obsessivecompulsive disorder. Also, there may
be multiple genetic causes of the syndrome consisting of just chronic multiple tics, a diagnosis that is in many
individuals clearly a milder manifestation of what in close relatives leads to
full Tourette syndrome. These are relatively minor problems in view of the
strong overall pattern of inheritance,
and TS is an excellent disorder for a
linkage study.

A large collaborative project has
been underway for several years in an
attempt to find the location of the hypothesized major gene for Tourette
syndrome (Kurlan et al., 1986; Pakstis
et al., 1991a). The project is based on
high-density families which have undergone very thorough clinical evaluations. Cell lines have been established
in the laboratory for each of the 300 or
so individuals being studied in order to
provide an essentially infinite supply of

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Vol. 38, No. 3-4

DNA to be tested. Establishing permanent cell lines is an essential component of a linkage study that will systematically scan the genome because
dozens to hundreds of markers may
have to be studied before linkage is
found. Rather than take large amounts
of blood from each subject in order to
get the amount of DNA that will be
needed, it is possible to take a small
blood sample, purify the B lymphocytes, and establish a permanent transformed cell line. These cells can be
grown in culture to large numbers and
large amounts of DNA can be extracted. Moreover, aliquots of these
cells are frozen in a viable state in liquid nitrogen so that in the future when
more DNA is needed they can be
thawed and regrown to large numbers
providing the additional DNA required. This is far easier than having to
travel many hundreds of miles to get
another sample from a critical individual when the first DNA sample is used
up. This strategy provides insurance
against Murphy’s law. In studies such
as this, Murphy’s law might be stated,
“The critical sample for the next test is
the one that you just ran out of.”
The effort invested in establishing
cell lines and typing large numbers of
DNA markers would be wasted if the
diagnostic evaluations were not of the
highest quality. The collaborators in
this study include three scientists who
are expert diagnosticians and have responsibility for the clinical evaluation
of all individuals in the families. These
evaluations are ongoing with repeated
visits every year or two to individuals in
various parts of the extended kindreds
to update the clinical information.

. Other components of this study include

the scientists responsible for all of the

 

Genes and Neuropsychiatric Disorders 171

DNA analyses and, not the least important, the scientists who are responsible for the management of the extensive amounts of data collected and the
linkage analyses of those data using sophisticated computer programs. Studies such as this are not interdisciplinary, but multidisciplinary.

The strategy for scanning the genome involves systematically looking
at blocks of DNA in specific regions of
the chromosomes so that the maximum
amount of information can be obtained
for each region of the chromosome.
This strategy is illustrated by our studies of the dopamine D2 receptor
(DRD2) gene which is a candidate
gene for TS but which we have studied
in its genomic context along with
nearby markers in order to evaluate
thoroughly the entire region (Gelernter et al., 1990). DRD2 is a candidate
gene because there is reason to think
that some component in the dopaminergic system might be involved in causing TS. Certainly, haloperidol, which
suppresses the dopamine system, can
ameliorate the symptoms of TS in
some patients. DRD2 was the first of
the dopamine receptor genes to be
cloned (Grandy et al., 19892); several
others have now been cloned and
mapped (See McAlpine et al., 1990),
and they are being studied in a similar
fashion.

Using a normal DNA polymorphism that is adjacent to the DRD2
gene (Grandy et al., 1989b; Hauge et
al., 1991), Gelernter et al. (1990)
showed that in some families the pattern of inheritance of the DRD2 gene
was different from the pattern of TS.
For example, cousins, both of whom
had TS from the same grandparent,
had copies of the DRD2 gene that
CY
=
©
N
mei
oO
=
oO
oO
oO
A
Co
©
=—
av.
om
=
—
CS
‘'S
Ss
oD
oo
O
S
Ce
©
>>
—
N
mi
oO
>
oa
c
~.
va
Oo
vo
oO
co
CS
©
—
c
Ss
©
A

came from completely different ancestors, not from the same affected grandparent. In other cases, two affected
children of an affected man got different copies of the DRD2 gene from
their father. These observations provide strong evidence excluding DRD2
as the cause of TS.

However, not all parts of these families were informative for linkage.
There are additional polymorphisms
within and immediately adjacent to the
DRD2 gene (Hauge et al., 1991), but
these were not available for this initial
study. Instead, the DRD2 gene was
studied in a large number of normal
families and mapped with respect to
other polymorphisms that were close
to it on the long arm of chromosome
11. Using this genetic map, it was possible to do a complete scan of this genomic region and determine the transmission pattern of DRD2 by studying
polymorphisms at the marker loci
flanking it. With this approach, additional segments of these families, that
were not informative for how the
DRD2 locus itself was transmitted,
were informative for these nearby
anonymous DNA markers and provided additional evidence that this entire block of chromosome 11 shows a
pattern of inheritance that is different
from TS. The clear conclusion is that
whatever its role in the dopamine system, the DRD2 locus is not the primary cause of TS.

Using the general linkage paradigm,
we have now studied over 200 marker
loci on this set of TS families. No significant evidence of linkage has been

found, and the data are sufficient to ex- 
clude the TS locus from approximately
80 per cent of the total genome (Pakstis
et al., 1991a, and unpublished). Stud
Social Biology

ies are now focussed on that remaining
20 per cent of the genome. Several
years of quite extensive effort have
been devoted to this study of TS, and
there are no positive findings to date.
This is disappointing but is not unexpected or that unusual. Approximately
90 per cent of the genome had been excluded for cystic fibrosis before that
gene was finally mapped to chromosome 7, While we are optimistic that a
TS gene will be found in the remaining
20 per cent of the genome, we must
acknowledge that an_ alternative
hypothesis—that there is no single
gene causing this disorder—will become much more likely if we approach
exclusion of 100 per cent of the genome
without finding a TS gene.

SCHIZOPHRENIA

In contrast to the several years of
linkage studies on TS with much of the
genome already studied, linkage studies of schizophrenia are in a much more
preliminary state. At an early stage a
particularly appealing hypothesis of a
candidate region was suggested by the
finding of Dr. Bassett and her colleagues (see Bassett, 1991, a paper in
this same issue). The partial trisomy
they identified focussed attention on
the proximal long arm of chromosome
5, a region in which the glucocorticoid
receptor had _ been provisionally
mapped. Since steroid psychosis can
mimic schizophrenia, two suggestions
were converging on the same region of
the genome. Two independent studies
were undertaken and reached diametrically opposite conclusions. Sherrington et al. (1988) found evidence in
favor of genetic linkage to this region,
while Kennedy et al. (1988) excluded a

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Vol. 38, No. 3-4

gene for schizophrenia from this region. In aslightly earlier study, Giuffra
et al. (1988) had shown that the glucocorticoid receptor (GRL) gene had
been incorrectly mapped to this region
of chromosome 5 and actually was located at the distal end of the long arm
of chromosome 5, quite far genetically.
Such errors in the human genetic map
exist as do gaps in knowledge about the
map. A significant part of linkage studies must be checking the map, revising
it if necessary, and building it when
none exists in the region. In any case,
Kennedy et al. (1988) showed that
GRL was not linked to schizophrenia.

Several other groups have studied
the proximal long arm of chromosome
5 in additional families and consistently
exclude the gene for schizophrenia
from this region (see review in Gelernter and Kidd, 1990). Since even the
original family material studied by
Sherrington et al. (1988) shows less evidence for linkage with schizophrenia
when additional markers are included,
there is now the consensus that if a
gene causing schizophrenia does exist
in the proximal long arm of chromosome 5, it accounts for a very small
fraction of the familial cases of schizophrenia. Though the initial cytogenetic
findings of Bassett et al. (1991) remain
to be accounted for, the linkage data of
Sherrington et al. (1988) are thought
by most to have been an unfortunate
false positive, the type of chance event
that can happen in linkage studies
when results are only at the threshold
of statistical significance. In fact, the
results of Sherrington et al., and those
of Egeland et al. (1987) discussed below, both appear to have been false
positives that are causing a reevaluation of the levels of statistical signifi
Genes and Neuropsychiatric Disorders

173

cance that must be used for linkage
studies of complex disorders (Robertson, 1989).

The dopamine D2 receptor that has
been studied for TS is also a candidate
gene for schizophrenia. In a study very
analogous to that for TS, we have studied the DRD2 locus and nearby markers and excluded this gene as a cause of
schizophrenia in the large kindred we
are studying (Moises et al., 1991).
Overall, in this large kindred, we have
now studied over 100 loci but have excluded only about 8 per cent of the
genome and have no strong positive
findings suggesting linkage for schizophrenia (Barr et al., 1991). We now believe that this kindred is typical of most
schizophrenia families in that the low
density of overt illness and the concomitant low penetrance in the model]
result in statistical uncertainty in the
precise pattern of transmission of alleles at the postulated susceptibility locus. Strong evidence for linkage or for
exclusion will require the use of highly
informative individual markers or a set
of closely linked markers. Fortunately,
both are becoming available.

MANIC DEPRESSIVE ILLNESS

Manic depressive illness is the best
example of the vicissitudes of genetic
linkage studies for neuropsychiatric
disorders. In a much publicized finding, Egeland et al. (1987) reported
quite significant evidence for genetic
linkage of DNA markers on the short
arm of chromosome 11 with manic depressive illness in a large Old Order
Amish kindred. The conclusion that a
gene had been identified had to be revised when additional data were collected on that family (Kelsoe et al.,
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

174 Kidd

1989). A brief review of that reversal
illustrates the difficulties inherent in
these studies and some of what we have
learned as a consequence.

The lod scores in the original Egeland et al. report were quite positive,
reaching a peak of +4.9 at the tip of
the short arm of chromosome 11 immediately adjacent to the harvey-ras
oncogene (HRAS). When this finding
was published, most researchers
thought it was quite strong evidence
for linkage since a lod score of +3 was
the conventional level of significance.
In addition, tyrosine hydroxylase
(TH), the gene producing the enzyme
for the first step in catecholamine synthesis, was mapped into that region.
Since TH was known to have alternative splicing in different tissues (Horellou et al., 1988), including the brain, it
seemed possible that TH could function normally in some tissues but abnormally in some brain neurons. Thus,
it was a good candidate gene. Interestingly, when we attempted to refine the
map position of TH, we found that it
had been incorrectly mapped by a few
centiMorgans and was actually very
close to the insulin gene (INS) (Xue et
al., 1988). At almost the same time, a
molecular study placed TH immediately adjacent to INS (O’Malley and
Rotwein, 1988). Though still close to
the position where manic depressive
illness mapped in this Old Order
Amish family, TH was no longer as
likely a candidate gene.

The similarities between this situation and GRL in the candidate region
for schizophrenia are illustrative of the
current problems of obtaining an accurate human linkage map. While there
is a good general framework map and
most genes are mapped correctly with

 

 

Social Biology

respect to entire chromosome, a map
position along the chromosome that is
based on preliminary data is very likely
to be revised:as more data are accumulated. Most loci are still only regionally mapped on the basis of preliminary
data; so, the accuracy of the map will
continue to be a problem for some
time. Fortunately, the human genetic
map is constantly improving and newer
molecular methodologies are allowing
even preliminary mapping data to be
much more accurate than was possible
just two or three years ago.

The revised conclusion in the Amish
study, however, was not caused by the
removal of tyrosine hydroxylase as a
candidate gene, but rather by the essential elimination of all evidence favoring linkage. This drastic change
came about for two reasons. First, additional family members were studied
in an attempt to bolster the original
finding as well as to refine the localization. Second, while those additional
family members were being collected,
time passed, and two individuals in the
original family had initial onset of illness. The evidence contributed by the
additional family members is entirely
negative and argues strongly against a
locus near HRAS. The new onsets alter the diagnostic picture —~individuals
previously unaffected became affected
—and indicate that disease susceptibility is being transmitted in a different
pattern than had previously been suggested. With the new pattern of disease
transmission, the evidence in favor of
linkage to HRAS and INS diminished
considerably and no longer reaches the
level of statistical significance. Thus,
there is currently no statistically significant evidence for a gene for manic depressive illness at the tip of the short
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

Vol. 38, No. 3-4

arm of chromosome 11; the gene that
was “found” has now been “lost.” Evidence was not found for linkage to
HRAS in any of several other studies
that attempted to replicate the original
finding (see discussion in Kelsoe et al.,
1989). It is important to note that the
data used in the original Amish analysis for segregation of the genetic markers were correct and that the statistical
evidence of linkage was a false-positive
finding, not a result of data errors.
As a result of the revised conclusion
about finding a gene in the Old Order
Amish kindred, we and others have begun searching in other parts of the genome using that same family in the
hopes of identifying a gene elsewhere.
A summary of our data shows that
about 25 per cent of the genome has
been excluded for linkage based on
more than a hundred different markers
typed on that kindred (Pakstis et al.,
1991b). Interestingly, out of the 185
linkage analyses done, the two with the
highest positive lod scores were HRAS
and INS. Those were still positive because data on the newest set of family
members have not been incorporated

Genes and Neuropsychiatric Disorders

 

175

into the Pakstis et al. summary, but indicate that such positive lod scores can
and do occur by chance alone.

CONCLUSION

Much of our discussion of significance has been based on having lod
scores of +3.0 as the criterion for accepting positive proof. That is no
longer considered sufficient in light of
the current, more “‘sophisticated”’ understanding. This sophistication has
been thrust upon us by finding positive
results that disappear before our eyes.
More rigorous evidence and higher
standards of proof are necessary before
accepting linkage as proven for these
complex disorders. However, linkage
remains a promising avenue to approach these disorders and holds great
promise for significant results in the
next few years. More information can
only give us an improved understanding of the complexities of these disorders, provided we tolerate trials and
tribulations along the way. While linkage studies still are not perfect, at least
they are the state of the art today.

REFERENCES

ARNHEIM, N., H. Li, and X. Cur. 1990. PCR
analysis of DNA sequences in single cells:
Single sperm gene mapping and genetic disease diagnosis. Genomics 8:415-419,

Barr, C.L., J. L. Kennepy, A. J. Paxstis, L.
WETTERBERG, B. SJOGREN, J. GELERNTER, J.
HALLMAYER, H. Moises, L.L. CAVALLISForZA, and K. K. Kipp. 1991. Progress in
genome scan for linkage in schizophrenia,
Abstract, 8th International Congress of Human Genetics.

Basset, A. 1991. Linkage analysis of schizophrenia: Challenges and promise. Soc. Biol.
38:189~196.

BoOERWINKLE, E., W. XIONG, E. Fourest, and L.
CHAN. 1989. Rapid typing of tandemly repeated hypervariable loci by the polymerase
chain reaction: Application to the apolipo
protein B 3’ hypervariable region. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. 86:212-216.

Botstein, D. 1990. 1989 Allen award address:
The American Society of Human Genetics
Annual Meeting, Baltimore. Amer. J. Hum.
Genet. 47:887-891.

Botstein, D., R. L. Wurte, M. SKoLnick, and
R. W. Davis. 1980. Construction of a genetic
linkage map in man using restriction fragment length polymorphisms. Amer. J. Hum.
Genet. 32:314-331. .

Bowcock, A. M., C. Bucci, J. M. HEBERT, J. R.
Kipp, K. K. Kipp, J. FRrEDLAENDER, L. L.
CAVALLI-SFORZA. 1987. Study of 47 DNA
markers in five populations from four continents. Gene Geog. 1:47-64.

Bowcock, A. M., J. R. Kipp, J. L. Mountain,
J. M. HesBert, L. CaroTenuto, K. K. Kipp,
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

176

and L. L. CavALui-SFoRZA. 1991.. Drift, admixture, and selection in human evolution: A
study with DNA polymorphisms. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 88:839-843.

EGELAND, J. A., D. S. Gernarp, D. L. PAuLs,
J.N. Sussex, K.K. Kipp, C.R. ALLEN,
A.M. Hostetter, and D.E. HousMan.
1987. Bipolar affective disorders linked to
DNA markers on chromosome 11. Nature
325:783-787.

GELERNTER, J., and K. K. Kipp. 1990. The current status of linkage studies in schizophrenia, p. 137-152. In P. McHugh and V.A.
McKusick (eds.), Brain and behavior.

GELERNTER, J., A. J. PAkstis, D. L. Pauts, R.
Kurtan, S.T. GANcHer, O. CIveELLi, D.
Granby, and K.K. Kipp. 1990. Tourette
syndrome is not linked to D, dopamine receptor. Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 47:1073-1077.

GoaTE, A., M-C. CHARTIER-HARLIN, M. MuLLAN, J. Brown, F. Crawrorp, L. Fipant, L.
Giurrra, A. Haynes, N. IrvING, L. JAMES,
R. Mant, P. Newton, K. Rooke, P. Roques,
C. TALBOT, M. PERICAK-VANCE, A. Roses, R.
WILLIAMSON, M. Rossor, M. Owen, and J.
Harpy. 1991. Segregation of a missense mutation in the amyloid precursor protein gene
with familial Alzheimer’s disease. Nature
349:704-706.

GranpDy, D.K., M.A. MARCHIONNI, H.
MakaM, R.E. StorKxo, M. ALFAno, L.
FROTHINGHAM, J. B. FiscHer, K. J. BURKEHowte, J. R. BuNzow, A. C. SERVER, and O.
CIVELLI. 1989a. Cloning of the cDNA and
gene for a human D2 dopamine receptor.
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 86(24):9762-9766.

Granby, D. K., M. Litt, L. ALLEN, J. R. Bunzow, M. MARCHIONNI, H. MAKaAM, L. REED,
R. E. MaGENIs, and O. CiveELLi. 19895. The
human dopamine D2 receptor gene is located
in chromosome 11 at q22-q23 and identifies a
Taql polymorphism. Amer. J. Hum. Genet.
45:778-785.

Giurrra, L. A., J. L. KENNEDY, C. M. CAsTIGLIONE, R.M. Evans, J.J. WasmuTH, and
K. K. Kipp. Glucocorticoid receptor maps to
the distal long arm of chromosome 5. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 49:313-314.

GUSELLA, J.F., N.S. WeEx ier, P.M. ConNEALLY, S.L. NayLtor, M.A. ANDERSON,
R.E. Tanzi, P.C. Watkins, K. Ottina,
M.R. Wattace, A. Y. SAKAGUCHI, A. B.
Youna, I. SHoutson, E. BontLia, and J. B.
Martin. 1983. A polymorphic DNA marker
genetically linked to Huntington’s disease.
Nature 306:234-238.

HauceE, X. Y., D. K. Granby, J. H. Eusanks,
G. A. Evans, O. Civeiu, and M. Litt. 1991.
Detection and characterization of additional
DNA polymorphisms in the dopamine D2 receptor gene. Genomics 10:527-530.

Horettou, P., B. Le Bourneites, J. CrortHumsert, B. GuiBert, V. LEviEL, and J.

 

Kidd

 

Social Biology

MaL_teT. 1988. Multiple human tyrosine hydroxylase enzymes, generated through alternative splicing, have different specific activities in Xenopus oocytes. J. Neurochem.
58:652-655.

Kan, Y. W., and A. M. Dozy. 1978. Polymorphism of DNA sequence adjacent to human
B-globin structural gene: Relationship to
sickle mutation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
75:5631-5635.

KELSOE, J.R., E.I. Ginns, J. A. EGELAND,
D.S. GerHarp, A.M. Go .pstTEIn, S.J.
BALE, D. L. Pauts, R. T. Lona, K. K. Kipp, .
G. Conte, D. E. Housman, and S. M. Paut.
1989. Reevaluation of the linkage relationship between chromosome 11p loci and the
gene for bipolar affective disorder in the Old
Order Amish. Nature 342:238-243.

KENNEDY, J. L., L. A. Grurrra, H. W. Moises,
L. L. Cava.ui-Srorza, A. J. Paxstis, J. R.
Kipp, C. M. CasTIGLIONE, B. SyoGren, L.
WETTERBERG, and K.K. Kipp. 1988. Evidence against linkage of schizophrenia with
markers on chromosome 5 in a Northern
Swedish Pedigree. Nature 336:167-170.

KEREM, B., J. M. RomMMENS, J. A. BUCHANAN,
D. MaRklEwicz, T. K. Cox, A. CHAKRAVARTI, M. BUCHWALD, and L. C. Tsut. 1989. ©
Identification of the cystic fibrosis gene: Genetic analysis. Science 245:1073-1080.

Kipp, J. R., F. L. BLracx, K. M. Weiss, I. BatAzs, and K. K. Kipp, 1991. Studies of three
Amerindian populations using nuclear DNA
polymorphisms, Hum. Biol. 63: 775-794.

Kipp, K. K. 1991. Progress toward completing
the human linkage map. Curr. Opin. Genet.
Develop. 1(1):99-105.

Kipp, K. K., A. M. Bowcock, J. SCHMIDTKE,
R. K. Track, F, Riccruti, G. Hutcuines, A.
BALE, P. PEARSON, and H. F. WILLARD, with
help from J. GELERNTER, L. Grurrra, and K.
KuBzpeELa. 1989. Report of the DNA committee and catalogs of cloned and mapped
genes and DNA polymorphisms. HGMi0.
Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51:622-947.

KURLAN, R., J. BEHR, L. MEDVED, I. SHOULSON,
D. Pau s, J. R. Kipp, and K. K. Kipp. 1986.
Familial Tourette’s syndrome: Report of a
large pedigree and potential for linkage analysis. Neurology 36:772-776.

Lupwic, E. H., W. Friep, and B. J. McCartHy.
1989. High-resolution analysis of a hypervariable region in the human apolipoprotein B
gene. Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 45:458-464.

Matuew, C. B. P., K.S. Cun, D. F. Easton,
K. THorpPe, C. CARTER, G.I. Liou, S.-L.
Fonc, C.D. B. Bripces, H. Haak, A. C.
NIEUWENHUIJZEN KRUSEMAN, S. SCHIFTER,
H. H. Hansen, H. TELeNrus, M. TELENIUSBerc, and B. A. J. Ponper. 1987. A linked
genetic marker for multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A on chromosome 10. Nature
328:527-528.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 38, No. 3-4

MCALPINE, P. J., L. C. Stranc, C. BoucHErx,
and T. B. SHows. 1990. The 1990 catalog of
mapped genes and report of the nomenclature committee. HGM10.5 Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 55:5-76.

Moises, H. W., J. GELERNTER, L. A. GIUFFRA,
V. Zarcont, O. Civerti, L. WeETTERBERG,
K. K. Kipp, L. L. Cavarit-Srorza. 1991. No
linkage between D2-dopamine receptor gene
region and schizophrenia. Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 48:643-647.

Oner.t, I., F. Rousseau, D. HeEITz, C. KRETz,
D. Devys, A. HANAUER, J. Bouf, M. F. BerTHEAS, and J, L. MANDEL. 1991. Instability of
a 550-base pair DNA segment and abnormal
methylation in fragile X syndrome. Science
252:1097-1102.

O’MaLLEY, K. L., and P. Rotwern. 1988. Human tyrosine hydroxylase and insulin genes
are contiguous on chromosome 11. Nucleic
Acids Res. 16:4437-4446.

Paxstis, A. J., P. Heutinx, D. L. Pauts, R.
KurLan, B. J. M. VAN DE WETERING, J. F.
LECKMAN, L. A. SANDKUYL, J. R. Kipp, G. J.
BREEDVELD, C. M. CASTIGLIONE, J. WEBER,
R. S. Sparkes, D. J. Conen, K. K. Kipp, and
B. A. Oostra. 1991a. Progress in the search
for genetic linkage with Tourette Syndrome:
An exclusion map covering more than 50 per
cent of the genome. Amer. Hum. Genet.
48 :281-294.

Paxstis, A. J., J. R. Kipp, C. M. CAsTIGLIONE,
and K. K. Kipp. 1991b. Status of the search
for a major genetic locus for affective disorder in the Old Order Amish. Hum. Genet.
87:475-483.

Pauts, D. L., and J. F. LEcKMAN. 1986. The inheritance of Gilles de {a Tourette’s syndrome
and associated behaviors. New Engl. J. Med.
315:993-997.

Pearson, P. L., K. K. Kipp, and H. F. WItLArp.
1987. Report of the committee on human
gene mapping by recombinant DNA techniques HGM9: Human Gene Mapping
Workshop 9. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 46:390566.

RiorDAN, J. R., J. M. Rommens, B. Kerem, N.
ALON, R. ROZMAHEL, Z. GRZELCZAK, J. ZIELENSKI, S. Lox, N. Pravsic, J. L. Cnou,
M.L. Drumm, E. IANNuzzi, F. §. Coxtins,
and L. C. Tsur. 1989. Identification of the
cystic fibrosis gene: Cloning and characterization of complementary DNA. Science
245:1066-1073.

Riscu, N. 1990. Linkage strategies for genetically complex traits. I. Multilocus models.
Amer. J. Hum. Genet. 46:222-228.

ROBERTSON, M. 1989. False start on manic depression. Nature News Views 342:222.

RomMens, J.M.; M. C. IANNuUZzI, B. KEREM,
M.L. Drumm, G. Metmer, M. Dean, R.
ROzMAHEL, J.L. Cote, D. KENNEDY, N.
Hipaka, M. Zsica, M. BucHwa.p, J. R. Ri
Genes and Neuropsychiatric Disorders

177

ORDAN, L. C. Tsut, F. S. Cotiins. 1989. Identification of the cystic fibrosis gene: Chromosome walking and jumping. Science
245:1059-1065.

Ruano, G., K. K. Kipp, and J.C. STEPHENS.
1990. Haplotype of multiple polymorphisms
resolved by enzymatic amplification of single
DNA molecules. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
87:6296-6300.

SEIZINGER, B. R:, G. A. RouLgau, L. J. OzeELius, A. H. Lange, A. G. FARyYNIAz, M. V.
Cuao, S. Huson, B. R. Korr, D. M. Parry,
M. A. PERICAK-VANCE, F. S. CoLiins, W. J.
Hosss, B. G. Fatcone, J. A. IANNAZZI, J. C.
Roy, P.H. St. Georce-Hystop, R.E.
TANzI, M. A. BOTHWELL, M. Upapuyaya, P.
Harper, A. E. GoupstEeIn, D. L. Hoover,
J. L. Baper, M. A. Spence, J. J. MULVIHILL,
A.S. AYLsworTH, J. M. Vance, G.O.D.
ROSSENWASSER, P. C. GASKEL, A. D. Roses,
R.L. Martuza, X.QO. BREAKEFIELD, and
J. F. Guseia. 1987. Genetic linkage of von
Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis to the
nerve growth factor receptor gene. Cell
49:589-594.

SHERRINGTON, R., J. BRYNJOLFSSON, H. PETurRsson, M. PoTTER, K. DuDLEsToN, B. BarraCLOUGH, J. WasmMuTH, M. Dosss, and H.
GuRLING. 1988. Localization of a susceptibility locus for schizophrenia on chromosome 5.
Nature 336:164—167.

Simpson, N. E., K. K. Kipp, P. J. GooDFELLow,
H. McDermip, S. Myers, J. R. Kipp, C. E.
Jackson, A. M. V. Duncan, L. A. FARRER,
K. Brascu, C. CastIGLIONE, M. GENEL, J.
GERTNER, C. R. GREENBERG, J. F. GUSELLA,
J.J. A. HoLDEN, and B. N. Waite. 1987. Assignment of multiple endocrine neoplasia
type 2A to chromosome 10 by linkage studies. Nature 328:528-530.

STEPHENS, J.C., M.L. CavanauGH, M.I.
GrRaDIE, M.L. Mapor, and K.K. Kipp.
1990. Mapping the human genome: Current
status. Science 250:237-244.

Tsui, L.C., M. BucHwaLp, D. Barker, J.C.
BRAMAN, R. KNOwLTOoN, J. W. Scoumm, H.
EIBErG, J. Mour, D. KENNEDY, N. PLavsic,
M. Zsica, D. MArkieEwicz, G. AkotTs, V.
Brown, C. HELMs, T. Gravius, C. PARKER,
K. Repixer, and H. Donis-KeLver. 1985,
Cystic fibrosis locus defined by a genetically
linked polymorphic DNA marker. Science
230:1054-1057.

WaLitace, M.R., D. A. Marcuux, L.B.
ANDERSON, R. LETCHER, H. M. ObDEH, A. M.
SAULINO, J. W. FouNTAIN, A. BRERETON, J.
NICHOLSON, A. L. MITCHELL, B. H. BrownSTEIN, and F. S. Cotiins. 1990. Type 1 neurofibromatosis gene: Identification of a large
transcript disrupted in three NFI1 patients.
Science 249:181~186.

WILLARD, H. F., M. SKoinick, P. PEARSON, and
J.-L. MANDEL. 1985. Report of the Commit178 Kidd Social Biology

tee on Human Gene Mapping by recombi- Xue, F.,J.R. Kipp, A. J. Paxstis, C. M. Castl
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:44 08 December 2015

nant DNA techniques. Eighth International
Human Gene Mapping Works (HGM8). Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 40:360-489,

WILLIAMSON, R., A. Bowcockx, K. Kipp, P.

PEARSON, J. SCHMIDTKE, H.S. Cuan, M.
CHIPPERFIELD, D. N. Cooper, J. HEwirT, F.
LewiTTER, B. Maipak, M. Quitt, F. RiccruTi, and R. Track. 1990. Report of the
DNA committee and catalogues of cloned
and mapped genes and DNA polymorphisms. HGM10.5, Cytogenet. Cell Genet.
55:457-778.

 

GLIONE, J. MALLETT, and K. K. Kipp. 1988.
Tyrosine hydroxylase maps to the short arm
of chromosome 11 proximal to the insulin
and HRAS1 loci. Genomics 2:288-293.

Yu, S., M. PriTcHARD, E. Kremer, M. Lyncu, J.

NaANcarrow, E. BAKER, K. Hotman, J.C.
MUuLLEY, S. T. WARREN, D. SCHLESSINGER,
G.R. SuTHERLAND, and R.I. RicuHarps.
1991. Fragile X genotype characterized by an
unstable region of DNA. Science 252:11791181.
