Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

The correspondence of data gathered from
husband and wife: Implications for family planning
studies

Josefina Jayme Card

To cite this article: Josefina Jayme Card (1978) The correspondence of data gathered from
husband and wife: Implications for family planning studies, Social Biology, 25:3, 196-204, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1978.9988338

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1978.9988338

 

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB crs | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
lil Article views: 2
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 6 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

   
    

ek
eas oa

  
 
   

Ne Eee
28

The Correspondence of Data Gathered from
Husband and Wife: Implications for
Family Planning Studies

Josefina Jayme Card

American Institutes for Research
Palo Alto, California

ABSTRACT: Demographic information, nondemographic information, and attitudinal data were
gathered from Filipino and Caucasian married couples in an effort to understand cross-cultural
differences in the antecedents of contraceptive behavior. While the correspondence of demographic data gathered from husband vs. wife was high for both ethnic groups studied, the
correspondence of nondemographic information and of attitudinal data was moderate at best,
especially for Filipinos. Consideration of husband data accounted for discrepancies between
wife’s motivation for fertility control and couple contraceptive behavior and, for Filipinos,
enhanced the predictability of contraceptive behavior over that achievable by Icoking at wife data
alone. These findings point to the importance of collecting and analyzing data from husbands if
one is to understand fertility-related behavior, particulariy in those cultures where couple com
 

munication is low and marital relationships are characterized by husband dominance.

Respondents in fertility-related surveys
have generally been women. One can
speculate on several causes for this sex
bias: (1) Since it is women who bear and
raise children, the ultimate responsibility
for fertility control is traditionally thought
of as lying on their shoulders. (2) Women
are more readily available during the day
than men to serve as study subjects because fewer of them work outside the
home. (3) Women cooperate more freely
with interviewers, especially on sensitive
topics such as contraception and family
planning.

The almost complete dependence of
surveys on data gathered from a single sex
should be examined for potential consequences. In the first place, conception is of
necessity the product of the actions of two
individuals. Since the partners may not
equally desire or wish to prevent a conception, it seems reasonable to hypothesize
that knowledge of the husband’s motivation for fertility control would enhance the
predictability of a couple’s contraceptive

behavior. In the second place, there are
ample data in the literature to demonstrate
the importance of couple communication
and interaction in effective family planning (Rainwater, 1960; Hill et al., 1959;
Michel, 1972).

The present paper will analyze data
gathered from stratified samples of married Filipino migrants and Caucasian controls living in the San Francisco Bay Area
(1) to determine the extent to which information gathered from husband and wife
agree; (2) to examine whether and to what
extent data gathered from the husband
can enhance the predictability of the
couple’s contraceptive behavior; and (3) to
investigate whether cross-cultural differences exist in the extent to which husband
and wife data correspond.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

SAMPLE

One hundred Filipino and fifty Caucasian married couples between the ages of

196

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 25, No. 3

20 and 40 residing in the San Francisco
Bay Area formed the study sample. All
couples were racially homogeneous, i.e.,
husband and wife were either both
Filipino or both Caucasian. The Filipino
sample was stratified by number of years
lived in the United States (less than four
years; four years or more). Both the
Filipino and Caucasian samples were then
further stratified by age of wife (20-30,
31-40) and by socioeconomic status (low,
high!) in an effort to assure that a variety
of age and socioeconomic groups were represented in the study.

The Filipinos were recruited by random
selection from immigrant entry listings at
the Philippine consulate for 1965-76. The
Caucasians were recruited by random
selection from telephone street directories
of the Filipinos’ neighborhoods. These
methods were augmented by personal re
ferral methods for about one-fourth of the

cases for cells in the sampling design
difficult to fill.

Husbands and wives were interviewed
separately but simultaneously by a pair of
interviewers matched for race and sex
with respondents. Aj] interviews were
conducted in the language of respondents’
choice. For the vast majority of cases (95
per cent of Filipinos and 100 per cent of
Caucasians), the choice was English; a
small number of interviews were conducted in Tagalog, the Philippine national
language.

Because stratification procedures were
used in designing the sample and because
nonrandom (personal referral) methods
were used to recruit a small proportion of
the cases interviewed, findings from the

! Socioeconomic status was computed as a linear
combination of husband’s education and occupation
(cf. Hollingshead and Redlich, 1958). For purposes
of stratification, a couple was considered to be of
high socioeconomic status if the husband either (1)
had some post-college education or (2) worked as an
executive, proprietor, manager, administrator, or
professional. All other couples were considered to be
of low socioeconomic status.

Correspondence of Data

197

study dealing with means and percentages
should not be generalized to the entire
population of Caucasians or Filipino migrants in the San Francisco area. However,
findings dealing with relationships among
the variables studied (as is the case with
most results presented in this paper) are on
much firmer ground.

VARIABLES

A model of fertility-related decision
making was developed from a review of
the literature on determinants of individual fertility and contraceptive use. The
model (Card and Wood, 1977) postulated
that fertility is a function of a gamut of
individual, dyadic, and environmental
factors, to wit: the international and national] political and socioeconomic context;
individual demographic background factors; individual personality traits and general value orientation; individual life
events and experiences; husband-wife
communication patterns; cultural norms
regarding family size; individual values of
children; the availability of family planning clinics, supplies, and information;
individual! knowledge and attitudes about
birth control; individual motivation for
fertility control; and contraceptive behavior.

In constructing the interview questionnaire, we spelled out salient variables
typifying each factor in the model and
then used each one as one or more interview items. Table 1 lists the attitudinal
scale variables created by combining
interview items and _ provides their
coefficient alpha reliability index. For
purposes of this paper, the contents of the
interview were categorized into three
variable types—demographic information
(e.g., husband’s job, number of children);
nondemographic information (e.g., extent
of communication between husband and
wife on specific topics, composition of
their friends); and attitudinal information
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

198 Card

Social Biology

TABLE 1

RELIABILITY OF ATTITUDINAL SCALE VARIABLES

Scale Variable

Planfulness® .. 0. 2. ceed cease ek oe we ewe ed Bae
Planfulness: Family planning subscale...........
People orientation .......... 0. cece e eee eee teeee
Preference for American culture} ...............
MOGGTRIGS «62 cca po mad we ee ee Kee oe He
Family size concept 0 as cacu sss ve ce ca cee wna es
Belief in egalitarianism of sex roles .............
Bole OF COUGMON. «os icon cacuans one oe new ea OOD
Attitudes toward children§ .................20.
Attitudes toward abortion .................005Attitudes toward population controll}............
Motivation for fertility control .................

* From Miller, unpublished.

: From Sn ‘and Taketes, 1966.

From Gough, 1974.
(e.g., attitudes toward abortion, attitudes
toward children). The degree of overlap
between husband’s and wife’s responses to
each of these variable types was then
compared and contrasted. It was hypothesized that the degree of overlap would be
greatest for the factual demographic information variables and lowest for the
subjective attitudinal variables. Of special
interest was the degree of overlap between
husband’s and wife’s reportings of nondemographic information about their life
together. To the extent that this overlap
resembled that of the demographic information, such data could reasonably be
gathered from one spouse alone. To the
extent that this overlap resembled that of
the subjective attitudinal variables, it
would seem advisable to gather such data
from both spouses.

RESULTS

CORRESPONDENCE OF DATA GATHERED
FROM HUSBAND AND WIFE

Table 2 presents the correlations between husband and wife scores separately
for Filipino and Caucasian couples for 4
demographic information variables, 25

Interpretation Coefficient
of High Score No. of Items Alpha

on Variable in Scale Reliability
High 8 0.61
High 4 0.74
High 4 0.47
High 7 0.59
High 6 0.55
Large 2 0.54
Strong 8 0.70
Active 7 0.51
Favorable 14 0.82
Favorable 6 6.84
Favorable 7 0.69
Strong 8 0.91

nondemographic information variables,
and 21 attitudinal variables. As expected,
the correlation for the demographic information variables was extremely high for
both groups (average correlation, 0.95 for
the 100 Filipino couples and 0.98 for the
50 Caucasian couples), and the average
correlation for the attitudinal variables
was much lower (0.25 for Filipinos; 0.45
for Caucasians). The degree of overlap between husband’s and wife’s responses to
nondemographic information items resembled that obtained for the subjective
attitudinal variables to a much greater extent than it did that obtained for the demographic variables (0.25 for Filipinos;
0.38 for Caucasians).

Caucasian couples had higher correspondence correlations than Filipino
couples on 38 of the 46 (82.6 per cent)
variables for which data from both ethnic
groups were available. There are several
possible explanations for this finding. (1)
Filipinos may have had more difficulty
than Caucasians in understanding the
interview questions because of their
poorer mastery of English, even though
precautions were taken to attenuate the
influence of language on the study’s
findings. Each respondent chose the lan
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 25, No. 3 Correspondence of Data 199

TABLE 2

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN DATA GATHERED FROM HUSBAND VS. WIFE, BY TYPE OF DATA AND ETHNIC
BACKGROUND OF COUPLE

r, Fil. r, Cauc.

Husbands Husbands

& Wives & Wives

(Y= 100 (V = 50

Name of Variable couples} couples)

Demographic information variables

Husband's job.............. 0.90 0.97
Wife's Job scncewnemacacnans 0.94 0.94
No. of years married ........ 0.99 1.00
No. of children from
present marriage.......... 0.96 0.99
Average: All demographic
information variables.... 0.95 0.98

Nondemographic information variables
Able to save money

monthly? ................ 0.17 0.42
Frequency of birth

control usage............. 0.70 0.75
Job or health changes

in past year? ............. 0.25 0.28
Problems with children

in past year? ............. 0.32 0.36
Per cent social time

spent with Americans ..... 0.31 N/A
Per cent social time

spent with Filipinos ....... 0.26 N/A
Per cent close friends

who are Filipinos ......... 0.19 N/A
Which spouse responsible

for:

Childcare ................ 0.36 0.30

Child discipline........... 0.25 0.41

Birth contro! decisions..... 0.16 0.12

Cleaning home ........... 0.23 0.54

Home repairs ............ 0.27 0.21

Cooking ..............05. 0.48 0.76

Earning a living .......... 0.44 0.65

Financial management .. 0.42 0.60

To what extent do husband
and wife talk about:

Children..............24. —0.02 0.70
Politics ...............055 0.24 0.36
Work .............0ceeee 0.37 0.15
Relatives .............00- —-0.08  —0.12
Life goals................ 0.15 0.29
Money ...........002000: 0.18 0.46
Birth control ............. 0.08 0.31
No. of children........... 0.27 0.24
SOX wo. cece cece ene eee eeese 0.13 0.26

yr, Fil. r, Cauc.

Husbands Husbands

& Wives & Wives

(V=100 (N = 50

Name of Variable couples) couples)

Nondemographic information variables
—Continued
Making sex interesting .... 0.07 0.35
Average: All nondemographic information
variables .............. 0.25 0.39

Attitudinal variables
Educational aspirations

for SOMS ...........0000e- 0.05 0.40
Educational aspirations

for daughters............. 0.14 0.30
Happiness self-rating ........ 0.00 0.25
Ideal family size ............ 0,08 0.36
Number preference for

CHUGQEN 6 ca cas ug occas aus 0.15 0.53
Sex preference for

children ..............20. 0.18 0.28
Want another child? ........ 0.71 0.84
No. of additional

children wanted .......... 0.57 0.75
Satisfaction with birth

control method used ...... 0.44 0.57
Planfulness* ............... 0.29 0.32
Planfulness: family

planning subscale* ........ 0.37 0.44
People orientation* ......... 0.03 0.06
Preference for American

over Filipino culture* ..... 0.34 N/A
Modernity* ..............4. 0.29 0.41
Family size concepts* ....... 0.05 0.28
Belief in egalitarianism

of sex roles* ............. 0.10 0.68
Role of children* ........... 0.14  —0.08
Attitudes toward

children® 1.0.0... 0.000000. 0.29 0.44
Attitudes toward

abortion® ................ 0.24 0.81
Attitudes toward population

control*® ............0008- 0.04 0.63
Motivation for fertility

control* ...............-. 0.61 0.80

Average: All attitudinal

variables .............. 0.24 0.45

* These variables were measured by combining responses to several interview items into a single scale score. Psychometric properties of the

scales are given in Table 1.

guage in which the interview: was conducted and also was told that individual
items could be rephrased in the native
dialect if not completely understood. DeSpite these precautions, this explanation
remains a possible one. (2) Filipino couples
may not communicate with each other to

the extent that Caucasian couples do. This
explanation is congruent with findings
from other studies (see Rosario’s 1970 review of the literature) which show that
couples from developing countries do not
communicate as much as couples from developed countries. (3) Filipino husbands
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

200

and wives may have lower correspondence
correlations because they come from more
diverse backgrounds than do Caucasians.
The correlation between parents’ socioeconomic status for husband and wife was
0.23 for Filipinos and 0.37 for Caucasians.
The correlation between husband’s and
wife’s educational attainment was 0.27 for
Filipinos and 0.77 for Caucasians. Thus,
Filipino husbands and wives are demographically more different from one another
than are Caucasians. Their discrepant
backgrounds could lead to differences in
their perceptions of various aspects of
their joint lives.

These explanations are not mutually exclusive. All may contribute in varying degrees to the finding that the correspondence between data gathered from
Filipino husbands and wives is lower than
the correspondence of data gathered from
Caucasian. husbands and wives. Whatever the appropriate explanation(s), the
finding has important methodological implications for fertility studies in developing
countries. It is important in these settings
to gather any nondemographic data,
whether informational or attitudinal, from
both spouses, whenever feasible. This section has shown that such data may not
always correspond. The next sections will
show that husband data enhance the predictability of couple contraceptive use
over the predictability possible with wife
data alone. Indeed, in the case of
Filipinos, husband data alone are a better

Card

 

Social Biology

predictor of such behavior than are wife
data alone.

CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN WIFE’S MOTIVATION FOR FERTILITY CONTROL AND COUPLE’S
CONTRACEPTIVE BEHAVIOR

Table 3 presents the relationship between the wife’s motivation for fertility
control and the “strength” of the couple’s
contraceptive behavior, separately for
Filipino and Caucasian women in the
sample. Motivation for fertility control
was conceptualized as the perception that
the disadvantages of having a child at a
particular time outweigh the advantages,
i.e., the strength of a couple’s resolve not
to have a child at a particular time. It was
measured by eight items. Six items asked
for respondents’ perceptions of the advantages, disadvantages, and degree to which
a child was wanted at present and within
the next five years. The remaining two
items asked respondents if they ever
wanted another child and, if so, how
many more children they wanted. Female
respondents were divided into three motivation subgroups depending on whether
their motivation scale scores were lower
than, within, or greater than one-half
standard deviation from the female respondent mean. (If the variable were normally distributed, this classification
scheme would put approximately . onethird of respondents in each subgroup.)

Strength of contraceptive behavior was
operationally defined as a combination of

 

TABLE 3

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MOTIVATION FOR FERTILITY CONTROL AND STRENGTH OF CONTRACEPTIVE
BEHAVIOR FOR FILIPINO VS. CAUCASIAN WIVES

FILIPINO WIVES (.V = 100)
STRENGTH OF CONTRACEPTIVE BEHAVIOR

CAUCASIAN WIVES (V = 50)
MOTIVATION STRENGTH OF CONTRACEPTIVE BEHAVIOR

FOR FERTILITY

CONTROL Low Medium High Low Medium High
Low ...... 20-02 e eee 24 14 8 7 3 4
Medium ............ 7 16 9 2 3 8
High ........0..000- 7 7 8 2 2 19

 
BS

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 25, No. 3

husband’s and wife’s responses to two
interview items: (1) Do you and your
husband/wife use birth control at present?
(four response options ranging from “yes,
all of the time” to “no”). (2) Which methods, if any, are you and your husband/wife
using at present? (response options: condom, diaphragm, foam, I.U.D., pill,
rhythm, male sterilization, female sterilization, withdrawal, other).

The first item was scored on a 5-point
scale: 5 = yes, all the time; 3 = yes, most
of the time; 1 = yes, sometimes; 0 = no.
The second item was also scored on a
5-point scale: 5 = male or female sterilization; 4 = IUD or pill; 3 = condom or
diaphragm; 2 = foam; 1 = rhythm or
withdrawal; 0 = none. When more than
one birth control method was being used,
the one with the lower score was deemed
to be the operative one. When contradictory information on either the first or second item was obtained from husband and
wife, the response with the lower score
was deemed to be the operative one.
Scores on both items were summed to get
the strength of contraceptive behavior
score. As can be seen from the scoring
method, only one strength of contraceptive behavior score was assigned per
couple. This score was then attributed to
both husband and wife. To obtain the
subgroup categories given in Table 3, contraceptive behavior total scores were used
to divide wives into low, medium, and
high subgroups in a manner analogous to
that described for the motivation for fertility control variable.

The cross-tabulation of motivation and
behavior subgroups in Table 3 shows that
of the 100 Filipino wives in the sample 48
per cent had contraceptive behavior “‘congruent” with their motivation for fertility
control (motivation and behavior both

‘low, both medium, or both high); 31 per

cent had behavior scores higher than their
motivation warranted (motivation low but

 

Correspondence of Data

 

201

behavior medium or high; motivation medium but behavior high); 21 per cent had
behavior scores lower than their motivation warranted (motivation high but behavior low or medium; motivation medium but behavior low). The corresponding percentages for the 50 Caucasian
wives in the sample were 58, 30, and 12
per cent. These figures show that Caucasian women succeed in translating their
motivation into behavior to a greater extent than do Filipinos. Only 12 per cent of
Caucasian women had contraceptive behavior weaker than their motivation warranted. For Filipino women, the figure
was 75 per cent higher (21 per cent).

USING HUSBAND DATA TO ACCOUNT FOR DISCREPANCIES BETWEEN WIFE’S MOTIVATION

FOR FERTILITY CONTROL AND COUPLE CONTRACEPTIVE BEHAVIOR

Can husband’s motivation for fertility
control account for the discrepancies in
wife’s motivation and behavior noted in
Table 3°? Table 4 presents relevant data.
Column 2 of Table 4 gives the average
difference between motivation scores of
Filipino husbands and wives for (1)
couples in which contraceptive behavior
was stronger than wife’s motivation warranted; (2) couples in which contraceptive
behavior was in keeping with wife’s motivation; (3) couples in which contraceptive
behavior was weaker than wife’s motivation warranted; and (4) the total Filipino
sample. Column 5 gives analogous data
for Caucasians. Notice that for both ethnic
groups, a husband’s motivation for fertility control was, on the whole, lower than
his wife’s: (total sample data). This finding
is possibly attributable to the fact that it is
the wife who will bear the brunt of rearing
any children to be born. Children affect a
woman’s life more than her husband’s, so
her motivation to control future births is,
generally speaking, stronger.

Of interest to this paper is the clear contribution of husband’s motivation for fer
 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

202 Card

Social Biology

TABLE 4

CONTRIBUTION OF HUSBAND’S MOTIVATION FOR
FERTILITY CONTROL TO STRENGTH OF CONTRACEPTIVE BEHAVIOR

 

 

FILIPINOS
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
WIFE'S MOTIVATION FOR
FERTILITY CONTROL AND

COUPLE’s STRENGTH OF Between Husband's &

CONTRACEPTIVE BEHAVIOR No. Wife’s Motivation
Behavior > motivation . 31 1.06
Behavior = motivation . 48 —1.32
Behavior < motivation . 21 —4.74

Total ............... 100 —1.30

Average Differences No. (%) of Husbands

CAUCASIANS

No. (%) of Husbands

Average Differences with Motivation

with Motivation Between Husband’s & Less than

Less than Wife's No. Wife’s Motivation Wife's
19 (61.3) 15 0.16 8 (53.3)
31 (64.6) 29 —1.37 18(62. 1)
16 (76.2) 6 —§5.21 5 (83.3)
66 (66.0) 50 ~1.37 31 (62.0)

 

tility control to contraceptive behavior, as
shown in Columns 2 and 5 of Table 4. For
the Filipino and Caucasian subgroups in
which couple contraceptive behavior was
stronger than wife’s motivation, husband’s
motivation was also stronger than wife’s
motivation (presumably influencing use of
stronger contraceptive methods). For the
Filipino and Caucasian subgroups in
which contraceptive behavior was congruent with wife’s motivation, husband’s
motivation was about equal to the husband mean (slightly less than wife’s motivation). For those subgroups in which
contraceptive behavior was weaker than
wife’s motivation, husband’s motivation
was significantly lower than wife’s motivation. The data in Columns 3 and 6 lead to
the same conclusion. Overall, 66 per cent
of Filipino and 62 per cent of Caucasian
husbands had lower scores on motivation
for fertility control than did their wives.
For subgroups in which couple contraceptive behavior was stronger than wife’s

motivation, this percentage was lower
(61.3 per cent for Filipinos; 53.3 per cent
for Caucasians). For subgroups in which
couple contraceptive behavior was weaker
than wife’s motivation, this percentage
was significantly higher (76.2 per cent for
Filipinos; 83.3 per cent for Caucasians),
Table 5 shows that the impact of motivation for fertility control on contraceptive
behavior (as measured by the, correlation
and the regression beta weight) was moderately strong, especially for Caucasians.
As mentioned earlier, Caucasians appear
to be more able than Filipinos to translate
their motivation for fertility control
into appropriate contraceptive behavior.
When spouse’s motivation level was controlled for (see the relative magnitude of
the beta weight in Row 2, Table 5), the
relative contribution of Caucasian wives’
motivation to contraceptive behavior increased slightly, but the relative contribution of Filipino wives’ motivation decreased significantly. These findings indi
TABLE 5

STRENGTH OF CONTRACEPTIVE BEHAVIOR AS A FUNCTION OF
HUSBAND'S VS. WIFE’S MOTIVATION FOR FERTILITY CONTROL

 

STRENGTH] OF CONTRACEPTIVE BEHAVIOR
AND MOTIVATION FOR FERTILITY CONTROL

ry strength of contraceptive behavior

and motivation for fertility control ..........
Beta weight in rdgression equation:

Strength of contraceptive behavior

= male motivation and female

motivation for fertility control ..............

Husbands Wives

FILIPINOS CAUCASIANS

Husbands Wives

0.37 0.33 0.53 0.54

0.22 0.13 0.25 0.31

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

Vol. 25, No. 3

cate that Filipino wives’ motivation does
not influence couple contraceptive behavior directly, but rather operates via husbands’ motivation. Caucasian women
exert more independent influence on
couple contraceptive behavior.

A stepwise regression of strength of contraceptive behavior was conducted, separately for Filipino and Caucasian wives.
Those variables listed in Table 2 which
had a significant correlation with strength
of contraceptive behavior were used as
predictor variables in the regressions. The
five best wife predictors explained 31 per
cent of the variance In couple contraceptive behavior for the Filipino sample, and
61 per cent of the variance for the Caucasian sample.* After adjusting for differential number of cases and predictor variables input, we find these figures shrink
slightly (to 26 per cent and 55 per cent,
respectively), but the overall pattern of
results remains the same, i.e., Caucasian
wife data can explain about twice as much
of the variance in couple contraceptive
behavior as Filipino wife data.

Husbands’ motivation for fertility control was then added to each regression
equation to determine if this single variable could enhance the predictability of
couple contraceptive behavior over that
achievable with wife data alone. For
Caucasians, husbands’ motivation did not
add anything to the amount of explainable
variance (adjusted R? = 0.55; F = 1.19,
not significant) in contraceptive behavior.
For Filipinos, husband’s motivation
added slightly to the amount of explainable variance (adjusted R? = 0.28, F =
4.21, p < 0.001); consideration of the next
four husband predictors continued to add
even more predictive power (adjusted R?
= 0.36). These findings reinforce the previously mentioned recommendation that
fertility surveys, especially those in devel
2 The content of obtained regression equations lies
outside the scope of this paper (see Card, 1977).

Correspondence of Data

203

oping countries, include data from husbands to enhance understanding of
fertility-related behavior.

SUMMARY

Most fertility surveys have concentrated
on data collected from females alone. In
the present study 100 Filipino and 50
Caucasian married couples living in the
San Francisco Bay Area were interviewed, separately but simultaneously, in
an effort to document cross-cultural differences in antecedents of contraceptive
usage. Interview data were analyzed: (1)
to determine the extent to which information gathered from husband and wife
agreed; and (2) to examine whether and to
what extent data gathered from the husband could enhance the predictability of
couple contraceptive usage over the predictability possible using wife data alone.

With respect to the first objective, the
findings were as follows. (1) The correspondence between husband and wife reports of demographic information was extremely high for both ethnic groups (=
0.95). (2) Interspouse correspondence on
nondemographic information (aspects of
their life together) was, however, no
higher than the correspondence between
their individual attitudes (between 0.25
and 0.45). (3) On all variable types, the
correspondence between information provided by Caucasian husbands and wives
was higher than the correspondence for
Filipino couples.

With respect to the second objective,
the findings were as follows. (1) The relationship between fertility control motivation and behavior was stronger for Caucasian wives, i.e., Caucasian wives were
better able than their Filipino counterparts to translate their motivation for fertility control into congruent contraceptive
behavior. (2) For both ethnic groups, consideration of husbands’ motivation for fertility control was able to account for conDownloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

 

204.

tradictions between wife’s motivation for
fertility control and couple contraceptive
behavior. (3) Adding husband’s motivation for fertility control to the regression
equation of best wife predictors did not
contribute significantly to the predictability of contraceptive behavior for the
Caucasian group, but it did for the
Filipino group, possibly because wife data
alone could account for over half of
the variance in Caucasian contraceptive
behavior but less than a third of the variance in Filipino contraceptive behavior.
These findings point to the importance
of collecting and analyzing data from husbands in fertility studies, especially when

Card

 

Social Biology

these studies take place in developing
countries like the Philippines where
couples may communicate with less scope
and frequency than do couples in developed countries and where husbands may
dominate family-related decision making.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This study was conducted with funds provided by the National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development (Contract HD-~52808 and Grant HD~-10684). The author
wishes to thank Dr. David E. Gross for his
help with computer analysis of the data
gathered and Dr. Warren B. Miller for his
helpful critique of an earlier version of this
paper.

REFERENCES

ARNOLD, F., R. A. BULATAO, C. BURIPAKDI, B. J.
CHUNG, J. T. FAWCETT, T. IRITANI, S. J. LEE,
and T. S. Wu. 1975. The value of children: A
cross-national study. East-West Population Institute, Honolulu.

CARD, J. J. 1977. Cross-cultural differences in the
antecedents and consequences of the motivation
for fertility control, p. 41-76. In J. J. Card (ed.),
Antecedents and consequences of the motivation
for fertility control: A cross-cultural study of
Filipino migrants and Caucasian controls. American Institutes for Research, Palo Alto.

CARD, J. J., and W. J. Woop. 1977. Determinants of
individual fertility and contraceptive use: A review
and synthesis of the literature, p. 1-40. In J. J.
Card (ed.), Antecedents and consequences of the
motivation for fertility control: A cross-cultural
study of Filipino migrants and Caucasian controls.
American Institutes for Research, Palo Alto.

GouGH, H. G. 1974. Population policy and social
attitude questionnaire. Paper presented at symposium on cross-cultural psychology, Western
Psychological Association meetings, San Francisco.

 

HI, R., J. Stycos, and K. Back. 1959. The family and population control. University of North
Carolina Press, Chapel Hill. 
HOLLINGSHEAD, A. A., and F. C. REDLICH. 1958.
Social class and mental illness. Wiley, New York.

JAYME, J. 1971. Demographic and socio-psychological determinants of the migration of highly trained
Filipinos to the United States. Doctoral dissertation, Department of Psychology, Carnegie-Mellon
University, Pittsburgh.

MICHEL, A. 1972. Prediction of a theoretical model
in family planning sociology. In B. E. Cogswell
and M. B. Sussman (eds.), Cross-national family
research. E. J. Brill, Leiden, The Netherlands.

MILLER, W. B. Description of instruments used in a
research project on the psychological aspects of
fertility behavior in women. Unpublished.

RAINWATER, L. 1960. And the poor get children.
Quadrangle Books, Chicago.

RosARio, F. Z. 1970. Husband-wife interaction and
family planning acceptance: A survey of the literature. East-West Population Institute, Honolulu.

SMITH, D. H., and A. INKELES. 1966. The O.M.
scale: A comparative socio-psychological measure
of individual modernity. Sociometry 29:353-377.

 

 

 
