Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Nominations sought for Mindel C. Sheps Award

To cite this article: (1977) Nominations sought for Mindel C. Sheps Award, Social Biology, 24:3,
251-252, DOI: 10.1080/19485565.1977.9988289

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1977.9988289

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

%
(g Submit your article to this journal @

lil Article views: 1

»
Q View related articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

 

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:37
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

 

Communications

Lalor Foundation Research Fellowship

Program for 1978

The Lalor Foundation has announced
its 1978 program of postdoctorate grants
for research in special areas of mammalian
reproductive physiology.

The Foundation will make grants up to
$14,500 each to qualified tax-exempt institutions for conduct of approved projects
up to one year. Foreign institutions can in
general achieve similar eligibility.

The applicant institution has the obligation and freedom to make its own designation of a Lalor Fellow for conduct of the
research from among its own personnel or
elsewhere. The Fellow designated should
have at least the equivalent of the Ph.D.
or M.D. degree. Upper age limit is 35
years.

Applications are restricted to research
projects bearing on: (a) early amniocen
Nominations Sought for Mindel
Award

Nominations are requested for the Mindel C. Sheps Award in Mathematical Demography, to be presented for the third
time in 1978 and every second year thereafter. The award has been established by
the Mindel C. Sheps Memorial Fund and
is sponsored by the Population Association
of America and the University of North
Carolina School of Public Health. It is
given in recognition of outstanding contributions to mathematica] demography or
demographic methodology.

 

tesis in fetal development, or alternative
approaches to evaluation of fetal dysfunction, dysgenic factors, or other disabilities,
either congenital or environmentally ascribed, and means toward their disposition; or (b) cervical and uterine phsyiology
and phenomena of basic or potential relevancy to pregnancy interruption, particularly for second trimester termination; or
(c) biochemistry and other phenomena of
uterine gestation in the marsupial as may
concern or be applied to events in the
pregnancy of primates.

Forms and details for institution application are available from the Lalor Foundation, 4400 Lancaster Pike, Wilmington,
Del. 19805. Deadline for filing is January
15, 1978. Appointments will be announced March 15, 1978.

C. Sheps

Individuals should be nominated for
this award on the basis of important contributions to knowledge, either in the form
of a single piece of work or a continuing
record of high accomplishment. The
award is intended to honor an individual
whose future research achievements are
likely to continue a past record of excellence rather than as a tribute to a demographer who is ending an active professional career. There are no specific requirements as to age, nationality, or place

251
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:37 08 December 2015

252

of residence, nor is the award restricted to
members of the Population Association of
America.

The award is named for Mindel C.
Sheps who, at her death in January, 1973,
was Professor of Biostatistics at the University of North Carolina School of Public
Health and Second Vice-President of the
Population Association of America. She
enjoyed a distinguished career as physician, biostatistician, and demographer,
applying mathematics and statistics to
studies in these areas. She received great
recognition for studies of the relationships
between the biological determinants of
fertility and observable demographic variables. This work focused on the development of mathematical and computer simulation models of human reproduction and
population change and on analysis of measurement problems in actual populations.
She served as advisor or consultant to
many international projects. Her extensive publications include several books,
Public Health and Population Change; On

Communications

Social Biology

the Measurement of Human Fertility, an
annotated translation of work by Louis
Henry; and Mathematical Models of Conception and Birth.

The recipient of the Mindel C. Sheps
Award will be selected by a committee
appointed by the President of the Population Association of America and the Dean
of the University of North Carolina School
of Public Health. Presentation of the
award, comprising a certificate and
$1,000, will be made at the annual meeting of the Population Association of America. The recipient of the first award was
Ansley J. Coale and the recipient of the
second award was Nathan Keyfitz.

To be_considered for the third award,
nominations must be received by February 15, 1978. Nomination forms may be
obtained from: Chairman, Mindel C.
Sheps Award Committee, Population Association of America, P.O. Box 14182,
Benjamin Franklin Station, Washington,
D.C. 20044.

Opening for a Socicbiologist, University of

Wisconsin-Madison

The University of Wisconsin-Madison is
seeking a Ph.D. Assistant Professor for the
Institute for Environmental Studies and
the Department of Anthropology. Candidates should have a strong background in
biology and the social sciences with evidence of broad research interests. The
successful applicant will take responsibility for a core course on “The Social Science
Perspective in Environmental Studies.”
There will be an opportunity for research
and teaching of higher-level courses in an
appropriate interest area. The appointment is for a two-year period with the

possibility of an additional appointment.

Send curriculum vitae with letter describing research interests and experience
to: Chairman, Search and Screen Committee, 70 Science Hall, 550 N. Park St.,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706. Include the names of three
persons from whom references may be solicited. Applications close December 1,
1977. The University of Wisconsin-Madison is an equal opportunity employer.
Women and minorities are encouraged to
apply.
