Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

 

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

Son preference among Filipino Muslims: A causal
analysis

William F. Stinner & Paul Douglas Mader

To cite this article: William F. Stinner & Paul Douglas Mader (1975) Son preference
among Filipino Muslims: A causal analysis, Social Biology, 22:2, 181-188, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1975.9988163

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1975.9988163

 

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.
(FB ann | 7
Submit your article to this journal @
ali] Article views: 1
N
Q View related articles 4

(7) Citing articles: 1 View citing articles G

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:35

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Son Preference Among Filipino Muslims:

A Causal Analysis

 

 

William F, Stinner and Paul Douglas Mader

Department of Sociology and Population Issues Research Office,
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania; and
Department of Sociology and Anthropology, University of South Alabama, Mobile, Alabema

The begetting of sons has occupied a
prominent position in a number of Asian
religious systems and, as such, has served
to reinforce large family-size norms in
societies faced with high and variable mortality. For example, in Hinduism, sons,
through religious intervention, are seen as
potential saviors for the father and the
ancestral past (Fagley, 1967, p. 78). In
Buddhism, sons are viewed as potential
religious functionaries, i.e., prospective
candidates for the Buddhist monkhood,
thus earning additional merit, not only
for themselves, but also for the parents
who gave them life (Ling, 1969, p. 55).
Among Muslim populations, sons are
viewed as having religious utility through
their religious intervention before and
after death (Kirk, 1966, p. 568).

However, these religious considerations
are often intertwined with other economic
and sociological considerations among the
peasant constituencies of these various
religious systems. For example, sons in
peasant societies are considered to have
economic utility in terms of assistance in
agricultural production and provision of
security in parental old age (Freedman,
1963, p. 230; Kirk, 1966, p. 568; ElHamamsy, 1972, p. 353). Similarly, in

these societies where kinship looms important and stress is placed on the continuity of the kinship lineage, the presence
of sons is seen as insuring the perpetuation of the family name and the continuation and extension of the kinship lineage
(Kirk, 1966, p. 568; El-Hamamsy, 1972,
p. 353). Moreover, within the patriarchal
patrilocal complex, the status and prestige
of women is directly linked to the reproductive function and specifically the bearing of male children (El-Hamamsy, 1972,
p. 354). In sum, it becomes difficult to
disentangle those effects on son preference
emanating from religious considerations
from the constellation of folk mores characterizing the social system of peasants in
general (see, for example, El-Hamamsy,
1972; Kirk, 1966, p. 568-569).

The foregoing points are aptly stressed
when we consider reasons advanced for
son preference among Muslims, to wit,
lineage continuation, female subordination,
kin strength in village conflict, the nature
of the inheritance system, economic security, and religious interventon before
and after death (see Kirk, 1966, p. 568;
El-Hamamsy, 1972, p. 353-354). As can
be seen, this listing contains items from
a number of institutional domains such as

181
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

182 Stinner and Mader

the economic system, kinship structure,
and female roles, over and above strictly
religious considerations. Alternatively, it
remains problematic as to whether son
preference pervades all subgroups within
Muslim society.

This analysis represents an exploratory
attempt to gain a better appreciation of
the relative efficacy of several of these
analytical dimensions in explaining relative son preference, i.e., the preference
for sons as opposed to daughters. The
investigation focuses on the Muslim population residing in the southern islands of
Mindanao and Sulu in the Philippines. In
a previous study, we found that Filipino
Muslims tended to exibit a greater relative preference for both more sons and
more sons than daughters than other subgroups in the Philippine population (Stinner and Mader, 1975). This research aims
at evaluating the extent to which son preference varies among subgroups within the
Filipino Muslim population.

Five major questions are addressed in
this investigation. First, is there an association between religious integration and
son preference? In other words, are women
who are more integrated into the Muslim
religion more likely to exhibit a greater
degree of son preference than less integrated women? Second, is there a relationship between household economic status and son preference? Do females from
high economic status families opt for sons
as opposed to daughters more so than females from low economic status families,
for example, to consolidate the high economic status of the family? Conversely,
does the precarious economic situation of
low income Muslim females provide a
motivational base for son preference to
enhance prospects for economic mobility?
Third, is there an association between female educational status and son preference? Would we anticipate that the higher

Social Biology

the educational status of Muslim females
the less likely they would be to view their
household status as predicated on the bearing of more sons than daughters? Likewise, it could possibly be argued that more
highly educated Muslim women would
specify preferences as to the sex composition of children more on an individual
basis divorced to some degree from the
preferences of the broader kinship structure. Fourth, to what extent do each of
these three factors retain independent
effects on son and daughter preference
when considered simultaneously? Fifth,
how do son and daughter preference mediate between the above three factors and
total ideal family size?

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The data used in this study are drawn
from a nationwide survey of 9,234 evermarried Filipino women conducted in May
and June of 1972 by the Philippine Bureau of the Census. This present exploratory research focuses on a subsample of
these women, namely 153 ever-married
Muslim women aged 20-34 residing in
rural households on the southern Philippine Islands of Mindanao and Sulu.

The preference data are derived from
an initial question with subsequent probes.
The initial question was: “If you could
start married life all over again up to the
time you reach 49 years of age, how many
children would you want to have?” If
respondents answered with such comments
as “up to fate, God, chance,” the following
question was asked: “Many people feel as
you do, but still they have some idea of
what they would want God (or fate or
chance) to send them. How about you?
How many children would you have liked
to have?” These gestions were followed
by: “Among these children, how many
boys and girls would you want to have?”

Repondents were then given the oppor
 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 22, No. 2

tunity to list the number of boys and girls
they preferred or whether they were “indifferent.” Of the original 207 eligible
respondents, 53 were eliminated from the
sample because they specified “indifference.” This response could be construed
as no preference or, perhaps, resignation
to the will of Allah. Only one woman was
eliminated because of nonresponse.

Sex preference is related to three independent variables derived from our three
constructs, i.e., religious integration, household economic status, and female educational status. Religious integration is
judged by the number of times respondents attend religious services. This indicator is the only “religiosity” related item
included in the survey; therefore, we are
forced to live with it, although with full
recognition of its inchoate nature. Household economic status is measured by the
annual income (in pesos) of the family
from all sources. Finally, female educational status is evaluated by the number
of years of formal educational attainment
achieved by the woman.

Son Preference Among Filipino Muslims

 

183

There are two phases to the analysis.
The first phase consists of an assessment
of differentials in the number of sons and
daughters preferred for each of the three
independent variables. This section is
followed by a path analysis setup. First,
total family size preferences are decomposed into the son and daughter components. Second, the relative effects of the
three exogenous variables, i.e., religious
integration, household economic status,
and female educational status, on son and
daughter preference, respectively, are assessed. The three exogenous variables are
treated as dichotomous dummy variables,
with the same breaking points used as in
phase one above. Third, an investigation
of the means by which the three exogenous
variables transmit their impact on total
family size preferences (i.e., via son preference or daughter preference) is conducted.

RESULTS

Table 1 contains the mean number of
children, sons, and daughters preferred by

TABLE 1

Mean NuMBER OF CHILDREN, Sows, AND DAUGHTERS PREFERRED BY RELIGIOUS INTEGRATION,
Hovusenorp Economic Status, AnD Femate Epucationat Status: Ever-MARRIED
Musims Women, Acep 20-34, Resipinc mv Rurat AREAS OF MINDANAO AND SULU

 

 

Mean Noumeer or CHILDREN

 

RAaTrIo
SELECTED Total (Sons/ No. oF
CHARACTERISTICS Children Sons Daughters DAUGHTERS) RESPONDENTS
Religious integration
Religious service attendance
Once per week or more ...... . 5.86 3.15 2.67 1.18 117
Less than once per week ...... 4.56 2.28 2.28 1.00 36
Ratio (High/Low) ......e.e+¢ 1.28 1.38 1.17 TT oo
Household economic status
Annual household income in pesos
3,000 pesos or MOre .....e0e0- 5.89 3.19 2.70 1.18 53
Less than 3,000 pesos ......... 5.31 2.81 2.50 1.12 100
Ratio (High/Low) ........06. 1.11 1.14 1.08 oe oe
Female educational status
Years of formal schooling
Four years or more ....... eT 4,83 2.48 2.35 1.07 48
Less than four years ...... ee 5.83 3.15 2.68 1.23 105
Ratio (High/Low) .......ce0. 0.83 0.79 0.88 eae PTT
Total «issisawte hide wan otis hee ee 5.51 2.94 2.57 1.18 153

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

184 Stinner and Mader

women who gave a specific numerical response to the question. As the table
shows, higher religious integration and
household economic status and lower female educational status are associated
with larger family-size preferences. More
specifically, Muslim women with high religious integration enunciated total family
size preferences 28 per cent higher than
women with low religious integration
(5.86 vs. 4.56) and women residing in high
income households stated preferences 11
per cent higher than women in low income
households (5.89 vs. 5.31). The overall
family-size preferences of Muslim women
with high educational status, however,
were 17 per cent less than those women
with low educational status (4.83 vs.
5.83).

When we examine mean number of sons
and daughters preferred, the same patterns
observed for overall family-size preferefces are in evidence, i.e., an increase
with increased religious integration and
household economic status and a decline
with higher levels of female educational
attainment (see column ratios). Nevertheless, the degree of change is greater for
son preference than for daughter preference. Higher religious integration results
in a 38 per cent increase in number of
sons preferred compared to a 17 per cent
increase in the number of daughters preferred. Higher household economic status
produces a 14 per cent increment in the

Social Biology

number of sons preferred as opposed to
an 8 per cent increase in the number of
daughters preferred. Finally, higher levels
of female educational attainment generate
a 21 per cent decline in number of sons
preferred contrasted to a 12 per cent decrease in number of daughters preferred.

The relatively greater increase of sons
as opposed to daughters preferred with
high levels of religious integration and
household economic status results in a
higher differential between sons and
daughters preferred, whereas the relatively greater decline of sons as opposed
to daughter preference with higher female
education results in a contraction of the
son-daughter differential (see row ratios).
The level of son preference is 18 per cent
higher than daughter preference for high
religious integration women compared to
no difference among women with low levels of religious integration. The differential
is 18 per cent for women in high income
households compared to 12 per cent for
women in low income households. Alternatively, the differential is but 7 per cent
for Muslim women with high levels of
educational attainment contrasted to 23
per cent for women with low levels of
educational attainment.

We now proceed to a multivariate
analysis of son and daughter preference
among these Muslim women. Table 2
contains an intercorrelation matrix inclusive of all variables in the analysis. The

 

TABLE 2
MATRIX OF BIVARIATE CoRRELATIONS*

VARIABLES XI X2 x3 x4 X5
X1—Religious integration @etesessesseneene eee ese ° ee
X2—Household economic status .....ccsees 0.177 aes see <a eee
X3—Female educational status @eveteansenens —0.123 0.159 eee eee oe
XA—OOUS csaacswsvesvecenaws ck eke eee eRe 0.232 0.114 —0.197 omit ow
X5—Daughters eacane eaeeaeetane eseeeve ooe 0.131 0.071 —0.119 0.644 coe
X6—Total family size ....sceeees ea ini ce i 0.207 0.105 —0.179 0.928 0.883

* Total number of cases = 153.

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 22, No. 2

Son Preference Among Filipino Muslims

 

185

SONS
0.664 ( TOTAL FAMILY SIZE
DAUGHTERS

Fre. 1—Decomposition of total family~size preferences.

path diagram illustrated in Figure 1
contains the decomposition of total familysize preferences and the respective standardized regression coefficients. Considering the decomposition of total family size
first, we note that son preference has a
higher direct effect on total family size
preference than does daughter preference
(0.614 vs. 0.487). In other words, the
preference for sons contributes more to the
explanation of variation in total familysize preferences than does the preference
for daughters. Furthermore, it can be
pointed out that there is a high degree of
relationship between the preference for

RELIGIOUS
INTEGRATION

0.177

    
 

HOUSEHOLD
ECONOMIC
STATUS

+0.123

EDUCATIONAL
STATUS

sons and the preference for daughters, i.e.,
as the number of sons preferred increases
so does the number of daughters (r=
0.644).

Figure 2 consists of the hypothesized
relationships among the various model
variables and the respective standardized
regression coefficients and residuals. It can
be gleaned from this figure, as well as
Table 3, that the exogenous variables,
namely, religious integration, household
economic status, and female educational
status have differing effects on son and
daughter preference, respectively.

Religious integration has a significant

  
  

TOTAL FAMILY SIZE

0.952

0.629
0.983 .

* Significant standardized regression coefficients (at least twice the standard error).
Fic. 2.—Path diagram for complete model.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

186 Stinner and Mader

Social Biology

TABLE 3

Totat AND Direct Errects or Rericious InrEcraTion, HousrHorp EconoMic STATUS, AND
FemaLe EpUCATIONAL STATUS ON SON AND DAUGHTER PREFERENCE

 

 

VARIABLES

Errects*

Total Direct

 

Sons
Religious integration

Religious service attendance .....sceesecees

Household economic status

0.232 0.189}

Annual household income in pesoS ......+.0. oeeececene 0.114 0.111

Female educational status

Daughters
Religious integration

—0.197 —0.1917

Religious service attendance ........ceeneses eacsecsces 0.131 0.104

Household economic status

Annual household income in pesos ........
Female educational status

Years of formal schooling ..........eeee0; errr re TT

0.071 0.071
—0,118

 

* Total effects are equivalent to the zero-order correlations. The direct effect is the standardized regression coefficient.
f Standardized regression coefficients which are at least twice their standard errors.

positive effect on son preference (0.189),
whereas female educational status has a
significant negative impact (—0.191).
Although household economic status is
related positively to son preference
(0.111), the effect is not statistically significant. In sum, high religious integration
and low female educational status produce
strong preferences for sons. None of the
exogenous variables has a statistically significant effect on daughter preference.
Thus, although the prior tabulations suggested an increase in daughter preference
with high religious integration and household economic status and low educational
status, we find these differences to be of
no major import.

The combined effect of the three exogenous variables on son and daughter preference still leaves a substantial amount
of variance unexplained. In terms of son
preference, 95 per cent of the variation
can be attributed to residual factors,
whereas for daughters the residual component amounts to 98 per cent. Thus, the
three exogenous variables account for

slightly more of the variation in son preference than daughter preference. Finally,
it can be seen that the three exogenous
variables account for a minimal part
of the correlation between son and daughter preference. The partial correlation
Y’sp-ruF iS equal to 0.629, only 0.015 less
than the bivariate correlation between
mean number of sons and mean number
of daughters preferred (7 == 0.644).

We can evaluate the extent to which
son and daughter preference intervene
between the three exogenous variables
and total family-size preference by means
of the following equations.?

(1) Religious integration:
Yrr = Prstsr + Profpr0.206 = 0.142 + 0.064.

(2) Household economic status:
fry = prstsu + Provpu0.105 = 0.070 +- 0.035.

1R = religious integration; H = household
economic status; EZ = female educational status;
S = son preference; D daughter preference; T =
total family-size preference.

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

Vol. 22, No. 2

(3) Female educational status:

Tru = Prstsu + provpr.—0.179 = —0.121 + —0.088.

The striking fact emerging from the
above equations is that the effects of the
three exogenous variables on total familysize preference are transmitted primarily
via son preference and only secondarily
via daughter preference. Slightly more
than two-thirds of the total effect of each
of the exogenous variables on total family
size preference is transmitted via son
preference.

CONCLUSIONS

The initial phase of this analysis pointed
to an increase in both the number of sons
and daughters preferred with higher levels
of religious integration and family economic status. On the other hand, higher
levels of female educational attainment resulted in lower numbers of sons and
daughters preferred. For both religious integration and family economic status, the
increase in the number of sons preferred
was greater than that for daughters, this
being especially the case for religious integration. In addition, the relative decline in
the number of sons preferred with higher
educational status was somewhat greater
than the decline in the number of daughters preferred. Among less religiously integrated and more highly educated women,
we can note a tendency toward preferences
for a balanced family, whereas among more
religiously integrated and less educated
Muslim women the stress is decidedly in
the direction of sons as opposed to daughters. However, among women from both
high and low economic status households,
relative preference for sons as opposed to
daughters is evident, although this is
more the case with high economic status
women than low economic status women.

The relatively greater impact of reli
Son Preference Among Filipino Muslims 187

gious integration and female educational
status on son preference as opposed to
daughter preference became evident in
the second phase of the analysis. Whereas
religious integration and educational status
had significant effects on the number of
sons preferred, they did not have significant effects on the number of daughters
preferred. Household economic status exhibited no significant effect on either the
number of sons or daughters preferred.
Moreover, the influence of our three exogenous variables on total family-size preferences was markedly transmitted via son
preference rather than daughter preference.

It can perhaps be argued that the strong
effect of religious integration on son preference as opposed to daughter preference
reflects theological considerations. Highly
integrated Muslim women could be considered to be more integrated into Muslim
ritualism in general; thus, they would
view sons as having definitive religious
utility through religious propitiation for
the family and ancestral past (see Kirk,
1966, p. 568).

It is noteworthy that similar effects on
family sex composition preferences were
not obtained for economic status and female educational status. This finding suggests that these two components of socioeconomic status need to be kept analytically distinct. The possibility that sons
have economic utility in both high and low
economic status households could be seriously entertained. In high income households, sons may be viewed as necessary to
consolidate and perpetuate the high economic status of the household, whereas
among low income households, given their
precarious economic situation, sons could
be viewed as essential to the maintenance
of even a minimal economic standard of
living or perhaps even necessary for economic mobility.

Given the previous conclusion, we can
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:35 08 December 2015

188 Stinner and Mader

argue that lowered son preference is not
a function of higher economic status but
rather a function of changes in the educational status of Muslim women. With the
upgrading of the status of Muslim women,
the strong patriarchal complex could be
weakened. Social mobility could provide
alternative sources for status and prestige
other than through the reproductive nexus.
Similarly, social mobility could enhance
the prospects for a more individualized
orientation to sex composition preferences
divorced from the social control of the
broader kinship structure.

Several final points should be stressed.
First, in none of the subgroups was there
in evidence a preference for fewer than
two sons. This finding could imply that,
even in the situation of a balanced family
sex composition pattern, son preference is
still evident. However, this finding would
then reflect the preference for a minimal
number of sons and not necessarily a
strong preference for more sons than
daughters. Second, approximately onequarter of the total potential sample of
women enunciated no preference as to the
sex composition of their families. These
women tended to be Jess religiously integrated, of low economic status, and of low
educational status. In essence, higher religious integration, household economic sta
Social Biology

tus, and female educational status are associated with defined preferences as to
family sex composition. It may be that
among these women the rational notion of
utility becomes salient, although the preceding findings suggest that the various
dimensions of utility are not of similar importance in the determination of sex composition preferences.

A third point that should be mentioned
is that these respondents were women, and
it may very well be that responses would
have been different if the respondents had
been Muslim men. It would be interesting
to speculate whether the same significant
negative effect of female educational status
on son preference would be evident had we
been able to allocate responses of the husband within the categorization of female
status.

In conclusion, the preceding analysis
demonstrates the importance and potential
benefits of both decomposing overall family-size preference into its son and daughter components as well as of beginning to
disentangle more systematically the array
of characteristics generally associated with
son preference. Only with such systematic
approaches will a more comprehensive understanding of the interchanges between
the normative milieu and reproductive behavior be obtained.

REFERENCES

Ex-Hamamsy, Lama SHukKRY. 1972. Belief systems and family planning in peasant societies,
pp. 335-337. In Harrison Brown and Edward
Hutchings, Jr. (eds.), Are our descendants
doomed? Technological change and population
growth. The Viking Press, New York.

Factey, Ricmarp. 1967. Doctrines and attitudes
of major religions in regard to fertility, pp. 78
84. In World Population Conference, 1965.
Vol. If. United Nations, New York.

FrerpMan, Ronatp. 1963. Norms for family size
in underdeveloped areas, pp. 220-240, In Pro
 

ceedings of the Royal Society B, Vol. 159,
No. 974. Royal Society, London.

Kirk, Duvtey. 1966. Factors affecting Moslem
natality, pp. 561-579. In Bernard R. Berelson
et al. (eds.), Family planning and population
programs. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Linc, T. O. 1969. Buddhist factors in population
growth and control: A survey based on Thailand and Ceylon. Pop. Stud. 23:53-60.

STINNER, WILLIAM F., and Pavt Dovucias MAnpeEr.
1975. Sons, daughters, or both?: An analysis
of family sex composition preferences in the
Philippines. Demography 12:67~79.
