Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

Structural statistics: Models relating demography
and social structure with applications to Apache
and Hopi

Paul A. Ballonoff

To cite this article: Paul A. Ballonoff (1973) Structural statistics: Models relating demography
and social structure with applications to Apache and Hopi, Social Biology, 20:4, 421-426, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1973.9988072

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1973.9988072

fn Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 2

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:34

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

 

Structural Statistics: Models Relating
Demography and Social Structure with
Applications to Apache and Hopi

Paul A. Ballonoft

Center for Demographic and Population Genetics
Health Science Center

University of Texas

Houston, Texas

A major unsolved problem in social theory is the relationship of social structures,
such as marriage and kinship rules or patterns, to social statistics such as average
family size, proportion of women in reproduction, or total group size of a particular
system. I present a model which relates
these previously separately conceived
phenomena in a unified formulation.

I presume a population divided into L
separate exogamous (i.e., out-marrying)
units whose members are recruited by descent. Generations are discrete, and each
generation must maintain all Z units. Each
unit must produce at least one male and
one female per generation. These assumptions correspond to the obvious meaning in
breeding experiments and to many empirical rules in human groups.

How big must each exogamous unit be
per generation to insure survival of all L
units with a specifiable probability? Let
be the proportion of males and f be the
proportion of females in an offspring population, so that m plus f equals 1. Let ” be
the number of surviving offspring per unit
per generation, and let P be the probability
of survival. An exogamous unit will not

 

meet the assumed conditions if all offspring in the unit are of the same sex, so
that the total probability of survival of a
particular unit is:

P=1—m" — }", (1)
But since there are Z such units, the probability of survival of the entire system is

(2)

I will not here study the effect of statistica] variations of ” within a unit, so Equation (2) expresses the probability of survival of this entire “social system”. For
development of similar models with application in reliability engineering, see ChengShi-Mei, 1964.

Equation (2) simplifies to Equation (3)
if I assume the sex ratio is m= f=:

P= (1 — (1/2)"~1)*. (3)

From Equation (3), if 2 equals 1 the probability of survival is zero, from the fact of
two sexes. As increases for fixed L, P
also increases. As Z increases for fixed n,
P decreases. Thus, one means of compensating for unreliability of units is for units

P= (1—m™— fn)®,

421
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

453 Ballonoff

to increase their offspring group size, and
hence the total population size.

Using Equation (3), I estimate the
system survival probability of Canyon Day
Flat White Mountain Western Apache (reported by Goodwin, 1942, especially Appendix H) as P approaches 0.99 per generation. This follows from an estimate of
the number of offspring per clan (reported
as number of children per clan in the data
source) as ~ equals 10.5; and from the
estimate Z equals 11 active resident clans
from the same source. As Canyon Day
Flat was not quite 100% of the White
Mountain Western Apache at the time of
the survey, this estimate of P may be
small. This or any higher estimate of P
is In agreement with the fact that the reference records no disappearances of clans
within the reported generation. Unaccounted sources of error are effects of
childhood mortality and of out-migration,
both of which tend to lower the effective
population size; and the effects of about a
20% exogamy rate to non-White Mountain Western Apache groups. This tends
to raise the effective population size, so
the two effects compensate in direction.

Now consider the logic of marriage rules
of the Western Apache. Using a published
notation (Basso, 1970) I symbolize a clan
with a small circle “o”, a “clan section”
of one or more clans as several small circles
in a larger circle, a “close relation” between clan sections (hence of clans in the
section) as a solid line between large circles, and a “distant relation” between clan
sections as a dashed line. A dotted line
between two clans (clan sections) here
indicates “unrelated.” Figure 1 shows the
“minimal structure” which depicts the following condition. Each clan has at least
one preferred partner clan in the figure?;

1 There is an elaborated discussion of the concept “minimal structure in Ballonoff, 1973. However, if each clan has only one partner, surely
this is minimal!

Social Biology

    

@eeevaeseote oe eaegnsne

Fic. 1—Minimal system for Western Apache
preferred marriage rule. Large circles show clan
sections; small circles show clans; solid lines show
close relationship; dashed lines show distant relationship (possible but not preferred partners) ;
dotted lines show unrelated (preferred partner)
clan sections. See text for further explanations.
marriage to members of one’s own section
is strictly prohibited; marriage to closely
related clans is strictly prohibited; marriage to distant related clans is permitted
but not preferred. Only unrelated clans
contain preferred partners.

Since each clan section conceptually
needs only one clan, the figure would be
accurate with only one small clan circle
within each larger section represented. I
have drawn more clans only for diagrammatic purposes. Notice also that the preference pattern for only one section (one
clan) has been drawn. If the figure is completed with dashed and dotted lines for
all sections, then each clan section has one
and only one available partner section.

Calling s the minimal structure number
which uniquely describes the least number
of independent reproducing units, Figure
1 illustrates that for the White Mountain
Western Apache s equals 6 clans, divided
into six sections, one clan to each section.
This is the correct number, since removal
of any one clan causes at least one additional clan to lose its available partners,
leading to further structural collapse of
the system, whereas addition of one or
more clans simply adds structural redundancy. Similar properties have been noted
in many other systems (see White, 1963,
or Ballonoff, 1973).

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

 

Vol. 20, No. 4

 

Fic, 2.—Illustration (not
and theoretical statistics discussed in the text, for s= 6 and s = 7.

I relate s to Z as shown in Figure 2, by
the following reasoning. Assume that there
are N distinct biological families, and that
the probability of a birth occurring in a
particular family (given that a birth oc
curs) is 1/N. Let F be the number of

females, and let N, be the number of
families which do not reproduce females.
Then the feasible set of (V,F) pairs for a
given value of s is bounded by Equation
(4). This feasible set would be represented
in Figure 2 as above and to the right of
the curve marked “‘s = 6.” Notice that the
axes of this figure are numbers of females
and of basic families and that the graphs
shown plot sets of values of Equation (6)
when s takes specific values. Asymptotic

Structural Statistics

 

423

45 line

N—>
to scale) of Equation (6) and its relationship to particular empirical

behavior of the curve reflects the concept
of s as a structural minimum:
SXN—N, (4)
The curve results from noting that the
assumption on birth probability suggests
that NV, is given by Equation (5), and also
from noting that the lower bound of the
feasible region is given by placing a strict
equality by Equation (4), substituting for
N,, and solving for F to get Equation (6):

N—17F
v= N |
N—s

os | N |

V—1
os | N |

 

(5)

 

F= (6)
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

424. Ballonoff

The reader may notice certain unusual
features of this argument. Most prominent
is that I have not looked at “variances.” In
effect, I am treating the values obtained
analytically as if they were the mean value
of some distribution. This can be corrected
by future theoreticians should this basic
model prove useful. Similarly, the empirical reference of particular terms is
vague and difficult. In the above, I refer to
“distinct biological families.” An equivalent phrase might be “equivalent reproducing females,” where the “typical” female is assumed with zero variance. The
difficulty in interpretation is significant in
that demographic concepts required by
structural arguments have not yet been
well formulated.

I am now interested in points of equilibrium which are those with one “equivalent
reproducing female” per one “basic biological reproduction unit,” in this case
households. One way of obtaining this is
to look at points on the plus 45 degree
line through the origin. Where this line
intersects a curve in the family of Equation (6), we discover a minimal equilibrium for a particular value of s. However,
another approach also appears to work.
Let —r be the slope of a line drawn from
a value of NV with a negative slope tangent
to one of this family of curves. In the
Western Apache data, WV = 32 households
are the basic biological reproducers and
N—N,=L=11 is given when r approaches 0.42 from the empirical Equation
(9) below. Equation (9) may be related
mnemonically to Equations (4) through
(6) by noting that rearrangement of Equation (9) gives Equation (7) which is in
the same form as the result of “integrating” Equation (8) with the “constant of
integration” equal to N,(N-N,). However, note that, in fact, Equation (9) was
found ad hoc and is presented here only

Social Biology

because it appears to work. The proposed
“integration” is not really legitimate:

s= Srv? — NAW — 0) (7)

s=f —rNdN =C——? (8)

No N—wN —
pz oN = No) 5] ( ; o) 5s (9)
7™

In Figure 2, a line of slope —r is shown
tangent to the curve “s== 7.” Since this
lies above and to the right of the curve
for “s = 6,” the empirically observed Canyon Day Flat statistics lie comfortably
inside the feasible set defined by Equation
(4). Note that the curve “s = 7” predicts
the observed data. The fact that the data
are consistent with a larger than minimal
structure within the feasible set is consistent with the high reliability estimate
P approaches 0.99,

It is also notable that the values L =
N —N,= 11 for N = 32 are given by a
table of Stirling Numbers of the Second
Sort (see Andrew, 1965, or Ballonoff,
1974), for 32 distinguishable elements
divided into Z indistinguishable classes,
at least one element to a class, where L =
11 classes produces the greatest number of
possible placements of the 32 elements
(the greatest amount of variability) for
any 1< L= 32. This relationship is useful in constructing variants of the model.
Consider a population restricted to values
on a single curve for fixed values of s. By
the above reasoning, there are associated
values of N and LZ which maximize variability of placement of NW biological reproducing units into LZ exogamous units.
What happens if the empirical number E£
of reproducing units exceeds the “optimum” NW? One possibility is a split of the
population into two separate populations,

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 20, No. 4

providing 2N=E. A different “split”
model may be found if the empirically observed number of exogamous units L, is
such that L,==L, but allows the tangent
line to “slip” along the “‘s-curve,” while remaining tangent. In both split models, the
empirical slopes before a split are flatter
than the “optimum” slope which has 7
approximately 0.42.

Exceeding the “optimal” minimal value
may lead to population growth (Ballonoff,
in press). The cost of raising survival probabilities above about 0.85 is increased
family size, which with a fixed number of
families implies a larger population, which
means that more than the equilibrium
minimum number of families are possible,
etc. This suggests that seeking equilibrium
may itself cause growth.

An example of approximately constant
empirical Z is provided by the 1903 split
of Oraibi Hopi people into two separate
groups (Titiev, 1944). Before the split,
there were nine groups at the highest Jevel
of organization (phratry) which would
have been Stirling optimum for N = 22
to 24 clans at the next lower level. This
in turn would have been Stirling optimum
L for N= 79 to 82 households, but empirically there were 29 clans, and approximately 130 households, After the split,
each half had almost the same number of
phratries (a fact which surprised the reporting ethnographer!). One group had
nine phratries,. which is Stirling optimum
for N = 23 clans which was close to Stirling optimum ZL for its approximately 75
households. The other group had eight
phratries, which was Stirling optimum L
for its N = 19 clans, which was Stirling
optimum ZL for N= approximately 60
households. The pair (V = 19, L= 8) is
approximated by a line tangent to the
curve “s= 4” with slope r= 14; while
the pair (V= 23, L=9) is similarly
tangent on the curve “s= 5.” A model

Structural Statistics

425

assuming either s = 4 or s= 5 but allowing temporary fluctuations in empirical
populations gives a good approximation to
these data. The model appears to work
well (that is, fit the reported numerical
data) in spite of the fact that the ethnographer does not rationalize the factionalizing as “caused” by “population.”

Please note that survival probability
calculations for this case become complicated. Also, I have not developed a variety
of possible variant models. For example,
a system may “home” on a particular
equilibrium distribution, such as F = N
for given s without any split mechanism;
but such a model would have an unstable
sex ratio, as in cycles of male warfare followed by female infanticide.

I conclude with an analogy to chemical
theory and suggest construction of a “table
of the social elements,” of which a partial
example is presented below. This table can
be constructed directly from the theory
of minimal structures and a table of Stirling Numbers of the Second Sort.

TABLE 1

TABLE OF THE SoctAL Elements, SHOWING
THEORETICAL POPULATION SIZES FOR SELECTED
STRUCTURAL NUMBERS REFERRED TO

. IN THE TEXT

N/LE=
L= N= Average
Typical Typical No. of
s= Optimal Empirical Biological
Minima} No. of No. of Units/
Structural Exogamous Biological Exogamous
No. Units Units Units
2 8 3 2.6
2 13 4.5 2.9
4 18 7 2.6
6 27 11 2.4

The Hopi and Apache examples show
that a final “table of social elements” will
be considerably more complicated.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I thank Eugene Giles, Department of
Anthropology, University of Illinois, for his
assistance in preparing the manuscript.
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:34 08 December 2015

426

Ballonoff

Social Biology

REFERENCES

Anvrew, A. M. 1965. Table of Stirling Numbers
of the Second Kind. Technical Report No. 6,
Electrical Engineering Research Laboratory,
University of Illinois, Urbana.

Battonorr, P. A. 1974. Stability properties of marriage systems. Im Proceedings IX I.U.A.E.S.
(in press).

. Statistical theory of marriage structures.
In P. A. Ballonoff (ed.) Mathematical models
of social and cognitive structures. University of
Iilinois Press, Urbana (in press).

Basso, K, H. 1970. The Cibecue Apache. Holt,
Rinehart, and Winston, New York.

 

CHENG-SHI-MEr. 1964. Life span and repair in
complex systems, Technical Report No. 2, Electrical Engineering Research Laboratory, University of Illinois, Urbana.

Goopwin, G. 1942. The social organization of the
Western Apache. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.

Titrev, M. 1944. Old Oraibi: A study of the Hopi
Indians of the third mesa. Papers of the Peabody
Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, XXII(1).

Wuire, H. 1963. Anatomy of kinship. Prentice
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.

 
