Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

a9q71LN0w

Social Biology

ISSN: 0037-766X (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: http://tandfonline.com/loi/hsbi19

 

The history of the journal social biology: 1954 (Vol.
1) through 1999 (Vol. 46)

Richard H. Osborne & Barbara T. Osborne

To cite this article: Richard H. Osborne & Barbara T. Osborne (1999) The history of the
journal social biology: 1954 (Vol. 1) through 1999 (Vol. 46), Social Biology, 46:3-4, 164-178, DOI:
10.1080/19485565.1999.9988996

 

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19485565.1999.9988996

 

fa Published online: 23 Aug 2010.

&
(g Submit your article to this journal @

all Article views: 9

»
Q View related articles 4

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=hsbi19

Download by: [University of Michigan] Date: 08 December 2015, At: 13:48

 
 

13:48 08 December 2015

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at

The History of the Journal
Social Biology

1954 (Vol. 1) through 1999 (Vol. 46)

 

Richard H. Osborne?
Barbara T. Osborne?

*Editor, 1961-1977, 1982-1999; Professor Emeritus, University of Wisconsin-Madison
*Technical Editor, 1968-1976; Managing Editor, 1977-1999
1129 East Eighth Street, Port Angeles, WA 98362

With the 1999 volume, Social Biology is in its 46th year of publication as a multidisciplinary and international journal. Since its inception, the journal’s goal has been
to provide a publication outlet that not only would be a bridge between the biological
and social sciences, but that would encourage these often disparate intellectual viewpoints to focus on the same human phenomenon or problem.

From 1954 (Vol. 1) through 1968 (Vol. 15) Social Biology published under the title
Eugenics Quarterly, a new journal founded to reflect an acceleration in both knowledge of and interest in the factors affecting human populations.

é

THE 1950s

For the first seven volumes (1954-1960) the officers and directors of the American
Eugenics Society were responsible for the scientific directions of the journal and for
soliciting manuscripts to maintain a quarterly publication.

During these early years the Editorial Board of Eugenics Quarterly was comprised
of:

Frederick Osborn, Chairman,

C. Nash Herndon, M.D.,

Frank Lorimer,

Helen G. Hammons, Managing Editor.

Listed as Consulting Editors on the journal masthead were:

Gordon Allen, M.D.,
Jan Book,

F. Clarke Fraser, M.D.,
Clyde V. Kiser,
George Mair,

Jean Sutter, M.D.
Lahlit Sanghvi

Five years earlier, in 1949, Frederick Osborn had begun shaping a new organization
out of the basically defunct American Eugenics Society (AES), a process which led to
the founding of the new journal. Osborn had long shared interests with the other two
1954 Editorial Board members—in population issues with demographer Frank
Lorimer and in medical genetics with physician G. Nash Herndon. The common inter
164

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 46, No. 3-4 History: 1954-1999 165

ests of the three men were in aspects of demography, genetics, and medicine relevant
to human populations.

Osborn, Lorimer, and Herndon saw the role of the American Eugenics Society as
encouraging research in the scientific study of human fertility, hereditary defect, and
population issues and saw the journal Eugenics Quarterly as the means for providing
both scientists and the general public with the results of such research.

The three goals of this “new” American Eugenics Society were printed inside the
front cover of Eugenics Quarterly:

STATEMENT OF AIMS

To promote research
on individual human differences

To provide authoritative information
about human heredity and qualitative aspects of population

To explore scientific applications
of knowledge in these fields

These goals had brought together a group of individuals from a number of academic disciplines and public service organizations. A cross-section of the men and
women comprising the officers and board of the American Eugenics Society at the
founding of the journal in 1954 shows several areas of interest:

President:
G. Nash Herndon, M.D., Bowman Gray Medical School

Vice President:
Harry L. Shapiro, Curator of Anthropology, American Museum of Natural History

Secretary: Frederick Osborn, President, Population Council

Board of Directors:
Gordon Allen, M.D., Research Division, National Institute of Mental Health
Robert Cook, American Genetics Association
Kingsley Davis, Professor of Sociology, Columbia University
Lee R. Dice, Director, Institute of Human Biology, University of Michigan
Alan F. Guttmacher, M.D., Mount Sinai Hospital, New York City
Frank H. Hankins, Professor Emeritus of Sociology, Smith College
Franz J. Kallmann, M.D., Geneticist, New York State Psychiatric Institute
Dudley Kirk, Demographic Director, The Population Council
Frank Lorimer, Professor of Population Studies, American University
Emily Mudd, Director, Marriage Council of Philadelphia
Gardner Murphy, Director of Research, The Menninger Foundation
Clarence P. Oliver, Professor of Zoology, University of Texas
Warren S. Thompson, Scripps Foundation for Population Research, Miami
University
Frank W. Notestein, Director, Office of Population Research, Princeton
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

166 History: 1954-1999 Social Biology

Bruce Wallace, Research Associate, Long Island Biological Association, Cold
Spring Harbor

Demography was strongly represented among the board members. Five of them
had been among the 13 founders of the Population Association of America (PAA)
in December 1930—Hankins, Lorimer,' Notestein, Osborn, and Thompson. Six of
them had served, or would serve, as President of PAA—Lorimer (1946), Notestein
(1947), Osborn (1949), Kiser (1952), Kirk (1959), and Davis (1962).

Robert C. Cook, Lee R. Dice, Clarence P. Oliver, and Bruce Wallace (Theodosius
Dobzhansky’s first Ph.D. in population genetics) were geneticists. Gordon Allen, G.
Nash Herndon and Franz J. Kallmann were physicians trained in genetics who were
working in research on hereditary disease.

Allen Guttmacher and Emily Mudd were active in family planning organizations.
Harry L. Shapiro, Frank Hankins, and Gardner Murphy represented the social sciences, ranging across anthropology, sociology, and psychology.

The views on race and social class of the “new” society were explicitly stated in the
opening essay of the first issue entitled “The Role of the American Eugenics Society”
(Eugenics Quarterly, 1954, Vol. 1, No. 1, page 2):

The public has first to learn that race and social classes are relatively of little importance
as indices of heredity capacity. This is not an easy lesson to learn. We all like to think that
our own group of people has superior qualities. The early eugenists were not alone in the admiration of their own race and class. Such ideas have been held by many societies and
classes since earliest times and are quite general throughout the world today.

In the United States and the democracies of western Europe their hold is weakening. It
should be the most immediate task of eugenics to substitute for this ancient form of selfadmiration the knowledge that hereditary capacities are widely scattered throughout the human race, among families within every social class and within every geographic area. This is
the message of science.

The essay also rejected any governmental interference with family formation, whether
in relation to size or to potential genetic inheritance (p. 3):

There can be no arbitrary decisions as to who should and who should not have children. The
parents alone must make the choice.

With Frederick Osborn’s typical modesty, he did not credit himself with the authorship
of this policy essay on the “new” eugenics. Consequently, historians of eugenics have
not credited him adequately for his strong position on the insignificance of race and
class in hereditary capabilities.

It was on the issue of race that Frederick Osborn broke with Wickliffe Draper,
a former financial supporter of AES and a co-founder of the Pioneer Fund in 1937.
The break came in 1954, the year not only of the journal’s founding but also of the
Supreme Court decision against racial segregation. Draper and the Pioneer Fund began
to fund research and societies which promoted racist views. Frederick Osborn would
not accept funds for AES from Draper on such a basis and also resigned from the Pio
'In 1934 Frederick Osborn and Frank Lorimer published together Dynamics of Population: Social and Biological Significance of Changing Birth Rates in the United States (Macmillan).

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 46, No. 3-4 _ History: 1954-1999 167

neer Fund. In a Memorandum? about Draper to the American Eugenics Society, Frederick Osborn wrote:

FO lunched with Wickliffe Draper at his apartment, 522 East 57th Street, on Tuesday, October 26th [1954].

In a general conversation covering the field of eugenics ... Draper said that if the Eugenics
Society would take a strong public position along the lines of his thinking, he would be willing to guarantee full support of the Society over at least a five year period.

...He outlined his ideas to include measures for establishing racial homogeneity in the
United States and other proposals which had at present no basis in scientific findings.

FO told him that, under these circumstances, the Society would have to look elsewhere for
its funds.

In his Editorial Comment in the second issue, Frederick Osborn presented words
of caution about population studies while writing about the forthcoming 1954 World
Population Conference of which he was the major promoter and organizer (Eugenics
Quarterly, 1954, Vol. 1, No. 2, p. 1).

The Organization of the World Population Conference

Any expression of public interest in science through governmental action brings a risk of
damaging the freedom of scientific inquiry. Yet it is obvious that governments can play an
important role in the advancement of science and in the application of scientific findings to
public affairs. Can science enter the forum of human affairs without losing its virtue? The
problem becomes especially acute with respect to inquiries on subjects beset by conflicting
interests, passions, and prejudices. It is further complicated in actions involving international
relations.

The plans for the World Population Conference to be held under the auspices of the
United Nations in Rome, August 31-September 10, 1954, represent a unique experiment in
cooperative inter-governmental and private action in the advancement of science, with respect both for legal principles and for scientific principles. Viewed in this light, the organization of the conference has great theoretical significance.

The Conference had six sessions; Frederick Osborn chaired Session B-10, comprised of three sections:

SectionI: Prevalence of Genetically Based Physical and Mental Deficiencies and the Frequency of Related Genes

Section IT: Short and Long-Term Influences of Various Factors on the Frequency of Genes
which Affect the Characteristics of Populations

Section III: Conclusions on the Distribution of Genes Affecting the Characteristics of the
Population

The presenters and chairmen for the three sessions represented eight countries:
Denmark, England, Germany, Italy, Japan, Scotland, Sweden, and the United States.
The Conference was a great success with over five hundred in attendance from around
the world. The presenter of the final paper, titled “Contribution of Demography to
Population Genetics,” was none other than Professor Sir Ronald A. Fisher.

*The correspondence is in the AES archives at the American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia, and on the
website (www.ferris.edu/isar) of the Institute for the Study of Academic Racism founded in 1993 by SSSB member

Barry Mehler. The website also contains a listing of organizations, political action, and research supported by
Draper and by the Pioneer Fund from 1954 to the present.

 

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

168 History: 1954-1999 Social Biology

The concluding remarks of the Conference Chairman, Frederick Osborn, further illustrate his orientations (Eugenics Quarterly, 1954, Vol. 1, No. 2, p. 214):

Were it not for man’s genetic diversity which, among other things, basically influences individual mental aptitudes, progress would probably not occur. This broad statement would, I
believe, be accepted by all authorities in the fields of biology and genetics. Man’s diversity
in regard to his genetic potentialities has such far-reaching consequences that it should not
and cannot be left to the consideration of only biologists and geneticists.

Present frequencies and distributions of human genes are the result partly of processes
beyond the control of man, and partly of man’s voluntary actions and inactions. In an increasing manner, future frequencies and distributions will be predictable on the basis of human activities. This will mean increased responsibility, since whatever we do or omit doing
has its definite, unescapable consequences.

Volumes | and 2 of the journal consisted largely of selected papers from sessions of
this conference. Later volumes of the Quarterly during the 1950s presented papers
given at academic symposia. The purpose was to encourage and to enlarge contemporary thinking on population issues by presentation of high-quality scientific research to
a larger audience.

The Society’s goal was to sponsor, organize, and present a symposium each year in
which no other major genetics or population symposium was scheduled.’ In August
1956 the First International Congress of Human Genetics was held in Copenhagen. In
November 1956 the Milbank Memorial Fund held a conference at the New York Academy of Medicine titled “The Nature and Transmission of the Genetic and Cultural
Characteristics of Human Populations.” In November 1957 the Society organized and
presented its own symposium at the New York Academy of Medicine titled “Heredity
Counseling.” The importance of genetics in medicine was by now well established,
and the Society continued its supportive role.

The New York Academy of Medicine lent support to the Society’s efforts to encourage the teaching of genetics as a part of medical training. They cooperated with the
Society in supporting a Medical Genetics Committee responsible for offering fellowships for genetics training to interested physicians. Initially this program provided fellowships for medical doctors to study at Lionel Penrose’s Laboratory at the University
of London and later at the Jackson Laboratories at Bar Harbor, Maine. John Paul Scott
and John Fuller, behavioral geneticists active in AES and later in the Behavior Genetics Association, were responsible for establishing the same cooperative arrangement
with The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine (Eugenics Quarterly, 1960,
Vol. 17, No. 4, p. 231).

In August 1958 the Tenth International Congress of Genetics was held at McGill
University, Montreal, Canada. In February 1959 the society’s third symposium, “Differences in Current Mating and Fertility Trends” was held at the New York Academy
of Medicine.

In 1960 Frederick Osborn published “A Return to the Principle of Natural Selection” which described the role of voluntary birth control within his concept of a new
eugenics (Eugenics Quarterly, 1960, Vol. 7, No. 4, p. 204-211). He wrote:

See pp. 232-264 of this issue listing symposia sponsored by the society.

 
 

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 46, No. 3-4 History: 1954-1999 169

The aim of eugenics should be to restore the principles—but not all of the methods—of
natural selection as it operated for 500,000 years of pre-human and human evolution (p.
204).

In the past, natural selection operated mainly through deaths. Obviously we are not going
to return to that method. Our alternative is to enlarge the part played by birth selection. Voluntary birth control gives us a special opportunity to switch from death selection to birth
selection (p. 206).

His basic orientation was to encourage strong social support for “healthy families” of
whatever size, race, or class. Knowledge of family planning would provide couples
with the means to fulfill their own desires for parenting, whether large families, small
families, or none at all. Within such a voluntary system, where people were provided
with maximum information and maximum support for their personal choices, he believed lay the best opportunity for any society to encourage maximum physical and
intellectual functioning for all individuals born.* Frederick Osborn defined this system
as “positive eugenics” and saw it as leading to long-term beneficial effects on human
populations and their evolution through time.

Some of Frederick Osborn’s most important support for the new journal of the
American Eugenics Society came from two distinguished scholars—geneticist
Theodosius Dobzhansky at Columbia University, and physical anthropologist Harry
Shapiro, Curator at the American Museum of Natural History and also professor at
Columbia University.

In 1950 both men had helped to engineer a comprehensive new graduate study
program at Columbia under the title of the Institute for the Study of Human Variation,
housed on-campus in the former home of Thomas Hunt Morgan, genetics’ first Nobel
Laureate. The first two graduate students enrolled in the Institute in 1950 were Lahlit
Sanghvi, a geneticist from the Tata Memorial Hospital in Bombay, and the author,
Richard Osborne, a transfer from Harvard University’s graduate program in physical
anthropology. Under the tutelage of Dobzhansky, Shapiro, L. C. Dunn, and Howard
Levene, the program brought together the study of genetics, biological anthropology,
biostatistics, and the medical sciences.

THE 1960s

THE MOVE TO A PEER-REVIEWED SCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
PUBLISHING ORIGINAL RESEARCH

By 1960 (Volume 7) the journal had received sufficient professional recognition to
indicate that it could become a peer-reviewed scientific journal publishing original research. It was at that time that Harry Shapiro, then President of AES, and Frederick
Osborn, then Secretary, asked Richard Osborne’ to take the editorship and to begin the
transition to a refereed journal of contributed rather than solicited papers.

‘His 1955 article “The Make-Up of Healthy Families” describes these goals in detail and how they might be advanced in a variety of social systems (Eugenics Quarterly, 1955, Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 78-82).

‘Pages 179-193 of this issue contain brief biographical data on Frederick Osborn, Theodosius Dobzhansky,
Harry Shapiro, and Richard Osborne.

 
 

 

170 History: 1954-1999 Social Biology

Moving a journal from solicited to contributed reports of original scientific research
would always be a challenge, even if the journal’s title did not include a non-science
concept like eugenics. Fortunately, however, the timing was favorable because of
the journal’s emphasis on multidisciplinary research. At the time most other scientific
journals represented research in only one discipline, that of the sponsor society.

As a member of the Board of Directors of the American Society of Human Genetics
and of Columbia University’s ongoing seminars on Genetics and the Origin of Man,
and also of several committees of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science, the new Editor had a variety of opportunities to reach out to potential contributing authors from different disciplines.

Gabriel Lasker, Editor of Human Biology, was not only a mentor in this process but
also generously referred manuscripts submitted to Human Biology that were more appropriate by subject matter for the new Quarterly. Major assistance in the medical area
came from an agreement to publish the papers presented at the Symposium on Medical
Genetics at the 1961 Tenth Pacific Science Congress (Eugenics Quarterly, 1962, Vol.
19, No. 1, pp. 1-74).

To attract a greater number of contributed research reports it was necessary to put
the journal before a much wider audience. There were almost no subscriptions from
academic institutions. All society members and other contacts were asked to request
= the libraries at the institutions with which they were affiliated to subscribe to the
5» journal. To help in this endeavor, the Population Council funded 40 subscriptions for
= foreign institutions. A high priority was placed upon getting the Quarterly into all of
S the top abstracting services. Free journal advertising in the Quarterly was offered to
‘6 any scientific journals that would carry a comparable advertisement for the Quarterly.
& By 1963 twelve such agreements were in place.

The editorial procedures of a journal are critical in attracting contributed manuscripts, one of the most important being the maintenance of complete anonymity of
— authors and referees in the peer review process. Another is the careful selection of
S referees most qualified in the subject area of each manuscript. The authors and manuscript referees can not be restricted to a small society membership. When peer review
is conscientiously carried out, it is one of the strongest incentives for authors to submit their work to a journal. Peer review also provides authors with professional help
in maximizing the scientific quality of their work. While the process multiplies the
editorial work many-fold, it is requisite for the production of a first-rate scientific
publication.

at 13:48 08 December 2015

n

1C

1

Univers

Downloaded

ESSAYS ON THE CONCEPT OF RACE

As the journal was working toward attracting the submission of high-quality original research in the 1960s, other factors were also at work. Of particular relevance
to the journal was the focus that the civil nghts movement brought to the concept of
“race.” In the Quarterly’s first issue (1954, Vol. 1, p. 1) the position of the American
Eugenics Society and the Quarterly on race, and on social class, had been strongly
stated. Another look at this issue was timely. It was decided that the journal would
publish invited essays by respected authorities that dealt with various aspects of race.
The essays, published in the journal in the late 1960s, formed the base of an expanded

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

Vol. 46, No. 3-4 History: 1954-1999 171

volume of articles published in hardback and paperback in 1971, entitled The Biological and Social Meaning of Race.°

Theodosius Dobzhansky prepared the first article, under the section “Biological
Factors.” Frederick Osborn presented the last article, under “Social Factors.” Richard
Osborne prepared an Appendix which traced “The History and Nature of Race Classification” and a Glossary of scientific terminology for the aid of students and laymen
interested in understanding the development of the concept of “race.”

INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES
AND SOVIET SCIENTISTS

The 1960s were also an active time for international conferences. The new Editor
used such conferences to build interest in the journal, and its international contributions grew. An interesting sidelight is the journal’s relationship to Soviet geneticists
and biologists.

Soviet scientists were permitted to attend a few European conferences, and it was
surprising to find them very familiar with the journal. The Quarterly had escaped the
Soviet censorship that befell genetics journals during the Lysenko period and was one
of the only journals available in the Soviet Union containing scientific articles that applied “Western genetics.” Consequently, the Quarterly had been eagerly absorbed by
Soviet scientists.

Following a conference in Utrecht, the Novosti Press Agency of Moscow began to
submit to the journal brief statements about biology and genetics in the Soviet Union.
The journal published these “communications” in the spirit of encouraging contacts
with the West. The first communication titled ““A New Soviet Hypothesis Concerning
Heredity” credited Nikolai Dubinin, Corresponding Member of the USSR Academy of
Science, with the discovery of the role of DNA and mutations in heredity (Eugenics
Quarterly, 1966, Vol. 13, p. 63). Startling news for Western science! Several interesting communications were published up through the late 1960s, by which time it was
felt that Soviet views on recent biology and genetics had been adequately described.

A CHANGING VIEW OF THE SOCIETY

The 1960s also saw many changes in the society and its goals. Strong contributions
of original research were being submitted to Eugenics Quarterly, and new fields were
developing. It became apparent that the society needed to weigh and to articulate its
positions in several different areas. Frederick Osborn organized and arranged funding
for the First Princeton Conference, held October 16-17, 1964 at the Princeton Inn,
Princeton, NJ. The invited participants consisted of leading geneticists and demographers who were given an opportunity to share research ideas and methods. The success of this first Princeton Conference resulted in planning for a second conference in
1965 that included anthropologists and psychologists as well as demographers and
population geneticists.

Communication problems developed. By the Third Princeton Conference in 1966
the problems between some of the psychologists and the population geneticists could

See pages 228-231 of this issue on The Biological and Social Meaning of Race (1971, Freeman Press).

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

172 History: 1954-1999 Social Biology

no longer be ignored. In committee discussion of this problem, Theodosius Dobzhansky suggested that the psychologists and animal behaviorists shared a focus, one that
included research interest in both behavior and genetics as studied in nonhuman populations. Discussions centered on the recently named field of “behavior genetics” as being the appropriate interface for issues relating to genetics and psychology.’

Frederick Osborn volunteered to arrange funding for the costs of determining if a
new society for the study of “behavior genetics” should be started; Richard Osborne
was asked to prepare a questionnaire and send it to scholars who might be interested in
such an organization.’

The above discussions in 1966 also brought into recognition how far the society
and the Eugenics Quarterly had moved from the “new eugenics” of the 1950s. Beginning in 1963 a statement of purpose had been added to the cover next to the title—To
further knowledge of the biological and socio-cultural forces affecting human populations. John Paul Scott, a geneticist then at Jackson Memorial Laboratory, suggested
that a descriptive name for the journal might be “social biology.”

It had become obvious that the demographers, geneticists, sociologists, and anthropologists had different orientations toward the study of human populations than did
the behavioralists working in animal biology and in human psychology. “Social biology” seemed to describe the interests of the former group, just as “behavior genetics”
had seemed to describe the interests of the latter group.

A NEw NAME FOR THE JOURNAL

At the Fourth Princeton Conference in 1967 demographer Norman Ryder formally
proposed a change in name for the Eugenics Quarterly to Social Biology. A motion
was presented that passed unanimously to change the journal’s name to Social Biology,
effective with Volume 16, 1969.

The fifth and final Princeton Conference in 1969 was a symposium designed to reflect the accomplishments of the preceding four conferences and to examine areas of
the society’s principal interests. The title chosen was The Genetic Restructuring of Human Populations (see pp. 247-249).

THE 1970s
A NEw NAME FOR THE SOCIETY

The return of the society to presentations of timely symposia began in 1970 with
“Differential Reproduction in Individuals with Mental and Physical Disorders,” a symposium co-sponsored by the Bio-Medical Division of The Population Council and held
at Rockefeller University, November 13-14.

The society’s symposium presented in 1971 with the joint sponsorship of the American Museum of Natural History was a three-day program titled “Human Evolution’s
Past, Present and Future.”

"In 1960 John Fuller, a society member, and W. Robert Thompson had published the book Behavior Genetics
(Wiley & Sons). Fuller was a geneticist and Thompson a psychologist.
‘See pp. 207-218 on the Behavior Genetics Association, pp. 241-249 on the Princeton Conferences.

 
    
   
    
     

Vol. 46, No. 3-4 History: 1954-1999

In 1973 the society changed its name from the American Eugenics Society to the
Society for the Study of Social Biology (Social Biology, 1973, Vol. 20, No. 1, p. 1):

A New Name
Society for the Study of Social Biology
(formerly The American Eugenics Society)

Four years ago the name of this journal was changed because the word eugenics had a
meaning too narrow to characterize the contents of the journal. The American Eugenics Society, as sponsor of the journal, elected at that time to retain its old name for historical reasons
and because eugenics remained the ultimate focus of interest.

As proximate goals became more diverse and more clearly perceived, dissatisfaction with
the old name increased. The change might have occurred earlier if selection of a new name
had been easy. The final choice, Society for the Study of Social Biology, was prompted
mainly by the new name of the journal, which has been well received.

The change of name of the society does not coincide with any change of its interests or
policies. Such a change was marked rather by the founding of this journal twenty years ago.
The common interests that have long united the membership, and to which their scientific
disciplines are relevant, are the trends of human evolution and the biological, medical, and
social forces that determine these trends.

THE ROLE OF FREDERICK OSBORN,
1946-1974

In 1946 when Frederick Osborn had taken on a five-year term as President, the quiescent American Eugenics Society had assets of only $829.64 and about 200 members.
Frederick Osborn began to raise funds for the society, from public and private agencies and foundations, and from contributions of individuals like himself.’

By 1954, society assets had increased to $27,000, largely through grants obtained
from the Dodge Foundation, the Milbank Memorial Fund, and The Population Council.° These assets provided the funds for the establishment of the Eugenics Quarterly
and for the salary of the full-time Managing Editor, Helen Hammons, who worked at
the 230 Park Avenue office.

When Richard Osborne, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Institute,'' New York
City, became Editor of the journal in 1961, the necessary clerical assistance and financial management of the journal continued to be handled through Mr. Osborn’s office.
With the Editor’s move to the University of Wisconsin in 1964, new arrangements
were necessary, with the cost of editorial assistance carried by Frederick Osborn and
by the various grants which he obtained for the society and the journal.

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 
 

   

 

 

  

In 1949 the office of the society was moved to Frederick Osborn’s private office at 230 Park Avenue in New
York City where it would remain until his retirement from the society in 1974. The secretarial work necessary for
the society and the journal was handled by Mr. Osborn’s personal office staff until 1974.

"Jn 1953 Frederick Osborn had been one of the founders of The Population Council along with John D. Rockefeller III. Osborn served as President until 1959 and as Chairman of the Executive Committee until 1968.

"In 1958, C. P. Rhoades, M.D., founder and director of the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Institute in New
York City and Emerson Day, M.D., first director of the Strang Cancer Prevention Clinic had invited the author
Richard Osbome to organize a section of Medical Genetics at Memorial SKI and Strang Clinic to apply comparable
study methods to cancer as were then being used successfuly with cardiovascular disease.

 
  
 
 
 
 

 

  
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

 

174 History: 1954-1999 Social Biology

By 1968 (Vol. 15) changes in management of the growing journal were necessary.
The printing was moved to the University of Chicago Press. To handle the increasing
copyediting and redactory, Barbara T. Harvey,’ a Book Editor at the University of
Wisconsin Press, joined the journal’s editorial staff as Technical Editor. Under her
guidance, a new format was designed for the journal, which was re-named Social
Biology in 1969. Navy and taupe world globes on the cover indicated its international
coverage of human populations. The journal’s statement of purpose was on the new
cover: To further knowledge of the biological and sociocultural forces affecting human
populations." More responsibility for the journal production and management was
transferred from Frederick Osborn’s office in New York City to Richard Osborne’s office at the University of Wisconsin to reduce cost and to improve efficiency.

Five years later, by 1973, the broadened and international coverage of the journal
had substantially increased the number of manuscripts being submitted. Ninety manuscripts were processed that year, and, largely due to the success of the journal, the society had grown from about 200 to 463 members.

In 1974, Frederick Osborn retired as society Treasurer, which resulted in many
changes for the journal. It was necessary to take as much of the work as possible into
the President’s and the Editors’ offices and also to determine if continued publication
of the journal was possible without the financial support of grants and gifts obtained
by Frederick Osborn. Long-time member Dudley Kirk at Stanford University took on
the duties of Secretary-Treasurer. The Editors’ offices assumed responsibility for institutional subscribers, and the President’s office for member subscribers. Through the
work of President Nikki Erlenmeyer-Kimling at the New York Psychiatric Institute
and of Technical Editor Barbara Osborne at the University of Wisconsin, the journal
survived the funding crisis in the mid-1970s.

By 1977 Richard Osborne felt free to submit a request to retire as Editor. The new
management procedures had been successful, and the journal seemed ready to become
self-supporting. Social Biology was carried in all of the leading abstract services, and
the Council on Biological Sciences Information listed Social Biology among the top
190 biological science journals in the world out of over 3,000 journals.

The SSSB Newsletter in February 1977 announced the acceptance of Arthur Falek
of the Center for Disease Control, Atlanta, as the new Editor of Social Biology along
with Associate Editors Nancy Howell of the Division of Social Sciences, University of
Toronto, and Leonard Heston of the Department of Psychiatry, University of Minnesota, and the appointment of Technical Editor Barbara Osborne as Managing Editor
of Social Biology. The new editors would begin with Volume 25 in 1978 (see Social
Biology, 1977, Vol. 24, No. 4, pp. 255-257).

“After 1970, Barbara Osborne. Her first association with the society was in 1966 when she was employed as
technical editor for the race essays to prepare them for presentation to potential book publishers.

“The final phrase “and their evolution” was added later at Frederick Osborn’s request. When the society
changed its name in 1973, it was a disappointment to him that he had not succeeded in achieving the wide popular
acceptance he had hoped for his redefinition of “eugenics” (see p. 169, this issue).

 

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 46, No. 3-4 History: 1954-1999 175

THE 1980s

There were inescapable difficulties for individuals in three distant locations—Georgia, Minnesota, and Toronto, Canada—sharing responsibility for a peer review system.
Delays in processing manuscripts immediately affected the publication schedule and
resulted in a sharp fall in submissions. By 1981, the journal was still publishing the
1979 issues. At the end of 1981, Richard Osborne was asked by the Board if he would
be willing to return to the editorship beginning in 1982."

It was a daunting prospect. There had been four years of declines in journal subscriptions among institutions and society members. The journal was now over two
years late in publishing. Institutional subscriptions had fallen from 1,100 to 600 and
were still dropping. Individual subscriptions by society members had fallen from 425
to 195. The society Secretary-Treasurer resigned, and by default, those duties also
were moved to the editorial offices. Managing Editor Barbara Osborne served as society Secretary-Treasurer from late 1981 to 1984 until a new Secretary-Treasurer could
be found, along with other new officers, to try to revive the society.

It would prove difficult to save a journal publishing two years late, bankrupt, and
sponsored by a disintegrated society. During the four years of downturn, many other
changes had occurred. In the 1980s there was less interest in the multidisciplinary society by potential members. Institutional libraries had fewer funds for adding journals
to their collections. The Milbank Memorial Fund and The Population Council had
changed focus and were no longer available as sources of support. The issue at hand
was to determine if the journal could survive at all, even at a much reduced level from
earlier years when its support was provided through Frederick Osborn.

The first effort would be to find enough good manuscripts to publish the now overdue issues. The 1979 volume was helped out by publishing an excellent symposium
“Genetics in Epidemiology,” chaired by members Gordon Allen and Bernice Cohen.
Enough manuscripts were put together to publish 1980 and 1981, but there was nothing
available for the 1982 volume. A solution was found that would help to identify the
journal’s coverage and impact as well as to provide manuscripts for Volume 29.

The Institute for Scientific Information® was asked to run the citation history of
articles published in the journal from 1961—1981'° as a means of determining which
articles and areas had the most impact. Volume 29 (1982) would discuss the ISI data
and reprint the most frequently cited articles. By their content, the articles divided
themselves into four general categories—Mating Patterns, Fertility and Population
Regulation, Genetic-environment Interaction, and Ongoing Evolution in Human Populations. Volume 29 was a critical volume in saving the journal, allowing time to catch
up manuscript submissions and peer reviews. Appropriately, the volume was dedicated
as a memorial volume to the journal’s founder, Frederick Osborn, who had also been
instrumental in founding the Office of Population Research at Princeton, the Population Association of America, and The Population Council (see pp. 179-183).

“In 1981, Secretary-Treasurer Sonja B. Haber wrote to the Board of Directors: “The journal of the Society is in
severe trouble due to a shortage of publishable material and the consequential publication delay. ... A Committee
was asked to select new nominees for the Editorship of the Journal. After several months of deliberation and inquiry, the Committee was able to find only one individual! willing to take on the responsibility, Richard Osborne,
former editor of Social Biology.”

'SSee pp. 194-201 of this issue for the most cited articles from 1961-1981.
     
   
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
    

NY
=
©
tH
oO

€

ece

A

CO
oe)

Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48

 

176 History: 1954-1999 Social Biology

It was difficult to stabilize dropping subscriptions and rising production costs. By
1984 the journal was forced to change permanently to publishing two double issues
each year in order to survive. It was a solution that provided the same number of pages
to readers as had quarterly publication, some 320 pages a year, but at substantially less
cost because of reduced press time and mailing costs. During the recent decade the editors have worked hard to maintain some five hundred institutional subscriptions in the
United States and abroad to support sending the journal to society members at low cost.

INFLUENCE OF SOCIAL BIOLOGY

For the long term, the greatest value of Social Biology will be the record it provides
for future scholars of the extraordinary population changes in the last half of the twentieth century. To enhance the utility of the journal as a reference and research source, a
cumulative Table of Contents for Volumes 1—46 is included at the end of this issue.

Archival materials and a complete set of journals have been sent to the American
Philosophical Society in Philadelphia, also the repository for archival materials of the
American Eugenics Society placed there by Frederick Osborn in the late 1970s.

Over the years, the journal has been one of the most influential journals in demography as noted again recently in an independent study by Van Dalen and Henkens,
“How Influential are Demography Journals?” published in 1999 in Population and Development Review (Vol. 25, No. 2, pp. 229-251).

Van Dalen and Henkens examined the 16 journals included in the Institute for Scientific Information’s citation indexes during 1991-1995. Under the category of demography, ISI includes those journals devoted to:

the study of human population distribution, especially with regard to size and density, and
vital statistics. Journals covered in this category are concerned with migration patterns, social biology, fertility and contraception, as well as demographic forecasting, environmental
and economic factors, and life span studies.

This description is a good fit for the research published in Social Biology during the
last forty years and for the journal’s statement of purpose:

To further knowledge of the biological and sociocultural forces affecting human populations
and their evolution.

Van Dalen and Henkens chose to study these 16 journals because the Institute for
Scientific Information constantly re-evaluates the journals to be included in or removed from their database based on whether or not they are considered to be “crucial
for the development of demography.” It speaks well for Social Biology that the journal
has been included continuously by ISI for 35 years, since the inception of the database.

Table 1 shows Social Biology in 8th place in terms of aggregate citations during
1991-1995. The table also provides an overview of other characteristics of the 16 major demography journals. Social Biology is one of the oldest journals, at 42 years in
1995. Its articles were cited in 119 journals during 1991-1995. In other rankings by
Van Dalen and Henkens of journal influence, Social Biology placed between 6th and
Sth among the 16 demography journals studied.

 
Downloaded by [University of Michigan] at 13:48 08 December 2015

Vol. 46, No. 3-4

AGGREGATE CITATION DATA FOR DEMOGRAPHY JOURNALS 1991-95 (YEARLY AVERAGES)

Journal

Demography

2. Family Planning

Perspectives

3. Population and
Development
Review

4, Population Studies
5. Studies in Family

Planning
6. Journal of

Biosocial Science

7. International
Migration
Review

8. Social Biology

9. Population

10. Population
Bulletin?

11. Population and
Environment

12. Population
Research and

Policy Review

13. European Journal

of Population

14. International
Migration

15. Journal of Family

Welfare

16. Journal of
Population

Economics?

Editorial

office

United States
United States
United States
Great Britain
United States
Great Britain
United States

United States
France

United States

United States

United States
France
Australia

India

Germany

History: 1954-1999

TABLE 1
Age of Number of
journal citations
in 1995 received
32 1,049.0
21 975.2
21 698.8
49 592.2
26 549.0
27 336.2
28 314.6
42 233.4
50 204.8
50 115.0
16 75.0
14 60.0
10 48.6
22 45.4
41 24.4

8 20.0

Number of
journals
citing
220

167

172

141

106

140

94
119

95

42

38

24

25

10

15

Number of
citations
sent

1,178.4
704.4
1,036.0
858.0
744.2
919.6
984.8

344.5
698.6

142.3

582.8

394.8
359.6
306.6

204.4

597.5

177

Number of
sources
cited

548

261

651

514

397

460

696

207
477

70

401

246

241

228

135

322

Source: Reprinted from Hendrik R. Van Dalen and Kena Henkens, “How Influential! Are Demography Journals?”, Population and Development Review 25, No. 2 (June 1999), pp. 229-251.
‘Published by the Population Reference Bureau; not to be confused with the Population Bulletin published by the United Nations.
‘Covered in Journal Citation Reports for the years 1994-95 only.

 

 
 

 

 

178 History: 1954-1999 Social Biology

REFLECTIONS

As we reflect on the 46 volumes of the journal, we find that we have prepared 37
volumes as Editor (since 1961) and 32 volumes as Technical Editor or Managing Editor (since 1968) containing more than one hundred individual issues. Each volume has
averaged about 320 pages, whether quarterly or biannual.

As Editor, Richard Osborne began with the Eugenics Quarterly, publishing very
few pages a year, going out to the members of the American Eugenics Society. It was
only because of his respect for the individuals then guiding the society, Theodosius
Dobzhansky, Harry Shapiro, and Frederick Osborn, that he agreed reluctantly to be
“Acting Editor” of the publication.

NM

S One of his provisos was that its cover would highlight the enlarged boldface letters
N 6s 99 : 66 ° 99 6s > 8 °

5 EQ,” with “ugenics” and “uarterly” in such small and faint type as to be nearly un
readable. The most important proviso was that he would be free to make “EQ” a scien® tific journal publishing only peer-reviewed materials. Dobzhansky, Shapiro, and OsG born gave their unqualified and enthusiastic support. It was not until the latter goal had
& been achieved ... some seven years later ... that the “Acting Editor” was willing to
2 accept the title of “Editor” of the journal.

co —-It was about this same time, 1968, after the Princeton Conferences and the renaming of the journal from “EQ” to Social Biology, that the later Managing Editor, Bar‘s'bara Osborne, was hired away from the University of Wisconsin Press. Her role was
.2°(1) to bring journal articles up to the standards of scientific publishing, (2) to improve
.2 the publication’s physical appearance, and (3) to get the journal into the libraries of re= spected academic institutions in the United States and abroad.

Three years later, in 1970, a working partnership became a personal partnership
‘z with the marriage of Richard and Barbara Osborne. Over the years, the continuation of
2 the journal became an unquestioned joint goal, motivated by satisfying communication
‘= with scholars worldwide and by the pleasure of seeing the respect accorded to Social
> Biology by the academic community.

That respect is reflected by the placement of Social Biology in citation indexes and
4 abstracting services along with the best of scientific publishing and also by its place in
© academic libraries in over sixty nations.

ty of Michiga

r

ed b

a

A NEW EDITOR FOR THE JOURNAL

Downl

Beginning with the year 2000 volume (Vol. 47), editorial responsibility for Social
Biology passes to Professor Kenneth L. Land, Department of Sociology, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina. The journal will be in good hands to continue its tradition of publishing high-quality peer-reviewed scientific research.

 
